The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville


This work is the first complete English translation of the Latin Etymologies of Isidore, bishop of Seville (c. 560–636). Isidore compiled the work between c. 615 and the early 630s and it takes the form of an encyclopedia, arranged by subject matter. It contains much lore of the late classical world beginning with the Seven Liberal Arts, including Rhetoric, and touches on hundreds of topics ranging from the names of God, the terminology of the law, the technologies of fabrics, ships, and agriculture, to the names of cities and rivers, the theatrical arts, and cooking utensils. Isidore provides etymologies for most of the terms he explains, finding in the causes of words the underlying key to their meaning. This book offers a highly readable translation of the twenty books of the Etymologies, one of the most widely known texts for a thousand years from Isidore’s time.
stephen a. barney is Emeritus Professor of English at the University of California, Irvine. He edited and annotated Chaucer’s Troilus for The Riverside Chaucer (1987), and among his books are Word-Hoard (1977), Allegories of History, Allegories of Love (1978), Studies in Troilus (1993), and A Commentary on ‘Piers Plowman’ (forthcoming).
w. j. lewis is a translator and editor. Her previous translations include two works by Galen: Hippocrates on the Nature of Man and On the Elements According to Hippocrates, and she co-translated On the Properties of Discourse: A Translation of Tractatus de Proprietatibus Sermonum with Stephen Barney, Calvin Normore and Terence Parsons (1997).
j. a. beach is an independent classics scholar and senior documenter for a software engineering company. She worked for several years at the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae and continues to explore the relationship between classics and computer technology.
oliver berghof isAssociateProfessorofComparativeLiteratureatCalifornia StateUniversity,SanMarcosandlecturerinhumanitiesatUniversityofCalifornia, Irvine. His previous publications include Georg Forster: A Voyage Round the World (ed. with Nicholas Thomas) (2000).
 

 
The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville
stephen a. barney,
w. j. lewis, j. a. beach, oliver berghof
with the collaboration of muriel hall
 
 
cambridge university press
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge cb2 2ru, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521837491
© Stephen A. Barney, W. J. Lewis, J. A. Beach and Oliver Berghof, 2006
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press. First published in print format 2006
isbn-13 978-0-511-21969-6 eBook (EBL) isbn-10 0-511-21969-5 eBook (EBL)
isbn-13 978-0-521-83749-1 hardback isbn-10 0-521-83749-9 hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
 
We dedicate this translation to
bennett and jeanette lewis
antonio
annabelle beatrice berghof
and
hildegard, gregor, alice, and ines berghof
thomas and peter barney
 

 
Contents
Acknowledgements page	ix
Note to the reader	xi

introduction
Introduction	3
	Historical background	4
	Chronology	6
	Life and works	7
	The sources of the Etymologies	10
	The character of the Etymologies	17
	The influence of the Etymologies	24
Editions of the Etymologies and this
	translation	27
Bibliography	29
the etymologies
Analytical table of contents	34
book i	Grammar	39
book ii	Rhetoric and dialectic	69
book iii	Mathematics, music, astronomy	89
book iv	Medicine	109
book v	Laws and times	117
book vi	Books and ecclesiastical offices	135
book vii	God, angels, and saints	153
book viii	The Church and sects	173
book ix	Languages, nations, reigns, the military,	
	citizens, family relationships	191
book x	Vocabulary	213
book xi	The human being and portents	231
book xii	Animals	247
book xiii	The cosmos and its parts	271
book xiv	The earth and its parts	285
book xv	Buildings and fields	301
 
viii	Contents
book xvi	Stones and metals	317
book xvii	Rural matters	337
book xviii War and games	359
book xix	Ships, buildings, and clothing	373
book xx	Provisions and various implements
appendix	395
Correspondence of Isidore and Braulio	409
indexes
General index	417	Index of Greek words	465 Index of citations	469
 
Acknowledgements
 
W
e are indebted to several friends for help with this translation. The Departments of English and of ClassicsattheUniversityofCalifornia,Irvine,havegiven support of various kinds – special thanks to Professor Patrick Sinclair. The staff at the library, especially the Interlibrary Loan Office, at the University of California, Irvine have been unfailingly helpful. The anonymous readers for Cambridge University Press have provided a goodnumberofemendationsandwisecounsel.Fortheir advice on technical matters we thank Diane Lee Lewis (textiles), Hiroyuki Minamino (music), Fred Robinson (Old English poetry), Dana Sutton (Latin), Rod Wallbank (mathematics), and Sarah Wallbank (Greek). We are also grateful to Theodore Andersson, Cherry G. Barney, David M. Barney, Justin Hamlin, Michael Hanly, and Traugott Lawler for reviewing segments of our work in draft. We have gratefully relied on the learning and diligence of Muriel Hall, who in the process of copy-editing the volume became a collaborator in the project.
 

 
Note to the reader
 
T
his translation is based on the Latin text edited by
W. M. Lindsay, Isidori Hispalensis Episcopi Etymologiarum sive Originum Libri XX (Oxford, 1911). Lindsay’s text remains in print from Oxford University Press (Clarendon), and is otherwise available in a facing-page Spanish translation (see Bibliography, Oroz Reta and Marcos Casquero, editors), as well as on the web and on a CD-ROM (see Introduction p. 2727). The correspondence between Isidore and Braulio presented as an Appendix is also edited by Lindsay, and is found in early manuscripts of the Etymologies.
Parentheses (round brackets) are used to set off the Latin word or English translation in question, and for brief explanatory notes or citations of texts. We set off parenthetical remarks by Isidore himself with commas or dashes. Hence, except for the Latin words, none of thematerialwithinparenthesesisfoundinIsidore’stext. Weregularlysignalourexplanatoryadditionswith“i.e.” or “cf.” when the words might otherwise appear to be Isidore’s. We use square brackets only to enclose materiallikewiseenclosedinsquarebracketsinLindsay’sedition, that is, wording found in some but not all of the manuscripts on which he based his text.
Isidore left a number of items incomplete. These are signaled by three ellipsis points (. . .) in the translation. Ellipsis points are otherwise used only rarely at the beginning or end of Isidore’s quotations from earlier authors.
Weavoidusingotherthancommonabbreviations.Of cited works we abbreviate Vergil’s Aeneid, Georgics, and Eclogues, and Ovid’s Metamorphoses, as Aen., Geo., Ecl., andMet.Weabbreviate“literally”as“lit.”On“gen.”and “ppl.” see below.
We include the Latin for key terms. We also provide the Latin in those instances, the great majority, where Isidorepresentsanetymologythatdependsonthesound or shape of the Latin itself.
Lindsay provided precise references to modern texts of the many authors whom Isidore quotes or cites. We have reviewed and updated these, referring in the first instance to the texts that appear in the Loeb Classical Library, and for other texts to the Oxford Classical Texts, the Teubner series, and other standard modern editions. A number of poets known only in fragments are cited fromEdwardCourtney,ed.,TheFragmentaryLatinPoets (Oxford,1993).Isidorewilloftenbutnotalwaysnamethe author, less often the title of the work, when he quotes; the missing information appears here within parentheses. Where Isidore’s quotation differs from the modern received text the translation follows Isidore’s words, and the reference is preceded by “cf.”; for examples see p. 8787.
Often an oblique form of a Latin noun or verb gives a better idea of how an etymological relationship is devised than the usual nominative or infinitive form that we provide. In these cases we also give the genitive form or the perfect participle, abbreviated as “gen.” and “ppl.” Unless it obscures Isidore’s point, we give the usual spellings of Latin words in modern dictionaries, and supply clarifications when needed.
Familiar biblical figures and places appear in their common English forms. Otherwise we generally follow the Douai-Rheims translation of the Latin Vulgate for biblical quotations, adjusting the translation when Isidore’s quotation differs from the Vulgate reading. We cite book, chapter, and verse from the Vulgate. I and II Kings correspond to I and II Samuel in the Authorized (King James; New Revised Standard) Version; III and IV Kings correspond to AV’s I and II Kings; Psalms 10 to 145 correspond to AV’s Psalms 11 to 146.
Isidore’s many repetitions of material are generally not signaled; these may be located by way of the Index.
Two facts should be noted, as we have not repeated them in the many relevant places in the text. A good
 
xii	Note to the reader
number of Isidore’s etymologies depend on the fact that the sound represented by b in Latin had by his time become indistinguishable for many speakers from the consonantal sound represented by v. Also, in Isidore’s geography, as was standard in the classical world, the land masses of the world (the orbis, which we translate as “globe”) were thought to be entirely encircled by the continuous body of water called Oceanus. We regularly translate this term as “Ocean,” with a capital O, and we use “sea” for other large bodies of water.
 
INTRODUCTION
 

 
Introduction
 
We are pleased to present the first complete English translation from the Latin of Isidore’s Etymologies. Isidore,BishopofSeville,compiledtheEtymologies(also known as the Origins) in the late teens and twenties of the seventh century, and left it nearly complete at his death in 636. In the form of an encyclopedia, it contains a compendium of much of the essential learning of the ancient Greco-Roman and early Christian worlds. In his important study of the Latin literary culture of medieval Europe,ErnstRobertCurtiusspokeoftheEtymologiesas serving “the entire Middle Ages as a basic book.”1 It was arguablythemostinfluentialbook,aftertheBible,inthe learned world of the Latin West for nearly a thousand years.
To get an idea of what a seventh-century Irish monk, or a lecturer at a cathedral school in the eleventh century, or an Italian poet of the fourteenth century, or a lexicographer of the sixteenth century could learn from the Etymologies, one might pick a bit of lore from each of the twenty books in which the work has come down to us. From Isidore, then, we learn that:
 Caesar Augustus used a code in which he replaced each letter with the following letter of the alphabet, b for a, etc. (I.xxv.2).
 Plato divided physics into four categories: arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy (II.xxiv.4).  The term ‘cymbal’ derives from the Greek words for “with” and “dancing,”  and  (III.xxii.12).
 A physician needs to know the Seven Liberal Arts of
Grammar, Rhetoric, Dialectic, Arithmetic,
Geometry, Music, and Astronomy (IV.xiii.1–4.)
 In ancient times execution by sword was preferred as speedier (V.xxvii.35).
1 “Grundbuch des ganzen Mittelalters,” in Europaische Literatur¨ und lateinisches Mittelalter (Bern, 1948), trans. by W. R. Trask, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages (New York, 1953: 23).
3
 Architects use green Carystean marble to panel libraries, because the green refreshes weary eyes (VI.xi.2).
 Esau had three names, meaning “red” (for the stew he made), “bloody” (for his complexion), and “hairy” (VII.vi.33–34).
 Aristotle says that Zoroaster, the first magician, composed two million verses (VIII.ix.1).
 A soldier (miles) is so called because once there were a thousand (mille) in one troop
(IX.iii.32).
 The word for a garrulous person (garrulus) derives from the name of the constantly chattering bird, the jackdaw (graculus) (X.114).
 In the womb, the knees (genua) are pressed against the face, and help to form the eye-sockets (genae); hence their name (XI.i.108).
 The ibis purges itself by spewing water into its anus with its beak (XII.vii.33).
 Because of its brightness, lightning reaches the eyes before thunder reaches the ears (XIII.viii.2).
 Gaul is so named from the whiteness of its people, for “milk” in Greek is  (XIV.iv.25).
 Minerva is ‘Athena’ in Greek; she is reputed to be inventor of many arts because various arts, and philosophy itself, consider the city of Athens their temple (XV.i.44).
 Amber is not the sap of the poplar, but of pine, because when burned it smells like pine pitch
(XVI.viii.6).
 An altar was dedicated in Rome to Stercutus, who brought the technique of dunging (stercorare) fields to Italy (XVII.i.3).
 The battering ram takes its name ‘ram’ from its character, because it butts walls (XVIII.xi.1).
 The women of Arabia and Mesopotamia wear the veil called theristrum even today as a protection from heat (XIX.xxv.6).
 Wine (vinum) is so called because it replenishes the veins (vena) with blood (XX.ii.2).
 
In the following introduction we provide sketches of sources of the Etymologies, of the character of the work, Isidore’s historical setting, of his life and works, of the and of its influence.2
Historical background
 
When Isidore was born around the middle of the sixth century, the Western Roman Empire no longer existed as a political entity. Gaul was now ruled by the Franks, and in Italy the Ostrogoths had just been defeated by Byzantine forces, who had also taken over North Africa from the Vandals a short time earlier. Spain, meanwhile, had been under Visigothic rule for over a century.3
The Visigoths, like the Ostrogoths, were a Germanic people, originally settled north of the Danube. In 376, under increasing pressure from the Huns, they were allowed by Roman authorities to cross the Danube and settle in Thrace. Their dealings with Rome within the Empire were rocky from the outset, and they soon rebelled, raiding throughout Thrace before defeating Roman forces outside Adrianople in 378. Fighting continued until the two sides reached an agreement in 382 which established the Visigoths as Roman allies bound to supply troops in return for subsidies and a certain amount of autonomy. By the end of the century relationshaddeterioratedagain,however,andtheVisigoths, led by Alaric (reigned 395–410), entered Italy and sacked Rome in 410 after they were unable to reach an agreement with the Emperor on the subsidies they were to receive. Still at odds with the Romans, they made their way to Southern Gaul in 412, and from there were driven by Emperor Constantius into Spain.
The Roman province of Hispania had been overrun a fewyearsprevioustothisbyalooseallianceofGermanic tribes, the Alans, the Vandals, and the Sueves. The Visigoths, faced with food shortages due to a Roman blockade, came to an agreement with Constantius to fight these earlier barbarian invaders on Rome’s behalf. After some success, they were resettled in Gaul in 418.
In 456, under Theodoric II (reigned 453–466), the Visigoths invaded Spain again, where the Suevi had become the dominant power in the meantime. Theodoric’s forces did not manage to conquer the entire peninsula, however; areas held by the Suevi, Galicians and others continued to assert their independence for some time, and the Basque territories were never completely subdued.
In 507, Clovis, the king of the Franks, attacked the Gaulish part of the Visigothic kingdom, and over the next quarter century the Visigoths lost all their Gaulish territory apart from the region around Narbonne known as Septimania. From this point on, the Visigothic kingdom was essentially confined to the Spanish peninsula.
It should be pointed out that although the Visigoths were rulers of Spain they probably only made up a small percentage of the population throughout the period under their rule; the majority of the inhabitants were Hispano-Roman. The new rulers retained a large partoftheRomanadministrativestructure;Romangovernors and officials continued to collect at least some Roman taxes4 and enforce Roman law.5 The two groups remainedsociallydistinct,however;abanfromimperial times on intermarriage between Goths and Romans, for example, apparently remained in effect until the later part of the sixth century.6
Visigothic Spain was a politically unstable kingdom throughout most of the sixth century. Four successive kings were murdered (Amalric, Theudis, Theudisclus, and Agila). From 544, Byzantine forces intervened in Visigothic affairs, possibly at the invitation of Athanagild in his rebellion against Agila. By 557, the Byzantines occupied the southeastern coast of the peninsula, including the port city of Cartagena. Isidore’s parents appear to have left Cartagena at about this time, quite possibly as a result of this invasion. In the meantime,
2	The fullest recent account of all these matters is the extensive General Introduction by Manuel C. D´ıaz y D´ıaz to the Spanish editionoftheEtymologies,ed.OrozRetaandMarcosCasquero19932: 3–257. No good general treatment of Isidore is available in English; the study by Brehaut (1912) is outdated.
3	For a recent overview of the whole period see McKitterick 2001.
4	Land tax, custom tolls, and collatio lustralis continued to be collected, for example; see Heather 1996: 194–95.
5	There is some controversy over whether the Gothic inhabitants were subject to a separate code based on traditional Gothic law; see, among others, King 1980, Collins 1995: 24–31, Heather 1996: 194–96, Velazquez´	1999, and Wood 1999. 6 Wood 1999: 193.
 
relations with the Franks to the north deteriorated and they began to threaten Visigothic Septimania and the Ebro Valley.
Following Athanagild’s death in 568, the Visigothic nobility chose Liuva to be king, and after Liuva’s death in571or573,hisbrotherLeovigild(theVisigothicmonarchy was not hereditary, although sometimes a son did succeed his father to the throne). Under Leovigild, the kingdom saw its strength increase. The new king’s military successes restored territory that had been lost to the Byzantinesandregainedpoliticalcontroloverrebellious areas (the city of Cordoba, for example, which had been in a state of rebellion since 550) and bordering regions in the northern part of the peninsula.
Leovigild’s attempt to win new converts to Arianism met with less success. Arianism was a form of Christianity that held that the three members of the Trinity were not equal and co-eternal – specifically that the Son was not God by nature but created, and not eternal like the Father.7 Catholic Christians condemned Arian doctrine as heresy at the Council of Nicaea in 325. The Goths, however, had already accepted Arianism when they converted to Christianity, and they continued to hold this doctrine as they moved westward into Gaul and then into Spain. Until Leovigild, the Gothic rulers had made no attempt to convert their largely Catholic subjects, and had apparently made little restriction on thepracticeofCatholicism,althoughtheCatholicclergy had been deprived of some of their privileges. Under the Arian rulers, the Catholic Church in Spain had been free to convene synods, construct new churches and found monasteries, correspond with the Pope, and circulate their writings openly. The two Churches coexisted independentlyofeachother,eachwithitsownclergy,shrines, and other institutions.
7	For a discussion of the theology of Gothic Arianism see Wiles
1996:45–51.
8	Some historians have suggested that the Franks first converted frompaganismtoArianism,andthenfromArianismtoCatholicism; see D. Schanzer, “Dating the Baptism of Clovis: the Bishop of Vienne vs. the Bishop of Tours,” Early Medieval Europe 7 (1998): 29–57.
9	Dialogues, iii.31. See Collins 1980:215–18 for further discussion of Leander’s role in Hermenigild’s conversion.
10	Collins 1995:54.
11	SeeStocking2000:59–88foradiscussionoftheCouncil;records of the Council may be found in G. Mart´ınez D´ıez and F. Rodr´ıguez, eds.,LaColecc´ıonCanonicaHispana´ ,V,ConciliosHispanos:segunda parte (Madrid, 1992).
Historical background
Leovigild, however, mounted a serious campaign to expand Arianism, choosing persuasion and rewards as his instruments, rather than force. In 580 he summoned the first Arian synod held in Spain, and ruled that converts to Arianism no longer needed to be rebaptized, which presumably also made the process of conversion more appealing to Catholics. According to Gregory of Tours (Libri Historiarum X, 6.18), Leovigild also attempted to win converts by redefining Arian doctrine toholdthattheFatherandSonwereequalandco-eternal and only the Holy Spirit was not equal. Although he managed to win over a few important Catholic figures, including the Bishop of Saragossa, he lost ground in his own family, for by 582 his older son Hermenigild had converted to Catholicism.
Hermenigild’s conversion may have been based as much on political considerations as religious conviction. He had rebelled against his father in 579, soon after his marriage to a Frankish princess (Clovis, the king of the Franks, had converted to Catholicism around the beginning of the sixth century),8 and had declared himself the independent monarch over the southern part of the peninsula. For three years, Leovigild seems to have acceptedthesituation,makingnoattempttoregaincontrol, while Hermenigild, for his part, did not seek to expand the territory under his rule. Some time around 582, Hermenigild converted to Catholicism, under the influenceofIsidore’sbrotherLeander,accordingtoPope Gregory I, a friend of Leander.9
In 583, Leovigild finally moved to retake the territory held by Hermenigild, and by 584 he had regained control and exiled Hermenigild to Valencia, where he was murdered the next year. Leovigild, in the meantime, continued his military successes, conquering the Suevic kingdom before he died in 586.
Reccared, Leovigild’s other son and Hermenigild’s younger brother, became king at his father’s death, and converted to Catholicism the following year. Again, as with Hermenigild, Leander of Seville was apparently instrumental in his conversion10. Reccared began systematically disassembling the Arian Church structure, reassigning Arian churches to the Catholic dioceses where they were located, and allowing Arian bishops whoconvertedtoretaintheirsees,evenwhenthismeant having two bishops in a single see. Most of the groundwork for these changes was laid at the kingdom-wide church Council convened by Reccared at Toledo in 589.11
 
Although he ordered the destruction of Arian books (and in fact no Arian documents are preserved from Visigothic Spain), there was little if any other persecution of Arians who refused to convert. In the first four years following his conversion, Reccared faced several Arian conspiracies and attempted revolts led by Gothic nobles, but these did not turn out to be serious threats, and within a generation Arianism appears to have died out.
One result of Reccared’s conversion to Catholicism was the formation of close ties between the monarchy and the Church. From this point forward, the Visigothic kings exercised control over the appointment of bishops and other decisions that had hitherto been made by the Church alone (see Letters IV and V in the Appendix). In return, the Church, in particular the council of bishops, wasgiventheauthorityandresponsibilityforoverseeing secularofficeslikelocaljudgesandagentsofthetreasury estates.
Reccared died in 601, shortly after Isidore became Bishop of Seville, and was succeeded by his seventeenyear-old illegitimate son Liuva II. Less than two years later,LiuvawasdeposedbyWitteric,aGothicnoble.Witteric had Liuva’s right hand cut off to prevent him from retaking the throne (Visigothic tradition required that the monarch be able-bodied), and then, in 603, had him executed. Witteric himself was assassinated in 610. The assassins and their motivations have not been recorded, but Witteric was by all accounts not a popular king. Isidore speaks of him with disapproval, and other contemporaries complained of injustices suffered under his role. Gundemar took the throne after Witteric’s death, and involved himself, as Reccared had, in the councils of bishops, before dying two years later.
Sisebutthenbecameking.Hewasamanofsomeintellectual attainment and authored, among other works, a poem on lunar eclipses (written in 613 as a response to Isidore’s cosmological treatise, De Natura Rerum) and a Life of St. Desiderius of Vienne.12 He was also noted by contemporaries for his personal piety, which led him to become deeply involved in the activities of the Church. According to Isidore, Sisebut’s anti-Jewish policy of forced conversion was based on zeal rather than knowledge.13 (Isidore may be referring to this campaigninEtymologiesV.xxxix.42.)Isidoredidnotentirely approve of this policy but apparently reserved his criticism until after Sisebut’s death.
Chronology
Sisebutdiedin621,ofnaturalcauses,oranoverdoseof medicine, or deliberate poisoning, depending on which account one credits.14 Reccared II, his young son and successor, died shortly thereafter, and Suinthila took the throne. He began his reign by pushing back a Basque incursion into the province of Tarragona (see Letter II). A further triumph followed a few years later when he succeeded in driving the Byzantines out of Spain. In one version of the Historia Gothorum, written during Suinthila’s reign, Isidore is lavish in his praise of the monarch. However, Suinthila was deposed in 631 by a group of nobles with Frankish assistance, and Sisenand was made king. Little is recorded about Sisenand’s reign aside from his participation in the Fourth Council of Toledo. He died in 636, the same year as Isidore.
 
557: Byzantines occupy Cartagena. ca. 560: Isidore is born. 572: Leovigild becomes king. ca. 579: Hermenigild rebels.
586: Death of Leovigild; Reccared becomes king.
587: Reccared converts to Catholicism.
600: Leander dies. Isidore becomes Archbishop of
Seville.
601/2: Reccared dies. Liuva II becomes king.
603: Witteric dethrones and murders Liuva II, and becomes king.
610: Witteric assassinated. Gundemar becomes king.
12	See J. Fontaine, “King Sisebut’s Vita Desiderii and the Political Function of Visigothic Hagiography,” in James 1980.
13	Isidore, History of the Goths, 61, translated in Wolf 1999:105; see Stocking 2000:132–6 for further discussion of Sisebut’s and Isidore’s views on conversion.
14	Isidore, History of the Goths in Wolf 1999:106: “Some claim that he died a natural death, others, that he died as a result of an overdose of some medication.” In an earlier version of the History of the Goths, the possibility of poisoning was mentioned (see Stocking 2000:135 fn. 69).
 
Life and works
 
611/12: Death of Gundemar. Sisebut becomes king.
613: Isidore dedicates De Natura Rerum to Sisebut.
621: Sisebut dies. Reccared II becomes king and dies shortly thereafter. Suinthila becomes king.
624: Suinthila drives the Byzantines completely out of Spain.
631: Suinthila is deposed. Sisenand becomes king.
Life and works
636: Sisenand dies. Isidore dies.
 
Few details can be given about Isidore’s life with any certainty. He was born some time around 560, about the time when his father Severianus relocated the family to SevillefromCartagena,whereinvadingByzantineforces hadtakencontrol.Isidore’sparentsdiedwhilehewasstill young, and he was brought up and educated in Seville underthecareofhisolderbrotherLeander,verylikelyin the monastery school where Leander was abbot (Riche´
1976:289).
Leander, who became Bishop of Seville before 580, wasanactiveandinfluentialchurchman.15 He wasapersonal friend of Gregory, later Pope Gregory I, whom he encountered on a visit to Constantinople and who dedicated his Moralia to Leander. A connection of greater consequence for the kingdom of Spain was Leander’s friendship with King Leovigild’s sons Hermenigild and Reccared, the future king; it was under Leander’s guidancethatbothhisroyalfriendsconvertedfromArianism to Catholicism.
After Leander’s death, and shortly before Reccared died, Isidore was made Bishop of Seville, most likely in
15	Good biographies of Leander, with accounts of his combat againstArianismandhiswritings,areL.Navarra,LeandrodiSiviglia: Profilo storico-letterario(Rome,1987),which prints and translates his HomiliainLaudemEcclesiae,andJ.Madoz,“SanLeandrodeSevilla,” Estudios Eclesiasticos´ 56 (1981): 415–53, printing the basic documentary sources for Leander’s career.
16	The kind of Greek known by Isidore and others from the sixth century on has been the subject of a number of studies: see Bischoff 1967:246–75, Riche´ 1976:44–45, W. Berschin, Griechisch-lateinisches Mittelalter, von Hieronymus zu Nikolaus von Kues (Bern and Munich, 1980), revised and expanded by the author and trans. J. C. Frakes as Greek Letters and the Latin Middle Ages, from Jerome to Nicholas of Cusa (Washington, DC, 1988) and especially M. Herren and S. A. Brown, eds., The Sacred Nectar of the Greeks: The Study of Greek in the West in the Early Middle Ages (London, 1988), esp. Herren’s introduction (v–xii), and the studies by Dionisotti (1–56), Herren (57–84), Berschin (85–104), and Riche (´ 143–68) in the same volume. Isidore’s knowledge of Hebrew was restricted to names interpreted by Jerome (Riche´ 1976:302).
the year 600. His other brother, Fulgentius, as well as his sister Florentina, also chose to go into the Church; Fulgentius became Bishop of Ecija and Florentina entered a nunnery. As one of the leading churchmen in the country, Isidore presided over important Church councils in Seville(in619)andToledo(in633).Theclosetiesthathad been established between the Visigothic monarchy and the Catholic Church after Reccared’s conversion make it likely that Isidore had some political influence as well. HisrelationshipwithKingSisebut(reigned612–621)was particularlyclose,extendingbeyondpracticalmattersof government to a personal friendship based on shared intellectual interests. Also important was his friendship with his younger colleague, Braulio, who was in Seville with Isidore until 619, when he became archdeacon (and later, in 631, bishop) of the Church in Saragossa. Their correspondence (see the letters attached to the Etymologies in the Appendix) provides a valuable glimpse of Isidore’s personality and daily life.
Isidore was deeply admired by his contemporaries for his scholarship and intellectual gifts. Although their praise for his Greek and Hebrew is perhaps unmerited (his knowledge of these languages appears to have extendedonlytodisconnectedGreektermsandphrases, and a smattering of Hebrew words), the breadth of his learning is nonetheless impressive.16 He was happy to draw on pagan authors as well as Church Fathers, and wasfamiliarwithworksasvariousasMartial’sEpigrams, Tertullian’s On Spectacles, and Pliny the Elder’s Natural History. In spite of the demands of his episcopal office, Isidore nevertheless found time to produce a substantial body of writing. Braulio compiled a list of these works, the Renotatio Isidori, presented in the order in which they were written, shortly after Isidore’s death in 636:
Isidore, an excellent man, bishop of the Church at Seville, successor to and brother of Bishop Leander, flourished from the time of the Emperor Mauritius and
 
King Reccared.17 Our own time indeed found in him a likeness to the knowledge of antiquity, and in him antiquity reclaimed something for itself. He was a man educated in every kind of expression, so that in the quality of his speech he was suited to both the ignorant audience and the learned. Indeed, he was famous for his incomparable eloquence, eloquence appropriate to the occasion. An intelligent reader can now very easily understand from his diverse undertakings and well-crafted works just how great Isidore’s knowledge was. Accordingly, I have noted down these thoughts about the works that have come to my notice. He published:
Two books of Differences (Differentiae), in which he used subtle distinctions to differentiate the meaning of terms whose use is confused.
One book of Introductions (Proemia), in which through brief notes he pointed out what each book of Holy
Scripture contains.
One book On the Lives and Deaths of the Fathers (De Ortu et Obitu Patrum), in which he noted with thoughtful brevity their deeds and worthiness, their deaths and burials.
Two books of Offices (Officia), for his brother Fulgentius, Bishop of Ecija, in which he set out the origin of the OfficesandwhyeachOfficeisperformedintheChurch of God, with interpretations of his own pen, but not without the authority of our forefathers.
TwobooksofSynonyms(Synonyma),withwhich,through the intervening exhortation of reason, he encouraged the reader to a consolation of the soul and a hope of receiving forgiveness.
One book On the Nature of Things (De Natura Rerum), addressed to King Sisebut, in which he resolved certain obscure matters concerning the elements, relying on his study of both the Doctors of the Church and the philosophers.
OnebookOnNumbers(DeNumeris),inwhichhetouched in part on the discipline of mathematics, on account of the numbers which are inserted in Sacred Scripture.
One book On the Names of the Law and the Gospels (De Nominibus Legis et Evangeliorum), in which he shows what the people who are mentioned signify in a mystical sense.
One book On Heresies (De Haeresibus), in which, following the examples of our forefathers, he gathers diverse topics, being as brief as he can.
Three books of Sentences (Sententiae), which he ornamented with flowers from the book of Morals by Pope Gregory.
One book of Chronicles (Chronicon), from the creation of the world up until his own time, collected with great brevity.
TwobooksAgainsttheJews(ContraJudaeos),attherequest of his sister Florentina, a virgin (i.e. a nun) in her way of life, in which he demonstrated everything that the Catholic Church believes based on the evidence of the Law and of the Prophets (i.e. based on the Hebrew
Scriptures alone).
One book On Illustrious Men (De Viris Illustribus), to which we are adding this entry.18
One book of the Monastic Rule (Monastica Regula), which he tempered most fittingly for use in this country and for the souls of the weak.
OnebookOntheOriginoftheGoths,andalsoTheKingdom of the Suevi, and The History of the Vandals (De Origine Gothorum et Regno Suevorum et etiam Vandalorum
Historia).
Two books of Questions (Quaestiones), which the reader may recognize as an abundant anthology of ancient treatises.
The Etymologies (Etymologiae), a codex of enormous size, divided by him into topics, not books. Although he left it unfinished, I divided it into twenty (or, “fifteen,” in some manuscripts) books, since he wrote the work at my request. Whoever thoughtfully and thoroughly reads through this work, which is suited to philosophy in every respect, will not be ignorant of the knowledge of human and divine matters, and deservedly so. Overflowing with eloquence of various arts with regard to nearly every point of them that ought to be known, it collects them in a summarized form.
There are also other minor works by this man, and abundantly ornamented writings in the Church of God. After such misfortune in Spain in recent years, God encouraged him, as if he were setting up a prop – to preserve the ancient monuments, I believe, lest we decay into rusticity. To him we may fittingly apply the philosopher’s comment (Cicero, Academica Posteriora 1.3): “Your books have brought us back, as if to our home, when we were roving and wandering in our own city like strangers, so that we might sometimes be able to understand who and where we are. You have laid open the lifetime of our country, the description of the ages, the laws of sacred matters and of priests, learning both domestic and public, the names, kinds, functions and
17	TheByzantineEmperorMauritiusreignedfrom582to602,and Reccared from 586 to 601.
18	OntheDeVirisIllustribusseebelow.Braulio’slistwasappended to a manuscript of Isidore’s treatise. It is edited from the manuscript Leon´ 22 by P. Galindo, pp. 356–60 in C. H. Lynch, San Braulio (Madrid, 1950).
 
causes of settlements, regions, places, and all matters both human and divine.”19
The proceedings of the Council at Seville, at which he was present, declare how with a flood of eloquence he pierced through the heresy of the Acephalites (see VIII. v. 66) with the arrows of divine Scripture and the testimonies of the Church Fathers. In this council he asserted the truth against Gregorius, leader of the aforementioned heresy.
Isidore died during the reign of the Emperor Heraclius and of the most Christian King Chintila.20 He was outstanding above everyone with his sound doctrine, and very generous in his works of charity.
All of these works except On Heresies (the subject of Etymologies VIII.v) are still extant. They range in date from what is presumably the earliest, the first book of theDifferentiae,around600,toaround625.Fourofthem focus closely on the Bible. The Introductions gives a brief description of each book of the Bible, and the On the Lives and Deaths of the Fathers is a collection containing short biographies of important Biblical figures. In spite of Braulio’s description, On Numbers is a religious rather than mathematical treatise; in it Isidore discusses the symbolic interpretation of numerals contained in the text of the Bible. On the Names of the Law and the Gospels, also known as the Allegories (Allegoriae), is a similar discussion of the symbolism of Biblical names.
Against the Jews is an attempt to win converts from JudaismtoChristianitybymeansofrationalpersuasion; it was most likely written around the time of King Sisebut’s campaign of forced conversion (see above, p. 6),
19 Braulio would have read Cicero’s encomium of Varro, the great predecessor of Isidore, in Augustine’s City of God 6.2. 20 TheByzantineEmperorHeracliusreignedfrom 610to641,and Chintila from 636 to 640.
21	Both the Chronicon (Chronica Maiora) and the shorter version (Chronica Minora) included in the Etymologies are edited by T. Mommsen, mgh, Auct. Ant. xi, 391–497 (Berlin, 1894). The new edition of the Chronica (615/16 and 626 redactions) by Martin (2003) contains the most recent full bibliography of Isidore studies and a thorough account of Isidore’s sources. See also P. M. Bassett, “The Use of History in the Chronicon of Isidore of Seville,” History and Theory 15 (1976): 278–92. See further the materials on the Chronicon and The History of the Goths in Wolf 1999.
22	On the History of the Goths see the edn. by Mommsen, preceding note, pp. 267–303, and the edn. by R. Alonso, Las Historias de los Godos, Vandalos y Suevos de Isidoro de Sevilla´	(Leon,´ 1975), with full introduction, and G. Donini and G. B. Ford, Isidore of Seville’s History of the Goths, Vandals, and Suevi (Leiden, 1970), with trans. See also J. N. Hillgarth, “Historiography in Visigothic Spain,” in La Storiografia altomedievale (Spoleto, 1970: 287–302).
Life and works
and may be seen as an alternative approach in contrast to Sisebut’s harsher measures. In the first book Isidore argues that Old Testament prophets foresaw the birth, death, resurrection, and divinity of Christ, while the second book presents passages from the prophets that Isidore interprets as condemning Jewish rituals.
The four other surviving theological works deal with the Church and the duties of Christians. The first book of Offices (also the subject of Etymologies VI.xix) gives a history of the Catholic liturgy, and is an important source of information about the Mozarabic liturgy. The second book deals with the various ecclesiastical offices andtheirduties.TheMonasticRuleandtheSentencesare more instructional works, the first providing an introduction to monastic life in simple and straightforward language, and the second a guide to Church doctrine and Christian conduct of life. In the Synonyms, Isidore presents a contemplation on sin and conversion, relying on synonyms to reiterate and emphasize each point of his message.
On the Nature of Things is a detailed cosmology dealingwithastronomy,meteorology,andothernaturalphenomena, as well as with the human conventions of timekeeping and calendars.
The Chronicles, although a useful source for the history of Visigothic Spain, is otherwise mainly derivative of earlier chronicles, particularly Eusebius’s chronicle (ca. 326), translated and continued by Jerome (ca. 378), and Prosper of Aquitaine (ca. 455) and others. Like the History of the Goths, it draws from Julius Africanus, Eusebius’s universal history, Orosius’s History against the Pagans, other works of Jerome, Augustine, and Cassiodorus. There are two versions, both by Isidore, one completedin615/16,duringSisebut’sreign,andtheother completed in 626. Etymologies V.xxxix incorporates an abbreviated version of the chronicle; the fact that it uses materials found in the 626 version shows that the work dedicated to Sisebut before 621 was not the complete Etymologies as we now have it.21 There are likewise two extant versions of On the Origin of the Goths, one that ends with the death of Sisebut in 621 and one that continues up through 625, in the middle of Suinthila’s reign. It is not clear which is the later version; it may be that the longeraccountwaswrittenfirstandthatIsidorethought it prudent to excise the final section after Suinthila’s fall from power.22 The Kingdom of the Suevi and The
 
History of the Vandals, although Braulio speaks of them as if they and On the Origin of the Goths were a single work, appear to be brief but separate histories, which have been appended to the larger work. In On Illustrious Men, Isidore presents thirty-three brief biographies of important Christian figures, mainly writers, from various countries (many Spaniards) and eras, including his brother Leander. It is a continuation of works with the same title by Jerome (ca. 392) and his continuator Gennadius (ca. 490); all three sketch the lives of prominent Christians, as an answer to Suetonius Tranquillus’s De
Viris Illustribus.23
Like the Etymologies, the Differences is closely concerned with the form and meaning of individual words. The first book explains the distinctions between pairs of words that are either synonyms or homophones, and gives instructions for correct usage. The second bookfocusesonthedifferencesbetweenthings;between angels, demons, and men, for example.
A second early notice of Isidore and his works was included by Ildefonsus, bishop of Toledo, in his work On Illustrious Men, a continuation of the Jerome– Gennadius–Isidore tradition.24 Ildefonsus was reputed to have been a student of Isidore’s; he completed the work shortly before his death in 667. The notice (cap. 8) follows:
Isidore held the bishopric of the see of Seville, in the Province of Baetica, after his brother Leander. He was a man esteemed for both his propriety and his intellect. In speaking he had acquired a supply of such pleasing eloquence that his admirable richness of speech amazed his listeners. Indeed, someone who had heard a sermon of his a second time would not approve unless it were repeated still further. He wrote not a few exceptional works, that is:
The Types of Offices,
The Book of Prefaces,
The Births and Deaths of the Fathers,
A book of lamentations, which he himself called the Synonyms,
Two little books written for his sister Florentina, Against the Iniquity of the Jews,
A book for King Sisebut, On the Nature of Things, A book of Differences, A book of Sentences.
Healsocollectedintooneplacefromvariousauthorswhat hehimselfcalledtheExpositionoftheSecretSacraments. It is also known as the Questions.
Finally, in response to a request from Braulio, Bishop of Saragossa, his book of Etymologies. He tried to fulfill this request completely over the course of many years,andseemedtofinishhisfinaldaysengagedinthis work.
He was active during the reigns of Reccared, Liuva, Witteric, Gundemar, Sisebut, Suinthila, and Sisenand. He held the honor of the bishopric for almost forty years, and maintained the distinction of its holy doctrine, its glory as well as its propriety.
Obviously a good deal of Isidore’s earlier writing was taken over into the Etymologies, which Isidore must have considered the summa of his scholarly career. Presumably he began work on it before the death of Sisebut early in 621, and he left it unfinished at his death in 636.
The sources of the Etymologies
Isidore was officially canonized as a saint in 1598, and was declared a Doctor of the Church in 1722. His feast day is April 4.
 
Isidore acknowledges, in the dedication (before 621) to King Sisebut prefaced to an early draft (perhaps Books I–X) of the Etymologies, that his work compiles material “gathered from my recollection (or, “record”) of readingsfromantiquity”(seetheappendedLetterVI).Thisis nomeretoposofhumility;nearlythewholework,infact, consistsofintricatelywovenexcerptsandparaphrasesof the works of earlier writers. To assess Isidore’s achievementwecannotlooktooriginalresearchesorinnovative interpretations, but rather to the ambition of the whole design, to his powers of selection and organization, and tohisgrandretentiveness.Hisaimswerenotnoveltybut
23	The main part of Suetonius’s work still extant is De (Claris) Grammaticis et Rhetoribus. The Jerome and Gennadius works are edited by E. C. Richardson, Hieronymus: Liber de Viris Illustribus. Gennadius: Liber de Viris Illustribus, Texte und Untersuchungen zur GeschichtederaltchristlichenLiteratur14,1.(Leipzig,1896).Onthese and Isidore’s De Viris Illustribus see R. McKitterick, The Carolingians and the Written Word (Cambridge, 1989: 200–02).
24	C.C.Merino,ed.andtrans.intoSpanish,El‘DeVirisIllustribus’ de Ildefonso de Toledo (Salamanca, 1972).
 
authority, not originality but accessibility, not augmenting but preserving and transmitting knowledge.
A full reckoning of Isidore’s sources must await the completion of the major edition of the Etymologies now under way, being published in the series Auteurs Latins du Moyen Age (Paris: Belles Lettres). To date five volumesofaprojectedtwenty,oneforeachbookoftheEtymologies, have appeared (see Bibliography). These and the important study by Jacques Fontaine (1959, 19832) are the only authoritative studies of the Etymologies’s sources yet to appear.
The following sketch divides Isidore’s sources into three kinds: first, his forebears in producing etymologies and encyclopedias; second, the actual scholars from whom he derives his information, whether or not at first hand; and third, the auctores whom he cites, that is, the acknowledged classical masters of imaginative literature and artful prose (Vergil, Cicero, and the rest).25
The idea that knowledge of the origins of words can yield up the words’ “true sense” (	  ), and indeed something of the intrinsic character of the thing named by the word, is very ancient. The oldest Greek and Hebrew writings take for granted that proper names can conceal and reveal the characters and fates of their
25	Preliminary guidance for many of the following authors and works may be found in The Oxford Classical Dictionary, 3rd edn., ed. Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth (Oxford, 2003), and Dictionary of the Middle Ages, ed. Joseph R. Strayer (New York, 1982– 89).
26	Fundamental studies of the history of etymologizing are Ilona Opelt,“Etymologie,”ReallexikonfurAntikeundChristentum¨ 6(1965: cols. 797–844) and Roswitha Klinck, Die lateinische Etymologie des Mittelalters (Munich, 1970). See also Fontaine 1981.
27	An introductory treatment of early encyclopedias is R. Collison 1966. Pp. 21–35 survey the tradition up to Isidore. With full bibliographies on both the basis of encyclopedias in Greek and Roman education and on encyclopedias themselves are H. Fuchs, “Enkyklios Paideia” (cols. 365–98) and “Enzyklopadie” (cols.¨ 504– 15) in Reallexikon fur Antike und Christentum¨ 5 (1962). See also Ribemont´ 2002andM.deGaudillac,“Encyclopediespr´ e-m´ edi´ evales´ et medi´ evales,” pp.´ 1–42 in La Pens´ee encyclop´edique au moyen ageˆ (Neuchatel,1966)andotheressaysinthiscollectiononencyclopedias partly derived from Isidore.
28	On the liberal arts see Arts lib´eraux et philosophie au moyen age.ˆ
Actes du Quatri`eme Congr`es International de Philosophie M´edi´evale, Montr´eal, 1967 (Paris, 1969), esp. the essays by Marrou and D´ıaz y D´ıaz. The scheme of the Seven Liberal Arts came to the Middle Ages primarily by way of Martianus Capella. See Herbert Backes, DieHochzeitMerkursundderPhilologie:StudienzuNotkersMartianUbersetzung¨ (Thorbecke,1982:esp.11–15),andP.Courcelle,LesLetters grecques en occident: De Macrobe a` Cassiodore (Paris, 1948).
bearers.26 Plato in the Cratylus treats the fundamental question, whether a thing takes its name arbitrarily or with reference to the thing’s nature. The first known work, now lost, devoted to the science of etymologies is the      of Heraclides Ponticus (fourth century bce). Developing the Greek science of etymology were the     of Apollodorus of Athens and a work by Demetrius of Ixion, both of the second century bce. In the Roman tradition of scholarship the first important figure is Aelius Stilo Praeconinus (ca. 154–74 bce), of whose works only fragments survive, but whose pupils Varro and Cicero carried on his interest in etymology. The Stoics, in particular, continued the study of etymology, including the articulation, by Varro (especially in the lost books ii–iv of On the Latin Language) and others, of the several types of etymologies.
Parallel to, and eventually coincident with, the development of etymologizing proper was the compilation of encyclopedias.27 As the term ‘encyclopedia’ suggests (if we may follow Isidore’s practice of explanation by etymology – ‘paideia’ means “education”), these were summations of learning intended for general instruction, the “cycle of education” proper to a free person – hence, the “liberal arts.” The first encyclopedias were Latin. Cato the Censor compiled (ca. 185 bce) an encyclopedia, now lost. Much the most important figure, bothfortheproductionofetymologiesandforthemaking of encyclopedias, is Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 bce). Of his many works those on the Latin language and on agriculture substantially survive. Lost is the Disciplines, an encyclopedia whose nine books treated in turn grammar, dialectic, rhetoric, geometry, arithmetic, astrology, music, medicine, and architecture. The first seven of these, regularly divided into the language arts (the trivium: the first three) and the mathematical arts (the quadrivium), became the classic model of preliminary education, the “Seven Liberal Arts.”28 The shape of Isidore’s first five books may be traced directly to Varro’s influence, though in fact it is unlikely that Isidore had direct access to texts of Varro.
Of A. Cornelius Celsus’s encyclopedia (early first century ce) only the medical books survive intact. After VarrothegreatestencyclopedistisPlinytheElder,whose massive Natural History (dedicated in 77 ce) in effect fills out the classical matrix of encyclopedic learning, adding to Varro’s cycle of the liberal arts the cycle of
 
scientific and naturalist lore: extensive treatments of the world in general (cosmology and meteorology), geography, the human being, zoology, botany, mineralogy, and medicine. Both Varro’s and Pliny’s works are arranged, withaviewtoreadyaccess,bytopicsinrationalorder.To thesefoundationalworksofscholarshipshouldbeadded the Institutes of Oratory (before 96 ce) of Quintilian, a masterwork on rhetoric in the broadest sense, including what we would call literary history and criticism.
With the exception of medicine, Roman scholarship after the first century ce shows a progressive decline in the practice of original scientific research. Concomitantly, the major works of reference (following Varro’s lead)focusmoreandmoreintentlyontheLatinlanguage itself. Encyclopedic works of the later period show more interest in presenting and defining, often with etymological explications, the terms of the arts and sciences, rather than the actual processes of the technologies and the essential qualities of the objects of study. One looks to these works for copious vocabulary, for careful discriminations of correct and incorrect usage of language, and in general for what might be called a heightened state of literacy.
ThemainencyclopedicworksafterPlinyaretheCompendiousDoctrine(earlyfourthcentury)ofNoniusMarcellus, arranged in alphabetical order; the Marriage of Mercury and Philology (perhaps early fifth century) of Martianus Capella, which contains a review of the Seven Liberal Arts; and the Institutes (ca. 562) of Cassiodorus, written in two books for the monks at the monastery he founded. Its first book gives instructions on the parts of the Bible and about how to study and copy religious writings, and the second is a compendium of the Seven Liberal Arts.29 Less encyclopedic in form – that is, organizedinadeliberatelycasualmanner–butofencyclopedic scope are the (mainly lost) Prata (early second century ce) of Suetonius Tranquillus, the Attic Nights (late second century ce) of Aulus Gellius, and the Saturnalia (early fifth century) of Macrobius. Of crucial importance are the vast commentaries by Servius (late fourth century), available to Isidore in the longer version called Servius Danielis (after its first publisher, Pierre Daniel), which is thought to include materials from Donatus not reworked by Servius. Servius’s commentaries amount to an encyclopedia organized by the order of the text of Vergil, rather than by topic or by alphabet. All these, apart from the Cassiodorus, are pagan works; among Christian works with encyclopedic abundance of lore arethewritingsofLactantius(ca.240–ca.320),including the Divine Institutes, Ambrose’s Hexameron (late fourth century), and Augustine’s City of God (413–426).
Alongside, and in part excerpting, the encyclopedias was a tradition of lexicography, which included from the outset definitions, etymologies, and differentiae, the discrimination of meaning and usage of closely related terms. At the head of this tradition stands Verrius Flaccus’s On the Meaning of Words (early first century ce),lostbutepitomizedbyS.PompeiusFestusinthelate second century. These works were arranged in roughly alphabetical order. The Latin tradition of free-standing glossaries, not attached to individual authors, seems to begin with the sources of Placidus’s glossary in the late fifth or early sixth century. Some glossaries compiled after Isidore’s time are known to include material from sources probably known to him, especially Paul the Deacon’s epitome of Festus, preserving much of that work otherwise lost, and the vast (over 500,000 entries) Liber Glossarum (Glossarium Ansileubi), probably of the late eighth century and compiled at Corbie or a related
scriptorium.30
Together with these encyclopedic and lexicographical works we must presume a substantial number of lost school-texts and manuals treating the various arts, and of course a mass of monographs, many still
29	R.A.B.Mynors,ed.,CassiodoriSenatorisInstitutiones(Oxford, 1937; corr. reprint 1961). An important translation and commentary: LeslieWebberJones, AnIntroductiontoDivineandHumanReadings, by Cassiodorus Senator (New York, 1946). Isidore apparently knew only the second book of the Institutes (Fontaine 2000:334); Mynors observes that the two books usually circulated separately.
30	The Liber Glossarum is edited (abridged) by W. M Lindsay, Glossaria Latina, vol. i (Paris, 1926). Lindsay also studied the Festus material contained in it and other post-Isidorean glossaries: see his reprinted Studies in Early Mediaeval Latin Glossaries, ed. Michael Lapidge (Aldershot, Hampshire, 1996), no. 7, “The Abstrusa Glossary and the Liber Glossarum.” Festus is also edited by Lindsay: Sexti Pompei Festi De Verborum Significatu quae Supersunt cum Pauli Epitome (Leipzig, 1913). See further D. Ganz, “The ‘Liber Glossarum’: A Carolingian Encyclopedia,” in Science in Western and Eastern Civilization in Carolingian Times, ed. P. L. Butzer and D. Lohrmann (Basel,1993:127–35),andT.A.M.Bishop,“ThePrototypeoftheLiber Glossarum,”inM.B.ParkesandA.G.Watson,eds.,MedievalScribes, Manuscripts and Libraries (London, 1978: 69–86). On Paul the Deacon’s epitome of Festus, completed in 786, see Settimio Lanciotti, “Tra Festo e Paolo,” in Paolo Diacono: Uno scrittore fra tradizione longobarda e rinnovamento carolingio (Udine, 2000: 237–50), and the references cited there.
 
extant, treating specific disciplines: grammar, rhetoric, medicine, law, geography, architecture, philosophy, chronology, logic, music, ecclesiastical and theological matters, and the rest. Outstanding among these are the treatises of Boethius (480–524), covering the disciplines of the quadrivium as well as important translations and commentariesonlogic;thestandardgrammaticalworks of Donatus (fourth century), Sacerdos (third century), and Terentianus (late second century); the many legal compilations of Julius Paulus (ca. 210) and Ulpian (died 223), whose works were used in the great codifications under Justinian (529–534); Vitruvius’s (late first century bce) On Architecture; for agriculture the works of Palladius (fourth century), partly based on Columella (60– 65 ce); Marius Victorinus’s (fourth century) translations of Greek philosophical texts; the geographically arranged miscellany of lore, practically an encyclopedia, theCollectionofMemorableThings(soonafter200)ofG. Julius Solinus; and for history and chronology Jerome’s
31	On historiography before and after Isidore see R. McKitterick, History and Memory in the Carolingian World (Cambridge, 2004).
32	On this see especially Fontaine (1966).
33	On such “transmitters” of classical culture as Boethius, Cassiodorus, and Isidore see E. K. Rand, Founders of the Middle Ages (Cambridge, MA, 1928). Broadly for the period see M. L. W. Laistner, Thought and Letters in Western Europe, AD 500–900 (Ithaca, NY, 1931), and esp. Riche (´ 1976) and J. J. Contreni, “The Carolingian Renaissance: Education and Literary Culture,” in R. McKitterick, ed., The New Cambridge Medieval History, vol. ii c. 700–c. 900 (Cambridge, 1995: 709–57).
34	The openings of three other books, X, XIII, and XIX, refer without specification to Isidore’s abbreviation of his sources. Three chapter titles refer to sources (II.xxv, xxvi, and xxix).
35	D´ıaz y D´ıaz observes that Isidore uses similar phrasing when speaking of his intentions in the preface to his treatise On the Nature of Things: “presenting some statements about the nature and causes of things . . . all of which I have noted in a brief sketch (brevis tabella) according to what has been written by the ancients and especially in the works of Catholic writers” (Oroz Reta and Marcos Casquero
19932:176).
36	The information about those whom Isidore names, and those whomhedirectlyquotes(whetherornotnamingthespecificsource), may be gleaned from two indexes in the Reta–Casquero edition (19932): “Index nominum” and “Loci citati in textu.” These do not include Isidore’s quotation or paraphrase of sources where he gives no indication of doing so. In what follows we collect statistics from these indexes with the caveat that they contain many errors.
37	Isidore appears to quote Varro at I.iii.1, I.xxvii.15, I.xxxviii.1,
II.xxiii.1,IV.viii.13,IV.xi.5,VIII.vi.21,VIII.vii.3,IX.ii.74,X.185,XI.i.51, XI.i.97,XIII.i.2,XIII.xviii.2,XV.xiii.6,XVII.ix.95,XX.x.1,XX.xi.9and otherwise names him as his authority at VIII.ix.13, XI.iii.1, XIV.vi.18, XIV.vi.36, XIV.viii.33, XIV.ix.2, XV.i.63, XVII.vii.57, XVII.i.1, and XVIII.xvi.2.
translationandcontinuationtotheyear378ofEusebius’s Chronicle, Rufinus’s translation and continuation (late fourth century) of Eusebius’sEcclesiastical History (early fourthcentury),andPaulusOrosius’sHistoryAgainstthe Pagans (418).31
FromthissurveyitappearsthatIsidore’stwininforming principles, etymologizing and encyclopedism, descend from ancient and distinguished ancestry.32 In that the Etymologies amounts to a reorganized redaction and compendium of writings mainly of the fourth to sixth centuries (with the large exception of Pliny), it could be said that his work is not merely conditioned by, but in the main is comprised of, the major components of intellectual history as they were handed down to him. He had access, albeit largely indirect, to the major traditions of Latin learning reaching back 800 years, from Gregory the Great to Cato. Like his fellow “transmitters”33 from Servius to Cassiodorus, Isidore quite consciously preserved, in abbreviated form, the accumulated learning of the classical world. As his disciple Braulio remarked in his Renotatio, “Our own time indeed found in him a likeness of the knowledge of antiquity, and in him antiquity reclaimed something for itself . . . God encouraged him . . . to preserve the ancient
monuments . . .”
Apart from the dedication to Sisebut Isidore does not speak generally about his use of sources in the Etymologies, with one exception, his use – particularly his occasional augmenting – of Jerome’s work explicating the meaning of Hebrew terms (VII.i.1).34 More vaguely, he claims to avoid presenting material about the founding of cities when the authorities differ among themselves, giving examples of such dissension from Sallust and two places in the Aeneid (XV.i.1). At the beginning of Book XIII he emphasizes that he will tell of the cosmos in a “brief sketch” (brevis tabella) and “with compendious brevity” (conpendiosa brevitas), implying abbreviation
of his sources.35
BecauseIsidorederiveshisinformationmainlyatsecond or third hand, his actual naming and even quoting of earlier scholars is no reliable guide to his immediate sources. Let the crucial figure of Varro, at the head of the encyclopedic tradition in which the Etymologies stands, serve as an example.36 Isidore names him as his authority for various facts twenty-eight times, and appears to quote him eighteen times.37 The first ten of these
 
citations give an idea of what Varro provides: he calls grammar ‘literacy’; he observes that Caesar’s use of the i in maximus led to the standard orthography; he defines the term prosa; he gives the etymology of the disease aurigo; he gives the etymology of the word for ‘mortar’ (pila); he speaks of fire as the soul of the world; he gives the etymology of the word for ‘prophet’ (vates); he recordsthe Pelasgians’firstarrivalinItaly;hedefinesthe word hilum; and he gives the etymology of the word for ‘tongue’ (lingua). Yet modern scholarship has affirmed that all of these references are at second hand; there is no evidence that Isidore handled any writing by Varro. Compare his naming of Pythagoras as authority eight times in the Etymologies; we can be sure that Isidore had no direct access to Pythagoras, who, as far as we know, wrote nothing.
Because so much of the Etymologies is complacently derivative, we can nowhere take for granted that we know the stance of the “we” who compiles the work. When he describes the types of parchment, Isidore might have told us about the production of books in his own scriptorium. Instead, he reproduces Pliny on the types of papyrus sheets and the ancient types of parchment (VI.x). Presumably many of the critical remarks about pagan beliefs that we find are Isidore’s own words – but many may derive from his Christian forebears. Things that persist “up to this day” may be those that persist up to the time of Isidore’s source. Usages that Isidore labels as “commonly” (vulgo) current may be those current in the milieu of the source. Descriptions of Spain, even of Seville, are exiguous, traditional, pro forma.
The names of earlier scholars found in the Etymologies display a striking fact. Isidore names Aristotle (15 times), Jerome (10), Cato (9), Plato (8), Pliny (7), Donatus (6), Eusebius (5), Augustine (5), Suetonius (4), and Josephus (2), along with single references to a few others. At one point he names, we may suppose with admiration and in emulation, those “who wrote many things”: Varro and, “of ours,” that is, of Christians, Origen and Augustine. Of all these writers, Isidore surely drew excerpts directly from Jerome and Augustine, and possibly from Pliny and Donatus, yet he probably never saw the other authorities, but borrowed the references from secondary works.38 (Whether or not he cites Pliny from intermediate sources, he often borrows from him at length verbatim.) More striking, he never names several encyclopedists from whose work he probably drew at second or third hand: Aulus Gellius, Nonius Marcellus, Lactantius, Macrobius, and Martianus Capella (possibly an immediate source). And most striking, nowhere in the Etymologies do we find mention of three of Isidore’s four (with Pliny) main scholarly sources: Solinus (himself heavily indebted to Pliny), Servius, and Cassiodorus.
Jacques Fontaine’s important study (1959, 19832) examines Isidore’s profound indebtedness to Cassiodorus’s Institutes in the first three books of the Etymologies, and Peter Marshall’s edition (1983) of Book II bears out Fontaine’s conclusions in even greater detail. The ALMA editions of other books of the Etymologies (IX, XII, XVII, XIX) confirm the findings of investigationssincethefifteenthcenturyconcerningIsidore’svast quotation and paraphrase of Servius, Pliny, and Solinus. In his treatment of the sources of Book XII (1986: 13– 22), Jacques Andre finds a typical situation. The book´ contains 58 citations – that is, acknowledged quotations (there are altogether nearly 600 of these in the Etymologies) – and 293 uncited borrowings. Of these most, 79, are from Solinus; 45 are from Pliny the Elder. From Serviuscome61borrowingsofmaterial;Andreestimates´ that some 400 from Servius occur in the whole of the Etymologies – this may understate the number. Of the Church Fathers from whom Isidore constantly borrows, in Book XII (on animals) the most used is Ambrose – the Hexameron. Ambrose is named only once in the Etymologies.
The ancient tradition of grammar and of encyclopedias took for granted that for the uses of particular words, as wellasforfiguresofspeechandinfactforanyotherinformation, the major poets and rhetoricians, the auctores, constituted the prime witnesses. Hence copious citation,ingrammarsandreferenceworks,ofwordingfrom VergilorCiceroorHoracenotonlydisplayedthewriter’s liberallearning(andstatus),andnotonlyillustratedparticular literary techniques or fact, but also authenticated assertions by the highest standard – higher, indeed, than immediateexperienceoftheworld.ThusIsidorereports (XII.iv.48) that Pythagoras says that a cadaver’s spinal cord turns into a snake, and to buttress the veracity of
38	The detailed evidence is found in Fontaine and in the ALMA editions – see below.
 
the idea he quotes Ovid’s Metamorphoses with the same report–eventhoughOvidleavesroomfordoubt(“there are those who believe . . .”). Surely Isidore himself did not believe so unbiblical an idea; rather, he follows his respected source, both in stating it as fact and in providing further authentication. Elsewhere (XIX.i.17) he speaks of a type of boat called phaselus, and notes that “we”(eitherseventh-centurySpaniardsorwhoeverwere the original audience of his source) incorrectly call this boatbaselus.Merelytoaffirmtheexistenceofthewordin itscorrectformhequotesVergil’sGeorgics.IfVergilused the word it is worth knowing – so the Roman scholars presumed, and Isidore follows them.
The most cited auctores used in this way are Vergil (over 190 citations),39 Cicero (over 50), and Lucan (some 45). Other much-cited figures are Plautus, Terence, Lucretius, Ovid, Horace, Juvenal, Martial, Ennius, Sallust, and Persius. In addition, Isidore quotes from the Bible nearly 200 times. Apart from the Bible and Vergil, and perhaps Ovid, Lucretius, and Martial, modern scholarship (especially Fontaine and the ALMA editors)showsthatIsidoreprobablyquotesnoneofthese auctores at first hand. Yet he often carefully names them; clearly he distinguishes between these writers and the scholarly providers of the bulk of his material. They are older (mainly Augustan and pre-Augustan); apart from Cicero and Sallust they are poets; they are revered from antiquity on as luminaries of the language, as originators and originals – they are, in short, what we would call “classics.” In contrast are the unnamed and seldom namedsources:Pliny,Servius,Cassiodorus,andtherest. We may presume that Isidore thought of them as not worth mentioning as authorities: they are fellow scholars, (except for Pliny) relatively recent, utilitarian and prosaic, themselves secondary. Evidently Isidore made
39	These figures derive from an index in the BAC edition of the Etymologies; however, in the same edition D´ıaz y D´ıaz (Oroz Reta and Marcos Casquero 19932:193) writes that Vergil is cited by name more than one hundred times, and 266 times altogether, as reported by N. Messina, “Le citazioni classiche nelle Etymologiae di Isidoro di Siviglia,” Archivos Leoneses 68 (1980: 205–64). Our own search finds that in the Etymologies Isidore cites Vergil by name 112 times.
40	Particularly valuable for Isidore’s sources are the works of Fontaine listed in the Bibliography. On the general topics of education and knowledge of the classics in Isidore’s Spain see Riche´ (1976), esp. 246–65, 274–303, and D´ıaz y D´ıaz (1975). The manuscript evidence for transmission of the classics in Spain may be found in Lowe, Codices Latini Antiquiores, and Reynolds 1983.
nosharpdivisionbetweentheauthoritativenessofpagan versus Christian writers, but he probably did generally regard his Christian sources – to use some old terminology – as “moderns,” and the pagans as “ancients” (whom with great frequency he calls maiores, veteres, antiqui; roughly “our ancestors, those of old times, the ancients”).
Because our translation of the Etymologies specifies sourcesonlyinthefewcaseswheretheyparticularlybear onIsidore’smeaning,weofferhereaveryroughguideto themajorsourcesoftheindividualbooks.40 Twocaveats: first, the forthcoming volumes of the ALMA edition of the Etymologies will supersede any current knowledge of sources; second, the positing of a source by no means indicates that it is Isidore’s immediate source. The first two books rely mainly on Cassiodorus, as does the third, with important additions from Boethius on mathematics. Book IV on medicine draws on Caelius Aurelianus’s (fifth century) Latin translation, On Acute Diseases and Chronic Disorders, of Soranus of Ephesus (second century)andPliny.Amongthesourcesofthelegalmaterials in Book V are the Institutes of Gaius (second century) and its epitome in the Lex Romana Visigothorum, and Julianus Salvius’s (second century) Digesta. The chroniclesectionupdatesandabbreviatesIsidore’sownChronicon, which derives from Jerome’s adaptation of Eusebius’s chronicle and continuations of it.
Books VI to VIII constitute the ecclesiastical and theological part of the Etymologies. Primary sources are, naturally, Augustine and Jerome, whom Isidore ransacked thoroughly, as well as Gregory the Great (a friend of Isidore’s brother Leander), Lactantius’s Divine Institutes,Tertullian,andforthepaganloreinBookVIII, Varro, Cicero, Pliny. Book IX weaves together material from Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Servius, Pliny, and Solinus. A remote source is M. Junianus Justinus’s (third century) Latin epitome of Pompeius Trogus’s universal history (early first century). The vocabulary of Book X derives from the glossographic tradition from Verrius Flaccus through Festus, as well as Servius, and the Church Fathers. For Books XI–XX excerpts from Pliny, Servius, and Solinus occur everywhere. Book XII borrows much from Ambrose’s Hexameron. Solinus and Paulus Orosius’s Histories against the Pagans (fifth century) provide much of the geographical learning in Book XIV.
 
On buildings and fields (Book XV), Columella and Servius are the main bases. Pliny, Servius, and Solinus yield most of Isidore’s mineralogical lore (Book XVI). Book XVII, on agriculture, derives ultimately from Cato via Varro, Columella, Pliny, Servius (mainly his commentary on the Georgics of Vergil), and Rutilius Palladius(fourthcentury),whoseagriculturaltreatisederives mainly from Columella and from his own experience in farming. On war and games (Book XVIII) Isidore draws much material from Servius and, on the Circus games, from the treatise De Spectaculis (ca. 200) of the Christian apologist Tertullian. The last two books may have been conceived as a unit (so Rodr´ıguez-Pantoja 1995: 1); Book xx bears no separate title in early manuscripts. Along with Servius (the main source), Jerome, Festus, and Pliny, in these books Isidore uses the abridgement of Vitruvius’s treatise on architecture made by M. Cetius Faventinus (uncertain date), Palladius, Book xiii of Nonus Marcellus, and others.
Isidore’s absorbing and replicating of these traditions, pagan and Christian, Plinian and Augustinian, show him facing both ways. He may be included among the last humanist polymaths of late antiquity, and also among the early and most influential medieval Christianscholars.41 Heobviouslyacceptedthecommonplace amongChristianscholars,fromAugustine(especiallyDe Doctrina Christiana) and Jerome, that mastery of pagan learning is a good thing for the inquiring Christian: the liberal arts are a fit introduction to the study of the Bible and theology.42 He offers an apology for one type of this learningtohisChristianreader(Etym.I.xliii):“Histories of peoples are no impediment to those who wish to read useful works, for many wise men have imparted the past deeds of humankind in histories for the instruction of the living.” Especially in the broad survey of the natural world and human institutions in the second decade of books, he passed beyond strictly Christian interest by revertingtotheinterestsofLatinscholarssomecenturies earlier.
In this connection a set of verses attributed, probably correctly, to Isidore makes a witty case for eclectic reading. The verses purport to speak of the contents of the cathedral library at Seville, as if they were written on the wallsorbookcases.43 Theworksofencyclopedists–Pliny, Servius,Cassiodorus,andtherest–gounmentioned;the poem sheds light not on the sources of the Etymologies but rather on Isidore’s attitude toward antique learning.
I. These bookcases of ours hold a great many books. Behold and read, you who so desire, if you wish.
Here lay your sluggishness aside, put off your fastidiousness of mind.
Believe me, brother, you will return thence a more learned man.
But perhaps you say, “Why do I need this now?
For I would think no study still remains for me:
I have unrolled histories and hurried through all the law.”
Truly, if you say this, then you yourself still know nothing.
II.	Here there are many sacred works, and here manyother secular ones.
If any of these poems pleases you, take it up and read it.
You see meadows filled with thorns and rich with flowers.
If you do not wish to take the thorns, then take the roses.
III.	Here the venerable volumes of the two Laws shineforth,
The New joined together with the Old.
IV.	Origen
I, the celebrated Origen, at one time a Doctor most true, Whom famous Greece first brought to the faith:
I was lofty in merit and famous for my abundance of speech,
But was suddenly ruined, cut short by a malicious tongue.
I toiled, if you may believe it, to compose as many thousands of books
As a legion has armed men.
No blasphemy ever touched my senses,
But I was watchful and wise, and safe from the enemy.
41	On Isidore’s place in the scholarly tradition see especially Fontaine (1966).
42	See among many studies H. Hagendahl, Latin Fathers and the
Classics:AStudyoftheApologists,Jerome,andOtherChristianWriters (Gothenburg, 1958) and G. Ellspermann, The Attitude of Early Christian Latin Writers toward Pagan Literature and Learning (Washington, 1949). Further references are in Riche´ 1976:7, and see his detailed treatment of Christian uses of classical writings, 79–176. In his Rule for Monks Isidore charged monks to avoid the books of pagans or heretics – evidence that such books were available in monastic libraries. Riche (´ 296) argues that the stricture would not apply to more experienced monks. Isidore’s time was broadly one of less interest in the classical texts, as indicated in Reynolds 1983. Reynolds notesthatof 264booksandfragmentsofLatinbookspreservedfrom the seventh century, only a tenth are secular works, and those mostly technical (p. xvi).
43	We translate from the edition in Sanchez Mart´ ´ın 2000. Among studies of the poem, and Isidore’s sources generally, is D´ıaz y D´ıaz 1975: esp. 136–42.
 
Only the words in my Peri Archon44 brought this misfortune on me.
Impious darts attacked me when I was assailed by these words.
V.	Hilary
Nurturing Gaul sent me, born in Poitiers, Her own Doctor Hilary with thundering speech.
VI.	Ambrose
Doctor Ambrose, celebrated for his miracles and hymns, Shines here with his chapters and his text.
VII.	Augustine
He lies who says he has read you entirely.
What reader could possess your complete works?
For you, Augustine, glow with a thousand volumes.
Your own books bear witness to what I say.
However pleasing may be the wisdom of books by many authors,
If Augustine is there, he himself will suffice you.
VIII.	Jerome
Translator Jerome, most learned in the various languages,
Bethlehem praises you, the whole world resounds with your name;
Our library also celebrates you through your books.
IX.	John
I am John by name, called ‘Chrysostom,’ Because a golden tongue45 makes my work glitter. Constantinople glows with me as its teacher
And I am everywhere renowned for my books as a
Doctor.
I have established morals, I have spoken of the rewards of virtues,
And I have taught wretched culprits to bemoan their crimes.
X.	Cyprian
With a brighter eloquence than all the rest, Cyprian, you gleam.
At one time you were a Doctor, now you are here as a martyr.
XI.	Prudentius, Avitus, Juvencus, Sedulius
If Maro, if Flaccus, if Naso and Persius raise a shudder,
If Lucan and Papinius46 disgust you, Sweet Prudentius of distinguished speech is at hand; With his various poems this noble one is enough.
Read through the learned poem of eloquent Avitus. Behold – Juvencus is there with you, and Sedulius, Both equal in tongue, both flourishing in verse. They bear large cups from the gospel fountain.
Leave off, therefore, waiting on pagan poets –
While you can have such good things, what is Callirhoe47 to you?
XII.	Eusebius, Orosius
Histories of events and circumstances of a bygone age,
This chest holds them collected together on parchment.
XIII.	Gregory
Hippo, as much as you are distinguished for your teacher Augustine,
So much is Rome for its Pope Gregory.
XIV.	Leander
You are held to be not much unequal to the ancient Doctors,
Leander the Bishop: your works teach us this.
XV.	Theodosius, Paulus, Gaius
Collected here is a most ample series of the laws of justice;
The character of the Etymologies
These rule the Latin forum with their true speaking.
 
Internal evidence alone defines the method and purpose of the Etymologies, because apart from the brief
44	Origen was accused of heresy, partly on the basis of statements he made in Peri Archon. For the text (i.e. Rufinus’s Latin translation) and an account of the controversy see H. Crouzel and M. Simonetti, ed. and French trans., Orig`ene: Trait´e des principes, Tomes i and ii, Sources Chretiennes´ 252 (Paris, 1978).
45	Cf. , “gold” and  , “mouth.”
46	The four poets in the title are Christians; the next six (Vergil, Horace, Ovid, Persius, Lucan, and Statius) are pagans.
47	Callirhoe was the name of an Athenian fountain, here taken as the inspiration of the pagan poets.
dedicationtoSisebut(appendedLetterVI)nostatement from Isidore survives. Obviously he compiled the work on the basis of extensive notes he took while reading through the sources at his disposal. Not infrequently he repeats material verbatim in different parts of the work; either he copied extracts twice or he had a filing system that allowed multiple use of a bit of information. Presumably he made his notes on the slips of parchment that he might have called schedae: “A scheda is a thing still being emended, and not yet redacted into books”
(VI.xiv.8).
 
TheguessthatIsidorehadhelpfromateamofcopyists (Fontaine, 1966:526) finds some support in the fact that some errors of transmission may indicate that Isidore was using excerpts poorly copied or out of context, perhaps excerpts made by a collaborator. Although these could result from Isidore’s own copying error or failure of memory, they are suggestive. At XVII.iv.10, for example,hemisconstruesServius’scommentonAeneid6.825, taking the phrase Pisaurum dicitur, “the city of Pesaro is so called . . . ,” as if it were pis aurum dicitur, “pis means gold” – there is no Latin word pis. Again, at XVII.vii.67 occurs another misreading of Servius (on Georgics 2.88), taking types of pears as olives. Most telling in this connection is a confusion at XVI.iii.3:
Crepido (i.e. ‘a projection, promontory’) is a broken-off extremity of rock, whence a height of sheer rock is called crepido, as in (Vergil, Aeneid 10.361): ‘Foot (pes) presses against foot’ – whence it is so called.
The place in Servius from which the information “crepido is a height of broken-off rock” is drawn actually is a comment on Aeneid 10.653, where the word crepido occurs. In the course of his comment, Servius cites in another connection Aeneid 10.361, which does not involve the term crepido but rather exemplifies a grammatical point. The error could be Isidore’s own, but it could easily be attributed to an assistant’s truncating the excerpt so as to leave the wrong line from Vergil as the authenticating illustration of the use of the term.ItappearsthatIsidorethenturnedtheerrorintoan etymology, deriving crepido from pes, gen. pedis. These instancesarefromServius,whoseorganizationfollowed the text of Vergil rather than an alphabetical or topical arrangement, and whose information was hence more difficulttoextractandreorderthanthematerialsinPliny or Cassiodorus, and thus more liable to errors of this kind.
Explicit evidence about the purpose of the Etymologies is scant.48 In a few places Isidore indicates that he will treat “what ought to be noted” (notandum) about a topic,49 but seldom does he explain why. In Book II, following Cassiodorus, he several times remarks on the usefulness of knowing the logical disciplines for understanding books of both rhetoric and logic, avoiding the deception of false sophisms, and grasping the “clearly wonderful” power of gathering human inventiveness into a limited set of topics.50 Elsewhere he explainsthesymbolsusedfordifferentweights,tokeepa reader who might be ignorant of them from falling into error (XVI.xxvii.1). Thus he aims to furnish the material required for good reading and to provide schemas for managing discourse. In a few places he proposes aids for understanding the Bible: knowing the rationale of terms for numbers can elucidate scriptural mysteries; exposition of Hebrew names reveals their meaning; the patriarchs’ names derive from intrinsic causes; the names of prophets can indicate what their words and deeds foretell; it is proper to know of cities whose origin is reported in Scripture (or in pagan histories).51 Again, he remarks that the most important of mountains and rivers – as celebrated in histories or in general opinion – should be known (XIII.xxi.6, XIV.viii.1).
AfullersenseofwhatIsidorewasabout,andforwhom he wrote, may be gathered from who he was and what he did. His close relations with the Visigothic rulers, especially Sisebut, and his dedication of the Etymologies to Sisebut (himself a writer),52 imply that he wrote in part for the general literate governing class of his nation – those who might partake of and patronize a liberal education.53 The clergy, too, were among the main recipients of Isidore’s attention – more obviously in some of his other works, but evidently in the Etymologies as well. His purpose was pastoral and pedagogical – he wished for his priests and monks to possess a general knowledge of what books make available, and to possess the preliminary skills that make intelligent reading, especially of Scripture, possible. External evidence of Isidore’s concern for education of the clergy is available: he presided over the Council of Toledo in 633, and one of the decrees promulgated there commanded bishops
48	On Isidore’s motives for compiling the Etymologies see Fontaine (2000: 174–76).
49	For example VII. vii. 1, XIII.xxi.6, XIV. viii.1. 50 See II.xxvi.15, xxviii. 1, xxx.18.
51 See III.iv.1, VII.i.2, VII.vii.1, VII.viii.3, XV.i.2. 52 Sisebut’s poem on natural phenomena is edited in J. Fontaine, Trait´e (1960: 328–35).
53	OnthelearningofthelaityinIsidore’sSpainseeRiche´ 1976:246– 65, and R. Collins, “Literacy and Laity in Early Medieval Spain,” in R. McKitterick, ed., The Uses of Literacy in Early Mediaeval Europe (Cambridge, 1990: 109–33). Relevant also is the chapter on “The Literacy of the Laity” in McKitterick, The Carolingians and the Written Word (Cambridge, 1989). A fascinating argument that, for the Spanish laity, learning Latin would be merely the learning of a traditional spellingsystemismadebyR.Wright,LateLatinandEarlyRomancein SpainandCarolingianFrance(Liverpool,1982),esp.83–95onIsidore.
 
to establish educational centers at each cathedral city of Spain. Bishop Braulio’s claims that the Etymologies were written at his own request (Letter II and Renotatio) presume a clerical motive, and Braulio’s sense of the Etymologies’purposeistothepoint:“Whoeverthoughtfullyandthoroughlyreadsthroughthiswork...willnot be ignorant of the knowledge of human and divine matters, and deservedly so. Overflowing with eloquence of various arts with regard to nearly every point of them that ought to be known, it collects them in summarized form.” The work, then, aims to gather what ought to be known, especially by a cleric, in a compendium.
Moreprecisely,theformoftheworkindicatesIsidore’s intentions. It is written in easy Latin, in relentlessly utilitarian prose. At the outset it presents the Seven Liberal Arts, with an obviously propaedeutic motive. It is a storehouse, to be sure, but it also provides a reasonably sequential general education. The hundreds of citations illustrate the facts presented, but conversely they exemplify the kinds of reading, pagan and Christian, that the Etymologies can enrich. Generally the treatment is in continuous prose, not tables or lists, and its effort at pleasing variation – even when the facts presented are rather repetitive in form – implies a reader absorbing the work consecutively, even as its careful organization ensuresaccesstopicbytopictoareaderlookingforaparticular fact. In an era when the gravest dangers to Christianity were thought to be intellectual errors, errors in understanding what one read – that is, heresies like Arianism – mastery of the language arts was the Church’s bestdefense.Isidore’sbookconstitutedalittlelibraryfor Christianswithoutaccesstoarichstoreofbooks(iteven incorporates a good deal of material from Isidore’s own previous books) in order to furnish capable Christian minds.
Although a good number of statements in the Etymologies address particular Christian concerns, such
54	Euhemerus’s utopian novel, Sacred Scripture, written around 300 bce, is extant only in fragments and epitomes. It presented the idea that Uranus, Cronos, and Zeus were human kings whose subjectsworshippedthemasgods–anideanotalientoAugustanRome. Christians naturally seized on the idea. For the development of the idea of euhemerism and physical allegory see Don Cameron Allen, MysteriouslyMeant:TheRediscoveryofPaganSymbolismandAllegorical Interpretation in the Renaissance (Baltimore, 1970). Examples of euhemeristic and rationalizing interpretations of such mythological figures as Scylla and Hydra may be found at II.xii.6 and XI.iii.28–31 and 34.
statements amount to comments by the way when theologically incorrect ideas emerge in Isidore’s sources. The core of the work is not apologetic but informational. Still, we find Isidore carefully denying such superstitions as that a turtle’s foot on board retards the progress of a ship (XII.vi.56), or that the stars have predictive power – “These [horoscopes] are undoubtedly contrary to our faith, and so they ought to be ignored by Christians, so that these things are not seen to be written up” (III.lxxi.38). Reporting that augurs claim to predict the future by observing crows, he remarks, “It is a great sin to believe that God would entrust his counsels to crows” (XII.vii.44). Isidore’s persistent response to pagan religious belief is euhemerism, the interpretation of pagan divinities and mythological figures as in fact human beings wrongly elevated as supernatural creatures by benighted heathen.54 In his chapter on the pagan gods (VIII.xi) Isidore begins confidently, “Those who the pagans assert are gods are revealed to have once been men, and after their death they began to be worshipped among their people.” In the same chapter (section29)herejectsthetraditionofinterpretingthenames of the gods as expressing universal physical properties, “physical allegory,” such that Cronos would represent time, Neptune water. Treating the names of the days of the week (V.xxx.5–11) Isidore gives both the Christian and the pagan terms. Noting that the latter are named from heathen gods – Saturday from Saturn, etc. – he is careful to remind us that those figures were actually giftedhumans,butheacknowledgesthatthesenamesfor days are in common use. “Now, in a Christian mouth, the names for the days of the week sound better when they agree with the Church’s observance. If, however, it should happen that prevailing practice should draw someone into uttering with his lips what he deplores in his heart, let him understand that all those figures whose names have been given to the days of the week were themselves human.” We sense here both Isidore’s theological precision and his episcopal tolerance.
The learned tradition that lies behind Isidore’s work wouldlendhimfiveschemesoforganizationfromwhich to choose. In roughly chronological order these are: the sequential “scholiastic” order of a particular text, as used by the scholiasts on ancient texts, and commentators on master texts like Vergil (Servius) and the Bible (the Church Fathers); the “encyclopedic” order from Varro through Pliny, arranged in rational order
 
by topic; the educational or propaedeutic order, especiallyoftheSevenLiberalArts(fromtriviumtoquadrivium), from Varro through Cassiodorus; the haphazard “conversational” order of Aulus Gellius and Macrobius; and the alphabetical “dictionary” order of collections of glosses and other extracts, through Placidus. Apart from these broader orders are the internal ordering principles of such monographic treatises as annals and chronologies (obviously, chronological order), medical works (e.g., acute and chronic diseases; head to toe anatomies), and the rational orders of logical and legal texts.
Isidore used all these orders except the scholiastic and the conversational. The general scheme of the twenty bookscanbeapproachedinseveralways.55 Onearrangement, with some support from the manuscript tradition, divides the Etymologies into two decades of ten books.InassessingthisarrangementweneedtorememberBraulio’sassertionintheRenotatiothatitwashe,not Isidore, who divided the text into books, where Isidore hadleftitonlydividedinto“titles”(tituli)–perhapswhat we call the “chapters” of the received text.56 The organizing principle of the second decade is obviously encyclopedic, and contains two movements: the first (Books XI–XVI) might be called On the Nature of Things – the Lucretian title, adopted by Isidore himself in an earlier work. This segment ranges (below celestial matters) from higher to lower things – from intelligent animals (humans;BookXI)throughotheranimals(XII),cosmic and non-earthly phenomena (XII), the earth (XIV), and earthy materials (XVI). Within these orders a number of subclassifications are perceptible – for example, the treatment of metals from the most to the least valuable, of gems by color, or the division of the world’s objects into those composed of each of the four elements. Out of order here, in this conception, is Book XV, rather a miscellany on cities and things built by humans – this would fit better, perhaps, in the second movement of the second decade. This movement (XVII–XX) broadly treats human institutions, artifacts, and activities. Book XVIIbeginsinthisway,atleast,withagriculture,though the bulk of the book treats flora in detail – our (ultimately Aristotelian) sense of order would prefer to place this material among the books on animals and minerals. Theorderofthislastgroupofbooksisnotobvious;their miscellaneous character may explain why they fall at the end of the whole work.
The first decade adopts several principles of order: propaedeutic, encyclopedic, alphabetic. Books I–III obviously conform to the idea of the Seven Liberal Arts, as explained in I.ii. These are followed by the treatments of medicine and law (IV, the first part of V), rounding out a general introductory education, we might say, in the professions. The second part of Book V, on the mensuration of time and the actual chronology of history, annalistically ordered, may be said to look both back, to theessentiallypagancharacteroftheliberaldisciplinesof thefirstbooks,andforward,tothereligiousmatterofthe following books. This set, Books VI to VIII, focuses on thesacredsciences,notinanobvioussequence.BookVI is propaedeutic to these, treating Scripture, the authority for the rest, then books in general, then a number of ecclesiastical matters. Books VII and VIII present a transparent order, moving from God downward to heresy and paganism. Book IX treats human institutions broadly conceived, human organization (languages, nations, reigns, cities, kinship), and Book X, alphabetically ordered, presents terms descriptive of humans. These two books might after all be classed with the following book (XI), the anatomy of human beings.
A more general characterization of the Etymologies’ scheme of organization would make the main division afterBookV.Thusthefirstpartconstitutesnotestoward a general education, and the second a particularization of reality based mainly on two principles, that of the Great Chain of Being (from God to inanimate materials) and that of the four elements. In this scheme, too, thelastgroupofbooksconstitutesananomalousmiscellany. Neither order consistently dominates the text, and the exigencies of Isidore’s broadest intention, to store in compendious form what is known from former times, ultimately takes precedence over the inherited schemes.
As Fontaine has pointed out (1966:536–38), Isidore’s followers derived material wholesale from the Etymologies, but under more fully Christianized, “clericalized” form, in “a sort of Carolingian edition.” Especially remarkable in this connection is the reordering of the work by Hrabanus Maurus in his On the Nature of Things, which begins not with the Liberal Arts (which
55	Asimilaraccountoftheorganizationoftheworkmaybefound in Fontaine 2000:176–78.
56	Furthermore,itseemsthatBrauliodividedtheworkintofifteen books; the division into twenty books developed during the course of the manuscript diffusion (see Reydellet 1966:435).
 
Hrabanus treated in another book) but with the religious material, and works “down” through the Chain of Being.57 Furthermore, Hrabanus lards the whole with allegorical interpretations of the kind found in Isidore’s own Certain Allegories of Sacred Scripture. Not until the thirteenth century, and not entirely until the sixteenth century,doestheimpulsetowardencyclopedismrecover the intellectual inclusiveness of Isidore.
Given this rough outline of the Etymologies, we can turntoitsparticularcontent,andbeginbynoticingafew things the Etymologies is not. First of all, it is not complete or polished – so Braulio implies and so Isidore says in the letters prefaced to the work in the manuscripts (Letters II and V). We may imagine that the finished work would have eliminated many of the repetitions currently present, and might have joined together the now scattered materials on law (Books II and V), on astronomy (Books III and XIII), on nations (Books IX, XIV, and XV), and the like. However, Isidore might well have retained those repeated statements that fall naturally into separate topics. Surely he would have completed or omitted the dozens of items that now stand as the lemma – a single word – alone, without further discussion. These are signaled in this translation by the appearance of ellipsis points, as XI.i.93 or XIX.v.4.58
Second, Isidore makes no effort to disclose the rationale of the taxonomies he presents. Here the (derived) shapelinessoftheearlybooksontheliberaldisciplinesis the exception; on the whole Isidore does not explain the order of things beyond what is implicit in their sequence in the text. In this he is like his sources, from Varro on, and differs from the masters of these sciences, Plato and Aristotle. As a consequence we have no reason to think
57	Hrabanus’s work is usually known under the title De Universo (mid-ninth century): Patrologia Latina 111. A facsimile of an early Montecassino manuscript of it is ed. G. Cavallo, De Rerum Naturis: Casin. 132, secolo XI (Turin, 1994). See Maria Rissel, Rezeption antiker undpatristischerWissenschaftbeiHrabanusMaurus(BernandFrankfurt, 1976).
58	A much rarer type of incompleteness occurs at XIV.ix.7, where a sentence breaks off before giving the Biblical citation.
59	II.xxix, VIII.vii.3, XIV.ix.2. The sources are explicitly named: Marius Victorinus and Varro. For such divisiones of topics see also I.v.4, II.v, II.xxi.1, II.xxiv.9–11, II.xxvi.5 (all from Cassiodorus), and V.xxvii.4(followingCicero)andXVIII.ii.1(followingSallust).Itmay be doubted whether Isidore supplied any such rationales apart from his sources.
60	This is the work Braulio calls On the Names in the Law and the
Gospels.
most of the classes of things treated are presented with all their members – a consideration repeatedly made explicitbyIsidorehimself(e.g.XII.vii.2).Soitis,afterall, with post-Linnaean biology as well. It should be added here that Isidore does include a good number of lesser schemata, establishing such logical sets of things as the types of definition, or the types of divination, or the
kinds of fields.59
Andthird,Isidoregenerallyavoids,intheEtymologies, providing “spiritual” or “mystical,” or “figurative,” that is, allegorical, interpretations of the items he adduces. Thesewerethemaincontentofhisearlierwork(perhaps 612–615), the Certain Allegories of Sacred Scripture.60 In fact we find a few of such interpretations: “the Hebrews used a ten-stringed psaltery on account of the number of laws of the Decalogue” (III.xxii.7); Esther’s people are “a figure of the Church of God,” and as Aman’s name means“wickedness,sohiskillingiscelebratedinthefeast of Purim” (Esther 7 and 9; Etym. VI.ii.29); the seraphim “figuratively signify the Old and New Testaments,” they have six wings as a figure of the things made in the six days, and their crying “Holy” three times (Isaiah 6:3) “shows the mystery of the Trinity” (VII.v.32–33); the split tip of a quill pen signifies the Old and New Testaments (VI.xiv.3). At one point Isidore explicitly denies any attempt to provide the spiritual sense: speaking of the names of Biblical characters, he says, “While a holy andspiritualcharacterabidesinthesenames,wearenow describing the meaning of their stories only with regard to the literal” (ad litteram; VII.vi.2). Indeed, his direct treatment of divinity in Book VII is essentially a treatment of names, and not a theological investigation. This self-imposed limitation has its precedent in Augustine’s The Literal Level of the Book of Genesis (De Genesi ad Litteram), and it is fairly consistently carried out through the Etymologies, hence giving Hrabanus his opportunity for “improvement” of the work for a clerical audience eager for such interpretations.
Isidore’s overriding interest, the fundamental principle of the Etymologies, falls under the discipline Isidore would call grammar, the “origin and foundation of liberal letters” (I.v.1), and what we would call philology – the art of understanding and correctly producing words andtexts.Itisanobviousfactthat,beforethenineteenth century (the twentieth in the East), philology broadly conceived was the dominant concern of the learned world, the queen of the sciences; Isidore merely reflects
 
that concern at one of the turning-points of intellectual history, as pagan thought in the West gave way to Christian thought. What we might understand as alternative master-disciplines – theology, or experimental science, or philosophy – in Isidore’s work are subsumed under philology in what Fontaine calls the “pangrammatical” cast of late antique culture (1966:534).
In fact three sequential chapters (I.xxix–xxxi) in his treatment of the art of Grammar treat three of the main informing principles of the Etymologies: these are etymology, glosses, and differentiae. If we add to these the theme of the next three chapters (xxxii–xxxiv), faulty Latin usage, and the idea that propositions are usefully finished with an illustrative or exemplary quotation, we will have summed up much of the content of the Etymologies.
First, glosses. Isidore defines a gloss as a single term that designates the meaning of another term (I.xxx). If we broaden this to include any sort of definition of a term, we might expect to find hundreds of such definitions in the Etymologies, and indeed there are many: the definition of “gloss” itself, or, selecting at random, of such terms as “chronic disease” (IV.vii.1), “hymn” (VI.xix.17), “tyro” (IX.iii.36), “vineshoot” (XVII.v.9). However, such glosses are relatively infrequent, as compared with Isidore’s usual presumption that the basic meaning of the Latin word is either already known to his reader, or (like terms for minerals or herbs) is not in his interest to define in any systematic way – such that, for example, one could positively identify an actual specimen of an item using only his description of it. This is not to say that formal systems of definition were unknown to him: thus in II.xxix he lists fifteen types of definition, with their Greek equivalents, “abbreviated from the book of Marius Victorinus”; and in II.xxv and xxvi he briefly but clearly expounds the logical taxonomy of Porphyry’s Isagoge and the system of predicates of Aristotle’s Categories.
Second,differentiae.Thisisthekindofdefinitionthat doesinterestIsidore,andtheyconstitutethesubjectmatter of a treatise he wrote before he turned to the Etymologies. In I.xxxi he says a differentia is the distinguishing and therefore defining feature of things otherwise alike, and gives for example the differentiation of the terms for a king (restrained and temperate) and a tyrant (cruel). Isidore introduces dozens of such differentiae in the Etymologies – between a maxim and a chreia (II.xi), between astronomy and astrology (III.xxvii), between three types of law (ius, lex, mores; V.iii), between types of wars (XVIII.i.2–10) and types of pyres (XX.x.9). As much as any information Isidore gives, such differentiae reveal Isidore’s pedagogical motives: to refine the reader’s sense of Latin, sharpen the mind with a fundamental form of reasoning, discourage incorrect usage.
Finally, etymology. On this crucial subject in Isidore we must refer to the essay by Fontaine (1978), with full bibliography, which remains the best treatment – perhaps the only essay on a section of the Etymologies, namelythechapteronetymologyitself(I.xxix),thatfully and definitively treats Isidore’s thinking and his work with his sources. The sources of this chapter include Quintilian’s Institutes of Oratory (I.vi.28), citing Cicero’s Topics (35) – where Cicero literally translates the Greek term     as veriloquium, “true utterance” – and Boethius’s commentary on the Topics.61 In his chapter on etymology Isidore gives no hint that what he is definingisthemostpowerfulinformingprincipleofthework that both he and Braulio refer to as either Etymologiae or Origines(LettersII,IV,V,VI,Renotatio).Hedefinesetymology as “the origin of words, when the force of a word or a name is inferred through interpretation.” He goes on, “The knowledge of a word’s etymology often has an indispensable usefulness for interpreting the word, for when you have seen whence a word has originated, you understand its force more quickly. Indeed, one’s insight into anything is clearer when its etymology is known.”62
In the same chapter Isidore offers a brief account (as had Varro and others) of types of etymology, as follows. Some things take their names not from their nature, but arbitrarily. Words with retrievable etymologies take them from their causa (rationale, intrinsic principle, explanatory force), the word’s answer to the question “why?” Other words derive from the thing’s origin, the word’s answer to the question “from where?” Of the former an example is rex (“king”) from acting recte (“correctly”); of the latter, homo (“human being”) from humus (“earth,” the “origin” – Aristotle would say “the material cause” – of the human). Still other etymologies
61	The commentary is trans. E. Stump, Boethius’s In Ciceronis Topica (Ithaca, NY, 1988). Cicero’s Topics are edited by T. Reinhardt (Oxford, 2003).
62	Obviously a great many, perhaps most, of the etymologies that Isidoreproposesareincorrectinlightofmodernscholarship.Forthe actual etymologies of Latin words consult A. Ernout and A. Meillet, Dictionnaire ´etymologique de la langue latine, 4th edn. (Paris, 1979) and the appendix on “Indo-European Roots” by Calvert Watkins in The American Heritage Dictionary (Boston, 1976).
 
are based on contraries, so that ‘mud’ (lutum) derives from ‘washing’ (lavare, with the past participle lutus). Some words have their etymology by derivation from other words, like the adjective “prudent” from the noun “prudence.” Some etymologies may be discovered in words of similar sound. Some words are derived from Greek, and others derive their names from place names. The origins of words derived from other foreign languages are often hard to discern.
This brief statement could be much expanded, but it contains the essence of Isidore’s principal endeavor, to disclose the inner and true (	  ) meaning of the Latin lexicon by way of the etymology of the words. The method is fundamentally derivational, whether from a thing’s intrinsic character (its causa) to its extrinsic name, or from its originating motive by process of time to its current locution, or from some term’s sound to another term’s similar sound, or from one word-class or language to another. The constantly repeated formulas are “X is so called because Y” and “X is so named as if the word were Y.” The focus on origins, indeed, finds expression in many places in the Etymologies where the origins of things rather than merely words are specified: the origins of various alphabets (I.iii.5) and the Latin letters (I.iv.1), of shorthand signs (I.xxii) and of fables (I.xl.1), of historiography (I.xlii) and of the disciplines of Rhetoric (II.ii.1) and physics (II.xxiv.4).63 Further, Isidore supplies hundreds of indications of the regions where things – metals, spices, gems, birds, and the like – originate, uniquely, or in their best condition, or abundantly, and whence they are imported (imported, that is, as Isidore’s sources presume, into Italy). The very idea of a disquisition on the “Nature of Things,” the essential title of an encyclopedic work, implied for a Latin reader the idea that the genesis of things is in question, as the word natura itself means (etymologically!) “what is begotten or generated,” from natus, the past participle of nasci, “be born.”64
63	A few more origins, particularly those inventors and discoverers whom he calls auctores, adduced by Isidore: mathematics (III.ii), geometry (III.x.1), music (III.xvi), various musical instruments (III.xxii.2 and 12), astronomy and astronomical writing (III.xxv and xxvi), medicine and its three schools (IV.iii and iv), laws (V.i) and chronicles(V.28),libraries(VI.iii.2–5),bookcollecting(VI.v),Christian libraries (VI.vi), canon-tables (VI.xv.1), the method of dating Easter Sunday (VI.xvii.1–2), agriculture (XVII.i.2). An unusual instance is the detailed technical description of the origin of glass (XVI.xvi.1–2).
64	So Etymologies XI.i.1, “Nature (natura) is so called because it causes something to be born (nasci).”
In a number of places Isidore offers a brief review of types of etymology for classes of things. Thus “meters are named either after their feet or after the topics about which they are written, or after their inventors, or after those who commonly use them, or after the number of syllables.” Examples, respectively, are dactylic, elegiac, Sapphic, Asclepiadian, pentameter (I.xxxix.5–15). Ointments are named after their regions, inventors, or material (IV.xii.7–9). Heretics may be named after their founders or their tenets (VIII.v.1); philosophers from their founders (Platonists) or their meeting sites (Stoics – VIII.vi.6). To such as these we can add the great many places where Isidore makes the type of an etymology explicit. Examples are the derivations of the names of seas from the names of people who perished in them(XIII.xvi.8);ofthediseasesatyriasisfromitsexemplars the satyrs (IV.vii.34); the names of parts of the Mediterranean from the adjacent regions (XIII.xvi.5); the different terms for earth from logic (ratio – XIV.i.1); ‘pocket change,’ the thing contained, from the word for ‘bag,’ the container (XVI.xviii.11; for such metonymies see I.xxxvii.8); derivation by physical resemblance, as the disease elefantiacus takes its name from the sufferer’sresemblancetoanelephant(IV.viii.12);fromonomatopoeia, as the word for ‘cricket,’ gryllus, is from the sound of its call (XII.iii.8); and similarly the names of many birds (XII.vii.9). The notorious type that Isidore labels with the Greek term      (“by opposition”) is not infrequent: thus the merciless Parcae take their name from the verb meaning “spare” (parcere –
VIII.xi.93).
Usually Isidore grants that the borrowing of a Latin word from Greek amounts to a sufficient etymology, though often he supplies a second explanation from within Latin as well. A great many etymologies based on Greek are not made explicit in the Etymologies, in some cases perhaps from Isidore’s own ignorance of the import of the etymology he adduces. We have supplied the relevant Greek in this translation when we are aware of it. In his treatment of illnesses, for example, Isidore provides a number of etymologies from Greek, but when he gives the etymology of the antidote tyriaca he omits the crucial information that  means “of venomous beasts” (IV.ix.8) although he knows that the medicine is “made from snakes.” He also supplies a number of etymologies from languages other than Latin or Greek – obviously from secondary sources. Most of these, as in the case of Biblical names, are from Hebrew,
 
butwealsolearnofwordsderivedfromPersian(XII.ii.7), Syrian (XII.vi.38), and a number of others.
The influence of the Etymologies
The most frequent type of etymology, from the very beginning(‘know’[scire]isnamedfrom‘learn’[discere]) to the end (‘branding iron’ [cauterium] is so called becauseasawarning[cautio]topotentialthievesitburns [urere]), is the discovery of a term’s origin in another term, a single word or a phrase, because of a resemblance in their sound. Such similarities are often tenuous and remote, as Isidore seems to acknowledge when he observes, in deriving ‘spiced’ (salsus) from the phrase ‘sprinkled with salt’ (sale aspersus), “with the [three] middle syllables taken away” (XX.ii.23) – it is a stretch. It is hard not to agree with the remark of Isidore’s distinguished editor Faustino Arevalo, some two hundred´ years ago, that Isidore can produce an etymology not in the belief that it is the actual origin of a term, but as a mnemonic aid (Patrologia Latina 82.954). Arevalo’s´ example is Isidore’s deriving ‘swan’ (cygnus) from ‘sing’ (canere) – after he has just referred to the Greek word that is the obvious etymon,  . We might add a large number of instances where Isidore notes that a term is “as if the word were” (quasi) another term. Thus Isidore distinguishes the two plural forms of pecus (“livestock”), pecora and pecudes, by proposing that the latter term is used only of animals that are eaten, “as if the word were pecuedes,” that is, as if it contained the term ‘eat’ (edere; XII.i.6). The many dozens of such instances may well reflect Isidore’s effort to help a student of Latin to remember a distinction rather than his belief in the actual origin of a word. To be sure, Isidore’s authoritative sources, pagan and Christian, were replete with etymologies no more strained than these. Isidore illuminates the essences of words, their natures, not in terms of historical linguistics, but in terms of grammar.
 
It would be hard to overestimate the influence of the Etymologies on medieval European culture, and impossible to describe it fully. Nearly a thousand manuscript copies survive, a truly huge number. As evidence of its continuing popularity down to and after the advent of printing,morethansixtymanuscriptcopiesofthewhole work, as well as more than seventy copies of excerpts, were written in the fifteenth century.65 It was among the early printed books (1472), and nearly a dozen printings appeared before the year 1500. According to D´ıaz y D´ıaz (Oroz Reta and Marcos Casquero 19932:210), abundant evidencedemonstratesthat,bytheyear800,copiesofthe Etymologies might be found “in all the cultural centers of Europe.”
The earliest dissemination of the work beyond the cathedral centers of Seville itself and Braulio’s Saragossa seems to have been in Gaul and Ireland. The earliest manuscript fragments of the Etymologies are housed at the monastery of St. Gall, a foundation in presentday Switzerland with Irish connections going back to the early seventh century. These fragments are written in an Irish scribal hand, perhaps as early as the midseventh century.66 Irish texts of the mid to late seventh century show knowledge of the Etymologies, for instance (possibly) the Twelve Abuses of the Age (perhaps before 650).67 The English scholar Aldhelm (obit 709) knew works of Isidore in the late seventh century, and “the
65	J. M. Fernandez Cat´ on,´ Las Etimolog´ıas en la tradicion´ manuscrita medieval estudiada por el Prof. Dr. Anspach (Leon,´ 1966).
66	The fragments are described by E. A. Lowe, Codices Latini
Antiquiores 7 (Oxford, 1956, no. 995). For the early diffusion of the Etymologies see A. E. Anspach, “Das Fortleben Isidors im vii. bis ix Jahrhundert,” in Miscellanea Isidoriana: Homenaje . . . (Rome, 1936:323–56)especiallyforinfluenceinSpain;Bischoff(1966:171–94), esp. 180–87; J. N. Hillgarth 1962; M. Herren, “On the Earliest Irish Acquaintance with Isidore of Seville,” in E. James (Oxford, 1980); Reydellet1966;OrozRetaandMarcosCasquero19932:200–11.Reydellet 1966:389–91 provides a list of the thirty-seven complete or nearly completemanuscriptsoftheEtymologiesdatingfrombeforethetenth century, with their provenances, and reference to the Bischoff study (1966) and Lowe’s Codices. Fontaine 2000:401–16 treats a number of instances of Isidore’s influence, with good bibliography on the subject.
67	On Isidore in early Ireland see Herren (preceding note); M. C. D´ıaz y D´ıaz, “Isidoriana ii: Sobre el Liber de Ordine Creaturarum,” Sacris Erudiri 5 (1953): 147–66; Paul Grosjean, “Sur quelques exeg´ etes` irlandaisduviie siecle,”` SacrisErudiri7(1955):67–97;Riche´ 1976:320. The Pseudo-Cyprian De XII Abusivis Saeculi is edited by Siegmund Hellmann in Texte und Untersuchungen der altchristlichen Literatur 34, 1 (Leipzig, 1909). A. Breen sharply disagrees with Hellmann’s “quiteunproventhesis”thattheTwelveAbusesmakesuseoftheworks ofIsidore:“EvidenceofAntiqueIrishExegesisinPseudo-Cyprian,De Duodecim Abusivis Saeculi,” Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, Section C, vol. 87 (1987): 71–101, esp. p. 76.
 
works of Isidore of Seville were a major influence on the development of Anglo-Saxon intellectual life in the age of Bede,” that is, in the late seventh and early eighth centuries.68
Bede himself, the most learned scholar of his age, made extensive use of the Etymologies, and the work thrived in the Carolingian educational program in Gaul (where Isidore was known at the abbey of Corbie by the mid-seventh century). We have noticed above that Alcuin‘s pupil, the churchman Hrabanus Maurus (ca. 780–856), called “the teacher of Germany,” “clericalized” the Etymologies of Isidore in his popular treatises The Natures of Things and Allegories on the Whole of Sacred Scripture, as well as other works. Both directly and indirectly, through such prominent writers as these, Isidore’sinfluencepervadedtheHighMiddleAgesofthe eleventh to fifteenth centuries, in which the Etymologies was always regarded as a prime authority.
Of that continuing influence we can here only touch on a couple of strands. First was the direct influence of the Etymologies on the traditions of lexicons and encyclopedias that were standard reference works of the later Middle Ages.69 We have noticed that the vast Liber
68	P. H. Blair, The World of Bede (London, 1970). F. C. Robinson has identified a number of bits of etymological lore from Isidore in such Old English poetic texts as Genesis, the riddles of The Exeter Book, and Instructions for Christians: see The Tomb of Beowulf and Other Essays on Old English, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1993), pp. 197, 103,
119.
69	A number of medieval encyclopedias that borrow from the Etymologies are treated by Collison 1964, 19662: 44–81. 70 L. Daly and B. A. Daly, Summa Britonis sive . . . Expositiones Vocabulorum Biblie, 2 vols. (Padua, 1975).
71 A few other evidences of Isidore’s influence: Isidore was often among those excerpted and praised in the collections of sententious utterances(theflorilegia)andthechroniclesofthelaterMiddleAges; a number of these are cited in Patrologia Latina 82:198–205. Aspects of Isidore’s influence on music theory well into the sixteenth century are discussed in R. Stevenson, Spanish Music in the Age of Columbus (TheHague,1960).MaterialsfromBookVIoftheEtymologiesarethe earliest sources for some lore about books and libraries, according to K. Christ, The Handbook of Medieval Library History, trans. T. M. Otto (Metuchen, New Jersey, 1984). Isidore’s deep influence on the medieval tradition of poetics and rhetoric may be exemplified in the citation of his name as an authority on the first page of John of Garland’s Parisian Poetics (about 1220–1235); see T. Lawler, ed., The ‘Parisiana Poetria’ of John of Garland (New Haven, 1974: 5). On “Etymology as a Category of Thought” in medieval Latin Poetry see Curtius (as n.1 above), pp. 495–500. Instances such as these can be multiplied indefinitely.
The influence of the
Glossarum (Glossarium Ansileubi), probably of the late eighth century, incorporates much of Isidore. Around the year 1053 the Italian Papias composed the Elementarium Doctrinae Rudimentum, an alphabetically arranged encyclopedic dictionary replete with etymologies and differentiae from Isidore, surviving in some ninety manuscripts and several Renaissance printings. Borrowing from Papias and Isidore, Osbern of Gloucester compiled his Panormia in the mid-twelfth century, and Huguccio (Hugutio), bishop of Ferrara, produced his Liber Derivationum, also known as the Magnae Derivationes (over 200 manuscripts), of the same type as Papias, around the year 1200. Before 1270 the Franciscan
GuillelmusBrito,masteratParis,completedhisSumma, another alphabetized dictionary of encyclopedic proportions, in this case treating some 2,500 words from the Bible. Its extensive use of the Etymologies, where Isidore is explicitly cited hundreds of times, is detailed in the Index of the modern edition.70 It survives in over 130 manuscript copies, and was printed in the fifteenth century. From these same sources and others Giovanni Balbi of Genoa (Johannes Januensis) finished the culminating encyclopedic dictionary of the Middle Ages, the Catholicon, in 1286. It was one of the first printed books, in 1460.
These dictionaries are accompanied by a series of topically arranged encyclopedias likewise derivative of Isidore, and cumulatively massive. Major ones include HonoriusAugustodunesis,TheImageoftheWorld (early twelfth century), Bartholomaeus Anglicus, The Properties of Things (ca. 1240 – early translated into six languages, including English), Thomas of Cantimpre’s´ Nature of Things (ca. 1245), and the massive set of encyclopedias (over three million words), the Speculum Maius, of Vincent of Beauvais (ca. 1260), of which some eighty manuscripts are extant; it was the first book printed at Strasbourg (1473–1476). Bartholomaeus’s encyclopedia was the basis of the thoroughly allegorized encyclopedic work of Pierre Bersuire, the Reductorium Morale of the mid-fourteenth century. The first encyclopedia in a vernacular language, Brunetto Latini’s Li Livres dou tr´esor, duly dependent on Isidore, appeared around 1265.
Some sense of the continuing use of the Etymologies beyond this tradition of reference works can be acquired byobservingitsinfluenceonthegreatItalianandEnglish poets of the fourteenth century.71 For Dante, suffice it
 
that Isidore is among the luminous minds in the circle of the Sun in Paradiso: “See, flaming beyond, the burning spirit of Isidore” (10.130–31).72 Boccaccio naturally derives material from Isidore (or by way of quotations of the Etymologies in Hrabanus and Vincent of Beauvais) in his learned treatise on the Genealogy of the Gods.73 Closer to hand, he would have found Isidore’s discussion of the origins of poetry and of the term poeta (EtymologiesVIII.vii.1–3)amongPetrarch’sFamiliarLetters, in the letter addressed to his brother Gherardo. Isidore had referred to an otherwise unknown passage from Suetonius, and to Varro, in his discussion. Isidore’s actual source is Servius on Aeneid 3.443. Petrarch in turn cites the material from Varro and Suetonius, and diligently records that he actually derives the information from Isidore, an author “better known to you.” Boccaccio repeats the information in his Short Treatise in Praise of Dante.74 So we find information passed from ancient Latin authors through Isidore and his encyclopedic borrowers to the Italian poets.
In his long French poem, The Mirror of Mankind (ca. 1377), the English poet John Gower calls Isidore “the perfect cleric.”75 In his equally long Latin poem The Voice of One Crying (ca. 1378–ca. 1393), in an exemplary instance, Gower cites Isidore in a passage actually drawn from Godfrey of Viterbo’s encyclopedic poem Pantheon (late twelfth century).76 In Piers Plowman (written ca. 1376), William Langland quotes and paraphrases Isidore’s definition of anima in the course of the figure Anima’s self-explication.77 This may be the only direct paraphrase of a passage of Isidore in English verse; it begins:
‘The whiles I quykne þe cors’, quod he, ‘called am I anima;
And for þat I kan and knowe called am I mens . . .’
Finally we may see the influence of the Etymologies on Chaucer. In the Parson’s Tale of The Canterbury Tales, and nowhere else, Chaucer names Isidore, and quotes from him, both times (lines 89 and 551) at second hand. The latter instance cites Isidore’s remarks on the long-lastingfiremadefromthejunipertree(Etymologies XVII.vii.35): so, says the Parson, is the smoldering fire of Wrath.
Again, we may find the Etymologies behind a passage in the Second Nun’s Tale that derives from the legend of Saint Cecilia in the Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine, the standard collection of saints’ lives in the later Middle Ages (before 1298).78 As often, Jacobus begins his Vita with an etymology of the name of the saint, here deriving her name from caelum, “heaven,” and explicitly borrowing from the Etymologies: “Or she [Saint Cecilia] is called a heaven because, as Isidore says, the philosophers asserted that the heavens are revolving, round, and burning.” He thus quotes verbatim, including the reference to “philosophers,” from Etymologies III.xxxi.1, and he goes on to say in what ways Cecilia was revolving, round, and burning (rotundum, volubile atqueardens).Chaucersayshewill“expowne”themeaning of Cecilia’s name, and follows Jacobus’s several etymologies in detail, concluding with this perfect Chaucerian stanza (113–19), with which we conclude our own exposition:79
And right so as thise philosophres write
That hevene is swift and round and eek brennynge,
Right so was faire Cecilie the white
Ful swift and bisy evere in good werkynge,
And round and hool in good perseverynge, And brennynge evere in charite ful brighte. Now have I yow declared what she highte.
72	“Vedi oltre fiammeggiar l’ardente spiro / d’Isidoro.” See also the citation of Isidore’s etymology of anima in Convivio iv.xv.11.
73	For example in the treatment of “poetry” in Genealogy xiv.vii, perhaps written around 1360. See C. G. Osgood, trans., Boccaccio on Poetry, 2nd edn. (Indianapolis, 1956), pp. 156–59, etc. – see Index. Boccaccio cites the same passage of Isidore in Genealogy xi.ii.
74	See Petrarch, pp. 413–14, and Boccaccio, pp. 492–93, translated in Medieval Literary Theory and Criticism c. 1100–c. 1375, eds. A. J. Minnis, A. B. Scott, and D. Wallace, rev. edn. (Oxford,
1991).
75	Line 10,405. See W. B. Wilson, trans., John Gower: Mirour de l’Omme (East Lansing, MI, 1992: 143).
76	VoxClamantisi.765.SeeE.W.Stockton,trans.,TheMajorLatin Works of John Gower (Seattle, 1962), p. 353.
77	G. Kane and E. T. Donaldson, Piers Plowman: The B Version (London, 1975), 15.23–39. The passage is from Etymologies XI.i.13. It is also quoted in the Summa of Guillelmus Brito, ed. Daly and Daly, p. 40, in Peter the Chanter’s Distinctiones Abel (late twelfth century, under the term ‘Anima’; unedited), and doubtless elsewhere – such is Isidore’s afterlife.
78	G. Ryan and H. Ripperger, trans., The Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine (New York, 1969), p. 689. For other citations of Isidore in the Legend see the Index. Caxton translated and printed the Legend in 1483.
79	The Riverside Chaucer, ed. Larry D. Benson (Boston, 1987).
 
Editions of the Etymologies and this translation
Editions of the Etymologies and this translation
 
The first printed edition of the Etymologies was issued by G. Zainer at Augsburg in 1472.80 This was followed by ten further editions by the year 1500. The first edition of the complete works of Isidore appeared in Paris in 1580. The first important scholarly edition was that of Juan de Grial, which became the basis for work on Isidore until the early nineteenth century; it was issued in Madrid in 1599. Its valuable notes are retained in Arevalo’s edition.´ The Jesuit scholar Faustino Arevalo produced his seven-´ volume edition of the opera omnia from Rome between 1797and1803;volumesiiiandivcontaintheEtymologies. Thisgreatedition,whosenotesupdateandcorrectGrial, was reprinted, with the usual large number of errors, in volumes 81–83 of the Patrologia Latina (ed. J.-P. Migne) in 1850.81 The Etymologies form the bulk of volume 82. In 1909 Rudolph Beer published in Leiden a facsimile edition of the “Toledo” manuscript of the Etymologies, now Madrid manuscript Tol. 15.8.
Wallace M. Lindsay edited the Etymologies for the Scriptorum Classicorum Bibliotheca Oxoniensis series in 1911. This was the first edition of the work based on modern principles of textual criticism, and it was prepared by the ablest student of Late Latin of his time. Lindsay claims, with good reason, to have produced a text that accords with the state of Isidore’s text as it might have appeared around the year 700. His diffidence about capturing the ipsissima verba of Isidore is sensible; given the complex relationship of Isidore with his sources, which themselves doubtless often came down to him in somewhat corrupted
80	The following information about early editions of Isidore is mainly drawn from D´ıaz y D´ıaz (Oroz Reta and Marcos Casquero
19932:226–36).
81	ThePatrologiaeditionwasreprintedin1977byBrepolsinTurnhout, Belgium.
82	We find no reason to dissent from the judgment, printed in his edition of Lindsay’s Studies, of Michael Lapidge, himself a distinguished Latinist: “Wallace Martin Lindsay (1858–1937) was one of the greatest, perhaps the greatest, Latin scholars ever born in these British Isles” (Studies in Early Medieval Latin Glossaries 1996: ix).
83	A.-I. Magallon Garcia,´ Concordantia in Isidori Hispaliensis Etymologias: A Lemmatized Concordance to the Etymologies of Isidore of Sevilla. 4 vols. Hildesheim, 1995.
84	On the origins of this edition see Oroz Reta and Marcos Casquero 19932:235–36.
form, it is in fact hard to be sure that one does not over-correct on the basis of sources. On the other hand, the steadily accumulating knowledge about the precise sources Isidore used will inevitably inform better readings in future editions, as it already has in the recent critical editions. Lindsay’s remarkable accuracy and good judgment have been apparent to us from the outset, and his edition will not easily be superseded.82 It is still in print, and is likewise handily accessible in the Oroz Reta-Marcos Casquero edition (19932), which has very few typographical errors. Further, it is also now available on the internet at the address http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/texts/ Isidore/home.html. This version is corrected and variously improved from the text that may also be found on the internet at www.thelatinlibrary.com/isidore.html. Lindsay’stextisalsoavailableontheCD-ROMissuedby CETEDOC in the Library of Latin Texts. A concordance to the Etymologies has recently appeared.83
Two translations into Spanish of the complete Etymologies have hitherto appeared for the Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos: by Luis Cortes y G´ ongora (Madrid,´ 1957), and by Jose Oroz Reta and Manuel-A. Marcos´ Casquero (19932). The latter edition has an excellent and comprehensive introduction by Manuel C. D´ıaz y D´ıaz, and is provided with the Latin text of Lindsay on facing pages with the translation. We have compared the Reta–Casquero translation in detail with our own, and we have a good number of differences of interpretation from their translation. Yet we must acknowledge that they have divined, at various points of difficulty in the Latin, solutions that we had not grasped.
As already noted, a new, international edition of the Etymologies has been appearing, book by book, in the series Auteurs Latins du Moyen Age, being published by Belles Lettres in Paris.84 To date five volumes have appeared, published from 1981 to 1995, under the general direction of the distinguished Isidoreans Jacques Fontaine and Manuel C. D´ıaz y D´ıaz. Information about these volumes appears in the bibliography appended below.Theseareaccompaniedbytranslationsinthelanguage of the editors; one has appeared so far in English (Marshall, 1983); of the others, three are in French, and one in Spanish. Of particular value is their profuse
 
presentation, in the form of footnotes, of the sources of Isidore’s text. We have examined these volumes in detail, have admired them enormously, have learned much from them, and occasionally refer to them in our own notes. The new editors make a number of emendations of Lindsay’s text on sound grounds, but in fact the excellence of Lindsay’s edition is confirmed by the small number of substantial emendations that the ALMA editors propose. In striking cases we supply the probably superior readings in our notes.
We have based our translation strictly on Lindsay’s text. It will be obvious that our translation is fairly literal, as we anticipate that readers with some knowledge of Latin will prefer clarity and help with the occasionally difficult syntax rather than elegance of style. As we have said,Isidore’sLatinisresolutelyutilitarian;hemanifestly aimed to help his readers, and not to delight them with fancy prose.85 We offer translations of a number of technical terms – plants, colors, minerals, and the like – not in confidence that the English term exactly catches the meaning of the Latin word (or whatever meaning Isidore or his sources might attach to the word), but as a rough guide to the sense. Further, when a Latin term in Isidore has no known English correspondent or meaning beyond what Isidore explicitly supplies, we have simply left the term in Latin: examples are flamines (X.96), sibilus (XII.iv.9), thracius (XVI.iv.8), and cetra (XVIII.xi.5). In the many places where Isidore quotes earlier authors in wording that departs from the modern received texts of those authors, we have translated Isidore,andnotthereceivedtext,annotatingthepassage when needed for clarity. The simple conventions that we follow in presenting the text are explained in the Note to the Reader.
85 Cf. Fontaine 2000:352: “Isidore sought a purely functional and pedagogical style that was accessible even to the least literate clerks and monks.”
 
Bibliography
 
Modern editions and translations of the Etymologies
Andre. J. (ed.) (´ 1981) Isidore de S´eville: Etymologies. Livre XVII, De l’agriculture, with tr. and comm. Paris.
(1986) Isidore de S´eville: Etymologies. Livre XII, Des animaux, with tr. and comm. Paris.
Goode, H. D. and Drake, G. C. (tr.) (1980) Cassiodorus, Institutiones Book II, Chapter V; Isidore of Seville, Etymologies Book III, Chapters 15–23. Colorado Springs.
Lindsay, W. M. (ed.) (1911) Isidori Hispalensis Episcopi Etymologiarum sive Originum Libri XX. Oxford.
Marshall,P.K.(ed.)(1983)Etymologies.BookII,Rhetoric, with tr. and comm. Paris.
Oroz Reta, J. and Marcos Casquero, M.-A. (eds.) (1993) Etimolog´ıas: edicion biling´ ue¨ , with tr. and comm., and introd. by Manuel C. D´ıaz y D´ıaz, 2nd edn. Madrid.
Reydellet, M. (ed.) (1984) Etymologies. Livre IX, Les langues et les groupes sociaux, with tr. and comm.
Paris.
Rodr´ıguez-Pantoja, M. (ed.) (1995) Etimolog´ıas. Libro XIX,Denaves,edificiosyvestidos,withtr.andcomm. Paris.
Modern editions and translations of other works by Isidore
Campos Ruiz, J. (ed.) (1971) Reglas monasticas de la´ Espana visigoda. Los tres libros de las “Sentencias”˜ (includes Isidore’s Regula Monachorum and Sententiae). Madrid.
Carracedo Fraga, J. (ed.) (1996) Liber de ortu et obitu patriarcharum. Turnhout.
Cazier, P. (ed.) (1998) Isidorus Hispalensis sententiae. Turnhout.
Codoner Merino, C. (ed.) (¯ 1964) El “De Viris Illustribus” de Isidoro de Sevilla. Salamanca.
(ed.)(1992)IsidorodeSevilla:Diferencias,withtr.and comm. Paris.
29
Fontaine, J. (ed.)(1960) Isidore de S´eville: Trait´e de la nature. Bordeaux.
Ford, G. B., Jr. (ed.) (1970) The Letters of St. Isidore of Seville, with tr., 2nd edn. Amsterdam.
Lawson, C. M. (ed.) (1989) Sancti Isidori Episcopi Hispalensis De ecclesiasticis officiis. Corpus Christianorum Series Latina 113. Turnhout
Lynch, C. H. (ed.) (1938) Saint Braulio, Bishop of Saragossa (631–651): His Life and Writings (includes a translation of the correspondence between Braulio and Isidore). Washington, DC. A Spanish translation: Madrid, 1950.
Martin, J. C. (ed.) (2003) Isidori Hispalensis Chronica. CCSL 112. Turnhout.
Sanchez Mart´ ´ın, J. M. (ed.) (2000) Isidori Hispalensis Versus. Turnhout.
Strunk, O. (ed.) (1998) Source Readings in Music History (includes a translation of Book iii, chapters 15–23). New York.
Trisoglio, F. (ed. and tr.) (2001) La natura delle cose. Rome.
VinayoGonz¯	alez,A.(ed.andtr.)(´	2001)Sinonimos´	.Leon.´
NotealsotheLibraryofLatinTexts:CLCLT-5(Turnhout, 2002), a searchable database that includes the Latin text of the Regula Monachorum from Campos Ruiz, J. (ed.) (1971), the Latin texts in Fontaine, J. (ed.) (1960), Lawson, C. M. (ed.) (1989), and Lindsay,
W. M. (ed.) (1911), as well as the Allegoriae, the De DifferentiisRerum,theDeDifferentiisVerborum,the De Fide Catholica Contra Iudaeos, the Quaestiones in Vetus Testamentum, and the Sententiae from the Patrologia Latina, vol. 83.
Further reading
Beer, R. (ed.)(1909) Isidori Etymologiae: Codex toletanus (nunc matritensis) 15, 8 phototypice editus. Leiden.
Beeson, C. H. (1913) Isidor-Studien (includes the text of the Versus Isidori). Munich.
 
Bibliography
Bischoff, B. (1966, 1967) Mittelatlterliche Studien, vols. i and ii. Stuttgart.
Brehaut, E. (1912) An Encyclopedist of the Dark Ages: Isidore of Seville (includes English translations of selected passages from each book). New York.
Cazier, P. (1994) Isidore de S´eville et la naissance de l‘Espagne catholique. Paris.
Collins, R. (1980) “Merida and Toledo:´ 550–585,” in James, E. (ed.) (1980).
(1995) Early Medieval Spain: Unity in Diversity, 400– 1000, 2nd edn. New York.
Collison, R. (1964, 19662) Encyclopedias: Their History Throughout the Ages. New York and London.
D´ıaz, P. C. (1999) “Visigothic political institutions,” in Heather, P. (ed.) (1999).
D´ıaz y D´ıaz, M. C. (ed.) (1961) Isidoriana. Leon.´
(1975) “La Trasmission de los textos antiguos en la peninsula iberica en los siglos vii–xi,” pp. 133–75 in La Cultura antica nell’occidente latino dal VII all’ XI secolo. Settimane di Studio del Centro Italiano di Studi sull’Alto Medioevo 22:1. Spoleto.
Fontaine, J. (1959, 19832) Isidore de S´eville et la culture classique dans l’Espagne wisigothique. Paris.
(1966) “Isidore de Seville et la mutation de´ l’encyclopedisme antique,” in´ Cahiers d’histoire mondiale IX, Neuchatel:ˆ 519–538, reprinted in Fontaine (1988).
(1978) “Coherence et originalit´ e de l’´ etymologie´ isidorienne,” pp. 113–44 in Homenaje a Eleuterio Elorduy S.J., ed. Felix Rodriguez and Juan Iturriaga.´ Deusto.
(1981) “Aux sources de la lexicographie medi´ evale:´ Isidore de Seville´ mediateur´ de l’etymologie´ antique,” pp. 97–103 in La Lexicographie du latin m´edi´eval et ses rapports avec les recherches actuelles sur la civilisation du moyen-ageˆ , Editions du CNRS. Paris.
(1988) Tradition et actualit´e chez Isidore de S´eville. London.
(2000) Isidore de S´eville: gen`ese et orginalit´e de la culture hispanique au temps des Wisigoths. Turnhout. Heather, P. (1991) Goths and Romans, 332–489. Oxford.
(1996) The Goths. Oxford.
(ed.) (1999) The Visigoths from the Migration Period to the Seventh Century: an Ethnographic Perspective.
San Marino.
Heather, P. and Matthews, J. (1991) The Goths in the Fourth Century. Liverpool.
Herren, M. (1980) “On the earliest Irish acquaintance with Isidore of Seville,” in James, E. (ed.) (1980).
Hillgarth, J. N. (1962) Visigothic Spain and Early Christian Ireland. Dublin.
James, E. (ed.) (1980) Visigothic Spain: New Approaches. Oxford.
King, P. D. (1980) “King Chindasvind and the first territorial law-code of the Visigothic Kingdom,” in James, E. (ed.) (1980).
McKitterick, R. (ed.) (2001) The Early Middle Ages: Europe 400–1000. The Short Oxford History of Europe. Oxford.
Reydellet, M. (1966) “La diffusion des Origines d’Isidore de Seville au haut moyen´ age,”ˆ M´elanges d’Arch´eologie et d’Histoire de l’Ecole Fran¸caise de Rome 78 (1966): 383–437.
Reynolds, L. D. (ed.) (1983) Texts and Transmission: A Survey of the Latin Classics. Oxford.
Ribemont, B. (´ 2002) Litt´erature et encyclop´edies du Moyen Age. Orleans.
Riche, P. (´ 1976) Education and Culture in the Barbarian West: Sixth through Eighth Centuries. Columbia, SC. Trans. by J. J. Contreni from Education et culturedansl’Occidentbarbare,6e–8e si´ecle(Paris,1962, 19723).
Sharpe, W. D. Isidore of Seville: The medical writings, in Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n. s. vol. 54, pt. 2 (1964): 1–70 (includes an English translation of Books 4 and 11).
Stocking, R. L. (2000) Bishops, Councils, and Consensus in the Visigothic Kingdom, 589–633. Ann Arbor.
Thompson, E. A. (1969) The Goths in Spain. Oxford.
Velazquez, I. (´ 1999) “Jural relations as an indicator of syncretism from the law of inheritance to the Dum Inlicita of Chindaswinth,” in Heather, P. (ed.) (1999).
Wolf, K. B. (1999) Conquerors and Chroniclers of Early Medieval Spain, 2nd edn. Liverpool (contains a translation of Isidore’s History of the Kings of the Goths).
Wood, I. (1999) “Social relations in the Visigothic Kingdomfromthefifthtotheseventhcentury:theexample of Merida,” in Heather, P. (ed.) (´	1999).
 
Bibliography	31
 
 
Additional sources
Buckland, W. W. (1963) A Text-Book of Roman Law from Augustus to Justinian, 3rd edn. Cambridge.
Casson, L. (1994) Ships and Seafaring in Ancient Times. Austin.
Daly, L. W. (1967) Contributions to a History of Alphabetization in Antiquity and the Middle Ages. Brussels.
Forbes, R. J. (1964) Studies in Ancient Technology, 2nd edn. Leiden.
Frend, W. H. C. (1985) Saints and Sinners in the Early Church. London.
Jolowicz, H. F. (1952) Historical Introduction to the Study of Roman Law, 2nd edn. Cambridge. MacKay,A.(ed.)(1997)AtlasofMedievalEurope.London Maltby, R. (1991) A Lexicon of Ancient Latin Etymologies. Leeds.
Richard, E. G. (1998) Mapping Time: The Calendar and its History. Oxford.
Singer,C.etal.(eds.)(1956)AHistoryofTechnology.New York.
White,K.D.(1967)AgriculturalImplementsoftheAncient World. Cambridge.
(1970) Roman Farming. Ithaca, NY.
Wild, J. P. (1970) Textile Manufacture in the Northern Roman Provinces. Cambridge.
Wiles,M.(1996)ArchetypalHeresy:Arianismthroughthe Centuries. Oxford.
Wilson, K. (1979) A History of Textiles. Boulder.
Two definitive bibliographies of works on Isidore
Hillgarth, J. N. (1983) “The position of Isidorian studies: acriticalreviewoftheliterature1936–1975,”inStudi Medievali, ser. 3, 24: 817–905, reprinted in Hillgarth, J. N. (1985) Visigothic Spain, Byzantium, and the Irish, London.
(1990)“Isidorianstudies,1976–1985,”StudiMedievali, ser. 3, 31: 925–73.
See also the recent and full bibliography in Martin’s edition of Chronica (2003).
 

 
THE ETYMOLOGIES
 
Analytical table of contents
 
The first table below, within quotation marks, is a translation of the listing of the titles of the twenty books of the Etymologies found at the beginning of some early manuscripts, along with its prefatory remark; the list is printed by Lindsay (vol. i, pages 11–12). Since Braulio, not Isidore, divided the work into books, we can be sure these titles are not Isidore’s. There follows an analytical tableofcontents,drawnfromthetextitself.Thetitleand chaptersofeachbookcorrespondwithourtranslationof the work. Book XX has no title in the early manuscripts. Manuscripts of the Etymologies often listed the chapter titles at the head of each book.1
“Sothatyoumayquicklyfindwhatyouarelookingfor in this work, this page reveals for you, reader, what matters the author of this volume discusses in the individual books – that is, in Book
I. Grammar and its parts. II. Rhetoric and dialectic.
III.	Mathematics, whose parts are arithmetic, music, geometry, and astronomy.
IV.	Medicine.
V.	Laws and the instruments of the judiciary, and times.
VI.	The order of Scripture, cycles and canons, liturgical feasts and offices.
VII.	God and angels, prophetic nomenclature, names of the holy fathers, martyrs, clerics, monks, and other names.
VIII.	Church and synagogue, religion and faith, heresies, philosophers, poets, sibyls, magicians, pagans, gods of the gentiles.
IX.	Languages of the nations, royal, military, and civic terminology, family relationships.
1 For an account of some of the manuscript systems of presenting tablesofcontentsoftheEtymologiesseeB.-J.Schroder,¨ TitelundText: ZurEntwicklunglateinischerGedichtuberschriften.MitUntersuchung-¨ en zu . . . Inhaltsverzeichnissen . . . Untersuchungen zur antiken Literatur und Geschichte, vol. 54 (Berlin, 1999). See also Reydellet 1966: 388 et passim.
34
X.	Certain terms in alphabetical order.
XI.	Humanbeingsandtheirparts,theagesofhumans, portents and metamorphoses.
XII.	Four-footed animals, creeping animals, fish, and flying animals.
XIII.	Elements, that is, the heavens and the air, waters, the sea, rivers and floods.
XIV.	Earth, paradise, the regions of the whole globe, islands, mountains, other terms for places, and the lower regions of the earth.
XV.	Cities, urban and rural buildings, fields, boundaries and measures of fields, roads.
XVI.	Earthy materials from land or water, every kind of gem and precious and base stones, ivory likewise, treated along with marble, glass, all the metals, weights and measures.
XVII.	Agriculture, crops of every kind, vines and trees of every kind, herbs and all vegetables.
XVIII.	Wars and triumphs and the instruments of war, the Forum, spectacles, games of chance and ball games.
XIX.	Ships, ropes, and nets, iron workers, the construction of walls and all the implements of building, also wool-working, ornaments, and all kinds of clothing.
XX.	Tables, foodstuffs, drink, and their vessels, vessels for wine, water, and oil, vessels of cooks, bakers, and lamps, beds, chairs, vehicles, rural and garden implements, equestrian equipment.”
Book I: GRAMMAR. i. Discipline and art. ii. The seven liberal disciplines. iii. The common letters of the alphabet. iv. The Latin letters. v. Grammar. vi. The parts of speech. vii. The noun. viii. The pronoun. ix. The verb. x. The adverb. xi. The participle. xii. The conjunction. xiii. The preposition. xiv. The interjection. xv. Letters in grammar. xvi. The syllable. xvii. Metrical feet. xviii.Accents.xix.Accentmarks.xx.Punctuatedclauses. xxi. Critical signs. xxii. Common shorthand signs. xxiii.
 
Signs used in law. xxiv. Military signs. xxv. Epistolary codes. xxvi. Finger signals. xxvii. Orthography. xxviii. Analogy. xxix. Etymology. xxx. Glosses. xxxi. Differentiation.xxxii.Barbarism.xxxiii.Solecisms.xxxiv.Faults. xxxv.Metaplasm.xxxvi.Schemas.xxxvii.Tropes.xxxviii. Prose. xxxix. Meters. xl. The fable. xli. History. xlii. The first authors of histories. xliii. The utility of history. xliv. The kinds of history.
Book II: RHETORIC AND DIALECTIC. i. Rhetoric and its name. ii. The founders of the art of rhetoric. iii. The term ‘orator’ and the parts of rhetoric. iv. The three kinds of arguments. v. The two states of legal arguments. vi. The tripartite dispute. vii. The four parts of an oration. viii. The five types of cases. ix. Syllogisms.
x. Law. xi. The maxim. xii. Confirmation and refutation. xiii. Prosopopoeia. xiv. Ethopoeia. xv. Kinds of questions. xvi. Style. xvii. The three registers of speaking. xviii. Clause, phrase, and sentence. xix. Faults to be avoided in letters, words, and expressions. xx. Combinations of words. xxi. Figures of words and expressions. xxii. Dialectic. xxiii. The difference between the arts of rhetoric and dialectic. xxiv. The definition of philosophy. xxv. Porphyry’s Isagoge. xxvi. Aristotle’s categories. xxvii. The De interpretatione. xxviii. Logical syllogisms. xxix. The division of definitions abbreviated from the book by Marius Victorinus. xxx. Topics. xxxi. Opposites.
Book III: MATHEMATICS. Mathematics. i. Words belonging to the study of arithmetic. ii. Originators of mathematics.iii.Whatanumberis.iv.Whatnumbersdo for us. v. The first division, of even and odd numbers. vi. The second division of all numbers. vii. The third division of all numbers. viii. The differences between arithmetic, geometry, and music. ix. How many infinite numbers exist. x. The inventors of geometry, and its name. xi. The fourfold division of geometry. xii. Geometrical figures. xiii. Geometric numbers. [xiv. Exposition of figures illustrated below.]
MUSIC. xv. Music and its name. xvi. The inventors of music. xvii. The power of music. xviii. The three parts of music. xix. The threefold division of music. xx. The first division of music, which is called harmonic. xxi. The second division, which is called organicus. xxii. The third division of music, which is called rhythmic. xxiii.
Musical numbers.
	Analytical table of contents	35
ASTRONOMY. xxiv. The name of astronomy. xxv. The inventors of astronomy. xxvi. Those who established astronomy. xxvii. The difference between astronomy and astrology. xxviii. Astronomical reckoning. xxix. The world and its name. xxx. The shape of the world. xxxi. The sky and its name. xxxii. The position of the celestial sphere. xxxiii. The movement of this same sphere. xxxiv. The course of the same sphere. xxxv. The speed of the sky. xxxvi. The axis of heaven. xxxvii. The celestial polar regions. xxxviii. The poles of the heavens. xxxix. The vault of heaven. xl. The doorways of heaven. xli. The twin faces of the sky. xlii. The four parts of heaven. xliii. The hemispheres. xliv. The five circles of heaven. xlv. The circle of the zodiac. xlvi. The bright circle. xlvii. The size of the sun. xlviii. The size of the moon. xlix. The nature of the sun. l. The course of the sun. li. The effect of the sun. lii. The path of the sun. liii. The light of the moon. liv. The shapes of the moon. lv. Interlunar intervals. lvi. The path of the moon. lvii. The proximity of the moon to the earth. lviii. Eclipse of the sun. lix. Eclipse of the moon. lx. The differences between stars, star clusters, and constellations. lxi. The light of the stars. lxii. The location of the stars. lxiii. The course of the stars. lxiv. The changing course of the stars. lxv. The distances between the stars. lxvi. The orbital number of the stars. lxvii. Planets. lxviii. Precession and antegrade motion of stars. lxix. Recession or retrograde motion of stars. lxx. The standing of stars. lxxi. The names of the stars and the reasons for these names.
Book IV: MEDICINE. i. Medicine. ii. The term
‘medicine.’ iii. The inventors of medicine. iv. The three schools of medicine. v. The four humors of the body. vi. Acute illnesses. vii. Chronic illnesses. viii. Illnesses that appear on the surface of the body. ix. Remedies and medications. x. Medical books. xi. The instruments of physicians. xii. Scents and ointments. xiii. The foundations of medicine.
Book V: LAWS AND TIMES. i. The originators of laws. ii. Divine laws and human laws. iii. How jurisprudence, laws, and customs differ from each other. iv. What natural law is. v. What civil law is. vi. What the law of nations is. vii. What military law is. viii. What public law is. ix. What quirital law is. x. What a law is. xi. What popular resolutions (i.e. plebiscites) are. xii. What a senate decree is. xiii. What an order and an edict are.
 
36	Analytical table of contents
xiv. What a response of jurists is. xv. Consular and tribunitial laws. xvi. Replete law. xvii. Rhodian laws. xviii. Private statutes. xix. What a law is capable of. xx. Why a law is enacted. xxi. What sort of law should be made. xxii. Cases. xxiii. Witnesses. xxiv. Legal instruments. xxv. Property. xxvi. Crimes written in the law. xxvii. Punishments drawn up in the laws. xxviii. The word for ‘chronicles.’ xxix. Moments and hours. xxx. Days. xxxi. Night. xxxii. The week. xxxiii. Months. xxxiv. Solstices and equinoxes. xxxv. The seasons of the year. xxxvi. Years. xxxvii. Olympiads, lustrums, and jubilees.xxxviii.Periodsandages.xxxix.Adescriptionof historical periods.
Book VI: BOOKS AND ECCLESIASTICAL OFFICES.
i. The Old and New Testament. ii. The writers and names of the Sacred Books. iii. Libraries. iv. Translators. v. The one who first brought books to Rome. vi. Those who established libraries among us Christians. vii. Those who have written many things. viii. The types of literary works. ix. Wax tablets. x. Papyrus sheets. xi. Parchment. xii. Bookmaking. xiii. The terminologyofbooks.xiv.Copyistsandtheirtools.xv.Canontables of the Gospels. xvi. The canons of Councils. xvii. The Easter cycle. xviii. The other liturgical feasts. xix. Offices.
Book VII: GOD, ANGELS, AND SAINTS. i. God. ii. The Son of God. iii. The Holy Spirit. iv. The Trinity. v. Angels.vi.Peoplewhoreceivedtheirnamefromacertain presaging. vii. The patriarchs. viii. The prophets. ix. The apostles. x. Other names in the Gospel. xi. Martyrs. xii. Clerics. xiii. Monks. xiv. Other faithful people.
Book VIII: THE CHURCH AND SECTS. i. The Church and the synagogue. ii. Religion and faith. iii. Heresy and schism. iv. Heresies of the Jews. v. Christian heresies. vi. Pagan philosophers. vii. Poets. viii. Sibyls. ix. Magicians. x. Pagans. xi. Gods of the heathens.
Book IX: LANGUAGES, NATIONS, REIGNS, THE MILITARY, CITIZENS, FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS. i. The languages of nations. ii. The names of nations. iii. Reigns and terms for military matters. iv. Citizens. v. Family relationships and their degrees. vi. Paternal and maternal relatives. vii. Marriages.
Book X: VOCABULARY. Certain terms for human beings.
Book XI: THE HUMAN BEING AND PORTENTS. i. Human beings and their parts. ii. The ages of human beings. iii. Portents. iv. Metamorphoses.
Book XII: ANIMALS. i. Livestock and beasts of burden. ii. Beasts. iii. Small animals. iv. Snakes. v. Vermin. vi. Fish. vii. Birds. viii. Tiny flying animals.
Book XIII. THE COSMOS AND ITS PARTS. i. The world. ii. Atoms. iii. Elements. iv. The sky. v. Parts of the sky. vi. The circles of heaven. vii. Air and clouds. viii. Thunder. ix. Lightning. x. The rainbow and phenomena of the clouds. xi. Winds. xii. Waters. xiii. Different kinds of water. xiv. The sea. xv. The Ocean. xvi. The Mediterranean Sea. xvii. Gulfs of the sea. xviii. Tides and straits. xix. Lakes and pools. xx. The abyss. xxi. Rivers. xxii. Floods.
Book XIV: THE EARTH AND ITS PARTS. i. The earth. ii. The globe. iii. Asia. iv. Europe. v. Libya. vi. Islands. vii. Promontories. viii. Mountains and other terms for landforms. ix. The lower regions.
Book XV: BUILDINGS AND FIELDS. i. Cities. Famous towns, and which men or women established them. ii. Public buildings. iii. Dwelling-places. iv. Sacred buildings. v. Repositories. vi. Workplaces. vii. Entranceways. viii. The parts of buildings. ix. Fortifications. x. Tents. xi. Sepulchers. xii. Rural buildings. xiii. Fields. xiv. The boundaries of fields. xv. The measures of fields. xvi. Roads.
Book XVI: STONES AND METALS. i. Dust and dirt clods. ii. Earthy materials derived from water. iii. Common stones. iv. More important stones. v. Marble. vi. Gems. vii. Green gems. viii. Red gems. ix. Purple gems. x White gems. xi. Black gems. xii. Varicolored gems. xiii. Crystalline gems. xiv. Fiery gems. xv. Golden gems. xvi. Glass.xvii.Metals.xviii.Gold.xix.Silver.xx.Bronze.xxi. Iron. xxii. Lead. xxiii. Tin. xxiv. Electrum. xxv. Weights. xxvi. Measures. xxvii. Symbols.
BookXVII:RURALMATTERS.i.Authorsonruralmatters.ii.Thecultivationoffields.iii.FruitsoftheEarth.iv.
 
Legumes. v. Vines. vi. Trees. vii. Specific names of trees. viii. Aromatic trees. ix. Aromatic or common plants. x. Garden vegetables. xi. Aromatic garden plants.
Book XVIII: WAR AND GAMES. i. War. ii. Triumphs. iii. Military standards. iv. War-trumpets. v. Arms. vi. Swords. vii. Spears. viii. Arrows. ix. Quivers. x. Slings. xi. The battering ram. xii. Shields. xiii. Cuirasses. xiv. Helmets. xv. The Forum. xvi. Spectacles. xvii. Gymnastic games. xviii. Types of gymnastics. xix. The jump. xx. The race. xxi. The throw. xxii. Feats of strength. xxiii. Wrestling. xxiv. The palestra. xxv. Competitions. xxvi. Types of competitions. xxvii. Circus games. xxviii. The circus.xxix.Theapparatus.xxx.Theturning-posts.xxxi. The obelisk. xxxii. The starting-gates. xxxiii. Charioteers. xxxiv. The team of four. xxxv. The chariot. xxxvi. The horses with which we race. xxxvii. The seven laps. xxxviii. The riders. xxxix. Horse-vaulters. xl. Foot racers. xli. The colors worn by horses. xlii. The theater. xliii.Thestagebuilding.xliv.Theorchestra.xlv.Tragedians.xlvi.Writersofcomedyxlvii.Stagemusicians.xlviii. Actors. xlix. Mimes. l. Dancers. li. What should be performed under which patron. lii. The amphitheater. liii. The equestrian game. liv. Net-fighters. lv. Pursuers. lvi. Ensnarers. lvii. Skirmishers. lviii. Combat to the death. lix. The performance of these games. lx. The gamingboard. lxi. Dice-tumblers. lxii. Gaming counters. lxiii. Dice. lxiv. The figurative senses of dicing. lxv. Dicing
	Analytical table of contents	37
terms. lxvi. The casting of dice. lxvii. The moving of counters. lxviii. The banning of dicing. lxix. Ball games.
Book XIX: SHIPS, BUILDINGS, AND CLOTHING. i.
Ships. ii. Parts of the ship and its equipment. iii. Sails. iv. Ropes. v. Nets. vi. The metalworkers’ forge. vii. Metalworkers’ tools. viii. The craft of building. ix. Siting. x. Construction. xi. Decoration. xii. Paneled ceilings. xiii. Wallpanels.xiv.Mosaics.xv.Molding.xvi.Pictures.xvii. Colorings. xviii. Tools for building. xix. Woodworkers. xx.Theinventionofclothmaking.xxi.Priestlyvestments according to the Law. xxii. The different kinds of clothing and their names. xxiii. The typical costumes of certain peoples. xxiv. Men’s outer garments. xxv. Women’s outer garments. xxvi. Bedspreads and other cloths that we use. xxvii. Wool. xxviii. Colorings for cloth. xxix. Tools for clothmaking. xxx. Ornaments. xxxi. Women’s head ornaments. xxxii. Rings. xxxiii. Belts. xxxiv. Footwear.
Book	XX:	[PROVISIONS	AND	VARIOUS
IMPLEMENTS.] i. Tables. ii. Foodstuffs. iii. Drink. iv. Dishes for food. v. Drinking vessels. vi. Wine and water vessels. vii. Vessels for oil. viii. Cooking vessels. ix. Storage containers. x. Lamp vessels. xi. Beds and chairs. xii. Vehicles. xiii. Other implements that we use. xiv. Rural implements. xv. Garden implements. xvi.
Equestrian equipment.
 
For conventions used in the translation see Note to the reader, pp. xi–xii
38
 
Book I Grammar (De grammatica)
 
 
i.	Discipline and art (De disciplina et arte) 1. A discipline(disciplina)takesitsnamefrom‘learning’(discere), whence it can also be called ‘knowledge’ (scientia). Now ‘know’ (scire) is named from ‘learn’ (discere), because none of us knows unless we have learned. A discipline is so named in another way, because ‘the full thing is learned’ (discitur plena). 2. And an art (ars, gen. artis) is so called because it consists of strict (artus) precepts and rules. Others say this word is derived by the Greeks from the word  , that is, ‘virtue,’ as they termed knowledge. 3. Plato and Aristotle would speak of this distinction between an art and a discipline: an art consists of matters that can turn out in different ways, while a discipline is concerned with things that have only one possible outcome. Thus, when something is expounded with true arguments, it will be a discipline; when something merely resembling the truth and based on opinion is treated, it will have the name of an art.
ii.	Thesevenliberaldisciplines(Deseptemliberalibusdisciplinis) 1. There are seven disciplines of the liberal arts. The first is grammar, that is, skill in speaking. The second is rhetoric, which, on account of the brilliance and fluency of its eloquence, is considered most necessary in public proceedings. The third is dialectic, otherwise known as logic, which separates the true from the falsebyverysubtleargumentation.2.Thefourthisarithmetic, which contains the principles and classifications of numbers. The fifth is music, which consists of poems and songs. 3. The sixth is geometry, which encompasses the measures and dimensions of the earth. The seventh is astronomy, which covers the law of the stars.
iii.	The common letters of the alphabet (De litteriscommunibus) 1.Thecommonlettersofthealphabetare theprimaryelementsoftheartofgrammar,andareused by scribes and accountants. The teaching of these letters is, as it were, the infancy of grammar, whence Varro also calls this discipline ‘literacy’ (litteratio). Indeed, letters are tokens of things, the signs of words, and they
39
have so much force that the utterances of those who are absent speak to us without a voice, [for they present words through the eyes, not through the ears]. 2. The use of letters was invented for the sake of remembering things, which are bound by letters lest they slip away intooblivion.Withsogreatavarietyofinformation,not everything could be learned by hearing, nor retained in the memory. 3. Letters (littera) are so called as if the term were legitera, because they provide a road (iter) for those who are reading (legere), or because they are repeated (iterare) in reading.
4. The Latin and Greek letters seem to be derived from the Hebrew, for among the Hebrews the first letter is called ‘aleph,’ and then ‘alpha’ was derived from it by the Greeks due to its similar pronunciation, whence A among Latin speakers. A transliterator fashioned the letter of one language from the similar sound of another language (i.e. derived the names and shapes of letters of similar sound from the “earlier” language); hence we can know that the Hebrew language is the mother of all languages and letters. But the Hebrews use twenty-two characters, following the twenty-two books of the Old Testament; the Greeks use twenty-four. Latin speakers, falling between these two languages, have twenty-three characters. 5. The letters of the Hebrews started with the Law transmitted by Moses. Those of the Syrians and Chaldeans began with Abraham, so that they agree in the number of characters and in their sounds with the Hebrewlettersanddifferonlyintheirshapes.QueenIsis, daughter of Inachus, devised the Egyptian letters when she came from Greece into Egypt, and passed them on to the Egyptians. Among the Egyptians, however, the priests used some letters and the common people used others. The priestly letters are known as  (sacred), the common letters, !"  (common).
The Phoenicians first discovered the use of Greek letters, whence Lucan (Civil War 3.220):
If the report is trustworthy, the Phoenicians were the first to dare to indicate by rudimentary shapes a sound meant to endure.
 
I.iii.6.–iv.4	Isidore of Seville
 
6.	Hence it is that the chapter headings of books arewritten with Phoenician scarlet, since it is from the Phoenicians that the letters had their origin. Cadmus, sonofAgenor,firstbroughtseventeenGreeklettersfrom Phoenicia into Greece: #, $, %, &, , ', (, ), *, +, ,, -, , ., /, 0, 1. Palamedes added three more to these at the time of the Trojan War: 2, , 3. After him the lyricist Simonides added three others: 4, 5, 6.
7.	Pythagoras of Samos first formed the letter ϒ as a symbol of human life. Its lower stem signifies the first stage of life, an uncertain age indeed, which has not yet givenitselftovicesortovirtues.Thebranchingintotwo, which is above, begins with adolescence: the right part of it is arduous, but leads toward a blessed life; the left is easier, but leads to death and destruction. Concerning this Persius (Satires 3.56) speaks thus:
And where the letter has spread out into Samian branches it has shown you the way that rises by means of the right-hand path.
8.	There are also five mystical letters among theGreeks. The first is ϒ, which signifies human life, concerning which we have just spoken. The second is 6, which [signifies] death, for the judges used to put this same letter down against the names of those whom they were sentencing to execution. And it is named ‘theta’ after the term   , that is, ‘death.’ Whence also it has a spear through the middle, that is, a sign of death. Concerning this a certain verse says:
How very unlucky before all others, the letter theta.
9.	The third, 0, shows the figure of the cross of the Lord, whence it is also interpreted as a symbol in Hebrew. Concerningthisletter,itwassaidtoanangelinEzekiel(9: 4):“GothroughthemidstofJerusalem,andmarkathau upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and mourn.”1 The remaining two mystical letters, the first and the last, Christclaimsforhimself;himselfthebeginning,himself the end, he says (Apocalypse 22:13): “I am Alpha and Omega,” for by moving towards each other in turn, # rolls on all the way to 3, and 3 bends back to #, so that the Lord might show in himself both the movement of the beginning to the end, and the movement of the end to the beginning.
10.	All the letters in Greek compose words and alsomake numbers, for they use the letter alpha as the number ‘one.’ And when they write beta, they mean ‘two’; when they write gamma, they mean ‘three’ in their numbers; when they write delta, they mean ‘four’ in their numbers – and so every letter corresponds to a number for the Greeks. 11. Latin speakers, however, do not assign numbers to the letters, but only use them to form words, with the exception of the letters I, and X, which both signifies the cross by its shape, and stands for the number ten.2
iv. TheLatinletters(Delitterislatinis)3 1. The nymph Carmentis first brought the Latin letters to the Italians. She is called Carmentis because she would sing in songs (carmen) of things to come, but she is properly called Nicostrate. 2. Letters are either common or liberal. ‘Common (communis) letters’ are so called because many people employ them for common use, in order to write and to read. ‘Liberal (liberalis) letters’ are so called because only those who write books (liber), and who know how to speak and compose correctly, know them. 3. There are two types of letter, for they are first divided into two groups, vowels and consonants. Vowels are letters that are released in various ways through the straightforward opening of the throat, without any contact. And they are called ‘vowels’ (vocalis), because they make a complete ‘vocal sound’ (vox, gen. vocis) on their own, and on their own they may make a syllable with no adjoining consonant. Consonants are letters that are produced by various motions of the tongue or a compression of the lips. And they are called ‘consonants’ (consonans) because they do not produce sound by themselves, but rather ‘sound together’ (consonare) with an adjoining vowel. 4. Consonants are divided into twogroups:semivowelsandmutes.Semivowels(semivocalis)aresocalledbecausetheytakeacertainhalf(semis) of their quality from vowels. Their letter-names, accordingly, begin with the vowel E, and end in their natural sound [as F, L, M etc.]. The mutes (mutus, i.e. the voiced stops) are so called because, without vowels joined to them, they are never released. In fact, if you were to remove the sound of the following vowel from them,
1	FortheVulgatethautheNewRevisedStandardVersiontranslates “mark.” The last letter of the Hebrew alphabet, ‘taw,’ parallel to the Greek ‘tau,’ was shaped like an X in ancient script and came to have the meaning “mark, sign, symbol.”
2	Isidore disregards here the numeral-letters V, L, C, D, M.
3	Isidore uses the word ‘letter’ (littera) to refer both to the written character and to the sound for which it stands.
 
The Etymologies	I.iv.5–iv.17
 
the sound of the letter will be a blocked murmur [as B, G, D, etc.]. Furthermore, vowels and semivowels and mutes were called by the ancients sounds (sonus) and semisounds (semisonus) and non-sounds (insonus).
5. Among the vowels, I and U signify different things to the grammarians. 6. Now they are vowels, and now semivowels,andnowmedials(i.e.glides).Theyarevowelsbecausetheymakesyllableswhentheyarepositioned alone or when they are joined to consonants. They are considered consonants in that they sometimes have a vowel set down after them in the same syllable, as Ianus, vates,andtheyareconsideredasconsonants.4 7.Theyare [also] called medials because only they naturally have a medial sound, as illius, unius. They sound more fully when joined to others, as Ianus, Vanus. They sound one way when alone and another when adjoined. On this account, I is sometimes called twofold, because whenever it is found between two vowels, it is taken as two consonants, as Troia, for there its sound is geminated. 8. Further, the letter V is sometimes nothing, because in some places it is neither vowel nor consonant, as in quis (who). It is not a vowel, because I follows, and it is not a consonant, because Q precedes. And thus when it is neither vowel nor consonant, it is undoubtedly nothing. This same sound is called digamma by the Greeks, when it is joined to itself or to other vowels. And it is called digamma because it has the double shape of the letter F, which looks like two gammas (i.e. one % atop another). On account of this resemblance the grammarians would call the vowels conjoined in this way digamma, as in votum, virgo.
9.Amongthesemivowels,somearecalledliquids(liquidus) because sometimes, when placed after other consonants in one syllable, they are deficient and excluded from the meter.5 In Latin there are two sounds which melt (liquescere) like this, L and R, as in fragor (crash), flatus (breathing). The others, M and N, are liquid in Greek, as in Mnestheus.
4	The Romans used a single letter i to represent both the vowel /i/ and the glide /y/, and the single letter u (= v) for both /u/ and /w/. The letters u and v are not distinct in the Latin alphabet.
5	In the scansion of Latin poetry, consonants followed by l or r may be treated as if they were single consonants.
6	From what Isidore said above, iv.4, he should have written “and end in their natural sound, if they are semivowels . . .”
7	Christian scribes abbreviated the name of Christ as Xp¯s (for Greek chi-rho-sigma) and similar forms.
10.	The old script consisted of seventeen Latin letters,and they are called legitimate (legitimus) for this reason: they either begin with the vowel E and end in a mute sound, if they are consonants,6 or because they begin with their own sound and end in the vowel E, if they are mutes [and they are A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T and U].
11.	The letter H was added afterwards for aspiration alone,whenceitisconsideredbymanytobeabreathing, notaletter,anditiscalledamarkofaspirationbecauseit elevates the voice, for aspiration is a sound that is raised more fully. Its opposite is prosodia, a sound accented levelly.12.Salvius,theschoolmaster,firstaddedtheletter K to Latin, so as to make a distinction in sound between the two letters C and Q. This letter is called superfluous because, with the exception of the word ‘Kalends,’ it is considered unnecessary; we express all such sounds by means of C. 13. Neither Greek nor Hebrew has a sound corresponding to our letter Q, for with the exception of Latin no other language possesses this letter. It did not exist earlier; hence it is also called superfluous because the ancients wrote all such sounds with a C.
14. The letter X did not exist in Latin until the time of Augustus, [and it was fitting for it to come into existence atthattime,inwhichthenameofChristbecameknown, which is written using the letter which makes the sign of thecross],7 buttheyusedtowriteCSinitsplace,whence X is called a double letter, because it is used for CS, so thatittakesitsnamefromthecompositionofthesesame letters. 15. Latin borrowed two letters from Greek, Y and Z, especially for the sake of writing Greek words. These letters were not written by the Romans until the time of Augustus, but two Ss were used for Z, as in hilarissat, and they would write I for Y.
16. There are three things associated with each letter: its name, how it is called; its shape, by which character it is designated; and its function, whether it is taken as vocalic or consonantal. Some people add ‘order,’ that is, what does it precede and what does it follow, as A is first and B following – for A is the first letter among all peoples, because it first initiates voice in babies as they arebeingborn.17.Indeed,nationsassignedthenamesof thelettersfromthesoundsintheirownlanguages,when the sounds of the mouth were noted and distinguished. After they paid attention to these sounds, they imposed bothnamesandshapesonthem.Theshapestheyformed partly by whim, and partly from the sound of the letters;
 
I.iv.18–vii.7	Isidore of Seville
 
for instance I and O – the first one is a thin sound, as it were, thus a slender twig, and the other a fat sound, thus a full shape.
Nownaturehasassignedthefunction,andhumanwill has assigned the order and the macron. 18. The ancients counted the macron among the letter characters, and it iscalled‘macron’(apex,lit.“peak”)becauseitisfarfrom the letter’s foot, and is placed at the top of the letter. It is a line drawn horizontally and levelly above the letter. [But a letter character (figura) is that with which a whole letter is written.]
v.	Grammar (De grammatica) 1. Grammar is the knowledge of speaking correctly, and is the origin and foundation of liberal letters. Among the disciplines this was invented after the letters of the alphabet, so that through it those who have already learned the letters knowthemethodofspeakingcorrectly.‘Grammar’takes its name from letters, for the Greeks call letters 7  .2.Itistrulycalledanart,becauseitconsistsofstrict (artus) rules and precepts. Others say that the word ‘art’ is derived by the Greeks from  , that is, ‘virtue,’ which they called knowledge. 3. ‘Oratory’ (oratio) is so called as if it were ‘method of speech’ (oris ratio), for ‘to orate’ (orare) is to speak and to say. Oratory is the joining of words with sense. But a joining without sense is not oratory, because then there is no method in the speaking. Oratory is made up of sense, voice and letters. 4. Thirty divisions of the grammatical art are enumerated by some, that is: the eight parts of speech, enunciation, letters, syllables, feet, accent, punctuation, critical signs, spelling, analogy, etymology, glosses, differentiation, barbarisms, solecisms, faults, metaplasms, schemes, tropes, prose, meter, tales, and histories.
vi.	Thepartsofspeech(Departibusorationis) 1.Aristotle first proposed two parts of speech, noun and verb; then Donatus defined eight (Ars Grammatica, ed. Keil 4.372). But all parts revert back to these two principal ones, that is, to the noun and verb, which signify the person and the act. The others are ancillary and derive their origin from these two. 2. For the pronoun is taken from the noun, whose function it assumes, as in ‘an orator . . . he’ (orator ille). The adverb is taken from the noun, as in ‘a learned one, learnedly’ (doctus, docte). The participle is taken from the noun and the verb, as in ‘I read, a reading one’ (lego, legens). The conjunction and preposition, however, and the interjection, occur in connection with these other parts. For this reason, some people define five parts of speech, because these latter three are superfluous.
vii.	The noun (De nomine)8 1. The noun (nomen) is so called as if it were ‘denoter’ (notamen), because by its designation it makes things known (noscere, ppl. notus) to us. Indeed, unless you know its name (nomen), the knowledge of a thing perishes.
Propernouns(propriumnomen)aresocalledbecause they are specific; they signify one single person only. There are four types of proper nouns: the praenomen, the name, the cognomen, and the agnomen. The praenomen is so called because it is placed before (prae) the name, as ‘Lucius,’ ‘Quintus.’ 2. The name (nomen) is so called because it identifies (notare) the clan, as ‘Cornelius,’ for all Corneliuses are in this clan. The cognomen (cognomen), because it is conjoined (coniungere) to the name, as ‘Scipio.’ The agnomen (agnomen) is an ‘acquired name’ (accedens nomen), as in ‘Metellus Creticus,’ so named because he subdued Crete: the agnomen comes from some outside cause. But it too is commonly called a cognomen, because it is added to the name for the sake of recognition (cognitio), or because it is used ‘with the name’ (cum nomine).
3. Appellative nouns (appellativum nomen) are so called because they are common and make reference to many things (cf. appellare, “name”). They are divided into twenty-eight types. Of these the corporeal (corporalis) nouns are so called because they are either seen or touched, as ‘sky,’ ‘earth.’ 4. The incorporeal (incorporalis) nouns, because they lack a body (corpus), so that they cannot be seen or touched, as ‘truth,’ ‘justice.’ 5. The general (generalis) nouns, because they denote many things, as ‘animal,’ for a human and a horse and a bird are animals. 6. The specific (specialis) nouns, because they indicate a sub-class, as ‘man,’ for a human being is a type (species) of animal. 7. Primary (principalis) nouns, because they hold a primary
8	Followingtraditionalgrammarians,Isidoreusesthetermnomen to refer to both nouns and adjectives, and also to mean “name.” The noun vs. adjective distinction is less clear-cut in Latin than in English because adjectives standing alone commonly function as substantives: bonus, “good” or “a good man.” Further, both nouns and adjectives have case endings. We translate nomen as “noun” or “adjective” or “name” or even “word” where appropriate.
 
position, and are not derived from another word, as ‘mountain,’ ‘fount.’ 8. Derivative (derivativus) nouns, because they are derived from another noun, as ‘mountainous region’ (montanus) from ‘mountain’ (mons). 9. Diminutive(diminutivus)nouns,becausetheydiminish the meaning, as ‘Greekling’ (Graeculus), ‘little scholar’ (scholasticulus). 10. Some nouns are called ‘diminutive in sound’ (sono diminutivus), because they sound like diminutive nouns, but are conceptually primary nouns, as ‘table’ (tabula), ‘fable’ (fabula). 11. ‘Entirely Greek’ (totusGraecus)nouns,becausetheyaredeclinedentirely in the Greek manner, as Callisto – for both Greek and Latin decline it in the same way. 12. ‘Entirely Latin’ (totus Latinus) nouns, because they are turned entirely into Latin. Greek has ‘Odysseus,’ and Latin ‘Ulysses.’ 13. Medial (medius) nouns are so called because they are partlyGreekandpartlyLatin.Thesearealsocalled‘mongrel’ (nothus), because they corrupt the final syllables while the previous syllables stay the same, as in Greek, for example, ‘Alexandros,’ ‘Menandros,’ while we (Latin speakers) have ‘Alexander,’ ‘Menander.’ They are called ‘mongrel’ inasmuch as whoever is begotten of unequal classes is called ‘mongrel.’ 14. Synonymous (synonymus) nouns, that is, plurinomial (plurinomius), because there is a single meaning shared by ‘many nouns’ (plura nomina),asterra,humus,andtellus(i.e.allmeaning“earth”). Indeed, these are all the same thing. 15. Homonymous (homonymus) nouns, that is uninomial (uninomius), because there is a multiple meaning in one (unus) noun, as tumulus, which is in one context a low hill, in another context rising (tumere) ground, and in another context a grave-mound – for there are diverse meanings in the one noun. 16. The relational (relativus) nouns are so called because they are defined in relation to another person, as ‘teacher,’ ‘master,’ ‘father.’ 17. Words defined as somehow related to something by way of their opposition of meaning are also called relational, as ‘right’ – for ‘right’ cannot be defined unless there is ‘left.’ 18. Next, the qualitative (qualitas) adjectives are so called
9	The form contemplator is ambiguous, being either the future imperative of the deponent verb contemplor (“observe”) or the agent noun (i.e. ‘observer’) formed from the same verb. Isidore here uses a formal criterion to define a noun: its taking the case endings of a declension, as the genitive of contemplator, for example, is contemplatoris. Apparently by mistake he actually refers to a noun’s taking the comparative degree, a property of adjectives only, where he must mean taking case endings.
I.vii.8–vii.28
because through them some quality is shown, as ‘wise,’ ‘beautiful,’ ‘rich.’ 19. Quantitative (quantitas) adjectives are so called because they are defined by measure, as ‘long,’ ‘short.’ 20. Patronymics (patronymicus) are so called because they are derived from fathers (pater), as ‘Tydides,’ son of Tydeus, ‘Aeneius,’ son of Aeneas, although they may also be derived from mothers and from more remote ancestors. 21. ‘Ctetic’ (cteticus) adjectives, that is possessive, from possession, as the ‘Evandrian’ sword. 22. Epithets (epitheton), which in Latin are calledeitheradjectives(adiectivus)oradditions,because they are ‘added to’ (adicere, ppl. adiectus) nouns to completethemeaning,as‘great,’‘learned.’Youmayaddthem to persons, as ‘a great philosopher,’ ‘a learned man,’ and the sense is complete. 23. Agent (actualis) nouns derivefromtheaction(actus),as‘leader,’‘king,’‘runner,’ ‘nurse,’ ‘orator.’ Ethnic (gens) adjectives come from the ethnic group (gens), as ‘Greek,’ ‘Roman.’ 24. Adjectives ofnationality(patrius)comefromanativeland(patria), as ‘Athenian,’ ‘Theban.’ Local (locus) adjectives from the place (locus), as ‘suburban.’ 25. Verbal (verbialis) nouns aresocalledbecausetheycomefromtheverb,as‘reader’ (lector, from legere, ppl. lectus, “read”). Participials (participalis), which have the same form as participles, as ‘the reading one’ (legens). 26. Quasi-verbal (verbis similis) nouns, so called from their similarity to the verb, as contemplator–forthiswordisbothaverbintheimperative mood, future tense, and a noun, because it takes the comparativedegree.9 Allthesetypesofappellativenouns come from the ‘naming quality’ (appellatio) of nouns.
27.	A second division is the comparison of adjec-tives. ‘Comparison’ (comparatio) is so called because it prefers one thing in comparison with another. There are three degrees of comparison: positive, comparative, and superlative. ‘Positive’ (positivus) is so called because it is placed (ponere, ppl. positus) first in the degrees of comparison, as ‘learned’ (doctus). ‘Comparative’ (comparativus) is so named because when compared (comparatus) with the positive it surpasses it, as ‘more learned’ (doctior) – for he knows more than someone who is merely learned. ‘Superlative’ (superlativus) is so called because it completely surpasses (superferre, ppl. superlatus) the comparative, as ‘most learned’ (doctissimus), for he knows more than someone who is merely doctior.
28.	‘Gendered nouns’ (genus) are so called because they generate (generare), as masculine and feminine. Othernounsarenotgendered,butanalogyandtradition
 
I.vii.29–viii.4	Isidore of Seville
 
have assigned them gender. A neuter (neuter, lit. “neither”)nounissonamedbecauseitisneitheronenorthe other, that is, neither masculine nor feminine. A common(communis)nounissocalledbecauseonenounhas ashareinbothgenders,ashiccanis(“thismaledog”)and haec canis (“this female dog”). 29. The opposite of this is an epicene (epicoenos) noun, because it expresses either sex with a single gender, as in hic piscis (“this fish”). It is of uncertain sex, because it can be distinguished neither by nature nor by sight, but only by expert discernment. The inclusive (omne genus) noun is so named because it serves for all genders: for masculine and feminine, neuter, common – for all (omnis).
30. ‘Grammatical number’ (numerus) is so named because it shows whether a noun is singular or plural. ‘Morphological form’ (figura), because nouns are eithersimpleorcompound.31.Cases(casus)aresocalled from ‘having an ending’ (cadere, ppl. casus): through the cases inflected nouns are varied and have their endings. The nominative (nominativus) case is so called because through it we name (nominare) something, as hic magister (“this teacher”). The genitive (genetivus), because through it we find the descent of someone, as huius magistri filius (“this teacher’s son”), or because we assign a thing to someone, as huius magistri liber (“this teacher’s book”). 32. The dative (dativus), because through it we show that we give (dare, ppl. datus) something to someone, as da huic magistro (“give to this teacher”).Theaccusative(accusativus),becausethrough it we accuse someone, as accuso hunc magistrum (“I accuse this teacher”). The vocative (vocativus), because throughitwecall(vocare)someone,asOmagister(“hey, teacher!”). Ablative (ablativus), because through it we indicate that we take away (auferre, ppl. ablatus) something from someone, as in aufer a magistro (“take from the teacher”). 33. Certain nouns and adjectives are called hexaptota because they have distinct inflection in six cases,asthewordunus(“one”).Pentaptota,becausethey are declined in only five cases, as doctus (“learned”). Tetraptota, because they are only declined in four cases, as latus (“side”). Triptota because only in three, as templum (“temple”). Diptota, because only in two, as Iuppiter (“Jupiter”). Monoptota, because they only use one case, as frugi (“thrifty”).10
viii. The pronoun (De pronomine) 1. The pronoun (pronomen) is so named because it is put ‘in place of the noun’(provicenominis),lestthenounitselfcauseannoyance when it is repeated. When we say, “Vergil wrote the Bucolics,” we continue with the pronoun, “he (ipse) wrote the Georgics,” and thus the variation in expression both removes annoyance and introduces ornament. 2. Pronouns are either definite or indefinite. Definite (finitus)pronounsaresocalledbecausetheydefine(definire) acertainperson,asego(“I”);foryouimmediatelyunderstand this to be me. The indefinite (infinitus) ones are so named because the persons referred to are not certain. Indefinite pronouns are used for those who are absent or undetermined, as quis (“anyone” (masc. or fem.)), quae (“any” (fem.)), quod (“any” (neut.)).11 Some are called‘lessthandefinite’(minusquamfinitus),sincethey make mention of a known person, as ipse (“he himself”), iste (“that one”) – for we know who is spoken of. 3. Possessives (possessivus) are so called because they show that we possess something, for when I say meus (“my”), tuus (“your”), I define something as mine, or yours. Correspondent (relativus) pronouns are so called because they are said in response (refero, ppl. relatus) to a question, as “who is?” (quis est?) is answered by “he is” (is est). Demonstratives (demonstrativus), because they have the sense of indicating (demonstrare). By them we indicate someone who is present, as hic, haec, hoc (“this one” (masc., fem., and neut.)); these three are also called articles. 4. Articles (articulus) are so called because they are ‘pressed together’ (artare), that is, they are connected, with nouns, as when we say hic orator (“the orator”). There is this difference between the article and the pronoun: it is an article when it is joined to a noun, as hic sapiens (“the wise man”). But when it is not joined, then it is a demonstrative pronoun, as hic et
10	The terms are derived from Greek numerical prefixes and the root of ! ω¯, “grammatical case.” Unus has six distinct forms for the six cases in the singular; doctus has five forms, with the dative and ablative singular sharing the same form; latus has four, with the nominative, accusative, and vocative singular sharing one form; templumhasthree,withthenominative,accusative,andvocativesingular sharing one form, and the dative and ablative singular sharing another; frugi is “indeclinable,” with only the one form. The conception seems to shift with the noun Iuppiter, which actually has only the one form, used only in the nominative and vocative; its oblique forms are supplied by the synonymous noun Iovis, which itself has four forms.
11	Quis is the masculine and feminine substantive form of the indefinite pronoun; quae and quod are adjectival forms, sometimes used substantively.
 
haec et hoc (“this one (masc.) and this (fem.) and this (neut)”).
5. All pronouns are either primary or derived. Primary (primogenis, lit. “born first”) are so called because they do not take their origin from elsewhere. There are twenty-one of these. Three are definite: ego (I), tu (you), ille (he). Seven are indefinite: quis (who), qualis (whatsort),talis(such),quantus(howmuch),tantus(so much), quotus (where in order), totus (such in order). There are six that are less than definite: iste (that one), ipse (he himself), hic (this one), is (he), idem (the same one), se (oneself, i.e. the 3rd person reflexive). There are five possessives: meus (my), tuus (your (sing.)), suus (his or her or their), noster (our), vester (your (pl.)). The rest are called derived, because they are derived and compounded from these, as quis-piam (whoever), ali-quis (someone), and the rest.
ix. The verb (De verbo) 1. The verb (verbum) is so called because it resounds by means of reverberation (verberatus) in the air, or because this part of speech often‘isinvolved’ (versare)inaspeech.Moreover,words (verbum) are signs of the mental processes with which peopleshowtheirthoughtstooneanotherinspeaking.12 And just as a noun indicates a person, so a verb indicates the doing or speaking of a person. With respect to the subject of a verb, there is an indication of active or passive. Thus scribo (“I write”) is what a person is doing. Scribor (“I am written”) also shows what a person is doing, but in this case a person who is undergoing the action.
2.TherearetwomeaningsfortheLatinverbum:grammatical and rhetorical. The verbum (i.e. the verb) of the grammariansconjugatesinthreetenses:preterit,present and future, as fecit (“he did”), facit (“he does”), faciet (“hewilldo”).Inthecaseofrhetoriciansverba(“words”) is used of their speech as a whole, as in verbis bonis nos cepit (“he captivated us with good words”), verba bona habuit (“he had good words”), where what is meant is not only the verba that fall into three tenses (i.e. the verbs), but the entire speech.
The qualities of verbs are: derivational forms, moods, conjugations, and voices [and tenses]. 3. ‘Derivational forms’(forma)ofverbsaresocalledbecausetheyinform (informare) us about some particular deed, for through
12 We translate verbum with either of its senses, “verb” or “word,” depending on the context; see section 2 below.
I.viii.5–ix.6
them we show what we are doing. The meditative (meditativus) is named from the sense of someone intending (meditari), as lecturio (“I intend to read,” formed on legere, ppl. lectus), that is, “I want to read.” Following on from intention, the inchoative (inchoativus) verb is so called from its indication of beginning (incohare), as calesco(“Ibecomewarm,”formedoncalere,“bewarm”). The frequentative (frequentativus) is so called from acting rather often, as lectito (“I read a lot”), clamito (“I yell a lot,” formed on clamare). The derivational forms have a bearing on the meaning, and the moods have a bearing on the inflection. Furthermore, you do not know what the inflection should be unless you have already learned what the meaning is.
4. The moods (modus) of the verb are so called from the modality (quemadmodum, lit. “in what manner”) of their sense. Thus the indicative (indicativus) mood is so calledbecauseithasthesenseofsomeoneindicating,as‘I read’(lego).Theimperative(imperativus),becauseithas the tone of someone commanding (imperare), as ‘read!’ (lege). The optative (optativus), because through it we desire (optare) to do something, as ‘would that I might read’ (utinam legerem). The subjunctive (coniunctivus), becausesomethingisjoined(coniungere)toit,sothatthe statement will be complete. Thus when you say, “when I yell” (cum clamem), the sense is left hanging. But if I say, “whenIyell,whydoyouthinkIamsilent?”(cumclamem, quare putas quod taceam?), the sense is complete. 5. The infinitive (infinitus) [mood] is so called because, while it defines (definire) tenses, it does not define a person of theverb,as‘toyell’(clamare),‘tohaveyelled’(clamasse). If you add a person to it – ‘I ought, you ought, he ought toyell’(clamaredebeo,debes,debet)–itbecomesaquasifinite verb. The non-personal (impersonalis) is so called because it lacks the person of a noun or pronoun, as ‘it is read’ (legitur): you may add a person, as ‘by me, by you, by him’ (a me, a te, ab illo), and the sense is filled out. But the infinitive mood lacks a marker of person as part of its verb form, while the non-personal lacks a pronoun or noun to mark person.
6. The conjugation (coniugatio) is so called because through it many things are joined (coniungere) to one root sound. It shows the endings of the future tense, lest through ignorance one should say legebo for legam (“I will write”). Now the first and second conjugation indicate the future tense by the endings -bo and -bor, while the third conjugation shows it with -am and
 
I.ix.7.–xiv	Isidore of Seville
 
-ar. 7. The voices (genus) of verbs are so named because they ‘bring forth’ (gignere, ppl. genitus). Thus you add r to the active and it brings forth the passive; conversely, you remove r from the passive and it brings forth the active. These are called active (activus) verbs because they act (agere, ppl. actus), as ‘I whip’ (verbero), and passive (passivus) verbs because they ‘undergo action’ (pati, ppl. passus), as ‘I am whipped’ (verberor); neutral (neutralis) verbs, because they neither act nor undergo action,as‘Iamlyingdown’(iaceo),‘Iamsitting’(sedeo)– for if you add the letter r to these, they do not sound Latin. Common-voiced (communis) verbs are so called because they both act and undergo action, as amplector (“I embrace, I am embraced”). Similarly, these, if the letter r is removed, are not Latin. Deponent (deponens) verbs are so called because they ‘set aside’ (deponere) the passive meaning of their future participles; this form ends in -dus, as gloriandus (“worthy of
boasting”).13
x.	The adverb (De adverbio) 1. The adverb (adverbium) is so named because it ‘comes near the verb’ (accedere < ad-cedere verbum), as in ‘read well’ (bene lege). ‘Well’ (bene) is the adverb, and ‘read’ (lege) is the verb.Therefore,theadverbissocalledbecauseitisalways completed when joined to the verb, for a verb by itself has complete sense, as ‘I write’ (scribo). But an adverb without a verb does not have a full meaning, as ‘today’ (hodie). You ‘add a verb’ (adicis . . . verbum) to this, ‘I write today’ (hodie scribo), and with the added verb you have completed the sense.
xi.	The participle (De participio) The participle (participium) is so called because it takes (capere) the functions (partes) of both the noun and the verb, as if it were parti-capium – for from the noun it takes gender and case, and from the verb tense and meaning, and from both, number and form.
xii.	The conjunction (De conjunctione) 1. The conjunction (coniunctio) is so called because it ‘joins together’ (coniungere) meanings and phrases, for conjunctions have no force on their own, but in their combining of other words they present, as it were, a certain glue. They either link nouns, as “Augustine and (et) Jerome”, or verbs, as “he writes and (et) he reads.” Conjunctions all share a single power: either they join, or they disjoin. 2. Copulative (copulativus) conjunctions are so called because they join meaning or persons, as “let’s go, you and (et) I, to the forum.” The et joins the meanings. Disjunctive (disiunctivus) conjunctions are so called because they disjoin things or persons, as “let’s do it, you or (aut) I.” Subjoined (subiunctivus) conjunctionsaresocalledbecausetheyareattachedbehind(subiungere),as-que (“and”). Thus we sayregique hominique Deoque (“and for the king and the person and God”); we do not say que regi, que homini.
3. Expletive (expletivus) conjunctions are so called because they ‘fill out’ (explere) the topic proposed, as in “if you don’t want this, ‘at least’ (saltim) do that.” Common (communis) conjunctions are named thus, because they are placed [and joined] anywhere, as igitur hoc faciam (“therefore I will do this”), hoc igitur faciam (“this therefore I will do”). 4. Causal (causalis) conjunctions are named from the reason (causa) that people intend to do something, for example, “I kill him, because (quia) he has gold”; the second clause is the reason. Rational (rationalis) conjunctions are so called from the reasoning (ratio) that someone uses in acting, as, “How may I kill him ‘so that’ (ne) I won’t be recognized? By poison or blade?”
xiii.	The preposition (De prepositione) The preposition (praepositio) is so called because it is placed before (praeponere, ppl. praepositus) nouns and verbs. Accusative (accusativus) and ablative (ablativus) prepositions are so called from the cases that they govern. Loquellares – so called because they always join to an utterance (loquella), that is, to words – have no force when they stand alone, as di-, dis-. But when joined to a word, they make a word-form, as diduco (“I divide”), distraho (“I pull apart”).
xiv.	The interjection (De interjectione) The interjection (interiectio) – so called because it is interjected (intericere, ppl. interiectus), that is, interposed, between
13 In late use the verbal form ending in -dus, i.e. the gerundive, became the future passive participle. Both this participle and the gerundive proper are passive in meaning; the literal meaning of gloriandus is “worthy of being boasted of.” Isidore is right to single out the gerundive as the exception to the general rule for deponent verbs (i.e. passive in form but active in sense), but its difference lies in keeping, not losing, the passive sense gerundives normally have: it is the only part of a deponent verb that has a passive meaning.
 
meaningfulphrases–expressestheemotionofanexcited mind, as when vah is said by someone exulting, heu by someone grieving, hem by someone angry, ei by someone afraid. These sounds are specific to each language, and are not easily translated into another language.
xv.	Letters in grammar (De litteris apud grammati-cos) [There are as many of these as there are articulated sounds. And one is called a letter (littera), as if the word were legitera, because it provides a road (iter) for those reading (legere), or because it is repeated (iterare) in reading.] (See iii.3 above.)
xvi.	The syllable (De syllaba) 1. The Greek term ‘syllable’ (syllaba) is called a combination (conceptio) or gathering(complexio)inLatin.Itisnamed‘syllable’from   8  ,thatis,‘tocombineletters,’ for  means “combine.” Hence a true syllable is one made up of several letters, for a single vowel is improperly spoken of as a syllable, but not correctly: it should be called not so much a syllable as a marking of time. Syllables are short, long, or common. 2. Short (brevis) are so called because they can never be drawn out. Long (longus), because they are always drawn out. Common (communis), because they are either drawn out or shortened according to the writer’s judgment as exigency compels. On this read Donatus.14 Syllables are called long and short because, due to their varying lengths of sound, they seem to take either a double or singleperiodoftime.‘Diphthong’(dipthongus)syllables are so called from the Greek word (i.e. from "-, “double” +  , “sound”), because in them two vowels are joined. 3. Of these, we have four true diphthongs: ae, oe, au, eu. Ei was in common use only among the ancients.
A syllable is called a semi-foot (semipes) by those who analyze meter, because it is half of a metrical foot: since a foot consists of two syllables, a single syllable is half a foot. Dionysius Lintius (i.e. Dionysius Thrax) devised themostappropriateindividualpatternsforallsyllables, and on this account was honored with a statue.
14	The fourth-century grammarian Aelius Donatus wrote textbooks that became standard. Here see Ars Grammatica, ed. Keil
4.368–69.
15	The reference is to the pyrrhica, a war-dance or reel.
16	Greek !   means “reversed,” as the foot is a reversed dactyl.
I.xv–xvii.12
xvii. Metrical feet (De pedibus) 1. Feet (pes) are what last for a certain time-span of syllables, and never alter their fixed span. They are called ‘feet’ because in using them the meters ‘walk.’ Just as we step with our feet, so the meters also advance, as it were, by means of feet. There are 124 different feet in all: four two-syllable feet, eight three-syllable, sixteen four-syllable, thirtytwo five-syllable, and sixty-four six-syllable. Up to four syllables they are called feet; the rest are called syzygies (syzygia). 2. These feet have specific reasons for the names by which they are called.
Thepyrrhic(pyrrichius)footissocalledbecauseitwas used habitually in contests or quite often in children’s games.15 The spondee (spondeus) is so called because it has a prolonged sound, for spondeus is the name of a certain droning, that is, the sound that would flow over the ears of those performing a sacrifice. Hence those who would play the pipes in the pagan rites were named ‘spondials.’3.Thetrochee(trochaeus)issocalledbecause it makes speedy alternations in a song, and runs quickly in meters like a wheel – for a wheel is called   9 in Greek. 4. The iamb (iambus) is so called because the Greeks say :; for ‘detract’ (detrahere, ppl. detractus). Poets were accustomed to perform all their invective or abuse (detractio) with poetry of this type. And the name comes from this, in that in some way it infuses a sort of poison of malediction or spite.
5. The tribrach (tribrachys), which is also called chorius, is named tribrach because it consists of three short syllables (see section 9 below). 6. The molossus (Molossus)isnamedfromthedancingoftheMolossians,which they performed while armed. 7. The anapest (anapaestus) [is so called because this foot is dedicated more to relaxation and games].16 8. The dactyl (dactylus) is named from ‘finger’ (cf. "  ), because it begins with a longer measure, and ends in two shorts. Thus this foot has one long joint and two shorts. Also an open hand is called a palm, and the dangling fingers are dactyls. 9. The amphibrach (amphibrachys, cf. <, “on both sides”), because it has a short on either side and a long lying in the middle – for a short is called 9. 10. The amphimacrus, because two longs have a short enclosed between them, for a long is called . 11. The bacchius is so called because with this foot the Bacchanals, that is, the rites of the god Liber (i.e. Bacchus), are celebrated. 12. The antibacchius, or palimbacchius, is so called because it is a reversal of the
 
I.xvii.13–xvii.28	Isidore of Seville
 
bacchius. 13. The proceleusmatic (proceleumaticus, i.e. proceleusmaticus),becauseitisappropriateforthe‘work chant’ (celeuma) of people singing. 14. The dispondeus and ditrochaeus and diiambus are so called because they are double iambs, spondees, and trochees. 15. The antispastus, because it is made of opposing syllables: from a short and a long, then a long and a short. 16. The choriamb (choriambus), because the song most appropriate for ‘a band of singers and dancers’ (chorus) is composed with this foot. 17. The ionic (ionicus) feet are with good reason named from the uneven (inaequalis) sound of their rhythm, for they have two long syllables and two short. 18. The paeonic (paeon) feet are named from their inventor. [They consist of one long and three shorts, and the long syllable is placed in various positions corresponding to the name (i.e. first paeon, second paeon, etc.)]. 19. Epitrites (epitritus) are so called because they always have three long syllables and one short. 20. Syzygies (syzygia) are feet with five and six syllables, and they are called ; in Greek, as are certain declensions.Thesearenotactuallyfeet,buttheyarecalledpentasyllables and hexasyllables, since they do not exceed five and six syllables. Hence it is not possible for any word in a poem to exceed this number of syllables, such as Carthaginiensium (“of Carthaginians”), Hierosolymitanorum (“of Jerusalemites”), and Constantinopolitanorum (“of Constantinopolitans”).
21.Ineachfootthereoccursanarsis(arsis)andathesis (thesis), that is, a raising and lowering of the voice – for the feet would not be able to follow a road unless they were alternately raised and lowered. For example, in arma (arms), ar- is the raising, and -ma the lowering. Properlyconstitutedfeetarecomprisedofadistribution of these two. The proportion is equal (aequus) whenever arsis and thesis are cut with an equal division of time. 22. The proportion is duple (duplus) whenever one of them exceeds the other twofold. The proportion is sescuple (sescuplus) whenever one exceeds the other by half again as much (i.e. a proportion of two and three). In the smaller member of this foot one unit more than the minimum is found, and in the larger member one unit less than the maximum, for sescum is a word for ‘half.’ The proportion is triple (triplus) when the larger part contains the entire smaller part three times: that is, a proportion of three to one. It is epitrite (epitritus), when the smaller part is contained in the larger, plus a third part of the smaller (i.e. a proportion of three and four, since four is equal to three plus one third of three). The members of feet are divided either in equal proportion, or double, or sescuple, or triple, or epitrite.
23.	We divide these into equal members:
SpondeePyrrhic ˘˘ DactylAnapest ˘˘
DispondeusProceleusmatic	˘˘ ˘˘
DiiambusDitrochaeus ˘ ˘ Antispastus ˘˘ Choriamb ˘ ˘
24.	Further, we divide these feet in a duple rhythm:
TrocheeIamb	˘
MolossusTribrach	˘ ˘˘
Ionic major˘˘	Ionic minor ˘˘
25.[Thereisonlyonethathastripleproportion,which is the most extreme proportion and is therefore present in few meters.]
Amphibrach ˘ ˘
26.	The ones with sescuple division are these:
AmphimacrusBacchius	˘
AntibacchiusFirst Paeon	˘˘˘
Second PaeonThird Paeon	˘˘ ˘
Fourth Paeon
27.	We divide the rest into the epitrite proportion:
First EpitriteSecond Epitrite
Third Epitrite	˘	Fourth Epitrite˘
There are, therefore, ten feet with equal proportion, six with duple proportion, one with triple proportion, seven with sescuple proportion, and four with epitrite proportion. And there is only one that has triple proportion, which is the most extreme proportion and is therefore present in few meters. 28. The number of syllablespossibleinafootrangesfromtwotosix;itproceeds no further, because feet extend to six syllables only.
There are time-intervals in feet, corresponding to the quantity that each foot has. Resolution (resolutio) of feet occurs when two shorts take the place of one long, or four shorts the place of two longs, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.16):
Sectaque intexunt abiete costas.
(They frame the ribs with sawn fir.)
Abiete here is a resolution of a spondee into a proceleusmatic; it is always following a synaloephis (i.e.
 
a fusion of two vowels into one syllable) that Vergil uses this resolution. 29. Although two shorts can take the place of one long, one long can never take the place of two shorts,17 for solid things can be divided, but divided things cannot be made solid.
There is a notation by whose mark syllables are recognized, for when you see the lower half of a circle written twice, it is a Pyrrhic foot: ˘˘, where you see two horizontal Is, it is a spondee: – –. So a short is marked with a lower half-circle, and a long with a horizontal I. 30. Meter is built from feet, such as trochaic meter from the trochee, dactylic from the dactyl, iambic from the iamb; we will speak a little later concerning this.
xviii. Accents(Deaccentibus) 1.Theaccent(accentus), which is called ‘prosody’ (prosodia) in Greek, [takes its name from Greek], for the Greek word ! is the Latin ad(“to”),andtheGreek >"= istheLatincantus(“song”; i.e. accentus < ad + cantus) – so this term is translated word for word. Latin speakers also have other names for it. They say ‘accent’ and ‘pitch’ (tonus) and ‘tenor’ (tenor),becauseatthatplacethesoundincreasesandfalls away. 2. ‘Accent’ is so called because it is joined to song (cantus), in the same way that the ‘adverb’ is so called because it is joined to the verb (see chapter x above). The acute (acutus) accent is so called because it sharpens (acuere) and raises the syllable; the grave (gravis, lit. “heavy”) accent, because it depresses and lowers, for it is the opposite of the acute. The circumflex (circumflexus) is so called because it consists of an acute and a grave. Thus beginning as an acute it ends as a grave, and when it thus rises and then falls, it makes a ‘turning around’ (circumflexus). 3. The acute and the circumflex are similar, for they both raise the syllable. The grave accent is
17	Isidore means that a long syllable cannot replace two shorts when the latter are required by a particular verse form, as, with rare exceptions, in the fifth foot of a dactylic hexameter.
18	A syllable’s vowel is short or long “by nature,” but a syllable is generally long “by position” if its vowel is followed by two consonants.
19	The remarks about accent (pitch?) here pertain to Greek pronunciation, and less clearly to Latin. The details are controversial. The last two sentences may refer to the rule in Greek that a word may have two accents if it is followed by an enclitic. See Donatus, ed. Keil 4.371–72.
20	The pitch or stress would rise on -ur sus but fall on ursus.
21	The text should read “meta, with its¯ e lengthened.” Ergo “therefore” occurs with a short o only rarely in the classical poets, but commonly in later ones.
I.xvii.29–xix.5
regardedasoppositetobothofthem,foritalwayslowers the syllable, while they raise it, as (Lucan, Civil War 1.15):
Unde venit Titan, et nox ibi sidera condit. (Whence Titan comes, and there night conceals the stars.)
Unde (“whence”) is grave here, (i.e. its pitch lowers as we move from the first to the second syllable). It has a lower sound than the acute and the circumflex.
4.Amonosyllabicwordwillhaveanacuteaccentifitis shortbynature,asvir(“man”),orlongbyposition,asars (“art”). But if it is long by nature, as res¯ (“thing”), then it has a circumflex.18 A disyllabic word, if its first syllable is long by nature and the second short, has a circumflex, as Musa¯ ; otherwise it has an acute. If a three-syllable word has a short middle syllable, as tibia (“shin”), then we make the first syllable acute. If it has a second syllable long by nature, and a short final syllable, as Metellus¯ , then we make the middle syllable circumflex. 5. Fourand five-syllable words are controlled by the pattern for three-syllable words. The grave accent can occur with another single accent in a single word, but never with two, as [Catullus]. In a compound word there is a single
accent.19
6. Accents were invented either for the sake of distinguishing, as (Vergil, Aen. 8.83):
Viridique in litore conspicitur sus
(And a pig is seen on the green shore)
so that you won’t say ursus (“bear”);20 or for the sake of pronunciation, lest you pronounce meta as short and not as meta¯ , with its a lengthened; or because of an ambiguity which must be resolved, as ergo. When the -go is lengthened, the word signifies a reason (i.e. “on account of”); when it is short, it signifies a conjunction
(i.e. “therefore”).21
xix. Accentmarks(Defigurisaccentuum) 1. There are ten accent marks, which are supplied by grammarians to distinguish words.  -?@, that is the acute accent, a line drawn upwards from the left side to the right, is made thus: ´. 2. $@, that is, grave, a line drawn from the upper left down to the right, is made thus: `. 3. !AB, that is, circumflex, a line made of an acute and a grave, is represented thus: ∧. 4. +, that is, a long mark (i.e. macron), is a horizontal stroke, thus: ¯. 5. $9, that is, the short, is the lower part of a
 
I.xix.6–xxi.5	Isidore of Seville
 
circle, lying thus: ˘. 6. ‘ϒB, that is, a joining (coniunctio), because it connects (conectere) two words, is a stroke drawn down that curves back at the line, thus:  7. Diastole, that is, a distinction (distinctio), which separates something from its opposite: the right half of a circle drawn down to the line:   8. The ‘apostrophe’ (apostrophus), also the right half of a circle, and placed at the upper part of a letter, is thus: ’. By this mark it is shown that the final vowel in a word is lacking, as tribunal’ for tribunale. 9. &@, which is translated as “aspiration” (aspiratio, i.e. the rough breathing), that is, where the letter H ought to be put, is marked by this shape:  . 10.  , which is translated as “dryness” (siccitas, i.e. the smooth breathing), or “a pure sound” – that is, where the letter H ought not to be – is expressed with this shape:  . 11. Latin speakers made the shapes of these two accent-marks from the letter of aspiration itself. Whence, if you join them, you will have made that same mark of aspiration (i.e. H). Conversely, if you split it at the midpoint, you make a "@ and a 4.
xx.	Punctuatedclauses(Deposituris) 1. A punctuated clause is a form for distinguishing meaning through colons, commas, and periods, which, when placed in their proper spot, show the sense of the reading to us.22 They are called ‘punctuated clauses’ (positura) either because they are marked by points that are set down (ponere, ppl. positus), or because there the voice is lowered(deponere,ppl.depositus)tomakeanintervalwitha pause. Greek speakers call them B, and Latin speakers, positurae. 2. The first punctuated clause is called the subdivision, and it is the same as a comma. The middle punctuation follows: it is the colon. The final punctuation, which closes the entire sentence, is the period.
The colon and the comma are parts of the sentence, as we have said. The difference between them is indicated by points placed in different spots. 3. For where the speech has begun and the sense is not yet complete, but it is necessary to take a breath, a comma occurs, that is, a part of the sense, and a point is placed even with the bottom of the letter. This is called the ‘subdivision’ (subdistinctio) because it takes the point below (subtus), that is, at the bottom of the line. 4. And where, in the following words, the sentence now makes sense but something still remains for the completion of the sentence, a colon occurs, and we mark it by a point even withthemiddleoftheletter.Andwecallthisthe‘middle’ (medius) punctuation, because we place the point at the middle of the letter. 5. But when, by proceeding through the speech, we make a complete closure of the sentence, aperiodoccurs,andweplaceapointevenwiththetopof the letter. This is called a distinctio, that is, a disjunction, becauseitsetsapartawholesentence.6.Thisistheusage among orators. On the other hand, among the poets, a comma occurs in the verse when, after two feet, there is still a syllable remaining in the word, because a break in the word is made there according to metrical scansion. But when no part of the speech still remains after two feet, it is a colon. And the entire verse is a period.23
xxi.	Critical signs (De notis sententiarum) 1. In addition to these, there were certain critical signs (nota) used in writing the works of the most famous authors; the ancients placed these in poems and histories to annotate the writing. The critical sign is a specific shape placed in the manner of a letter, to show a particular judgment aboutawordorsentencesorverses.Therearetwenty-six marks which may be placed in verse, given below with their names:
2.   The asterisk is placed next to omissions, so that things which appear to be missing may be clarified through this mark, for star is called   in Greek, and the term ‘asterisk’ (asteriscus) is derived from this. 3. – The obolus, that is, a horizontal stroke, is placed next to words or sentences repeated unnecessarily, or by placeswheresomepassageismarkedasfalse,sothat,like an arrow, it slays the superfluous and pierces the false, for an arrow is called C in Greek. 4.   An obolus with a point above it is put next to those places, about which there is some doubt as to whether they ought to betakenoutorkept.[Itismarkedasfalse.]5. Thelemniscus, that is, a horizontal stroke between two points, is put next to those places that translators of Holy Writ
22	In this section Isidore uses the terms ‘colon,’ ‘comma,’ and ‘period’ to refer both to the actual parts of the sentence and to the marks of punctuation used to terminate them.
23	Isidore equates the signs for the metrists’ caesura and diaeresis with the signs for the comma and colon. The caesura is the ending of a word within a metrical foot, especially within the third foot, or within both the second and fourth feet, of a hexameter line, and the diaeresis is the coincidence of the end of foot and word. Isidore defines the comma/caesura as the ending of a metrical foot within a word; the sense is generally the same.
 
have rendered with the same meaning but with different words.
6. Theantigraphuswithapointisplacedwherethere isadifferentmeaninginthetranslations.7. –Theasterisk with obolus: Aristarchus used this specifically next to those verses not placed in their proper location. 8.  The paragraph (paragraphus) is placed so as to separate topics which run on in sequence, just as in a catalog, places are separated from each other, and regions from each other, and in the competitions, prizes are separated from each other, and contests from other contests. 9.  The positura is a mark opposite to the paragraph. It is shaped this way because, just as the paragraph marks beginnings, this one separates ends from beginnings. 10.
  The cryphia, the lower half of a circle with a point, is put next to those places where a difficult and obscure question cannot be answered or solved. 11.   The antisimma is placed at those verses whose order should be transposed. It is found so placed in ancient authors also. 12.   The antisimma with a point is put next to those places where there are two verses with the same meaning, and it is doubtful which one should be selected.
13. > The diple. Our scribes place this in books of churchmen to separate or to make clear the citations of Sacred Scriptures. 14.   The diple !  9  (“with a point”). Leogoras of Syracuse first placed this next to Homeric verses to distinguish Mount Olympus from the heavenly Olympus. 15.   The diple ! B, that is, with two points. The ancients set this next to the verseswhichZenodotusofEphesusincorrectlyadded,or removed, or transposed. Our scribes also have used this same sign next to those verses. 16.   The diple C 7 B is interposed to separate the speeches in comedies and tragedies. 17.   The reverse C B, whenever thestropheandtheantistropheareintroduced.18. The reverse diple with obolus is placed next to those passages that refer back to something, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 10.88):
Do I try to overturn the state of Troy from its foundation for you? I? Or is it he who threw the miserable Trojans to the Greeks?24
19.   The diple with an obolus above it is placed next to passages representing changed conditions of places, times, and people. 20.   The diple pointing right and
24 The lines from Vergil refer to events described in more detail earlier in his poem.
I.xxi.6–xxiii.1
reversed with an obolus above is used when a unit is completed in that place, and signifies that something similar follows.
21.  The ceraunium is placed whenever a set of verses is rejected and not marked individually with an obolus; for lightning is called   in Greek. 22.   The chrisimon: this is placed according to each person’s individualdesiretomarksomething.23.   PhiandRho,that is,   (i.e. “attention”): this is placed where there is something obscure requiring close attention. 24.   The upward anchor is placed where there is some exceedingly great subject matter. 25.   The downward anchor, where something done most basely and improperly is denounced. 26. The mark of the corona is only placed at the end of a book. 27. The alogus is the mark [that] is placed beside errors.
28. There are also other small marks (i.e. signes de renvoi) made in books for drawing attention to things that are explained at the edges of the pages, so that when the reader finds a sign of this type in the margin he may know that it is an explanation of the same word or line that he finds with a similar mark lying above it when he turns back to the text.
xxii.	Common shorthand signs (De notis vulgaribus)1. Ennius first invented eleven hundred common signs. These signs were used in this way: several scribes standing by together would write down whatever was said in a trial or judgment, with the sections distributed among themsothateachscribewouldtakedownacertainnumberofwordsinturn.InRome,TulliusTiro,afreedmanof Cicero’s, first devised such signs, but only for prepositions. 2. After him, Vipsanius, Philargius, and Aquila, another freedman of Maecenas, added others. Then, after the total number of signs had been collected, set in order,andincreasedinnumber,Senecaproducedawork with five thousand signs. They are called ‘signs’ (nota) because they would designate (notare) words and syllables by predetermined characters and recall them to the knowledge (notitia) of readers. Those who have learned these signs are properly called stenographers (notarius) today.
xxiii.	Signsusedinlaw(Denotisiuridicis) 1. In books oflawcertainlettersstandforwords;inthiswaythewritingbecomesquickerandshorter.So,forinstance,bonum factum (“good deed”) would be written as BF, senatus
 
I.xxiii.2–xxvii.3
consultum (“senate decree”) as SC, respublica (“republic”) as RP, populus Romanus (“Roman people”) as PR, dumtaxat (“at least”) as DT, mulier (“woman”) by the upside-down letter M, pupillus (“male orphan”) by a regular P, pupilla (“female orphan”) by a   with the top reversed, caput (“head”) by a single K, calumniae causa (“case of false accusation”) by two joined KK, iudex esto (“let the judge be present”) by IE, dolum malum (“grievous fraud”) by DM. 2. We find very many similar signsofthistypeinancientbooks.Recentemperorshave ordained that these legal signs be abolished from codes of law, because shrewd people were cleverly deceiving many ignorant people by means of these signs. So the emperorsorderedthatfullwordsshouldbeusedtowrite the laws, so that they would cause no errors or ambiguities, but would clearly show what must be obeyed and what must be avoided.
xxiv.	Military signs (De notis militaribus) 1. The ancients also used a special sign in the rosters that contained the names of soldiers; by this sign it could be seen how many of the soldiers were still alive and how many had fallen in battle. The sign tau, 0, placed at the beginning of the line indicated a survivor, while theta, 6, was placed by the name of each of the slain. Therefore this letter has a spear through the middle, which is the sign of death. Concerning which Persius says (Satires 4.13):
And he is able to affix the black theta to crime.
2. But when they wanted to indicate ignorance (i.e. as to whether a soldier was alive or dead), they used the letter lambda, just as they would indicate death when they would put theta at the head of the line. There were also special signs for the payment of stipends.
xxv.	Epistolarycodes(Denotislitterarum) 1.Ourpredecessorsalsousedtoestablishbetweenthemselvesepistolary codes, so that they might write back and forth with these signs whatever they wanted to write secretly to each other. Brutus is an example: he used to indicate with these codes what he was about to do, while everyoneelsewasunawareofwhatthecodedlettersmeantfor him.2.CaesarAugustusalsosaidtohisson:“Sinceinnumerable things are constantly occurring about which we mustwritetoeachother,andwhichmustbesecret,letus have between us code-signs, if you will, such that, when something is to be written in code, we will replace each letter with the following letter in this way: b for a, c for b, and then the rest in the same way. For the letter z, we will return to a double aa.” Some also write with the words reversed.
xxvi.	Finger signals (De notis digitorum) 1. There are also some signals for the fingers, and for eyes as well, by which those at a distance can silently communicate with each other. This is the custom with the military: when the army is agreeing on an action they signal assent with their hands, because they cannot use their voices. Some, because they cannot speak a greeting, use a motion of the sword. 2. Ennius, speaking of a certain shameless woman, says (Naevius, Comedies 52):
Tossing from hand to hand in a ring of players like a ball, she gives herself and makes herself common. She embraces one, nods to another, and her hand is occupied with yet another, she pinches the foot of another, gives to another a ring to look at, calls another by blowing a kiss, sings with another, and to still others gives signals with her finger.
And Solomon (Proverbs 6:13): “He winketh with the eyes, presseth with the foot, and speaketh with the finger.”
xxvii.	Orthography (De orthographia) 1. The Greek term ‘orthography’ (orthographia) is translated into Latin as ‘correct writing’ [for orto means “correctly” and graphia “writing”]. This discipline teaches how we should spell, for just as grammatical art treats of the inflection of parts of speech, so orthography treats of the skill of spelling. For instance, ad (“to”): when it is a prepositionittakestheletterD,butwhenitisaconjunction, the letter T (i.e. at, “but”). 2. Haud (“scarcely”), when it is an adverb of negation, ends in the letter D and is aspirated initially. But when it is a [disjunctive] conjunction, it is written with the letter T and without aspiration (i.e. aut, “or”). 3. The preposition apud (“at”) is written with a D, as in ad patrem (“at the father”), because our predecessors often used apud for ad [having removed two of the middle letters.]25
25 Isidore is advising against the common spelling aput. Keil, the editor of Isidore’s source here in Cassiodorus, proposes reading “as ‘ad’ praepositio” (“as is the preposition ‘at’”) for “as in ad patrem.” The bracketed addition of course has it backwards; apud supposedly adds two letters to ad.
 
4. But sometimes letters are correctly put in place of other letters. There is a certain kinship between the letters B and P, for we say Pyrrhus for Burrus. [The letters] CandGhaveacertainkinship.Thuswhilewesaycentum (“hundred”) and trecentos (“three hundred”), after that we say quadringentos (“four hundred”), putting G for C. SimilarlythereisakinshipbetweenCandQ,forwewrite huiusce(“ofthis”)withCandcuiusque(“ofeach”)witha Q. The preposition cum (“with”) should be written with a C, but if it is a conjunction (“while”), then it should be written with a Q, for we say quum lego (“while I speak”). Deus (“God”) is written with an E alone, but daemon (“demon”) should be marked by the diphthong AE. 5. Equus (“horse”), which is the animal, should be written with E alone, but aequus, which means “just,” should be written with the diphthong AE. Exsul (“exile”) should be written with the S added, because an exile is someone who is ‘outside the land’ (extra solum). Exultat (“he exults) is better written without the letter S. For, since X is made up of C and S, why, when the sound is already contained in it, should a second one be added to it?
6. Aequor (“the level sea”) should be written with a diphthong (i.e. not with E alone), because the name is made from aqua (“water”). 7. Forsitan (“perhaps”) shouldbewrittenwithNattheend,becauseitsfullform is si forte tandem (“if by chance indeed”). 8. Fedus, that is, ‘deformed,’ should be written with an E alone; foedus, that is, ‘pact,’ should be written with the diphthong OE. 9. Formosus (“beautiful”) is written without an N
(i.e. not formonsus), because it is so called from forma (“beauty”), [or from formus, that is, ‘warm’; for warmth of blood produces beauty]. Gnatus (“offspring”), that is, ‘son,’ should be written with a G, because it represents generatus (“begotten”). 10. H, which is the letter of aspiration, is joined in Latin only to vowels, as honor, homo(“man”),humus(“soil”),[humilitas(“humility”)]. There is also aspiration with consonants, but only in Greek and Hebrew words. The interjections heus and heu should also be written with an H.
11. Some think that the letter I occurring between two vowels, as in Troia, Maia, should be written twice. Logic, however, does not permit this, for three vowels are never
26 The forms that Isidore cites, idem and itur, are significant because they show the consonants in question when they are followed by a vowel. The d/t distinction, although evidently being lost in word-final position, was still preserved medially.
I.xxvii.4–xxvii.20
written in a single syllable. But the letter I occurring between two vowels does have a double sound (i.e. in metrical scansion). 12. The neuter pronoun id (“it”) is written with a D, because the paradigm is is, ea, id (“he, she, it”) since it makes the word idem (“the same”). But if it is a third person verb, it is identified by the letter T, because the paradigm is eo, is, it (“I go, you go, he/she/it goes”) [since it makes the form] itur (“is traveled”).26
13. The ancients placed the letter K first whenever an A followed, as in kaput (“head”), kanna (“reed”), kalamus (“cane”). But now only Karthago (“Carthage”) and kalendae (“Calends”) are written with this letter. However, all Greek words with a following vowel of any sort are written with a K. 14. Laetus (“joyful”) is written with a diphthong, because ‘joyfulness’ (laetitia) is so called from ‘wideness’ (latitudo), the opposite of which is sorrow, which causes constriction. We sometimes use the letter L for the letter D, as in latum (“carried”) for datum (“given”) and calamitatem for cadamitatem, for the word ‘calamity’ is derived from ‘falling’ (cadendum).
15. There is a question about how maxumus or maximus(“greatest”),andanysimilarpairs,oughttobewritten. Varro relates that Caesar was accustomed to pronounce and write words of this type with an I. Hence, based on the authority of so great a man, it became the practice that maximus, optimus (“best”), pessimus (“worst”) were written. 16. Malo (“I prefer”) should be written with one L, because it is magis volo (“I wish rather”). But the infinitive malle (“to prefer”) has two Ls because it is magis velle (“to wish rather”). Nolo (“I am unwilling”)alsowithoneL,andnolle(“tobeunwilling”) with two, for nolo is ne-volo (“I do not want”) and nolle is ne-velle (“not to want”).
17. Os, if it means “face” or “bone” should be written withanOalone;ifitreferstoaperson,anHshouldbeput first (i.e. hos, plural accusative of the demonstrative). 18. Ora (“shores”), associated with boundaries, should be written with an O; hora (“hour”), associated with days, withanH.Onus,ifitmeans“burden,”shouldbewritten with an O alone; if it means “honor,” written with the aspiration of an H (i.e. honos). 19. Praepositio (“preposition”) and praeterea (“besides”) should be written with diphthongs. Further, pene (“almost”), which is a conjunction, with E; poena, which is ‘punishment’ with OE.
20. The letter Q is correctly placed when it has the letter U immediately following, and they are followed by any other vowel or vowels, so that a single syllable
 
I.xxvii.21–xxix.1
is made. The rest are written with C. 21. The pronoun quae (“which, who”) should be written with an A, the conjunction -que (“and”) without an A. 22. Quid (“what”) is written with a D when it is a pronoun, and withaTwhenitistheverbwhoseparadigmappearssimply, as queo, quis, quit (“I can, you can, he/she/it can”), and in the compound nequeo, nequis, nequit (“I cannot, you cannot, he/she/it cannot”). Quod (“that”) when it is a pronoun should be written with D, when a numeric termwithT(i.e.quot,“asmany”),becausetotidem(“just asmany”)iswrittenwithT.Quotidie(“daily”)shouldbe written with Q, not C (i.e. cotidie), since it is quot diebus (“on as many days”).
23. The letter R has a connection with the letter S, for the ancients said honos, labos, arbos, but now we say honor, labor, arbor (“tree”). 24. Sat (“enough”) must be written with T, because its complete form is satis. Sed (“but”) must be written with a D, for sed was pronounced as sedum by the ancients; we have cut off the final two letters. 25. Tantus (“so much”) as well as quantus (“as much”) used to have the letter M in the middle, for it was from quam (“as”) and tam (“so”) – whence alsoquamtitas,quamtus,tamtus.26.Theinterjectionvae (“woe”) should be written with an A, the conjunction ve (“or”) without. 27. Xps¯ (“Christ”),27 because it is Greek, should be written with an X, so also xrisma (“chrism”). 28.OnlyGreekwordsarewrittenwiththelettersYandZ, for although the letter Z expresses the sound in iustitia (“justice”), still, because the word is Latin, it must be written with a T.28 So also militia (“military”), malitia (“malice”),nequitia(“worthlessness”),andothersimilar words. 29. Also, the practice among our predecessors for ambiguouswordswasthis:whenithasonemeaningwith a short vowel, and another with the same vowel lengthened, they would place a macron over the long syllable. For example, whether populus would mean ‘the poplar tree’ (i.e. populus¯ ) or ‘a multitude of people’ would be distinguished by the macron. Moreover, whenever consonants were doubled, they placed a mark called sicilicus (i.e.amarkshapedlikeasickle, )above,asinthewords cella, serra, asseres. Our predecessors did not use double letters, but they would write a sicilicus above, and by this mark the reader was alerted that the letter would be doubled.
xxviii. Analogy(Deanalogia) 1. The Greek term ‘analogy’(analogia)iscalledinLatinthecomparison(conparatio) or ‘regular relation’ (proportio) of similar things. Its force is that something doubtful is compared to a similar thing that is not doubtful, and uncertain things areexplainedbymeansofthingsthatarecertain.Acomparisonbyanalogycanbedrawnfromeightfeatures:that is, from quality, from the comparative degree, from gender, from number, from form, from case, from endings with similar syllables, and from the similarity of tenses. 2. If any one of these is lacking, it is no longer analogy, thatis,similarity,butratheranomaly,thatis,outsidethe rule,suchaslepus(“hare”)andlupus(“wolf”).Theycorrespond entirely, except that they differ in case endings, as we say lupi (“of the wolf”), but leporis (“of the hare”). Thus the regular pattern is that when you ask whether trames (“footpath”) is masculine or feminine, it is similar to limes (“boundary-path”) in its entire declension, and so must be masculine.
3. And again, if you think that funis (“rope”) is of uncertain gender, it is similar to panis (“bread”) in its entire declension, and so must be masculine. And again, from a comparison of the positive degree, so if you say doctus (“learned”), you will also say magnus (“big”), for they are both positives and similar to each other. This also occurs with diminutives. For example, funiculus (“small rope,” with an obviously masculine ending) showsthatfunis(“rope”)ismasculine,justasmarmusculum (“small block of marble,” with an obviously neuter ending) shows that marmor (“marble”) is of neuter gender.4.Forthegenderoftheprincipalformisusuallyalso the gender of the diminutive. But this is not always so, as in pistrinum (“pounding-mill” – neuter), but pistrilla (“little pounding-mill” – feminine). Nevertheless, just as we ought to know the declension by comparison of the ending, [that is, from the primary form], we ought to infer the gender from the diminutive.
xxix. Etymology (De etymologia) 1. Etymology (etymologia) is the origin of words, when the force of a verb or a noun is inferred through interpretation. Aristotle called this    (sign), and Cicero adnotatio (symbolization),29 because by presenting their model it makes known (notus) the names and words for things.
27	The abbreviation derives from Greek chi-rho-sigma, from  .
28	ThepronunciationatthistimeofzandoftheLatin-t-inwords like militia was /ts/. Compare Italian milizia, malizia.
29	Cicero, Topics 35, commonly reading nota for adnotatio.
 
For example, flumen (“river”) is so called from fluendum (“flowing”) because it has grown by flowing. 2. The knowledge of a word’s etymology often has an indispensable usefulness for interpreting the word, for when you have seen whence a word has originated, you understand its force more quickly. Indeed, one’s insight into anythingisclearerwhenitsetymologyisknown.30 However, not all words were established by the ancients from nature;somewereestablishedbywhim,justaswesometimes give names to our slaves and possessions according to what tickles our fancy. 3. Hence it is the case that etymologies are not to be found for all words, because somethingsreceivednamesnotaccordingtotheirinnate qualities, but by the caprice of human will.
Etymologies of words are furnished either from their rationale(causa),as‘kings’(rex,gen.regis)from[‘ruling’ (regendum) and] ‘acting correctly’ (recte agendum); or from their origin, as ‘man’ (homo) because he is from ‘earth’ (humus), or from the contrary, as ‘mud’ (lutum) from‘washing’(lavare,ppl.lutus),sincemudisnotclean, and ‘grove’ (lucus), because, darkened by its shade, it is scarcely ‘lit’ (lucere). 4. Some are created by derivationfromotherwords,as‘prudent’(prudens)from‘prudence’(prudentia);somefromthesounds,as‘garrulous’ (garrulus) from ‘babbling sound’ (garrulitas). Some are derived from Greek etymology and have a Latin declension, as ‘woods’ (silva), ‘home’ (domus). 5. Other words derive their names from names of places, cities, [or] rivers. In addition, many take their names from the languages of various peoples, so that it is difficult to discern their origin. Indeed, there are many foreign words unfamiliar to Latin and Greek speakers.
xxx. Glosses (De glossis) 1. ‘Gloss’ (glossa) receives its name from Greek, with the meaning ‘tongue.’ Philosophers call it adverbum, because it defines the utterance in question by means of one single word (verbum): in oneworditdeclareswhatagiventhingis,ascontiscereest tacere (“‘to fall still’ is ‘to be silent’”). 2. Again in (Vergil, Aen. 10.314):
Latus haurit apertum (gouges the exposed flank),
30	Fontaine 1981:100 notes that this sentence is adapted from a legal maxim cited by Tertullian, De Fuge 1.2: “Indeed, one’s insight into anything is clearer when its author is known” – substituting etymologia cognita for auctore cognito.
31	Isidore wrote a separate treatise, De differentiis, on this subject.
I.xxix.2–xxxii.4
‘gouges’ (haurit, lit. “drinks”) is glossed as ‘pierces through’ (percutit). And again, as when we gloss ‘termination’ (terminus) as ‘end’ (finis), and we interpret ‘ravaged’ (populatus) to be ‘devastated’ (vastatus), and in general when we make clear the meaning of one word by means of one other word.
xxxi.	Differentiation (De differentiis)31 A differentiation (differentia) is a type of definition, which writers on the liberal arts call ‘concerning the same and the different.’ Thus two things, of the kind that are confused with each other because of a certain quality that they have in common, are distinguished by an inferred difference, through which it is understood what each of the two is. For instance, one asks what is the difference between a ‘king’anda‘tyrant’:wedefinewhateachisbyapplyinga differentiation, so that “a king is restrained and temperate, but a tyrant is cruel.” Thus when the differentiation between these two has been given, then one knows what each of them is. And so on in the same way.
xxxii.	Barbarism (De barbarismo) 1. A barbarism (barbarismus) is a word pronounced with a corrupted letter or sound: a corrupted letter, as in floriet (i.e. the incorrect future form of florere, “bloom”), when one ought to say florebit (“will bloom”); a corrupted sound, if the first syllable is lengthened and the middle syllable omitted in words like latebrae (“hiding places”), tenebrae(“shadows”).Itiscalled‘barbarism’frombarbarian (barbarus)peoples,sincetheywereignorantofthepurity of the Latin language, for some groups of people, once they had been made Romans, brought to Rome their mistakesinlanguageandcustomsaswellastheirwealth. 2.Thereisthisdifferencebetweenabarbarismandaborrowing (barbarolexis), that a barbarism occurs in a Latin word when it is corrupted, but when foreign words are brought into Latin speech, it is called ‘borrowing.’ Further,whenafaultoflanguageoccursinprose,itiscalleda barbarism,butwhenitoccursinmeter,itiscalledametaplasm (metaplasmus). 3. In addition, a barbarism can occurinwrittenorspokenlanguage.Inwrittenlanguage it occurs in four ways: if someone adds, changes, transposes,orremovesaletterinawordorsyllable.Inspoken language it may occur in length, intonation, aspiration, and other ways that will follow. 4. A barbarism by length is made if someone says a short syllable for a long, or a long for a short. A barbarism by intonation, if the accent
 
I.xxxii.5–xxxiv.6
is moved to another syllable. By aspiration, if the letter H is added where it should not be, or omitted where it should occur. 5. A barbarism by hiatus, whenever a verse iscutoffinspeakingbeforeitiscompleted,orwhenevera vowel follows a vowel, as in Musai Aonides.32 Barbarisms also occur by motacism, [iotacism], and lambdacism. 6. A motacism (motacismus) occurs whenever a vowel follows the letter M, as bonum aurum (“good gold), iustum amicum (“just friend”), and we avoid this fault either by suspendingtheletterM,orbyleavingitout.33 7.Iotacism (iotacismus) occurs in words with the sound of the letter iotadoubled,asTroia,Maia,wherethepronunciationof these letters should be weak, so that they seem to sound likeoneiota,nottwo.8.Lambdacism(labdacismus)happensiftwoLsarepronouncedinsteadofone,asAfricans do, as in colloquium instead of conloquium, or whenever we pronounce a single L too weakly, or a double L too strongly.Thisisbackwards,forweoughttopronouncea singleLstronglyandadoubleLweakly.9.Conlisiooccurs whenever the end of the last syllable is the beginning of the next, as in matertera (“mother’s sister”).34
xxxiii.	Solecisms(Desoloecismis) 1.Asolecism(soloecismus) is an unsuitable construction made up of more than one word, just as a barbarism is the corruption of a single word. Thus a solecism is a group of words that are not joined by the correct rule, as if someone were to say inter nobis (“between us,” with nobis in the wrongcase)insteadofinternos,ordateveniamsceleratorum (“grant forgiveness of sinners”) instead of sceleratis (“to sinners”). 2. It is called solecism from the Cilicians, whocamefromthecitySoloe,nowcalledPompeiopolis; when, while dwelling among other peoples, they mixed theirownandotherlanguagesincorrectlyandincongruously, they gave their name to solecism. Whence those who speak like this are said to commit solecisms.
3.Amongpoets,asolecismiscalledaschema(schema) wheneveritiscommittedintheverseduetothedemands of the meter. But when no such demand is present, it remains a fault of solecism. 4. A solecism occurs in two manners: either in parts of speech, or in accidence. It occurs in parts of speech, if we use one part of speech instead of another, for instance, if we join prepositions to adverbs. It occurs in accidence, that is, in those things that are connected to the parts of speech, as, for example through qualities, genders and numbers, forms, and cases. Solecism may be committed in all of these, as Donatus has explained (ed. Keil 4.393). 5. It is committed in many ways besides these, for Lucilius spoke of one hundred kinds of solecisms, all of which anyone who is eager to obey the rules of speaking correctly ought to avoid rather than commit.
xxxiv.	Faults(Devitiis) 1. Grammarians call the things that we ought to be wary of when we speak ‘faults’ (vitium). And these are: barbarism, solecism, acyrology, cacenphaton, and the rest. 2. A barbarism is the corruption of a single word, [as if someone were to lengthen the third syllable in ignoscere]. 3. A solecism is a faulty construction of words [as if someone were to say inter hominibus (“between men,” with hominibus in the wrong case) instead of inter homines]. 4. Acyrology (acyrologia) is the use of an inappropriate word, as (Lucan, Civil War 2.15):
Let the fearful one hope.
To be strictly correct, however, a fearful one dreads, and does not hope. Also (cf. Vergil, Aen. 5.287):
Gramineo in campo (In a field of grass).
It is correct to refer to a field as ‘grassy’ (graminosus), not ‘made of grass’ (gramineus). 5. Cacemphaton is speech which is obscene or sounds disorderly. Obscene as (Vergil, Aen. 1.579):
His animum arrecti dictis (Aroused in their hearts by these words).35
Disorderly, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.27):
iuvat ire et Dorica castra (And it is a pleasure to go to the Doric camps).
Foritispoorcompositiontobeginwiththesamesyllable with which the preceding word has ended.
6. Pleonasm (pleonasmos) is the superfluous addition of a single word, as (Vergil, Geo. 2.1):
(So far, the cultivation of fields and the stars of the sky).
32	Hiatus is the suspension of vowel elision where it would be expected.
33	“Suspending the letter M” probably means a loss of the final m with accompanying nasalization of the preceding vowel. In classical metrics, a final m did not inhibit elision of vowels, so that bonum est scans as two syllables.
34	Early editors produce better sense here with the reading mater terra, “mother earth.”
35	Arrigere (ppl. arrectus) can be used in a sexual sense.
 
For stars are in no other place than in the sky. 7. Perissology (perissologia) is the superfluous addition of several words, as (Deuteronomy 33:6): “Let Ruben live, and not die...”–sincetoliveisnothingotherthannotto die. 8. Macrology (macrologia) is speaking at length, and including unnecessary matters as (Livy, cited in Quintilian, Inst. or. 8.3.53): “The legates, not having achieved peace, returned back home whence they had come.” 9. A tautology (tautologia) is a repetition of the same thing as (Vergil, Aen. 1.546):
If the fates preserve the man, if he is nourished by the etherial air, and does not yet recline in the cruel shades . . .
For everything that is repeated has the same theme, but is delivered with a crowd of words. 10. Ellipsis (eclipsis) is a gap in speech, in which necessary words are lacking, as (Vergil, Aen. 4.138):
Whose quiver out of gold . . . , for the verb ‘was’ is lacking.
11. Tapinosis is a lowering, reducing the state of a great subject by words as (Vergil, Aen. 1.118):
Here and there men appear, swimming in the vast whirlpool.
Forheuses‘whirlpool’(gurges)insteadof‘ocean’(mare). 12. Cacosyntheton is a faulty arrangement of words as (Vergil, Aen. 9.609):
Versaque iuvencum terga fatigamus hasta
(And we goad the flanks of our bullocks with reversed spears).36
13. Amphibolia is ambiguous speech that occurs with the accusative case, as in this answer of Apollo to Pyrrhus (Ennius, Annals 179):
Aio te , Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse
(I say that you, scion of Aeacus, can conquer the Romans – or – I say that the Romans can conquer you, scion of Aeacus).
36	Scarcely a fault, but the adjective and noun versa hasta (“with reversed spear”) might have been placed closer together.
37	That is, a verb with both an active and a passive sense; see ix.7 above.
38	The first vowel of religio was regularly short in Isidore’s time, but the addition of a consonant makes it long by position, for the sake of meter.
39	The first syllable of Diana, originally long but normally short, is taken as long in this line for the sake of meter.
I.xxxiv.7–xxxv.4
In this verse it is not clear whom he has designated as the victor. 14. It can also occur due to a distinction that is not clear, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.263):
Bellum ingens geret Italia
(Italy will wage an immense war – or – Immense Italy will wage war).
The distinction is unclear, whether it is ‘immense war’ or ‘immense Italy.’ 15. This also occurs due to a common verb,37 as Deprecatur Cato, calumniatur Cicero, praestolatur Brutus, dedignatur Antonius (“Cato denounces, Cicero slanders, Brutus expects, Anthony scorns”; or, “Catoisdenounced,”etc.).Inthisambiguityitisnotdisclosedwhetherthesepeopledenounceorslanderothers, or others denounce or slander them. 16. It also occurs with homonyms, in which one word has many meanings, such as acies (“edge, keenness, front line”), when you do not add ‘of the sword, of the eyes, of the army.’
xxxv. Metaplasm (De metaplasmis) 1. Metaplasm (metaplasmus) in the Greek language is called ‘transformation’ (transformatio) in Latin. It occurs in a single word due to the requirements of meter and to poetic license; its varieties are as follows. 2. Prothesis is an addition to the beginning of a word, as [gnatus, for natus (“born”), tetulit for tulit (“carried”)]. Epenthesis is an addition in the middle of the word, as [(Vergil, Aen.
3.409):
Maneant in relligione nepotes
(May the descendants continue in the religious duties),
instead of religione,38 and relliquias for reliquias (“relics”), induperator for inperator (“ruler”)]. 3. Paragoge is an addition at the end of the word, as [admittier (i.e. the archaic middle or passive form) for admitti (“to be admitted”), magis for mage (“more”), and potestur for potest (“is able”)]. Aphaeresis is an excision from the beginning of the word, as temno for contemno(“despise”).Syncope(syncope)isanexcisionfrom the middle, as forsan for forsitan (“perhaps”). Apocope (apocope) is an excision from the end, as sat for satis (“enough”). 4. Ectasis is an improper lengthening, as [(Vergil, Aen. 1.499):
Exercet Diana choros¯ (Diana oversees the dancers),39 and (Vergil, Aen. 1.2):
	Italiam fato¯	( . . . to Italy, by fate . . . ),
 
I.xxxv.5–xxxvi.5
while Italiam ought to be said with short syllables.] Systole is an improper shortening, as [(Vergil, Aen.
6.773):
urbemque Fidenam (and the city of Fidena),
where the first syllable ought to be long (i.e. FDdenam). As also when we say Orion with short syllables, when it should be said with lengthened ones]. Diaeresis (diaeresis) is the splitting of one syllable into two, as [(Vergil, Aen. 9.26):
dives picta¨ı vestis (rich with embroidered clothes)
instead of pictae, and (Ennius, Annals 33):
Alba¨ı longa¨ı (of Alba Longa)
for Albae longae.] 5. Episynaloephe is the slurring of two [syllables] into one, as [Phæthon for Pha¨ethon, Neri for Nere¨ı, and æripedem for a¨eripedem].
Synaloepha (synaloephe) is the combining of vowels from adjacent words, as [(Vergil, Aen. 9.1):
Atque ea diversa penitus dum parte geruntur (And while those things were happening far away)].
6. Ellipsis (eclipsis) is the combining of consonants with vowels as [(Vergil, Aen. 1.3):
Multum ille et terris iactatus et alto
(Much tossed about on lands and sea)].
Antithesis is the substitution of one letter for another, as[inpeteforimpetu(“witharush”),olliforilli(“they”)]. Metathesis (metathesis) is the transposition of letters, as [ThymbreforThymber,EvandreforEvander].7.Between the barbarism and the figure, that is, a polished Latin utterance,isthemetaplasm,whichmayoccurasafaultin speech in a single word. Likewise, between the solecism andtheschema,thatis,apolishedconstructionofwords, is the figure, which may become a fault in speech in a group of words. Therefore metaplasms and schemas are midway, and distinguished by skill and by lack of skill.40 They also are used as ornament.
xxxvi. Schemas(Deschematibus) 1.Schemas(schema, plural schemata) are translated from Greek into Latin as ‘figures of speech’ (eloquium figurae), which occur in words and phrases in various forms of speaking, for the sake of ornamenting speech. While there are many of these according to the grammarians, the following are met with. 2. Prolepsis (prolempsis) is an anticipation, where those things that ought to follow are placed first, as (Vergil, Aen. 12.161):
Interea reges ingenti mole, Latinus . . . (In the meantime, the kings, in mighty pomp, as Latinus . . .).
It ought to say, Interea reges ingenti mole (“In the meantime, the kings in mighty pomp”), and immediately add what logically follows (12.169), procedunt castris (“proceed to camp”), and then say Latinus . . . , etc. But an anticipation of subject has been made for the sake of ornament, and those things which ought to follow the statementaboutthekingsareinterposedforsevenverses, and after that ‘proceed to camp’ is added. It is therefore ananticipation,becausewhatoughttofollowisputfirst. 3. Zeugma (zeugma) is a phrase where several thoughts are encompassed in one word. There are three types, for the word which links the phrases is either placed first, last, or in the middle. Placed first as (Lucilius 139):
Vertitur oenophoris fundus, sententia nobis (The bottom is inverted by the wineholders, the sentence by us).
In the middle, as (Ennius, Annals 329):
Graecia Sulpicio sorti data, Gallia Cottae
(Greece was given by lot to Sulpicius, Gaul to Cotta).
At the end as in (Terence, Andria 68):
Namque hoc tempore obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit (For in our times, obsequiousness does friends, and truth does hatred beget).
4.	Hypozeuxis is the figure opposite to the one above, where there is a separate phrase for each individual meaning, as (Vergil, Aen. 10.149):
Regem adit et regi memorat nomenque genusque (He approaches the king and tells the king both his name and family).
5.	Syllepsis (syllempsis) is the use of an expression completed by a singular verb with dissimilar or plural phrases, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.553):
Sociis et rege recepto
40 It appears that “metaplasms and figures” would better fit the context than “metaplasms and schemas.”
 
(“When companions and king be found”; recepto is singular),
or a singular phrase is supplied with a plural verb, as
(Vergil, Ecl. 1.80):
Sunt nobis mitia poma,
. . . et pressi copia lactis (There are for us ripe fruits, . . . and an abundance of cheese).
For he said sunt (“are”) above. He ought to say this: est et pressicopialactis(“andthereisanabundanceofcheese”). 6. Syllepsis occurs not only with parts of speech, but also with things incidental to the parts of speech. Where one is used for many, and many for one, that is syllepsis. One for many, as this (Vergil, Aen. 2.20):
And they fill the belly with an armed soldier, when the Trojan horse was not filled with one soldier, but many. And again, many for one as in the Gospel (Matthew 27:44): “The thieves, that were crucified with him, reproached him,” where instead of merely the one, both of them are represented as having blasphemed.
7.	Anadiplosis (anadiplosis) occurs when a following verse begins with the same word that ended the previous verse, as in this (Vergil, Ecl. 8.55):
Certent et cygnis ululae, sit Tityrus Orpheus,
Orpheus in silvis, inter delphinas Arion
(And let the screech-owls compete with the swans, let Tityrus be Orpheus, an Orpheus in the woods, an Arion among the dolphins).
8.	Anaphora (anaphora) is the repetition of the same word at the beginning of several verses, as (Vergil, Aen.
3.157):
Nos te Dardania incensa tuaque arma secuti, nos tumidum sub te permensi classibus aequor (We followed you and your troops from burning Dardania, we traversed the swollen sea in a fleet under your command).
9.Epanaphoraistherepetitionofawordatthebeginning of each phrase in a single verse, as (Vergil, Aen. 7.759):
Te nemus Anguitiae, vitrea te Focinus unda, te liquidi flevere lacus
(For you the forest of Anguitia wept, for you Lake Fucinus with its glassy wave, for you the clear lakes).
10.	Epizeuxis is a doubling of words with a single sense, as (Vergil, Aen. 4.660):
I.xxxvi.6–xxxvi.17
Sic, sic iuvat ire per umbras
(Thus, thus it is a joyful thing to go through the shades).
11.	Epanalepsis is a repetition of the same word at the beginningandendoftheverse,asinthis(Juvenal,Satires 14.139):
Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit (The love of money grows as wealth itself grows).
12.	Paronomasia (paronomasia) is the use of nearly the same word with a different meaning, as in this: Abire an obire te convenit? (“Are you to pass on or to pass away?”),thatis,‘tobecomeanexile’or‘todie.’13.Schesis onomaton is a group of linked nouns, joined in a kind of parade, as (cf. Lucretius, On the Nature of Things 5.1192):
Nubila, nix, grando, procellae, fulmina, venti (Clouds, snow, hail, tempests, lightning, winds).
14.	Alliteration (paromoeon) is a group of words beginning with the same letter; such a sort is found in Ennius (Annals 109):
O Tite tute Tati tibi tanta tyranne tulisti (O Titus Tatius, you tyrant, you yourself have brought such things on yourself).
But Vergil moderates this well, when he uses this figure not through the entire verse, like Ennius, but sometimes only at the beginning of a verse, as in this (Aen. 1.295):
Saeva sedens super arma (Sitting over his savage weapons), and at other times at the end, as (Aen. 3.183):
Sola mihi tales casus Cassandra canebat (Cassandra alone foretold to me such calamities).
15.	Homoeoptoton occurs when many words in the same grammaticalcaseareused,asinthis(Vergil,Aen.12.903):
Sed neque currentem, sed nec cognoscit euntem, tollentemque manu saxumque inmane moventem (But he does not know (himself) while running or walking, and lifting and moving the huge rock with his hand).
16.	Homoeoteleuton (homoeon teleuton) occurs when several verbs terminate in the same way, as (Cicero,
AgainstCatiline2.1):abiit,abcessit,evasit,erupit(“heleft, he walked off, he escaped, he burst forth”). 17. Polyptoton (polyptoton) occurs when a sentence is varied with different grammatical cases, as (Persius, Satires 3.84):
 
I.xxxvi.18–xxxvii.5
Ex nihilo nihilum, ad nihilum nil posse reverti (Nothing from nothing, nothing can be returned to nothing)
and (Persius, Satires 5.79):
Marci Dama. – Papae! –Marco spondente, recusas? . . .
Marcus dixit. – Ita est. – Adsigna, Marce, tabellas. (Marcus Dama: What? although Marcus stands surety, do you refuse? . . . Marcus has said it, it must be so. Make out the tablets, Marcus.)41
18.	Hirmos is a phrase of continuous speech reserving its sense until the very end as in (Vergil, Aen. 1.159):
Est in secessu longo locus, insula portum . . . (There is a place in a long inlet, an island (making) a harbor . . . ),
and so on. Here the sense proceeds at length up to this point (1.165):
Horrentique atrum nemus inminet umbris
(A black grove looms with bristling shade).42
19.	Polysyndeton (polysyntheton) is a passage linked by many conjunctions, as (Vergil, Geo. 3.344):
Tectumque, laremque, armaque, Amicleumque canem (the house and the Lares and the weapons and the Amiclean dog).
20.Dialyton,orasyndeton(asyntheton),isafigurethatis composedintheoppositeway,simplyandfreelywithout conjunctions, as venimus, vidimus, placuit (“we came, we saw, it was good”). 21. Antithesis (antitheton) occurs where opposites are placed against each other and bring beauty to the sentence, as this (Ovid, Met. 1.19):
Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis: mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus
(Cold things battled with hot ones, moist with dry, soft with hard, those having weight with the weightless).
22. Hypallage occurs whenever words are taken in the opposite way as (Vergil, Aen. 3.61):
Dare classibus Austros (Give the east wind to the fleet),
when we should give the ships to the winds, not the winds to the ships.
xxxvii. Tropes (De tropis) 1. The grammarians designate tropes (tropus) with a Greek name; they are translated into Latin as ‘modes of speech’ (modus locutionum). They shift from their proper meaning to a similar sense that is less strict. It is most difficult to record the names of all of them, but Donatus has written down thirteen to be handed down for use (ed. Keil 4.399–402).
2. Metaphor (metaphora) is an adopted transference of some word, as when we say “cornfields ripple,” “the vinesputforthgems,”althoughwedonotfindwavesand gems in these things; in these phrases, terms have been transferred from elsewhere. But these expressions, and others that also use tropes, are veiled in figural garb with respect to what should be understood, so that they may exercise the reader’s understanding, and lest the subjects grow common from being stripped bare and obvious. 3. And metaphors occur in four ways: from animate to animate, as (anon., Courtney fr. 6):
He mounted winged horses; speaking metaphorically it associates the wings of a bird with a quadruped. Also (Vergil, Ecl. 6.80):
With what running (i.e. with what flight) she (i.e. Philomela transformed into a bird) sought deserted places;
thisassociatestherunningofaquadrupedwithawinged creature.Fromtheinanimatetotheinanimate,as(anon., Courtney fr. 4):
The pine-wood plows the sea, the lofty keel cuts a furrow;
this associates the use of land with water, since plowing andcuttingafurrowhavetodowiththeland,notthesea. 4.Frominanimatetoanimate,as“bloomingyouth”;this associates inanimate flowers with youth, which is living. From animate to inanimate, as (anon., Courtney fr. 5; cited from Augustine, Christian Doctrine 3.7.11):
You, father Neptune, whose white temples, wreathed with crashing brine, resound; to whom the great Ocean flows forth as your eternal beard, and in whose hair rivers wander.
For‘beard,’‘temples,’and‘hair’pertainnottotheOcean but to men. 5. In this way, some terms for things are transferred very elegantly from one kind to another for
41	The received text of Persius begins the quotation with Marcus, not the genitive Marci, which is unintelligible in context.
42	The translation reflects the received text of Vergil, as well as some Isidore manuscripts, with umbra, not (unintelligible) umbris.
 
the sake of beauty, so that the speech may be greatly adorned. Metaphor is either of one direction, as ‘the cornfields are rippling’ – for you cannot say ‘the ripples are cornfielding’ – or it is an antistropha, that is reciprocal, as remigium alarum (“oarage of wings”; Vergil, Aen. 6.19). We can speak of both wings (i.e. oars) of ships and oarages (i.e. beatings) of wings.
6. Catachresis (catachresis) is a name applied to an unrelatedthing.Andthisdiffersfromametaphorinthat metaphor enlarges on something having a name, while catachresis makes use of an unrelated name because it does not have one of its own; as (Vergil, Geo. 2.131):
And most similar to a laurel with respect to its (i.e. a tree’s) face,
and (Vergil, Aen. 5.157):
. . . Centaur (i.e. a ship’s name); now the two are carried as one with brows (i.e. bows) united, and they plow the salt seas with long keels.
Now a ‘face’ and a ‘brow’ pertain only to animals and men.Andifthepoethadnotappliedthisnametoaship, he would not have had a word that he could use which was appropriate for that part.
7.Metalepsis(metalempsis)isatropedesignatingwhat follows from what precedes it, as (Persius, Satires 3.11):
The hand of this sheet came, and a knotty reed pen.
Forby‘hand,’wordsaremeant,andby‘reedpen,’letters are meant.
	8.	Metonymy	(metonymia)	is	a	designation
(transnominatio) that is transferred from one meaning to another similar meaning. It is made in many ways. For instance, it expresses what is contained by what contains, as “the theater applauds,” “the meadows low,” when in the first instance people applaud and in the second, cows low. In the opposite way, it also expresses that which contains by that which is contained, as
(Vergil, Aen. 2.311):
Now the nearby Ucalegon burns,
when it is not Ucalegon (i.e. a Trojan citizen), but his house, that burns. 9. Also, it expresses what has been discovered by the discoverer, as (Terence, Eunuch 732);
Without Ceres and Liber, Venus grows cold, and (Vergil, Aen. 9.76):
Vulcan sends mingled embers to the stars.
I.xxxvii.6–xxxvii.13
For by Ceres, the discoverer of grain, he means “bread”; by Liber, the discoverer of the vine, “wine”; by Venus, “desire”; and by Vulcan, “fire.” In the opposite way, it expresses the discoverer by the discovery as (Plautus, fr. 159):
We pray to wine (for the god is present here),
inplaceof‘Liber,’who,accordingtotheGreeks,invented wine. 10. Also, metonymy expresses that which is caused by its cause, as ‘sluggish cold,’ because it makes people sluggish, and ‘pale fear,’ since it makes people pale. In the opposite way, it expresses the cause by that which is caused, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 5.817):
The father yokes the horses and puts foaming bits made of gold on them, spirited as they are.
He said ‘foaming bits,’ although they themselves certainly do not make foam, but rather the horse that wears them sprinkles them with scattered foam.
11.	Antonomasia (antonomasia) is a trope applied for a name, that is, instead of a name, as ‘begotten of Maia’ for Mercury. This trope occurs in three manners: from the spirit, as (Vergil, Aen. 5.407):
And the large-souled son of Anchises; from the body as (Vergil, Aen. 3.619):
That lofty one; from something extrinsic, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.475):
Unlucky boy, no match for Achilles when he met him.
12.	An epithet (epitheton) is in addition to the name, for it is placed before its noun, as ‘bountiful Ceres,’ and (Vergil, Geo. 1.470):
Unclean dogs and ominous birds.
There is this difference between antonomasia and an epithet, that antonomasia is used in place of a name, while an epithet is never used without the name. With these two tropes we may revile someone, or describe him, or praise him.
13.	Synecdoche (synecdoche) is the conceit by which the whole is understood from the part, or the part from the whole. With it a genus is designated by its species, and a species by its genus [while species is the part and genus is the whole]. The part is understood from the whole, as in (Vergil, Aen. 6.311):
 
I.xxxvii.14–xxxvii.21
As many as the birds that flock together, when the frigid year chases them to sea.
Indeed, it is not the whole of year that is frigid, but only part of the year, that is, winter. In the opposite way, the whole is designated by the part, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.256):
When the royal helm had raised the torches,
when it is not merely the helm, but the ship, and not the ship, but those in the ship, and not all of those in the ship, but a single one who brings forth the torches.
14.	Onomatopoeia (onomatopoeia) is a word fashioned to imitate the sound of jumbled noise as the stridor (“creaking”) of hinges, the hinnitus (“whinnying”) of horses, the mugitus (“lowing”) of cows, the balatus (“bleating”) of sheep. 15. Periphrasis (periphrasis) is a circumlocution (circumloquium), when a single topic is expressed with many words, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.387):
He plucks the vital airs.
A single meaning is expressed by this combination of words, that is, “he lives.” This trope is twofold, for either it splendidly brings forth the truth, or it avoids foulness by indirection. It splendidly brings forth the truth in (Vergil, Aen. 4.584 and 9.459):
And now, early Aurora was scattering new light on the earth, leaving the saffron bed of Tithonus.
He means, “now it grew light,” or, “it was daybreak.” It avoids foulness by indirection, as in (cf. Vergil, Aen.
8.405):
And he sought what was pleasing, relaxed in his wife’s embrace.
By this indirection he avoids obscenity, and decently expresses the act of sexual intercourse.
16. Hyperbaton (hyperbaton) is a transposition (transcensio), when a word or sentence is changed in its order. There are five types of this: anastrophe, hysteron proteron, parenthesis, tmesis, and synthesis. Anastrophe is a reversed order of words as litora circum (“the shores around”; Vergil, Aen. 3.75), instead of circum litora. 17. Hysteron proteron (hysteron proteron) is a sentence with the order changed, as (Vergil, Aen. 3.662):
Then he touched the deep waves, and came to the water.
For he came to the water first, and thus touched the waves. 18. Parenthesis (parenthesis) occurs when we interrupt our sentence, so that the sentence remains entire when this interruption is removed from the middle, as (Vergil Aen. 1.643):
Aeneas – for his paternal love could not permit his mind to rest – quickly sends Achates to the ships.
[For this is the order: “Aeneas quickly sends Achates.”] And that which intervenes is the parenthesis. 19. Tmesis (tmesis) is a division of one word by the interposition of other words, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 1.412):
Multum nebulae circum dea fudit amictum (The goddess surrounded (them) with a thick mantle of mist),
instead of circumfudit. 20. Synthesis (synthesis) occurs when words from every part of the thought are jumbled up, as in this (cf. Vergil, Aen. 2.348):
Iuvenes, fortissima frustra pectora, si vobis audendi extrema cupido est certa sequi, quae sit rebus fortuna videtis. Excessere omnes aditis arisque relictis dii, quibus inperium hoc steterat; succurritis urbi incensae; moriamur et in media arma ruamus.
(Young men, in vain your stout hearts; if your desire for daring the final battle is fixed on following me, you see what the outcome of the matter will be. They have all left the abandoned shrines and altars, the gods on whom this empire was established; you are helping a burning city; let us die and rush into the midst of the fray).
For the order is like this: “Young men with stout hearts, in vain you would be helping a burning city, because the gods have left. So if you firmly wish to follow me as I attempt a final battle, let us rush into the midst of the fray and die.” 21. Hyperbole (hyperbole) is a loftiness that exceeds credibility, beyond what can be believed, as (Vergil, Aen. 3.423):
She strikes the stars with a wave, and (Vergil, Aen. 1.107):
It lays open the sea bottom between the waves.
In this way something is magnified beyond belief; yet it does not stray from the path of expressing truth, even though the words go beyond what is referred to, so that the intention may seem to be of one speaking, not of one deceiving.Bythistropesomethingmaynotonlybemagnified, but also diminished. Magnified as in ‘faster than
 
The Etymologies	I.xxxvii.22–xxxvii.31
 
the East Wind’; diminished as in ‘softer than a feather,’ ‘harder than a rock.’
22. Allegory (allegoria) is ‘other-speech’ (alieniloquium), for it literally says one thing, and another thing is understood, as in (Vergil, Aen. 1.184):
He saw three stags wandering on the shore,
where either the three leaders of the Punic wars are meant, or the three Punic wars themselves. Also in the
Bucolics (Ecl. 3.71):
I have sent ten golden apples,
that is, ten pastoral eclogues to Augustus. This trope has manytypes,sevenofwhichstandout:irony,antiphrasis, riddle, charientismos, paroemia, sarcasm, astysmos.
23.	Irony (ironia) is an expression wherein by one’s tone of voice the meaning is understood as the contrary. Thus with this trope something is said cleverly as an accusation or as an insult, as in this (Vergil, Aen. 1.140):
Your home, East wind; let Aeolus take pride in that palace, and rule in that closed prison of winds.
And yet in what way is it a palace, if it is a prison? This is answered by the tone of voice, for the normal tone of voice applies to ‘prison’ and the irony is in ‘take pride in’ and ‘palace.’ And so, by a different tone of voice, the entire thing is made known through a display of irony, by which one derides by praising.
24.	Antiphrasis (antiphrasis) is a term to be understoodfromitsopposite,as‘grove’(lucus)becauseitlacks light (lux, gen. lucis), due to the excessive shade of the forest;and‘ghosts’(manes,fromoldLatinmani,“benevolent ones”), that is, ‘mild ones’ – although they are actually pitiless – and ‘moderate ones’ – although they are terrifying and savage (immanes); and the Parcae and Eumenides (lit. in Greek “the gracious ones”), that is, the Furies, because they spare (parcere) and are gracious to no one. By this trope also people call dwarves by Atlas’s name, and call the blind ‘the seers,’ and commonly, call Ethiopians ‘the silver ones.’ 25. Between irony and antiphrasis there is this difference: that irony expresses what one intends to be understood through the tone of voice alone, as when we say to someone doing everythingpoorly,“You’redoingagoodjob,”whileantiphrasis
43 The received text of Vergil, with genitori rather than genitoris, means “to my father, the son of Peleus.”
signifies the contrary not through the tone of voice, but only through its words, whose source has the opposite meaning.
26.	A riddle (aenigma) is an obscure question that is difficult to solve unless it is explained, as this (Judges 14:14): “Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong came forth sweetness,” meaning that a honeycomb was taken from the mouth of a (dead) lion. Between allegory and the riddle there is this difference, that the force of allegory is twofold and figuratively indicates one subject under the guise of other subjects, while a riddle merely has an obscure meaning, and its solution is hinted at through certain images.
27.	Charientismos is a trope by which harsh things are made more pleasing in speech, as when someone asking, “Has anyone missed us?” is answered, “Good Fortunemissedyou.”Fromthisitisunderstoodthatnoone has missed us. 28. Paroemia is a proverb appropriate to the subject or situation. To the subject, as in, “You kick against the pricks,” when resisting adversity is meant. To the situation, as in “the wolf in the story”: peasants say thatapersonwouldlosehisvoiceifhesawawolfinfront of him. Thus the proverb, “the wolf in the story,” is said to someone who suddenly falls silent. 29. Sarcasm (sarcasmos) is hostile ridicule with bitterness, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 2.547):
Therefore you will report these things, and you will go as a messenger of my father to the son of Peleus; remember
to tell him of my sorry deeds and that Neoptolemus is degenerate.43
30.	The opposite of this is astysmos, pleasantry without anger, as in this (Vergil, Ecl. 3.90):
Whoever does not hate Bavius, may he love your songs, Maevius, and may he likewise yoke foxes and milk billy-goats.
That is, whoever does not hate Bavius is doomed to like Maevius – for Maevius and Bavius were terrible poets, and Vergil’s enemies. Therefore, whoever loves them would do things contrary to nature, that is, he would yoke foxes and milk billy-goats.
31.	Homoeosis, which is translated in Latin as similitude (similitudo), is that by which the description of somelessknownthingismadeclearbysomethingbetter known which is similar to it. There are three types: icon, parabola,andparadigm,thatis,image,comparison,and
 
I.xxxvii.32–xxxix.6
model. 32. Icon (icon, cf. :E, “image”) is an image (imago),whenweattempttoexplaintheshapeofathing from a similar kind as (Vergil, Aen. 4.558):
Similar to Mercury in all respects: in voice and color and blonde hair and graceful youthful limbs.
Thus similarity with regard to appearance is fitting for the one whose character is introduced. 33. Parabola (parabola) is a comparison (comparatio) from dissimilar things, as (Lucan, Civil War 1.205):
Like a lion seen hard by in the fields of heat-bearing Libya, he beset the enemy,
where he compares Caesar to a lion, making a comparison, not from his own kind, but from another. 34. Paradigm (paradigma) is a model (exemplum) of someone’s word or deed, or something that is appropriate to the thing that we describe either from its similar or from its dissimilar nature, thus: “Scipio perished at Hippo as bravely as did Cato at Utica.”
35. A comparison (similitudo) may be made in three ways: from an equal, from a greater, from a lesser. From an equal (Vergil, Aen. 1.148):
And just as often when rebellion has broken out in a great populace.
From a greater to a lesser (Lucan, Civil War 1.151):
Just as lightning is forced down by the winds through the clouds.
And from a lesser to a greater (Vergil, Aen. 6.119):
If Orpheus could summon the spirit of his wife, relying on a Thracian cithara and its melodious strings,
as if he meant, relying on a small unimportant object; that is, if he relies on a cithara, I rely on my piety.
xxxviii.	Prose (De prosa) 1. Prose (prosa) is an extended discourse, unconstrained by rules of meter. The ancients used to say that prose is extended (productus) and straightforward (rectus).44 Whence Varro in his work on Plautus says that prosis lectis (read as prose) means ‘straightforwardly,’ and thus a discourse that is not inflected by meter, but is straightforward, is called prose in that it extends (producere) directly. Others say that prose is so called because it is profuse (profusus), or because it ‘rushes forth’ (proruere) and runs expansively with no set limit to it. 2. Moreover, for the Greeks as well as the Romans, the interest in poems was far more ancient than in prose, for at first all things used to be set in verse, and enthusiasm for prose flourished later. Among the Greeks, Pherecydes of Syros was first to write with unmetered speech, and among the Romans, Appius Caecus, in his oration against Pyrrhus, was first to use unmetered speech. Straightway after this, others competed by means of eloquence in prose.
xxxix.	Meters (De metris) 1. Meters (metrum) are so called because they are bounded by the fixed measures (mensura) and intervals of feet, and they do not proceed beyond the designated dimension of time – for measure is called B   in Greek. 2. Verses are so called because when they are arranged in their regular order into feet they are governed within a fixed limit through segments that are called caesurae (caesum) and members (membrum). Lest these segments roll on longer than good judgment could sustain, reason has established a measure from which the verse should be turned back; from this ‘verse’ (versus) itself is named, because it is turned back (revertere, ppl. reversus). 3. And related to this is rhythm (rhythmus), which is not governed by a specific limit, but nevertheless proceeds regularly with ordered feet. In Latin this is called none other than ‘number’ (numerus), regarding which is this (Vergil, Ecl. 9.45):
I recall the numbers (numerus), if I could grasp the words!
4.	Whatever has metric feet is called a ‘poem’ (carmen). People suppose that the name was given to it either because it was pronounced ‘in pieces’ (carptim), just as today we say that wool that the scourers tear in pieces is carded (carminare), or because they used to think that people who sang those poems had lost (carere) their minds.
5.	Meters are named either after their feet, or after thetopics about which they are written, or after their inventors, or after those who commonly use them, or after the number of syllables. 6. Meters named after feet are, for example, dactylic, iambic, trochaic, for trochaic meter is constructed from the trochee, dactylic from the dactyl, and others similarly from their feet. Meters are named after number, as hexameter, pentameter, trimeter – as
44 In fact the old form of the word prorsus, “straight on,” was prosus, the source of the word prosa.
 
The Etymologies	I.xxxix.7–xxxix.18
 
we name one kind of verse senarius (i.e. ‘of six’) from the number of feet. But the Greeks call them trimeters, because they pair them. Ennius is said to be the first to have written Latin hexameters; people call them ‘long’ verses. 7. Meters are said to be named for their inventors, as Anacreontic, Sapphic, Archilochian. Thus Anacreon composed Anacreontic meters, the woman SapphopublishedSapphicmeters,acertainArchilochus wrote Archilochian meters, and a certain Colophonian practiced Colophonian meters. And the deviser of Sotadean meters is Sotades, a Cretan by family. And the lyric poet Simonides composed Simonidian meters.
8. Meters are named for those commonly using them, as, for example, Asclepiadian meters. Now Aesclepius did not invent them, but they were named thus from his time on because he used them most elegantly [and most often]. 9. Meters are named for the topics about which they are written, as heroic, elegiac, bucolic. For instance, a poem is called heroic (heroicus) because the actsanddeedsofstrongmenarerecountedinit,forcelestial (aerius) men, as it were, worthy of the skies because of their wisdom and strength, are called heroes (heros). This meter (i.e. dactylic hexameter) takes precedence over the others in importance. It alone of all the meters is suited for great works as much as for small, equally capable of smoothness and sweetness. 10. On account of these powers, it alone receives this name, as it is called ‘heroic’ so that the deeds of heroes will be remembered. It is considered the simplest of all meters, and is composedusingtwofeet,thedactylandthespondee.Itoften consists almost entirely of either the former or the latter, except that the most well balanced verse is made with a mixture of both rather than being formed by a single type of foot.
11. The heroic is also the earliest of all meters. Moses is shown to have composed this meter first in his song in Deuteronomy (Deuteronomy 32–33) long before Pherecydes and Homer. Whence it appears that the practice of poetry is more ancient among the Hebrews than among the pagans, seeing that Job, a contemporary of Moses, also took up hexameter verse, with its dactyl and spondee. 12. Achatesius of Miletus is said to have been firstamongtheGreekstocomposethis,or,asotherssup-
45 Isidore refers to the inconsistency that the term ‘bucolic’ is derived in Greek from    (“cowherd”), although it has its origin in songs of shepherds and goatherds rather than cowherds.
pose,PherecydesofSyros.ThismeterwascalledPythian before Homer, and after Homer was called heroic. 13. People choose to call it Pythian because the oracles of Apollo were proclaimed in this kind of meter. When he attacked the serpent Python with arrows on Parnassus, to avenge his mother, the dwellers at Delphi cheered him on with this meter, saying, as Terentianus has it (On Meter 1591): [:F !, :F !, :F !].
14. The ‘elegiac’ (elegiacus) meter is so called because the measure of this particular song is suited for mournful subjects. Terentianus (On Meter 1799) used to call those meters ‘elegiacs’ because such a rhythmic closure, as they say, is more suited to sorrowful modes. 15. But by whom this was invented there is hardly any agreement, except that Ennius was the first among us Latin speakers to use it. Moreover, a dispute among the grammarians continues to this day about who was first among Greeks, so it may be set aside as a matter sub iudice. Some of them claim a certain Colophonian as the inventor and author, and some of them Archilochus.
16. And many people believe the bucolic (bucolicus), thatis,thepastoral(pastoralis)poem,wasfirstcomposed byshepherdsinSyracuse,andsomebelievebyshepherds in Sparta. As Xerxes, king of the Persians, crossed into Thrace, and the Spartan maidens, in fear of the enemy, neitherleftthecitynorperformedthesolemnprocession and rustic dance of Diana according to custom, a crowd of shepherds celebrated this with artless songs, lest the religious observance should pass unmarked. And it is called bucolic for the most part, although speeches and songs of the shepherds and goatherds are contained in it.45
17.ItisclearthatDavidtheprophetfirstcomposedand sanghymns(hymnus)inpraiseofGod.Then,amongthe pagans, Memmia Timothoe – who lived in the time of Ennius, long after David – first made hymns to Apollo and the Muses. ‘Hymns’ are translated from Greek into Latin as “praises” (laudes). 18. Epithalamiums (epithalamium) are wedding songs, which are sung by rhetoricians in honor of the bride and groom. Solomon first composed these in praise of the church and of Christ (i.e. the Song of Songs). From him the pagans appropriated the epithalamium for themselves, and a song of this type was taken up. This kind of song was first performed by pagans on the stage, and later was associated only with weddings. It is called epithalamium because it is sung in bedchambers (thalamus).
 
I.xxxix.19–xl.5	Isidore of Seville
 
19. Jeremiah first composed the threnody (threnos), which is called ‘lament’ (lamentum) in Latin, in a poem on the city of Jerusalem [when it was destroyed] and on the people [Israel] when they [were destroyed and] wereledcaptive.Afterthis,amongtheGreeks,Simonides the lyric poet was first. It was associated with funerals and laments, as it is today. 20. ‘Epitaph’ (epitaphium) in Greek is translated in Latin as “over the grave” (supra tumulum), for it is an inscription about the dead, which is made over the repose of those who are now dead. Their life, conduct, and age are written there. 21. A work consisting of many books is called a poesis by its Greek name; a poem (poema) is a work of one book, an idyll (idyllion), a work of few verses, a distich (distichon) of two verses, and a monostich (monostichon) of one verse. 22. An epigram (epigramma) is an inscription, which is translated into Latin as “a writing upon something” (superscriptio), for ! is translated as “upon” (super) and  as “letter” or “writing” (scriptio). 23. An epode(epodon)isashort‘concludingpassage’(clausula) in a poem. It is called epode because it is sung after the mannerofelegiacverse,whichconsistsofalongerlineset down first, and then another, shorter, line. The shorter ones that follow each of the longer are used as a refrain, as if they were clausulae. 24. The lyric poets speak of clausulae as cutoff verses substituted for whole verses, as with Horace (Epodes 2.1):
Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis
(O happy he who, far from busyness), and then a cutoff verse follows:
Ut prisca gens mortalium
(Like the first race of mortals), and thus alternate verses in succession lack some part: similar to the verse preceding, but shorter (i.e. iambic trimeters alternate with iambic dimeters).
25. The grammarians are accustomed to call those poems ‘centos’ (cento) which piece together their own particular work in a patchwork (centonarius) manner from poems of Homer and Vergil, making a single poem out of many scattered passages previously composed, based on the possibilities offered by each source. 26. In fact, Proba, wife of Adelphus, copied a very full cento from Vergil on the creation of the world and the Gospels (i.e. Cento Probae), with its subject matter composed in accordance with Vergil’s verses, and the verses fitted together in accordance with her subject matter. Thus also a certain Pomponius, among other compositions of his leisure hours, written in his own style, composed his Tityrusoutofthissamepoet,inhonorofChrist;likewise he composed a cento from the Aeneid.
xl. The fable (De fabula) 1. Poets named ‘fables’ (fabula) from ‘speaking’ (fari), because they are not actual events that took place, but were only invented in words. Thesearepresentedwiththeintentionthattheconversationofimaginarydumbanimalsamongthemselvesmay be recognized as a certain image of the life of humans. AlcmeonofCrotonissaidtohavebeenthefirsttoinvent these, and they are called Aesopian, because among the Phrygians, Aesop was accomplished in this area. 2. And there are both Aesopian fables and Libystican fables. They are Aesopian fables when dumb animals, or inanimate things such as cities, trees, mountains, rocks, and rivers, are imagined to converse among themselves. But they are Libystican fables when humans are imagined as conversing with animals, or animals with humans. 3. Poetshavemadeupsomefablesforthesakeofentertainment, and expounded others as having to do with the natureofthings,andstillothersasabouthumanmorals. Those made up for the sake of entertainment are such as are commonly told, or that kind that Plautus and Terence composed. 4. People make up fables about the nature of things, like ‘crooked-limbed Vulcan,’ because by nature fire is never straight, and like the animal with three shapes (Lucretius On the Nature of Things 5.905):
A lion in front, a dragon in the rear, and in the middle, the Chimaera itself,
that is, a she-goat.46 With this, people intend to distinguish the ages of man: the first, adolescence, is ferocious and bristling, like a lion; the midpart of life is the mostlucid,likeashe-goat,becausesheseesmostacutely; then comes old age with its crooked happenstances – the dragon. 5. Thus also the fable of the Hippocentaur, that is, a human being mixed with a horse, was invented to express the speedy course of human life, because it is known that a horse is very fast.
46 That is, the middle of the creature has the form of a shegoat. Lucretius took the basic form of the Chimaera, and hence its torso, to be a she-goat (capra), from the Greek 9, “she-goat” or “the monster Chimaera.” Here and elsewhere Isidore uses the word caprea, regularly meaning “roe-deer,” for “she-goat” (regularly capra).
 
The Etymologies	I.xl.6–xliv.5
 
6. Then there are fables with a moral, as in Horace a mouse speaks to a mouse, and a weasel to a little fox, so that through an imaginary story a true meaning may be applied to the story’s action. Whence also Aesop’s fables are the kind told for the purpose of a moral, just as in the book of Judges (9:8) the trees seek a king for themselves and speak to the olive tree, the fig tree, the grape vine, and the bramble-bush. The whole story is made up especially for the moral, so that we arrive at the matter that is intended with the true meaning, though, to be sure, by means of a made-up narrative. 7. Thus the orator Demosthenes used a fable against Philip: when PhiliphadorderedtheAthenianstogivehimtenorators, and only then would he depart, Demosthenes invented a fable by which he dissuaded the Athenians from yielding. He said that once upon a time wolves persuaded shepherds whose attentiveness they wished to lull that they should meet in friendship – but with the condition that the shepherds would duly hand over their dogs, which were a cause of strife, to the wolves. The shepherds agreed to this and in the hope of security handed over their dogs, who had kept the most vigilant watch over their sheep. Then the wolves, since the source of their fear had been removed, tore to pieces all that were in the shepherds’ herds, not only to satisfy their hunger, but also their wantonness. He said that Philip also was making a demand of the leaders of the people so that he might the more easily oppress a city deprived of its protectors.
xli. History(Dehistoria) 1.Ahistory(historia)isanarration of deeds accomplished; through it what occurred in the past is sorted out. History is so called from the Greek term   @ (“inquire, observe”), that is, from ‘seeing’ or from ‘knowing.’ Indeed, among the ancients no one would write a history unless he had been present and had seen what was to be written down, for we grasp with our eyes things that occur better than what we gather with our hearing, 2. since what is seen is revealed without falsehood. This discipline has to do with Grammar, because whatever is worthy of remembrance is committed to writing. And for this reason, histories are called ‘monuments’ (monumentum), because they grant
47 Onthetermargumentumas“possiblefiction”seeE.R.Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages, trans. Trask (NY, 1953), 452–55.
aremembrance(memoria)ofdeedsthathavebeendone. A series (series) is so called by an analogy with a garland (serta) of flowers tied together one after the other.
xlii.	The first authors of histories (De primis auc-toribus historiarum) 1. Among us Christians Moses was the first to write a history, on creation. But among the pagans, Dares the Phrygian was first to publish a history, on the Greeks and Trojans, which they say he wrote on palm leaves. 2. After Dares, Herodotus is held as the first to write history in Greece. After him Pherecydes was renowned, at the time when Ezra wrote the law.
xliii.	Theutilityofhistory(Deutilitatehistoriae) Historiesofpeoplesarenoimpedimenttothosewhowishto read useful works, for many wise people have imparted the past deeds of humankind in histories for the instruction of the living. Through history they handle a final reckoning back through seasons and years, and they investigatemanyindispensablemattersthroughthesuccession of consuls and kings.
xliv.	The kinds of history (De generibus historiae) 1. Therearethreekindsofhistory.Theeventsofasingleday arecalledan‘ephemeris’(ephemeris);wecallthisa‘diary’ (diarium). What the Romans call ‘daily’ (diurnus), the Greeks call ephemeris. 2. Histories that are distributed into individual months are called ‘calendars’ (kalendarium). 3. Annals (annales) are the actions of individual years(annus),forwhateverdomesticormilitarymatters, onseaorland,worthyofmemoryaretreatedyearbyyear in records they called ‘annals’ from yearly (anniversarius) deeds. 4. But history (historia) concerns itself with many years or ages, and through the diligence of history annual records are reported in books. There is this difference between history and annals, namely, that history is of those times that we have seen, but annals are of those years that our age has not known. Whence Sallust consists of history, and Livy, Eusebius, and Jerome of annals and history. 5. And history, ‘plausible narration’ (argumentum),47 and fable differ from one other. Histories are true deeds that have happened, plausible narrations are things that, even if they have not happened, nevertheless could happen, and fables are things that have not happened and cannot happen, because they are contrary to nature.
 

 
Book II Rhetoric and dialectic (De rhetorica et dialectica)
 
 
i.	Rhetoric and its name (De rhetorica eiusquenomine) 1. Rhetoric is the art of speaking well in civil cases, [and eloquence (eloquentia) is fluency (copia)] for the purpose of persuading people toward the just and good. Rhetoric is named from the Greek term
G  ;, that is, fluency of speech, for GH in Greek means “speech,” G A means “orator.” 2. Further, rhetoric is connected with the art of grammar (Grammatica), for in grammar we learn the art of speaking correctly, while in rhetoric we understand how we may express what we have learned.
ii.	Thefoundersoftheartofrhetoric(Deinventoribusrhetoricae artis) 1. This discipline was invented by the Greeks, by Gorgias, Aristotle, and Hermagoras, and was carried over into Latin culture by Cicero and Quintilian [and Titianus],1 but so copiously and variously that it is easy for a reader to wonder at it, but impossible to grasp it fully. 2. For while one has a treatise on rhetoric in hand, the sequence of its content as it were clings to the memory, but when it is set aside all recollection of it soon slips away. Accomplished knowledge of this discipline makes one an orator.
iii.	The term ‘orator’ and the parts of rhetoric (Denomine oratoris et partibus rhetoricae) 1. An orator therefore is a good man, skilled in speaking. A man’s goodness is based on his nature, his behavior, his training in the arts. One skilled in speaking is grounded in artful eloquence, which consists of five parts: invention, arrangement, style, memory, pronunciation (inventio, dispositio, elocutio, memoria, pronuntiatio), and of the goal of this office, which is to persuade of something. 2. Further, this skill in speaking is based on three things: one’s nature, instruction, and practice. Nature, from one’s native wit; instruction, from acquired knowledge;
1	This ‘Titianus’ is probably an artifact of scribal error.
2	Causa may often be translated as “(legal) case,” or “(rhetorical or legal) argument,” or “cause.”
69
practice, from diligence. And these are things that are looked for not only in an orator, but in any person with regard to his craft, in order that he might accomplish something.
iv. Thethreekindsofarguments(Detribusgeneribus causarum)2 1. There are three kinds of arguments: deliberative, demonstrative, and judicial (deliberativus, demonstrativus, iudicialis). The deliberative kind treats questions of expediency in life, what ought or ought not to be done. The demonstrative is the kind in which a praiseworthy or reprehensible person is displayed as such. 2. Judicial, in which a decision for punishment or reward is rendered according to the deed of that person. It is called ‘judicial’ because it judges (iudicare) a man, and its decision shows whether a praiseworthy person may be worthy of a reward, or whether a person surely charged with a crime may be condemned or freed from punishment.
3. The deliberative kind is so called because in it one deliberates (deliberare) concerning some matter. There are two types of this kind, suasion and dissuasion, that is, concerning what ought to be sought and what ought to be avoided, what ought to be done and not done. 4. Suasiveargumentisfurtherdividedintothreetopics:the decent, the useful, and the possible. This differs somewhat from deliberative argument in that suasive argumenthastodowithanotherperson,whereasdeliberative argument sometimes deals with oneself alone. Further, in suasive argument two things are especially effective: hope and fear.
5. Demonstrative argument is so called because it describes (demonstrare) some particular thing, either by praising or by blaming. This class has two species: praise (laus) and blame (vituperatio). The sequence of praising is divided into three periods of time: before, during, or aftertheactorpersonbeingpraised.6.Before,as(Vergil, Aen. 1.605):
What such happy times brought you forth?
 
II.iv.7–v.9	Isidore of Seville
 
in the present, as (Aen. 1.597):
O you alone in pitying the unspeakable hardships of Troy; after, as (Aen. 1.607):
As long as rivers run into the sea, as long as shadows traverse the mountains, your honor, your name, your praises will remain always.
7. With an equal and inverted type of argument, this pattern is preserved in blaming a person: before, during, or after the present circumstances of the person.
A commonplace (locus communis) pertains to the demonstrative class of blaming, but it differs from it in a certain way, for blame, which is the opposite of praise, is directed especially to the particular character of the doer, 8. whereas a commonplace is rather set forth in a general way with regard to the wickedness of the thing done. Hence it is called a commonplace, because, in the absence of personal characteristics, it treats not so much a particular individual as the wicked deed itself. Indeed, every vice is found not in one person only, but as common to many.
v. The two states of legal arguments (De gemino statu causarum) 1. For rhetoricians, that matter in which a case (causa) has standing is called its ‘state’ (status), that is, the issue (constitutio).3 Greek speaks of a ‘state’ from  , “contention.” The Latin term however is not only from battle, in which adversaries battle over a proposition, but also because in it each party ‘has standing’ (consistere). A state consists of the charge and the rebuttal. 2. The states of cases are two: rational (rationalis) and legal (legalis).
From the rational state arise the classes conjecture, purpose, quality, transference (coniectura, finis, qualitas, translatio). Under purpose, judicial (iudicialis) and ‘related to affairs’ (negotialis). Under judicial, absolute (absoluta) and extraneous (adsumptiva). Under extraneous: concession (concessio), setting aside the charge (remotio criminis), retorting to the charge (relatio criminis), compensation (compensatio). Under concession, self-justification (purgatio) and plea for indulgence(deprecatio).3.Theconjectural(coniecturalis)state obtainswhenanactionallegedbyonesideisflatlydenied bytheother.Thestateisdefinitive(definitivus)whenthat which is alleged is not argued to exist as such, but what it may be is proved by means of the definitions employed.
The state ‘quality’ (qualitas) obtains when ‘what sort of’ (qualis) matter may be in hand is considered; because it deals with controversy concerning the force and class (genus)oftheaffair,thisproceeding(constitutio)iscalled ‘general’ (generalis). 4. Transference (translatio) obtains when a case hangs on this: either that the proper person is not bringing the charge, or that it is not being brought before the proper people, or that the time, the law, the charge, or the penalty is inappropriate. That proceeding is ‘transferent’ because the suit seems to be in need of transference and change. 5. A judicial (iudicialis) state is that in which is investigated the nature of what is fair and right, and the recompense or the rationale for the punishment. That state is ‘related to affairs’ (negotialis) in which is considered the part of the law that has to do with established practice and equity between citizens. The extraneous (adsumptivus) state is that which offers nothing firm of itself against an objection, [but takes to itself(adsumere)somedefensefromoutside].6.Concession (concessio) obtains when the accused does not offer a defense concerning what has been done, but asks for it to be forgiven. We have ourselves commended this in the case of penitents. ‘Setting aside the charge’ (remotio) occurs when a defendant makes every effort to displace onto some other person a crime caused by himself and his own fault.
7. ‘Retorting to the charge’ (relatio criminis) occurs when the deed is declared justly done because someone was provoked beforehand by an injustice. Comparison (comparatio) occurs when some deed of another person is argued to be proper and useful, because as that deed happened, so this deed at issue is said to have been committed. 8. Purgation (purgatio) obtains when, although the deed is admitted, the liability is set aside. This has three types: imprudence, accident, necessity (inprudentia, casus, necessitas). The ‘plea for indulgence’ (deprecatio) occurs when the defendant admits to having done wrong, and having done wrong deliberately, and yet he requests that he be forgiven. This type very seldom occurs.
9. Then from state of ‘appeal to the law’ (legalis) these types emerge, that is: ‘written law and its intention’
3 In Latin the words for status, state, standing, consist, and constitution are obviously related via the verb stare, “to stand.” Here ‘state’ means practically “an issue,” “a point of dispute,” involving the classes of argument pro and con about a legal case.
 
The Etymologies	II.v.10–ix.4
 
(scriptum et voluntas), contradictory laws (leges contrariae), ambiguity (ambiguitas), inference or logical reasoning (collectio sive ratiocinatio), and legal definition (definitio). The argument ‘what is written and its intention’ is used when the words themselves seem to be at variance with the thought of the writer. The argument of ‘contradictory laws’ operates when two or more laws are recognized as contradictory. ‘Ambiguity’ occurs when what is written seems to mean two or more things. The argument by ‘inference or logical reasoning’ is used when, from what is written, another thing that is not written is deduced. ‘Legal definition’ obtains when one investigates the meaning it has in the specific point of dispute in which it is found.
10. The types of argument, then, rational and legal together, are reckoned by some quite definitely as eighteen. But according to Cicero on rhetoric (On Invention 1.8) there are nineteen, because he locates ‘transference’(translatio)chieflyamongthe‘rational’arguments. Yet even Cicero, refuting himself, includes ‘transference’ among the legal arguments.
vi.	The tripartite dispute (De tripertita controversia) 1.AccordingtoCicero,atripartitedisputeiseithersimple or conjunct (iunctus). If conjunct, it should be consideredwhetheritisaconjunctionofseveralquestions,orof somecomparison.Thatdisputeissimplewhichpresents a single unqualified question, thus: “Should we declare war on Corinth or not?” 2. A dispute is conjoint of severalquestions,inwhichseveralthingsarequeried,inthis way: “Should Carthage be demolished, or rather given back to the Carthaginians, or rather should a colony be planted there?” A dispute is conjunct by way of comparison when one queries what is better or best to do, in this fashion: “Should the army be sent into Macedonia against Philip, so that it might help our allies, or rather be retained in Italy, so that there may be the greatest strength against Hannibal?”
vii.	The four parts of an oration (De quattuorpartibusorationis) 1. In rhetoric there are four parts of an oration (oratio): the exordium (exordium), the narrative(narratio),theargumentation(argumentatio),the conclusion(conclusio).Thefirstoftheseelicitstheattentionofthelistener,thesecondlaysoutthefacts,thethird establishestrustinwhatisasserted,thefourthcompletes the end of the whole oration. 2. One ought to begin so as to render the listener benevolent, docile, or attentive: benevolent by entreaty, docile by instruction, attentive by stimulation. In the narrative we should speak briefly and candidly. The argumentation should first confirm ourownposition,andthendemolishtheadversaryview. Theconclusionshouldincitethelisteners’heartstocarry out what we say.
viii.	The five types of cases (De quinque modiscausarum) 1. There are five kinds of cases: honorable, surprising, humble, doubtful, obscure (honestus, admirabilis, humilis, anceps, obscurus). The honorable type of case is that in which the mind of the listener is immediately, without our oration, well-disposed. The surprising, in which the inclinations of those who are about to hear are on the other side. The humble, to which the listener pays little attention. 2. The doubtful, in which either the judgment is doubtful, or a case is of partly decent and partly wicked matters, so that it arouses both benevolence and offense. The obscure, in which either the listeners are slow-witted, or the case is perceived to be tied up in matters that are rather hard to understand.
ix.	Syllogisms(Desyllogismis) 1. The Greek term ‘syllogism’ (syllogismus) is called ‘argumentation’ (argumentatio) in Latin. ‘Argumentation’ is so called as if it were the speech of a ‘clear mind’ (arguta mens), with which we follow through to a probable discovery. A syllogism therefore is the final conclusion (conclusio) of a propositionandanadditionalpropositionandademonstration,eitherfromtheuncertaintyofsomeonedisputing, or the assurance of someone proving. 2. Hence a syllogism consists of three parts: proposition (propositio, i.e. the major premise), the additional proposition (assumptio, i.e. the minor premise), and the conclusion (conclusio). The major premise, for example: “What is good cannot have a bad use.” The listener grants it. He ‘adds a minor premise’ (adsumere): “Money has a bad use.” It is concluded (concludere), “Therefore money is not good.”
3. Not only rhetoricians, but especially logicians use syllogisms, although the apostle Paul often puts forth major and minor premises and confirms with a conclusion – which things, as we have said, belong properly to the disciplines of logic and rhetoric. 4. Among rhetoricians the main kinds of syllogisms are two: induction
 
II.ix.5–ix.18	Isidore of Seville
 
(inductio) and inference (ratiocinatio). The parts of induction are three: first the proposition (i.e. the major premise); second the ‘thing brought in’ (illatio, from inferre, “infer”), also called the ‘additional proposition’ (assumptio,i.e.theminorpremise);thirdtheconclusion. 5. Induction is that which in matters not liable to doubt demands assent when it is carried out, among philosophers or rhetoricians or people conversing. The major premise of an induction introduces (inducere) parallels, in one or more aspects, to the matter that must be granted. 6. The ‘thing brought in’ of an induction, also called the minor premise, is that which introduces the matter in dispute for whose sake the parallels were used.Theconclusionofaninductionisthatwhicheither confirms what is granted in the minor premise, or states what may be deduced from it.
Inference (ratiocinatio) is a discourse by which what is in question is put to the test. 7. There are two types of inference. First is the enthymeme (enthymema), which is an incomplete syllogism, and used in rhetoric. The second is the epichireme (epichirema), an unrhetorical, broader syllogism. 8. Hence ‘enthymeme’ is translated into Latin ‘conception of the mind’ (conceptio mentis),4 and writers on the art usually call it an incomplete syllogism, because its form of argument consists of two parts,asitemployswhataimstoarouseconvictionwhile bypassing the rule of syllogisms. For example: “If the storm is to be avoided, therefore one ought not sail.” Thustheargumentiscompletedfromthemajorpremise and the conclusion alone, whence it is considered more appropriate for orators than logicians.
9. There are five branches of enthymeme: first the convincing, second the demonstrating, third the sententious,fourththeexemplifying,andfifththecollective (convincibilis, ostentabilis, sententialis, exemplabilis, collectivus). 10. The convincing is that which convinces by manifestreason,asCicerodidinhisDefenseofMilo(79): “Therefore you are sitting as avengers of the death of a man whose life you would not be willing to restore, even if you thought you could.” 11. The demonstrating is that which exerts control by means of an indisputable depiction (demonstratio) of the defendant, as Cicero in the Catiline Oration (1.2): “Still he lives; nay, he even comes into the senate.” The sententious is that which a general maxim (sententia) adduces, as in Terence (Andria 68):
Flattery breeds friends; truth, hatred.
12. The exemplifying is that which compares some other situation (exemplum), and by this means threatens that the outcome will be similar, as Cicero says in his Philippics (2.1): “I wonder, Antonius, that you do not tremble at the fates of those whose example you imitate.” 13. The collective enthymeme collects (colligere, ppl. collectus) what has been argued into one, as Cicero says in his Defense of Milo (41): “Was he then willing to do, irritating some, what he was not willing to do with the gratitude of all? Did he have no hesitation in killing lawlessly,atanunpropitiousplaceandtime,riskinghisneck, a man he did not venture to kill with impunity, with the law, the place, and the time on his side?”
14. Moreover there is another definition of the enthymeme,accordingto(Marius)Victorinus:fromthe major premise (propositio) alone, as has already been said, which is composed thus: “If the storm is to be avoided, one should not seek to sail.” 15. Or from the minor premise (assumptio) alone, as this: “If he is an enemy, he slays; moreover he [is] an enemy.” Because theconclusionislackinghere,itiscalledanenthymeme. 16. Next is the epichireme, deriving from inference as broader and more developed than rhetorical syllogisms, distinct in breadth and in length of utterance from logical syllogisms, for which reason it is given to the rhetoricians.Thisconsistsofthreetypes:thefirst,ofthreeparts; the second, of four parts; the third, of five parts.
17. The three-part epichirematic syllogism consists of three members: the major premise (propositio), minor premise (assumptio), and conclusion (conclusio). The four-part type consists of four members: first the major premise, second the minor premise joined to the major premise or a minor premise, third the proof (probatio), and the conclusion.5 18. The five-part type accordingly has five members: first the major premise, second its proof,thirdtheminorpremise,fourthitsproof,fifththe conclusion. Cicero puts it thus in his art of rhetoric (On Invention 1.9): “If deliberation (deliberatio) and demonstration (demonstratio) are kinds of arguments (causa), they cannot rightly be considered parts of any one kind of argument – for the same thing can be a kind of one thing and part of another, but not a kind and a part of
4	The term derives from the Greek  + , ‘mind.’
5	Isidore’s source here, Cassiodorus, makes sense in speaking of the third part as the proof joined to either the major or minor premise.
 
The Etymologies	II.x.1–xii.5
 
the same thing,” and so forth, up to the point where the constituents of this syllogism are concluded.
x. Law (De lege) 1. Law (lex) is the ordinance (constitutio) of the people, which the elders have solemnly ratified with the common people. What a king or emperor proclaims (edicere), is called an ordinance (constitutio) or edict (edictum). The basis of fairness (aequitas) is twofold, sometimes in laws, sometimes in custom (mores). Between law and custom there is this difference, that law is written, while custom is usage (consuetudo) tested and found good by its antiquity, or unwritten law. Indeed, law (lex) is so named from ‘reading’ (legere), because it is written. 2. Custom (mos) is longstanding usage, taken likewise from ‘moral habits’ (mores,thepluralofmos).‘Customarylaw’(consuetudo) moreover is a certain system of justice (ius), established by moral habits, which is received as law when law is lacking; nor does it matter whether it exists in writing or in reason, seeing that reason commends a law. 3. Indeed if law amounts to reason (ratio), the law will consist of everything that already agrees with reason, provided that it accords with religion, befits orderly conduct, and profits welfare. Customary law is so called because it is in ‘common use’ (communis usus).
4. Every law either permits something, as “a valiant man may seek his reward,” or it forbids, as “it is not permittedtomarryasacredvirgin,”oritpunishes,as“he whocommitsmurderwillundergocapitalpunishment.” 5. Moreover laws are made so that human audacity may be controlled by fear of them, and that innocence may be protected among the wicked, and that among the wicked themselves the power of harming may be reined in by the fear of punishment – for by the rewards and punishments of the law, human life is governed. 6. A law will be decent, just, enforceable, natural, in keeping with the custom of the country, appropriate to the place and time, needful, useful, and also clear – so that it does not hold anything that can deceive through obscurity – and for no private benefit, but for the common profit (communis utilitas) of the citizens.
xi.	The maxim (De sententia) 1. A maxim (sententia) is an impersonal saying, as (Terence, Andria 68):
Flattery breeds friends; truth, hatred.
Ifapersonwereaddedtothis,itwouldbeachreia(chria), thus: “Achilles offended Agamemnon by speaking the truth” or “Metrophanes earned the favor of Mithridates by flattering him.” 2. For between chreia and maxim is this distinction, that a maxim is uttered without a person, and a chreia is never said without a person. Whence if a person is added to a maxim, it becomes a chreia; if the person is taken away, it becomes a maxim.
xii.	Confirmation and refutation (De catasceva etanasceva) 1. A confirmation (catasceva) is a corroboration of the thing proposed, while a refutation (anasceva) is the contrary of the above, for it refutes the possibility thatsomethingproposedashavingbeenbornormadeor saidexistsoreverexisted.Itisasif,forexample,someone should deny that a Chimaera existed, or confirm that it existed. 2. Between these arguments and a thesis (thesis) is this difference, that a thesis, although it also may enter debateoneitherside,neverthelessisakindofpondering or urging about an uncertain matter. Further, confirmationsandrefutationsmostlyengageinthosemattersthat are improbable, but that are put forward as truths.
3.Thefirstdivisionoftherefutationistheinappropriate (inconveniens) and the lie (mendacium). The species of the inappropriate are the indecent and the useless. Again the indecent is treated either in words or deeds. In words, when someone is said to have used words that are ugly and not appropriate to someone’s authority, as if someone were to defame Cato the Censor himself as having incited young people to wickedness and lechery. 4. In deeds, as if someone were said to have done something inappropriate to piety and his own good name, as is the fable of the adultery of Mars and Venus.
The lie (mendacium) has three kinds. The incredible lie,inwhichsomethingisnotbelievedtohavebeendone, as the youth who, standing on the Sicilian shore, saw the fleet approach Africa. 5. The impossible lie, as Clodius laid a trap for Milo and was killed by Milo. This is a contradiction,forifhelaidatrap,hekilled.Hewaskilled;he didnotlayatrap.Thispatternreworkedintoitscontrary wouldbeaneffectiveconfirmation(catasceva).[Wemay set down as all the gradations the decent, the useful, the likely,thepossible,theconsistent,orconverselytheindecent, the useless, the insufficiently likely, the impossible, the contradictory.] It will be fitting nevertheless so to arrange our principles that we say either that one ought to believe in the authority of the ancients, or that faith
 
II.xii.6–xviii.1
in fables is not to be maintained. 6. And with regard to this last, by way of refutation (anasceva) we should ask whether they who concocted those things did not wish to mean something else, as that Scylla lived not as a sea-hag, but as a seaside-dwelling woman, not girded by dogs, but as someone rapacious and inhospitable to visitors.
xiii.	Prosopopoeia (De prosopoeia) 1. Prosopopoeia occurs when personality and speech are invented for inanimate things. Cicero in the Catiline Oration (1.27): “If,intruth,myfatherland,whichisfardearertomethan my life, were to speak with me, saying,” etc. 2. Thus we bring in speaking mountains and rivers or trees, imposing personhood on a thing that does not have the capacity for speech. This is common in tragedies and found very frequently in orations.
xiv. Ethopoeia	(De	ethopoeia) 1.	We	call	that
‘ethopoeia’ whereby we represent the character of a person in such a way as to express traits related to age, occupation,fortune,happiness,gender,grief,boldness.Thus whenthecharacterofapirateistakenup,thespeechwill be bold, abrupt, rash; when the speech of a woman is imitated, the oration ought to fit her sex. A distinct way of speaking ought to be used for young and old, soldier and general, parasite and rustic and philosopher. 2. One caught up in joy speaks one way, one wounded, another. In this genre of speech these things should be most fully thought out: who speaks and with whom, about whom, where, and when, what one has done or will do, or what one can suffer if one neglects these decrees.
xv.	Kinds of questions (De generibus quaestionum)1. There are two kinds of questions, of which one is the finite (finitus), the other the indefinite (infinitus). The finite is I! in Greek, called ‘case’ (causa) in Latin, where there is controversy with a particular person. 2. The indefinite is called B in Greek, ‘proposition’ (propositum) in Latin. This concerns no particular person, nor is there in it any particular circumstance, that is, neither place nor time. In a case (causa) everything is particular, whence a proposition is as it were a part of a case.6
xvi.	Style (De elocutione) 1. With regard to style (elocutio) it will be correct to use what the matter, the place,thetime,andthecharacteroftheaudiencerequire, ensuring that profane things are not be mingled with religious, immodest with chaste, frivolous with weighty, playfulwithearnest,orlaughablewithsad. 2.Oneought to speak in good Latin, and clearly, for he speaks in good Latin who persistently seeks the true and natural words for things, nor does he diverge from the speech and culture of the present time. It is not enough for such a man to watch what he says, unless he says it openly and smoothly; and more than that, his actions must match his words.
xvii.	The three registers of speaking (De trimododicendigenere) 1. One ought to speak of humble things softly, of dramatic matters emphatically, of varied matters moderately. Indeed, these are the familiar three registers (genus) of speaking: humble, middling, grandiloquent(humilis,medius,grandiloquus).Nowwhenwesay great things, they should be uttered grandly; when we speakofsmallthings,delicately;whenthingsofthemiddling sort, temperately. 2. For in small causes nothing shouldbespokengrandlyorloftily,butoneshouldspeak in a simple and ordinary manner. But in greater causes, where we deal with God or human salvation, more magnificence and brilliance should be displayed. 3. In moderate causes, where nothing is treated in order to effect anaction,butonlythattheaudiencemaybepleased,one should speak with moderation, somewhere between the two.Buteventhoughsomeonemayspeakofgreatthings, nevertheless he should not always teach (var. dicere, “speak”) grandly, but humbly, when he teaches; moderately, when he praises or chastises something; grandly, when he calls to conversion minds that are turned away. In the humble style adequate words should be used; in the middling, showy; in the grand, ardent.
xviii.	Clause,phrase,andsentence(Decolo,commate,et periodis) 1. Every utterance is composed and constituted of words, the phrase, the clause, and the sentence. A phrase (comma) is a small component of thought, a clause (colon) is a member, and a sentence (periodos) is a ‘rounding-off or compass’ (ambitus vel circuitus; cf. ! " ,“goinground”).Aphraseismadefromacombination of words, a clause from phrases, and a sentence
6 The notion is that general theses may be used as part of the argumentation of a particular case.
 
from clauses. 2. A comma is the marking off of a speechjuncture, as (cf. Cicero, Defense of Milo 1): “Although I fear, judges, . . .” – there is one comma, and another comma follows – “. . . that it may be unseemly to speak for the bravest of men, . . .” and this makes up a clause (colon), that is, a member, that makes the sense intelligible. But still the utterance is left hanging, and in this way finally from several clauses the sentence’s period (periodos) is made, that is the last closing-off of the thought, thus: “. . . and so they miss the traditional procedure of the courts.” But a sentence should not be longer than what may be delivered in one breath.
xix.	Faultstobeavoidedinletters,words,andexpres-sions (De vitiis litterarum et verborum et sententiarum cavendis) 1. Again, the pure and chaste speech of an orator should be without all faults, as much in letters as in words, and indeed in expressions (sententia). 2. In letters, their adjoining should be apt and proper, and thus care must be taken to ensure that the final vowel of the preceding word is not the same as the initial vowel of the following word, as feminae Aegyptiae (“of an Egyptian woman”). This construction would be better if consonants were adjoined to the vowels. One should also avoid the adjoining of the three consonants which coming together seem to be grating and as it were to clash, that is r, s, and x, as: ars studiorum (“the art of study”), rex Xerxes (“King Xerxes”), error Romuli (“the wandering of Romulus”). Also to be avoided is the consonant m dashing against vowels, as verum enim (“but indeed”).
xx.	Combinations of words (De iuncturis verborum)1. Also we should be wary of faults in words, so that we don’t position words improperly, which the Greeks call acyrologia. Therefore propriety should be cherished, so that sometimes because of the meanness of a foul and nasty word one should use terms in a transferred sense, yetnotfetchedfromfaraway,butsuchasseemneighbors and cognates to the true ones. 2. Very far-fetched hyperbatons(seeI.xxxvii.16),whichcannotbeemployedwithout confusion with other meanings, should be avoided.
Ambiguity (ambiguitas) is also to be avoided, as well
7	See I. xxxvi–xxxvii above; Donatus, Ars Grammatica, ed. Keil
4.397–402.
8	Many manuscripts omit the remainder of this chapter.
II.xviii.2–xxi.4
as that fault when, carried away by the excitement of oratory, some people conclude, in a long and roundabout rambling (ambages) with empty sounds interposed, what they could have expressed in one or two words.Thisfaultiscalledperissologia.3.Tothistheoppositeguiltyfaultistorobthespeechofevenessentialwords in one’s zeal for brevity. To be avoided also are the faults of expressions (sententia) as well as those of letters and words; these are recognized as among the first studies of grammarians. 4. These are cacemphaton, tautologia, ellipsis, acyrologia, macrologia, perissologia, pleonasm, and ones like these. But contrariwise enargeia (energia) aswellasemphasis,whichcausessomethingtobeunderstood beyond what one has said, elevate and adorn an oration, as if you were to say, “He rises to the glory of Scipio,” and Vergil (Aen. 2.262):
Sliding down the lowered rope.
For when he says ‘sliding down’ he suggests the image of height. To this the opposite virtue is to diminish in one’s words things that are in their nature great.
xxi. Figures of words and of expressions (De figuris verborum et sententiarum) 1. A speech is amplified and adorned with figures of words and of expressions. Because a straight and continuous oration makes for weariness and disgust as much for the speaker as for the hearer, it should be inflected and varied into other forms, so that it might refresh the speaker and become more elaborate, and deflect criticism with a diversity of presentation and hearing. Of these figures most, from Donatus, have been noted above in the schemes of the art of grammar.7 2. Hence here it is fitting to insert only those that never or with difficulty occur in poetry, but freely in oratory.8
3.[Anadiplosisisadoublingofwords,as(Cicero,Catiline Oration 1.2): “Still he lives. Lives! He even comes into the Senate!” 4. Climax (climax) is an ‘ascending series’ (gradatio), when the second notion begins at the point where the first leaves off, and from here as if in steps (gradus) the order of speech is managed, as in the speech of Africanus: “From innocence arises esteem; fromesteem,preferment;frompreferment,sovereignty; from sovereignty, liberty.” Some call this figure the ‘chain’ (catena), because one term is as it were linked to another, and in this way more ideas are conveyed in the doubling of the words. Moreover, this scheme
 
II.xxi.5–xxi.15
occurs not only in single words, but also in the grouping of words, as this from (Sempronius) Gracchus (fr. 43): “Yourboyhoodwasadishonortoyouryouth,youryouth the disgrace of your old age, your old age the scandal of the state.” And likewise from Scipio (Africanus Minor, fr. 33): “By force and unwillingly compelled, I made a pact with him; when the pact was made, I brought him before the judge; when he was brought, I condemned him in the first assembly; when he was condemned, I discharged him willingly.”
5.	Antitheses (antitheton) are called ‘oppositions’ (contrapositum) in Latin. When these are set in opposition they make for beauty of expression, and among the ornaments of speech they remain the most lovely, as Cicero (Catiline Oration 2.25): “On this side shame does battle; on that, impudence; here modesty, there debauchery; here faith, there deceit; here piety, there wickedness; here steadiness, there rage; here decency, there foulness; here restraint, there lust; here in short equity, temperance, courage, wisdom, all the virtues strugglewithiniquity,dissipation,cowardice,foolhardiness – with all the vices. Finally wealth struggles against poverty, right thinking against depravity, sanity against madness – in sum, good hope against desperation in every circumstance.” In strife and battle of this kind the book of Ecclesiasticus used the ornament of this type of locution, saying (cf. 33:15): “Good is set against evil, and life against death; so also is the sinner against a just man. And so look upon all the works of the most High. Two and two, and one against another.”
6.	Synonymy (synonymia) occurs whenever in connected speech we signify one thing with several words, as Cicero puts it (Catiline Oration 1.8): “You do nothing, you attempt nothing, you think of nothing.” Again (Catiline Oration 1.10): “I will not bear it, I will not tolerate it, I will not permit it.” 7. Epanodos, which our grammarians call ‘regression’ (regressio) (Cicero, Defense of Ligarius 19): “The dignity of the first ones was almost equal; not the equal, perhaps, of those that followed.” 8. Antapodosis, whenever the middle terms agree with the first and the last, [as is] (Cicero, Against the Speech of Metellus, fr. 5): “Yours is this deed I now reprove, senators, not mine – granted a most lovely deed – but, as I have said, not mine, but yours.”
9. Paradiastole occurs whenever we make distinctions by way of explanatory definition (cf. Rutilius Lupus, Schemata Lexeos 1.4): “While you call yourself wise instead of cunning, brave instead of reckless, thrifty insteadofstingy.”10.Antanaclasisisthatwhichexpresses a contrary sense with the same word. A certain man was complaining about his son because he was ‘looking forward’ (exspectare) to his death, and the son answered, “I don’t look forward (exspectare) to it; nay I wish,” he said, “that you would dread (exspectare) it.” 11. Antimetabole is an inversion of words that makes a contrary sense when their order is changed: “I don’t live to eat, but I eat to live.” And this (Cicero, Philippics 4.8): “If Antony is consul, then is Brutus the enemy; if the savior of the republic is Brutus, the enemy is Antony.” 12. The figure exoche (Cicero, Defense of Milo 59): “Who called them? Appius. Who brought them forth? Appius.”9
13. Now let us examine the ‘figures of thought’ (figura sententiae), which are worth the effort to know. 14. A maxim (sententia) is an impersonal saying, as (Terence, Andria 68)
Flattery breeds friends, truth hatred.
Ifapersonwereaddedtothis,itwouldbeachreia(chria), thus: “Achilles offended Agamemnon by speaking the truth” or “Metrophanes earned the favor of Mithridates by flattering him.” Between a chreia and a maxim is this distinction, that a maxim is produced without a person, but a chreia is never spoken without a person. Whence if a person is added to a maxim, it becomes a chreia; if taken away, it becomes a maxim.
15. There are many kinds of sentences (sententia).10 Some are indicative (indicativus), some proclamatory (pronuntiativus), as (Vergil, Aen. 4.373):
Faith is nowhere secure.
Some are imperative (imperativus), as (Vergil, Aen.
4.223):
Go and take action, son; call the west winds, and glide on your wings.
Some wondering (admirativus) (Aen. 1.11):
Does such great wrath possess divine minds?
9	The citation does not exemplify exoche; the text may be corrupt by omission.
10	Often a sententia, as above, is specifically a sententious saying, a maxim; now, as the following shows, Isidore simply means
“expression” of a thought, our “sentence.”
 
16.	Some comparative (comparativus) (anon., Courtney fr. 1):
If I conquer and die, what good is it for me to conquer?
Some superlative (superlativus), which are uttered with some emotion and indignation (Aen. 3.56):
To what, cursed hunger for gold, will you not drive mortal hearts?
17.	Some interrogative (interrogativus), [as] (Aen. 8.112):
Young men, what cause drove you to try unknown ways? . . . What is your race, where is your home? Do you bring here peace, or war?
18.	Others as a reply (responsivus), as: “From over there,” or “From there.” Some prayerful (deprecativus), as (Aen. 6.365):
Invincible one, snatch me from these evils!
Some promising (promissivus), as (Aen. 1.257):
Forgo fear, the fates of your children remain secure.
Some concessive (concessivus), which would inhibit by urging, as (Aen. 4.381):
Go, pursue Italy on the winds, seek your kingdom across the waves.
These concessive sayings, lest their prompting not be understood, are mixed with some things that unobtrusively inhibit, as “on the winds,” “across the waves.” Somedemonstrative(demonstrativus),as:“There!”or “Behold!” Some optative (optativus), as (Aen. 8.560):
O that Jupiter would bring me back bygone years.
19. Some derogatory (derogativus), as: “By no means.” Some, which are uttered with an exclamation (exclamatio), as (Petronius, Satyricon 108):
What madness, o citizens, changes peace into arms?
And Cicero (Catiline Oration 1.9): “O immortal gods, where among the nations are we?” 20. Some hortatory
(exhortativus), when we incite toward an idea, as (Aen.
8.364):
Dare, guest, to spurn wealth.
11 The sententia flentis is left unexemplified, as are those below from admonens to commiserans.
II.xxi.16–xxi.28
21. Some dissuasive (dehortativus), when we draw back from an opposing vice and sin. 22. And some affirmative (affirmativus), as: “Why not,” or “Indeed.” Some are preceptive (praeceptivus), as (cf. Vergil, Geo. 1.299):
Naked plow, sow naked, and you will have your crop in the cold.
23. Prohibiting (vetativus), as (Geo. 2.299):
Neither sow hazel among the vines, nor reach for the highest shoots.
24.Negative(negativus),as:“No,”“Notatall.”Andthere are wondering (mirativus) sentences, as (Jerome, Epistle 25, to Rusticus 15 (PL 22.1080)): “What! I can scarcely survive; would I wish to fornicate?” 25. Some sentences are of one grieving (dolens), as (cf. Ovid, Heroides 5.149): Woe is me, that no love is curable with herbs.
Some of one weeping (flens), [as]. . .11 Some express a similitude (similitudo), thus (Vergil, Aen. 5.588):
As once the Labyrinth, they say, in high Crete.
There are sentences of one warning (admonens), one laughing (inridens), one moaning (gemens). There are hortatory (exhortativus) sentences, consoling (consolativus) sentences, those of one commiserating (commiserans). Of these sentences, as many as there are figures, so many are the tones of voice in uttering them.
26.Thereare‘double-edgedstatements’(amphidoxa), conferring partly honor, partly dishonor, as (Ovid, Met.
2.53):
Your desire is not safe: you seek great things, Phaeton.
27. And there are others: procatalepsis, when we grant beforehand what can be objected against us in order to dilute its impact, as (Cicero, On Divination, Against Caecilius 1): “If any of you, judges, or of those who are present, perhaps are amazed.” And there is aporia, the doubting(dubitatio)ofonepretendingnottoknowwhat he knows, or how he should say it. 28. Koenonosis is called one’s ‘sharing of counsel’ (communicatio consilii) with one’s judges or one’s adversaries, as if you were to say: “I take counsel (consulere) with you, judges, or else withyou,adversaries,aboutwhatactionwassuitablefor me to take, or rather what you would have thought of doing.”
 
II.xxi.29–xxi.48
29. Paradox (paradoxon) occurs when we say that something unexpected has happened, as Cicero in his Defense of Flaccus (cf. Pro Flacco 1): “He who ought to have been the singer of his praises has become the one who begs for his release from danger.” 30. Epitrope, that is, yielding (permissio), when we yield up (permittere) some things to be evaluated by the judges or adversaries themselves,asCalvusintheAgainstVatinius(Vati[ci]nio; i.e. In Vatinium, fr. 23): “Put on a bold face, and say that you are more worthy to become praetor than Cato.” 31. Parrhesia is speech full of freedom and confidence (Cicero, Defense of Milo 72): “I have not slain Spurius Maelius,” and so on. This figure should be used with caution, as did Cicero, for he explained his conduct beforehand. 32. Ethopoeia occurs when we introduce speech from an absent person, as Cicero in his Defense of Caelius (33–34) has Appius Caecus speaking with Clodia. 33. Enargeia (energia) is the performance of things acted out or as if they were acted out before our eyes, on which we have already spoken. 34. Metathesis is the figure that sends the thoughts of the judges toward past or future events,12 in this way: “Call your minds back to the spectacle of the defeated, wretched city, and imagine that you see the burning, the slaughter, the plundering, the pillage, the wounds on the bodies of children, the capture of wives, the butchering of elders.” Or toward the future, as an anticipation of what the opponent is about to say, as by Cicero in his Defense of Milo (79), when he directs the thoughts of the judges toward that condition of the republic [which] will come to be even if, were Milo killed, Clodius should live.
35.	Aposiopesis occurs when we break off what we seemedtobeabouttosaywithsilence(Vergil,Aen.1.135):
Whom I . . . but it is more important to settle the restless waves.
36.	Epanalepsis is digression (digressio):13 “The heat of my argument and the importance of these matters has carried me off a little further than I wished, but I return to the case at hand.” 37. Anamnesis is the recollection of a matter that we pretend to have forgotten. 38. Aparisis occurswhenatanopportunemomentweappealtowhat we have as it were deposited beforehand in the minds of the judges.14
39.	Etiology (aetiologia) occurs when we set forth something and give its cause and explanation.
40.	Characterization (characterismus) is a detailed description of some figure, as (Vergil, Aen. 4.558):
In every way like Mercury, in voice and coloring and blond hair and handsome youthful limbs.
J  occurs when people pile up in one place several thoughts, briefly set forth, and the speaker runs through them with some haste, as Cicero (Catiline Oration 3.1): “The republic, citizens, and the lives of you all, your goods, fortunes, wives, and children,” etc. 41. Irony (ironia) occurs when through a pretense someone wishes to be understood otherwise than he says. This is done either when we praise someone whom we wish to blame, or blame him whom we would praise. An example of each would be if you were to call Catiline a lover of the republic, or Scipio an enemy of the republic. 42. Diasyrmus diminishes in words things that are great, or magnifies very small things. 43. Efon occurs whenever we linger for a rather long time on the same thought: “Whom at last did he spare? Whose friendship did he keep in trust? To which good man was he not hostile? When did he not either accuse someone, or beat him, or betray him?”15
44. Epangelia is a ‘promise’ (promissio) by which we make the judge attentive, promising that we are about to say grand or very small things. 45. Personification (prosopopoeia) occurs when personality and speech are contrived for inanimate things. Cicero in the Catiline Oration (1.27): “If, in truth, my fatherland, which is far dearer to me than my life, were to speak with me, saying,” etc. 46. Parathesis occurs when as it were we insert something incomplete into the memories of the judges, saying that we will return to it when the right moment comes. 47. Peusis, that is soliloquy (soliloquium), occurs when we ourselves answer our own questions. 48. Synaeresis16 occurs when we defer something, asking
12	For metathesis we should understand metastasis. Metathesis is correctly defined at I.xxxv.6. The first example offered has no known source.
13	An error; epanalepsis is correctly defined at I.xxxvi.11. The example given has no known source.
14	For the corrupt aparisis editors have conjectured apaetesis, the figure in which a topic, set aside in anger, recurs. See 46 below.
15	Forcorruptefoneditorssuggestepimone,repetitivedwellingon a topic, or efen from the Greek ’ K (“on one thing”). The source of the example given is not known.
16	Lindsay substitutes synaeresis for the corrupt sinerosis of the manuscripts. Isidore may have meant synerotesis.
 
that we may be permitted to say something else in the meanwhile.]17
xxii.	Dialectic (De dialectica) 1. Dialectic (dialectica) is the discipline devised for investigating the causes of things. It is a branch of philosophy, and is called logic (logica), that is, the rational (rationalis) power of defining, questioning, and discussing.18 Dialectic teaches, withregardtomanytypesofquestions,howthetrueand thefalsemaybedistinguishedbydisputation.2.Someof the earliest philosophers had ‘logic’ among their terms, but they did not refine it to the level of skill of an art. After these, Aristotle brought the argumentative methods of this discipline under certain rules and named it ‘dialectic’ (dialectica) because in it one disputes about terms (dictum), for   means “utterance” (dictio). Dialectic follows the discipline of rhetoric because they have many things in common.
xxiii.	The difference between the arts of rhetoric anddialectic(Dedifferentiadialecticaeetrhetoricaeartis) 1. Varro in his nine books of Disciplines defines dialectic and rhetoric with this similitude: “Dialectic and rhetoric are like the clenched fist and the open palm of a man’shand:theformerpincheswords,thelatterextends them.”19 2. While dialectic is indeed sharper for examining things, rhetoric is more fluent for those things it strives to teach. Dialectic sometimes appears in schools; rhetoric continually comes to the public forum. Dialectic reaches very few students; rhetoric often reaches the whole populace. 3. Before they come to explaining the Isagoge (see chapter xxv. below), philosophers customarily lay out a definition of philosophy, so that matters that pertain to the Isagoge may be more readily set forth.
xxiv.	The definition of philosophy (De definitionephilosophiae) 1. Philosophy is the understanding of human and divine things joined with the pursuit of
17	This ends the passage, sections 3–48, omitted in many manuscripts.
18	In fact, the liberal art called “dialectic” nearly coincides with theancientandmoderndisciplineoflogic.Ontheverbalconnection of the logical with the rational see xxiv. 7 below.
19	On Varro see the Introduction, p. 11.
20	The traditional Seven Sages of Greece were Thales, Solon, Periander, Cleobulus, Chion, Bias, and Pittacus.
II.xxii.1–xxiv.7
living well. It seems to consist of two things: knowledge (scientia) and opinion (opinatio). 2. Knowledge obtains whensomethingisperceivedbysurereasoning;opinion, however, when an unsure thing still lies concealed and is grasped by no solid reasoning – for instance whether the sun is as large as it seems to be or is larger than the whole earth, or whether the moon is spherical or concave, or whether the stars are stuck to the sky or are carried through the air in a free course, or of what size and what material the heavens themselves may be, whether they are at rest and immobile or are whirling at unbelievable speed, or how thick the earth is, or on what foundation it endures balanced and suspended.
3. The name ‘philosophy’ itself in Latin translation professes the ‘love of wisdom’ (amor sapientiae), for the Greek  - means “love,” and   means “wisdom.” There are three kinds of philosophy: one natural (naturalis), which in Greek is ‘physics’ (physica), in which one discusses the investigation of nature; a second moral (moralis), which is called ‘ethics’ (ethica) in Greek, in which moral behavior is treated; a third rational (rationalis), which is named with the Greek term ‘logic’ (logica), in which there is disputation concerning how in the causes of things and in moral behavior the truthitselfmaybeinvestigated.4.Hencephysicsinvolves the cause of inquiring, ethics, the order of living, and logic, the rationale of knowing.
Among the Greeks the first who investigated physics deeply was Thales of Miletus, one of the Seven Sages.20 Indeed, he before anyone else examined the first principles of the sky and the power of natural things with contemplative reason. Later Plato divided physics into four categories:arithmetic,geometry,music,andastronomy. 5. Socrates first established ethics for the correcting and settling of conduct, and directed his whole effort toward disputation about living well. He divided ethics into the four virtues of the soul, namely prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance. 6. Prudence (prudentia) has to do with how the bad is distinguished from the good in affairs.Fortitude(fortitudo),howadversitymaybeborne with equanimity. Temperance (temperantia), how passion and the desire for things may be reined in. Justice (iustitia), how to each is distributed his own by right judging.
7. Plato added logic, which is called rational philosophy. Through it, when the causes of things and conduct had been dissected, he scrutinized the essence of those
 
II.xxiv.8–xxv.2
causes rationally, while dividing logic into rhetoric and dialectic.Thisphilosophyiscalledlogic,thatis,therational (rationalis), for   in Greek means both ‘utterance’ (sermo) and ‘reason’ (ratio). 8. And indeed, divine eloquence (i.e. the Bible) likewise consists of these three branches of philosophy; it is likely to treat nature, as in Genesis and Ecclesiastes, or conduct, as in Proverbs and here and there in all the books, or logic – by virtue of which our (Christian) writers lay claim to the theory of interpretation (theoretica) for themselves, as in the Song of Songs and the Gospels.21 9. Again some of the learned (i.e. Cassiodorus, Institutes 2.3.5) have defined philosophy in name and in its parts in this way: philosophy is the provable knowledge (probabilis scientia) of human and divine things, insofar as this is possible for a human. Otherwise: philosophy is the art of arts and the discipline of disciplines. Again: philosophy is a meditation on death, a definition more suitable for Christians who, with worldly ambition trod under heel, and a disciplined way of life, live out the likeness of their future homeland.
Philosophy is divided into two parts, the first speculative(inspectivus),thesecondpractical(actualis).10.Others have defined the method of philosophy as consisting of two parts, of which the first is speculative, the second practical. The speculative is divided into three types: first natural (naturalis), second doctrinal (doctrinalis),22 thirddivine(divinus).Doctrinalisdividedintofour,that is, first arithmetic, second music, third geometry, fourth astronomy. 11. Practical philosophy is divided into three, that is, first moral (moralis), second economic (dispensativus), third civil (civilis).
That branch of philosophy is called speculative (inspectivus) by which, having passed beyond visible things, we contemplate in some measure concerning divine and heavenly things, and we investigate those things by the mind alone because they pass beyond the corporeal gaze. 12. Philosophy is called natural when the nature(natura)ofeachindividualthingisexamined,for nothing is generated (generare) in life, but rather each thing is classified by those properties according to which the Creator defined it, unless perhaps by the will of God some miracle is shown to occur.23
13. Philosophy is called divine when we treat of the ineffable nature of God or creatures that are spiritual in some respect, the most profound questions with regard to quality. 14. Doctrinal philosophy is the science that studies abstract quantity, for that quantity is called abstract which we treat with pure reason, separating it by the intellect from matter or from other accidental qualities – as are even and odd – or from things of this kind. It has four branches: arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy. 15. Arithmetic is the discipline of numerable quantity in itself. Geometry is the discipline of unmoving size and of shapes. Music is the discipline that speaks of numbers that inhere in something, namely those that are found in sounds. Astronomy is the discipline that contemplates all the courses of the heavenly bodies and the figures of the constellations, and with searching reason discourses on the habitual movements of the stars around one another and around the earth.
16. Further, that branch of philosophy is called practical (actualis) that explains in their own workings things that are proposed. It has three parts: moral, economic, and civil. That philosophy is called moral (moralis) through which we seek a decent conduct of life, and set up principles aiming toward virtue. That philosophy is called economic (dispensativus) wherein the ordering of domestic affairs is wisely disposed. That philosophy is called civil (civilis) through which the welfare of the whole state is attended to.
xxv. Porphyry’s Isagoge (De Isagogis Porphyrii)24 1. After these definitions of philosophy, in which everything is contained generally, now let us set forth Porphyry’sIsagoge.‘Isagoge’(Isagoga)isaGreekword,in Latin ‘introduction’ (introductio), specifically for those who are beginning philosophy. It contains in itself a demonstration of the first principles of any thing as to what it may be, and the thing is explained with its own solid and substantial definition. 2. First we posit
21	More likely Isidore wrote theologiam (as his source in Jerome has it) rather than theoreticam; hence, “or logic, instead of which our writers lay claim to theology . . .”
22	As will be clear below, “doctrinal” philosophy is the mathematical sciences; the Latin term doctrinalis, which contains the sense “learning,” renders the root of the Greek word  , which itself contains the sense “learning.”
23	Playing on the related terms (g)natura and genero, “generate, beget,”Isidoreinsiststhatphysicstreatsnaturalthings,butthatthese are not self-generated or created independently of divine will.
24	The Neoplatonist Porphyry (died ca. 305 ce) wrote the Introduction (Isagoge) to the Categories of Aristotle, which became the standard introductory textbook on logic, regularly called simply Isagoge.
 
the genus, then we subjoin the species and other things that can be allied, and we separate them by particulars they hold in common, continually introducing the differentiae until we arrive at the individual character (proprium)ofthethingwhoseidentifyingpropertieswehave been investigating by means of a definition that marks it out. For example: A human being is an animal, rational, mortal, land-dwelling, bipedal, capable of laughter.
3.Whenthegenusiscalledanimal,thesubstance(substantia) of a human being is set forth. Now a human being is of the ‘animal’ genus, but because this spreads a wide net, the species is added, ‘land-dwelling’: now that which is [supposed to be] of the air or of the water is excluded. The differentia then, as ‘bipedal,’ which is posited as against animals that are supported by many feet. Again ‘rational,’ as against those which lack reason; ‘mortal’ too, as against that which is [not] an angel. 4. Afterwards,tothesedistinctionsandexclusionsisadded theindividualtrait(proprium)inthelastplace,[‘capable of laughter’] – for it is characteristic of a human being alone that he laughs. Thus is completed in every respect the definition for setting forth ‘human being.’ Aristotle andCicerothoughtthatafulldefinitioninthisdiscipline consisted of genera and differentiae. 5. Afterwards some, fuller in their teaching about this, divide the complete definition of substance into five parts as their branches. Of these the first concerns the genus, the second the species, the third the differentia, the fourth the individual trait, the fifth the accidental property (accidens).
6. Genus, as ‘animal,’ for that is the generic (generale) and common term for all things having a soul (anima). Species, as ‘human being,’ for that is the ‘specific property’ (specialitas), by which he is separated from other animate things. Differentiae, as ‘rational,’ ‘mortal.’ In these two differentiae a human being differs from others. 7. When he is called ‘a rational being,’ he is distinguished from irrational, speechless animals that do not have reason. When [he is called] ‘a mortal being,’ he is distinguishedfromangels,whodonotknowdeath.Individual trait, as ‘capable of laughter,’ for it is the human being who laughs, and except for the human being this is true of no animal. Accidental property, as color in the body, learning in the mind. 8. These things both
25 Marius Victorinus’s translation (fourth century ce) has been lost, but Boethius’s commentary (fifth century) became a standard text.
II.xxv.3–xxvi.6.
occur (accidere) and change with variation over time. From all these five parts we have the expression of the full thought, thus: “Man is an animal, rational, mortal, capable of laughter, capable of good and evil.” Hence in every discourse about substance we ought to include species and differentiae until, when all things that could bethesamethingareexcluded,wemayattaintheobject, sothatitsindividualnature(proprietas)maynowbeheld fixed.
9. Victorinus the orator translated the Isagoge from Greek into Latin, and Boethius produced his commentary on it in five books.25
xxvi. Aristotle’s categories (De categoriis Aristotelis) 1. We come to the categories (categoria) of Aristotle, which in Latin are called ‘predications’ (praedicamentum). With these every form of discourse is included in accordance with their various significations. 2. The instruments (instrumentum) of the categories are three: the first is equivocal (aequivocus), the second univocal (univocus), the third denominative (denominativus). They are equivocal when many things possess the same name, but not the same definition, as ‘lion’ – for with regardtothename,theactual,thepainted,andthezodiacal lion are called ‘lion’; with regard to the definition, the actual is defined one way, the painted another, the zodiacal another. 3. The instruments are univocal when two or more things share a single name and a single definition, as ‘clothing.’ Thus both a cloak and a tunic can take the name ‘clothing’ along with its definition. Therefore this is understood to be univocal among the types of instruments, because it gives both a name and a definition to its forms. 4. We call denominative, that is ‘derivative’ (derivativus), whichever instruments take their name from some single instance of differentiation withregardtoanoun,as‘good’from‘goodness,’‘wicked’ from ‘wickedness.’
5. There are ten species of categories: substance, quantity, quality, relation, situation, place, time, habit, activity, and passivity (substantia, quantitas, qualitas, relatio, situs, locus, tempus, habitus, agere, pati). 6. ‘Substance’ is what a thing properly and principally is called, which is neither predicated of the subject, nor inheres in the subject, as ‘some particular man’ or ‘some particular horse.’ In addition, there are things called ‘secondary substances’ (secunda substantia), in which types those things that were just now called substances in the
 
II.xxvi.7–xxvii.3
principalsensearepresentandincluded,astheprincipal substance‘Cicero’isincludedinthesecondarysubstance ‘man.’ 7. ‘Quantity’ is the measure by which something is shown to be large or small, as ‘long,’ ‘short.’ ‘Quality’ expresses ‘of what sort’ (qualis) a person may be, as ‘orator’ or ‘peasant,’ ‘black’ or ‘white.’ ‘Relation’ is what is ‘related’ (referre, ppl. relatus) to something, for when ‘son’ is said, ‘father’ is also indicated. These things arise together as related (relativa). Indeed, ‘slave’ and ‘master’ have a simultaneous onset of the name, nor can a master sometimes be found before a slave, nor a slave before a master, for one cannot exist before the other.
8. ‘Place’ is where a thing is: in the forum, in a street. Further, movement of place has six directions: right and left,forwardandback,upanddown.Alsothosesixdirections have two aspects, [that is, situation and time. ‘Situation,’ as] ‘far’ and ‘near.’ ‘Time,’ as ‘yesterday,’ ‘today.’ Moreover ‘situation’ (situs) is so called from ‘position’ (positio), as someone may stand, or sit, or lie down. 9. ‘Habit’ (habitus) is so called from ‘having’ (habere) something–asto‘have’knowledgeinthemind,strength in the body, clothing around the body, and the other things that fall under this mode of having, with their number assigned by the learned. 10. Now ‘activity’ and ‘passivity’ are functions of the sense that one is acting or receiving the action. So ‘I write’ is in the active voice, because it indicates the situation of one doing; ‘I am written’ is passive, because it indicates that one receives the action.
Countless things are classified in these nine types, of which we have presented some as examples, or in the type‘substance’itself,whichis  L (“essentialbeing”). It is also the case with whatever we perceive with the intellect: we present them in speech with one or another of these ten predicates. 11. A sentence full of these runs like this: “Augustine, the great orator, the son of that man, standing, in the temple, today, wearing a priest’s fillet, is worn out from arguing.”
Further, ‘being’ (usia) is ‘substance’ (substantia) that is, the ‘essential property’ (proprium) that underlies (subiacere) the other categories; the remaining nine are accidents. ‘Substance’ is so called because every thing subsists (subsistere) with reference to itself. A body subsists, and therefore is a substance. 12. Those accidents, indeed, which are in the subsisting thing and in the subject are not substances, because they do not remain (subsistere) but are changed, such as color or shape. 13. The terms ‘of the subject’ (de subiecto) and ‘in the subject’ (in subiecto) amount as it were to ‘of the thing itself’ and ‘in the thing itself.’ Thus where something is spoken of as ‘of the subject,’ it is the substance, as if one were to say ‘of the substance.’ But where ‘in the subject’ is said, we speak of accidents, that is, what ‘falls in with’ (accidere) the substance, as quantity, quality, or shape. Genera and species are ‘of the subject,’ therefore, and
accidents are ‘in the subject.’
Of these nine accidents three are within the essential being (usia) – quantity, [and] quality, and situation – for these cannot exist without essential being. Apartfromessentialbeing,however,areplace,time,and habit; relation, activity, and passivity are both within and apart from essential being. 14. The categories are accepted as being ‘predicative’ (appellatus) because they cannot be perceived apart from subjects. Indeed, who can perceive what ‘human being’ may be unless he puts some human being before his eyes as the subject of the term?
15. This work of Aristotle should be understood because, as has been said, whatever a person says is contained among these ten predications. It will be helpful moreover for understanding those books that are directed to rhetoricians or dialecticians.
xxvii. The De interpretatione (De perihermeniis) 1. FromherefollowstheDeinterpretatione(Perihermenias, i.e. Peri hermenias “On interpretation”), an extremely subtlebook,andinitsvariedformsandrepetitionsmost careful. With regard to it people say, “When he was writing De interpretatione, Aristotle dipped his pen in his mind.”
2.PrefacetoDeinterpretatione.Everythingthatisone and is signified by one word is signified either by a substantive (nomen) or a verb (verbum).26 These two parts of speech ‘give expression to’ (interpretari) everything that the mind conceives of to say, for every utterance is a ‘mediator of expression’ (interpres) of a thing conceivedbythemind.3.Aristotle,amanmostskilledinthe manner of expressing things and in forming statements, names this perihermenia, which we call ‘interpretation’
26 Latin frequently uses adjectives substantively, and in logic and grammar adjectives are often gathered with nouns under the term nomen, here often rendered ‘substantive.’
 
The Etymologies	II.xxvii.4–xxviii.13
 
(interpretatio),27 specificallybecausethingsconceivedin the mind are rendered (interpretari) in expressed words throughcataphasisandapophasis,thatisaffirmationand negation. Through affirmation, as ‘a person is running’; through negation, as ‘a person is not running.’
4. So in his De interpretatione the philosopher mentionedabovetreatsseventypes:thesubstantive,theverb, the phrase, the proposition, affirmation, negation, and contradiction (nomen, verbum, oratio, enuntiatio, affirmatio, negatio, contradictio). 5. A ‘substantive’ is a vocal sound with a conventional meaning, without tense, of whichnosegmentisseparatelymeaningful,as‘Socrates.’ A ‘verb’ is what designates tense. A segment of the verb (i.e. the tense ending) has no other meaning beyond always denoting those things that are said about time, as ‘thinks,’‘argues.’A‘phrase’isameaningfulvocalsound, of which some segments are separately meaningful, as ‘Socrates argues.’ A ‘propositional utterance’ (enuntiativa oratio) is a vocal sound signifying of a thing that it is something or is not, as ‘Socrates is,’ ‘Socrates is not.’
6. An ‘affirmation’ is a pronouncement (enuntiatio) by someone about something, as ‘Socrates is.’ A ‘negation’ is a denial of something by someone, as ‘Socrates is not.’ A ‘contradiction’ is the ‘contrary positing’ (oppositio)ofanaffirmationandanegation,as‘Socratesargues; Socrates does not argue.’ 7. [All these things are treated, very minutely divided and subdivided, in the book De interpretatione,andletitsufficetohaveintimatedbriefly here the definitions of these things, since a competent explanation is found in the book itself. The usefulness] of the De interpretatione is this, that syllogisms are made fromtheinterpretations.Fromhere‘analyticlogic’(analytica) is systematically investigated.
xxviii. Logical syllogisms (De syllogismis dialecticis) 1. Logical syllogisms follow from here, where the usefulness and power of the whole art becomes clear. The conclusion of these syllogisms greatly aids the reader in investigating the truth, to the extent that the error of deceiving the opponent by the sophisms of false conclusions may be banished.
2. The formulations (formula) of the categories (categorica), that is, of the predicative syllogisms, are three.
27 Isidore takes the Greek phrase (and Aristotle’s title) !M K, ‘concerning interpretations’ or ‘concerning expressions,’ as a single word meaning “interpretation.”
There are nine types of the first formulation. 3. The first type is that which draws together, that is, which assembles, a universal affirmation (dedicativum) from universal affirmations directly (directim), as: “Every just thing is decent; every decent thing is good; therefore every just thing is good.” 4. The second type is that which draws together a universal negation (abdicativum) from universalaffirmationsandnegationsdirectly,as:“Everyjust thing is decent; no decent thing is wicked; therefore no just thing is wicked.” 5. The third type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from a particular and a universal affirmation directly, as: “A particular justthingisdecent;alldecentthingsareuseful;therefore that particular just thing is useful.”
6. The fourth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a particular affirmation and a universal negation directly, as: “A particular just thing is decent; no decent thing is wicked; therefore that particular just thing is not wicked.” 7. The fifth type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from universal affirmations by indirection (reflexio), as: “Every just thing is decent; every decent thing is good; therefore a particular good thing is just.” 8. The sixth type is that which draws together a universal negation from a universal affirmation and a universal negation indirectly, as: “Every just thing is decent; no decent thing is wicked; therefore no wicked thing is just.”
9. The seventh type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from a particular and a universal affirmation indirectly, as: “A particular just thing is decent; every decent thing is useful; therefore that particular just thing is useful.” 10. The eighth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a universal negation and a universal affirmation indirectly, as: “No wicked thing is decent; every decent thing is just; therefore a particular wicked thing is not just.” 11. The ninth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a universal negation and a particular affirmation indirectly, as: “No wicked thing is decent; a particular decent thing is just; therefore that particular just thing is not wicked.”
12.Ofthesecondformulationtherearefourtypes.The first type is that which draws together a universal negation from a universal affirmation and a universal negation directly, as: “Every just thing is decent; no wicked thing is decent; therefore no wicked thing is just.” 13. The second type is that which draws together a universal
 
II.xxviii.14–xxix.2
negation from a universal negation and a universal affirmative directly, as: “No wicked thing is decent; every just thing is decent; therefore no wicked thing is just.” 14.Thethirdtypeisthatwhichdrawstogetheraparticularnegationfromaparticularaffirmationandauniversal negation directly, as: “A particular just thing is decent; no wicked thing is decent; therefore that particular just thing is not wicked.” 15. The fourth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a particular negation and a universal affirmation directly, as: “A particularjustthingisnotwicked;everybadthingiswicked; therefore that particular just thing is not bad.”
16. There are six types of the third formulation. The first type is that which draws together a particular affirmation from universal affirmations as much directly as indirectly, as: “Every just thing is decent; every decent thing is just; every just thing is good; therefore a particular decent thing is good, a particular good thing is decent.”17.Thesecondtypeisthatwhichdrawstogether a particular affirmation from a particular and a universal affirmation directly, as: “A particular just thing is decent; every just thing is good; therefore a particular decent thing is good.”28 18. The third type is [that which draws together] a particular affirmation from a universal and a particular affirmation directly, as: “Every just thing is decent; a particular just thing is good; therefore a particular decent thing is good.”
19. The fourth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a universal affirmation and a [particular] negation directly, as: “Every just thing is decent; no just thing is bad; therefore a particular decent thing is not bad.” 20. The fifth type is that which draws togetheraparticularnegationfromaparticularaffirmation and a universal negation directly, as: “A particular just thing is decent; no just thing is bad; therefore a particular decent thing is not bad.” 21. The sixth type is that which draws together a particular negation from a universal affirmation and a particular negation directly, as: “Every just thing is decent; a particular just thing is not bad; therefore a particular decent thing is not bad.”
22. Let anyone who wishes fully to know these formulations of the categorical syllogisms read the book titled theInterpretations(Perihermenias)byApuleius,29 andhe will learn the things that have been treated there in more detail. For things that are precise and well-considered leadthereaderwithprofit,Godwilling,towardthegreat paths of understanding.
Now let us come in due course to the ‘hypothetical syllogisms’ (hypotheticus syllogismus). 23. The types of hypotheticalsyllogisms,whicharemadewithsomeconclusion, are seven. The first type is, “If it is day, it is light; it is day; therefore it is light.” The second type is, “If it is day, it is light; it is not light; therefore it is not day.” The third type is thus: “It cannot be the case that it is both day and not light; yet it is day; therefore it is light.” 24. The fourth type is thus: “Either it is day, or night; yet it is day; therefore it is not night.” The fifth type is thus: “Either it is day, or night; yet it is not night; therefore it is day.” The sixth type is this: “It cannot be the case that it is both day and not light; but [it is] day; therefore it is not night.” 25. The seventh type is thus: “It cannot be the case that it is both day and night; yet it is not night; therefore it is day.” If anyone should wish more fully to know the types of hypothetical syllogisms, let him read the book by Marius Victorinus entitled On the hypothetical syllogisms (De syllogismis hypotheticis).
26. At this point let us go on to the logical species of ‘definitions,’whichstandoutwithsuchgreatdistinction that they can clearly show the forms of characterizing things and certain characteristics of expressions.
xxix. Thedivisionofdefinitionsabbreviatedfromthe bookbyMariusVictorinus(Dedivisionedefinitionum ex Marii Victorini libro abbreviata)30 1. For philosophers a definition (definitio) explains, for things needing to be described, what the thing itself is, what sort of thing it is, and how it should be constituted with regard to its members. It is a brief statement determining the natureofeachthingasitisdistinguishedfromwhatithas in common with other things by an individual, proper signification. The division of definitions is presented in fifteen parts.
2. The first species of definition is  LE", that is, ‘substantial’ (substantialis), which is properly and truly called a definition, as is “A human being is an animal, rational, mortal, capable of feeling and of learning.” Now this definition, descending through the species and the differentiae, comes to the individual thing, and
28	For this second type we translate a better reading derived from the source in Cassiodorus.
29	Most scholars now believe that the M K is wrongly attributed to Apuleius, second-century ce author of The Golden Ass.
30	Victorinus was a philosopher and grammarian of the fourth century ce.
 
The Etymologies	II.xxix.3–xxix.12
 
most fully designates what a human being is. 3. The second species of definition, which in Greek is called  , in Latin is named a ‘notion’ (notio), and we can speak of this ‘notion’ with a common, and not anindividualizingname.Thisisalwaysdoneinthisway: “A human being is what in rational thought and learned skill stands out above all animals.” This notion did not saywhatahumanbeingis,butwhatonecando,callinga particular distinguishing feature to notice (notitia), as it were.Inthisandtheremainderofthedefinitionsanotice of the thing is presented, but no substantial (substantialis) explication is produced; because that first species is substantial, it holds first place among the definitions. 4. The third species of definition is called !  in Greek, ‘qualitative’ (qualitativus) in Latin, because it takes its name from ‘quality’ (qualitas), since it clearly shows ‘what sort of thing’ (qualis) is something that exists. An example of this is the following: “A human being is one who prospers by means of intelligence and succeeds in the arts, and by his understanding of things either chooses what he ought to do, or spurns with reproach what is unprofitable.” Thus by these qualities ‘man’ is expressed and defined. 5. The fourth species of definition is named I!  in Greek, and in
Latin, by Cicero, ‘description’ (descriptio). This clarifies what a thing may be by ‘writing around’ (descriptio) it when a circumlocution of words and deeds is applied. In response to the question of what a greedy, or cruel, or luxurious person is like, the common nature of the luxurious, the greedy, or the cruel is described (describere). For instance, if we wish to define the luxurious person, we say, “The luxurious person strives after a way of life that is not necessary, but sumptuous and loaded with goods;luxuriesflowaroundhim,andheiseagerinlust.” These and other things define the luxurious person, but they define by description. This species of definition is more suited to orators than logicians because it offers latitude as to what likeness is applied in good matters and in bad.
6. The fifth species of definition is what in Greek is  8 [ ]?,andinLatinwhatwecall‘gloss’(adverbium). This explains the word for the matter in question
31 The example, from the source in Cassiodorus, seems not to match the definition. The Greek term means “by way of a sketch or outline,” and Quintilian describes the term as a figure by which something is vividly sketched in words: Institutes 9.2.40.
by one other single word, and in a certain way it declares with the single second word what is stated in the single first word, as “conticescere (‘be quiet’) is tacere (‘be silent’).” Again, as we speak of ‘terminus’ as “end,” or as ‘depopulated’ is interpreted to be “devastated.” 7. The Greekscallthesixthspeciesofdefinition  8 " , and in Latin we call it ‘by differentiation’ (per differentiam). Writers on the arts name it ‘on the same and the different’ (de eodem et de altero), as when one asks what isthedifferencebetweena‘king’anda‘tyrant’;whenthe differentia is applied, what each is, is defined; that is, “A king is measured and temperate, but a tyrant impious and harsh.”
8. The seventh species of definition is what the Greeks call  8   , and Latin speakers, ‘by metaphor’ (per translationem), as Cicero in the Topics (32): “A shore is where the waves play.” This can be treated variously; it can be used to admonish, to distinguish, to blame, or to praise. As it may admonish: “Nobility is the burden on descendants of the virtue of their forebears.” As it may distinguish: “The crown of the head is the citadel of the body.” As it may praise: “Youth is the flower of one’s lifetime.” As it may blame: “Riches are the long travelmoney of a shortlife.”9.Theeighthspeciesofdefinition in Greek is called  8    N   , in Latin
‘by the privative of the contrary’ (per privantiam contrarii) of that which is defined: “That is good which is notbad.Thatisjustwhichisnotunjust,”andthelike.We ought to use this kind of definition when the contrary is known, as “If the good is what profits with decency, that which is not such a thing is bad.”
10. The ninth species of definition is called in Greek  8 I! !A, in Latin ‘by a certain outline’ (per quandamimaginationem),as“AeneasisthesonofVenus and Anchises.” This always involves individual items, which the Greeks call O  .31 11. The tenth species of definition is called in Greek  8  , in Latin ‘by analogy’ (iuxta rationem) – as if it were asked what is an animal, and it were answered, “Such as man.” The example clarifies the thing previously asked about – for this is the property of a definition, that it clarify what the thing is that is asked about.
12. The eleventh species of definition is called  ’ !P Q   Q   B  inGreek,inLatin‘by the shortage of the full amount of the same kind’ (per indigentiam pleni ex eodem genere) – as if it were asked what a triens is, and it were answered, “That which is
 
II.xxix.13–xxx.8
short of an as by two-thirds.”32 13. The twelfth species of definition in Greek is  8 ! , that is, ‘by praise’ (per laudem), as Cicero in his Defense of Cluentius (146): “Law is the mind and spirit and counsel and judgment of the citizen body.” And elsewhere (Cicero, Philippics 2.113):“Peaceistranquilfreedom.”Itisalso‘byreproach’ (per vituperationem), which the Greeks call 4 , as (ibid.): “Slavery is the last of all evils, to be repelled not onlybywar,butalsobydeath.”14.Thethirteenthspecies of definition is called  8  R !   in Greek, and ‘by relationship’ (ad aliquid) in Latin, as is this: “A father is a man who has a son,” “A master is a man who has a
slave.”
15. The fourteenth species of definition is  8  R S  (“by definition”), as Cicero on rhetoric (On Invention 1.42): “A ‘genus’ is that which embraces several parts.” Again, “A ‘part’ is what falls under a genus.”33 16. The fifteenth species of definition is called  8 : 7    in Greek, and ‘by the thing’s cause’ (secundum rei rationem) in Latin, as: “Day is the sun over the earth; night is the sun under the earth.”
We should know that the aforementioned species of definitions are rightly linked with the subject of topics, because they are set among certain of its arguments, and are mentioned in several places among the topics. Now let us come to the topics, which are the seats of arguments, the springs of understanding, and the sources of style.
xxx. Topics (De topicis)34 1. Topics (topica) is the discipline of coming up with arguments. The division of topics, or of the commonplaces (locus) with which arguments are expressed, is threefold. Some inhere in the thing itself that is in question; others, which are called ‘effects’ (effectum), are understood to be drawn in a certain way from other matters; others are taken from outside(extrinsecus).Arguments(argumentum)thatinhere inthethingitselfthatisinquestionaredividedintothree. First, from the whole; second, from the part; third, from the known.
2. The argument is ‘from the whole’ when a definition is applied to what is in question, as Cicero says (cf. Defense of Marcellus 26): “Glory is praise rightly won by deeds and renown for great services to the state.” 3. The argument is ‘from parts’ when he who defends himself either denies a deed or makes the defense that the deed was legal. 4. The argument is ‘from a slur’ (a nota)whensomeargumentischosenbecauseoftheforce of a particular term, as Cicero (Against Piso 19): “I was seeking, as I say, a consul – whom I could not find in that gelded boar.”
5. Effects (effectum) are arguments that are known to be drawn in some way from other matters. These are fourteen in number. The first is the argument ‘by cognates’(aconiugatis),asoneadaptsanounandmakes a verb, as Cicero says Verres ‘swept’ (everrere) a province (Second Action Against Verres 2.52). Or a noun from a verb, when a ‘thief’ is said to ‘thieve.’ Or a noun is made from a noun; Terence (cf. Andria 218) –
It is a scheme of lunatics (amentium), scarcely of lovers (amantium) –
where the ending of one term differs, formed in another declension.35 6.Thesecondargumentis‘fromgenerality’ (agenere),whenamaximisspokenconcerningthesame genus, as Vergil (cf. Aen. 4.569):
A changing and inconstant gender.36
7.	The third argument is ‘from the specific’ (ab specie), when a specific thing creates trust in the general question, as (Aen. 7.363):
Did not the Phrygian shepherd thus enter Lacedaemon?
The argument is ‘from likeness’ (a simile) when similitudes of some things are put forward (Aen. 10.333):
Bring close my weapons; my hand will not hurl any at the Rutulians in vain, weapons which stood in Greek bodies on the Trojan plain.
8.	The argument is ‘by differentiation’ (a differentia) when some things are made distinct by difference, as Vergil (Aen. 10.581):
You do not espy the horses of Diomede, or the chariot of
Achilles.
32	The triens is one-third of the weight of the as.
33	NoLatintermisprovidedforthefourteenthspecies.TheGreek, an editorial conjecture, means “by definition” or “by a term in a proposition.” If Isidore wrote here a form of definitio it would easily have been lost by haplography.
34	The name of the discipline, ‘topics,’ derives from the title of Aristotle’s work on commonplaces to be used in argumentation, the Topica. The term derives from the Greek  ! , “place.”
35	Terenceactuallywroteinceptio(“scheme”),notinterceptio.The example Isidore has chosen does not fit his statement.
36	Vergil actually wrote, “A varying and changeable thing is woman always.” Isidore’s paraphrase (Varium et mutabile genus) plays on the two meanings of genus, “gender” and “genus.”
 
The Etymologies	II.xxx.9–xxxi.1
 
Theargumentiscalled‘bycontraries’(acontrariis)when discordant things oppose each other, as Vergil (cf. Aen.
9.95):
Should ships made by mortal hand have the rights of immortals? And traverse uncertain dangers in certainty, Aeneas?
9. The argument is called ‘from consequences’ (a consequentibus) when something inevitably follows on the posited situation, as Vergil (Aen. 1.529):
That violence is not in our mind, nor do conquered people have such pride.
The argument is ‘by antecedence’ (ab antecedentibus) when something is affirmed from things that were done before, as Cicero in Defense of Milo (44): “When he has not hesitated to reveal what he planned, can you have any doubt about what he did?” 10. The argument is ‘by impugning’ (a repugnantibus) when what is objected is demolished by some contrary position, as Cicero (Defense of King Deiotarus 15): “This man, therefore, not only freed from such danger, but enriched with most ample honor, would have wished to kill you at home.” 11. The argument is ‘by cognates’ (a coniugatis)37 when it is shown that what would result from a certain situation is against probability, as Vergil (cf. Aen. 8.147):
They believe that if they drive us away there will be nothing to prevent them from putting all Hesperia utterly under their yoke.
12.Theargumentis‘bycauses’(acausis)whenparticular matters are treated with respect to common custom, as Terence (cf. Andria 582):
For some time I have had my fears about you, worried that you might do what the run of servants do and trick me.
Theargumentis‘byeffects’(abeffectis)whensomething is affirmed as a result of those things which have been done, as Vergil (Aen. 4.13):
Fear betrays ignoble spirits.
13. The argument is ‘by comparison’ (a conparatione) when the reasoning of a statement is formed by imputation from a comparison of persons or cases, as Vergil (cf. Aen. 10.81):
37 The text is evidently corrupt here. See 5 above.
You can take Aeneas from the hands of the Greeks . . . but is it wrong that I in my turn helped the Rutulians in some way?
14. Then there are arguments that are introduced from outside(extrinsecus),whichtheGreekscall  B9 ,that is, ‘without art’ (artis expers), as is ‘testimony’ (testimonium) – indeed testimony consists of the thing itself. 15. This class of arguments is divided into five types: first, ‘by the character’ (ex persona); second, ‘by the authority of nature’ (ex naturae auctoritate); third, ‘by the circumstances of the authorities’ (ex temporibus auctoritatum); fourth, ‘from the sayings and deeds of ancestors’ (ex dictis factisque maiorum); fifth, ‘by torture’ (ex tormentis).
Now the third type above, ‘by the circumstances,’ branches into eight species. The first is intelligence, the second wealth, the third age, the fourth luck, the fifth art, the sixth usage, the seventh necessity, the eighth the coincidence of chance happenings. Testimony is everything that is taken from some external matter in order to carry conviction. Not every sort of person has the gravity of testimony that arouses credence; rather it should be someone esteemed for probity of character. 16. The ‘authority of nature’ holds the greatest strength. Many testimonies confer authority: intelligence, wealth, age, luck, art, usage, necessity, and the coincidence of chance happenings. Trust is sought ‘by the sayings and deeds of ancestors’ when the sayings and deeds of former people are mentioned. Trust is conveyed ‘by torture’; after it no oneisbelievedtobewillingtolie.17.Themattersthatare treated ‘by the circumstances,’ because they are obvious from the terminology, need no definition.
It should be stored in the memory that topics offer arguments in common for orators, logicians, poets, and legal experts. When they apply to an examination of specifics, they pertain to rhetoricians, poets, and legal experts, but when they are used in general disputation they are clearly the business of philosophers. 18. Clearly this is a wonderful kind of achievement, that it has been possible to gather into one whatever the mobility and variety of the human mind could discover as it looked for understanding in diverse subjects, encompassing the free and willful intellect. Indeed, wherever it turns, in whatever thinking it engages, human ingenuity cannot but fall into one of the arguments discussed above.
xxxi. Opposites (De oppositis) 1. There are four types of contraries (contrarium), which Aristotle calls
 
II.xxxi.2–xxxi.8
  , that is, ‘opposites’ (oppositum) because they seem to stand opposing one another as if face to face, as contraries. Still, not all things that are opposed (opponere) to one another are contraries, but all things are opposed by a contrary.38
The first type of contrary is called diverse (diversus) according to Cicero (Topics 35), because these are set againstoneanotherassuchcompleteoppositesthatthey have no part in the things to which they are opposed, as ‘wisdom’ to ‘stupidity.’ 2. This type is divided into three species:somehaveamiddle(medium);somearewithout a middle; and some have a middle but are nevertheless withoutatermforit,unlesseachofthecontrariescreates a term for it. ‘White’ and ‘black’ have a middle term, because often ‘pale’ or ‘dark’ is found between them. 3. Those contraries are without a middle whenever only one of the two opposites occurs at one time, as ‘health’ or ‘sickness.’ There is no middle of these. Then, those contraries of which the middle has no term – as ‘happy, unhappy,’ have the middle, ‘not happy.’
Thesecondtypeofcontrariesisofrelatives(relativus), which are opposed to one another in such a way that they are compared with themselves, as ‘double, single.’ 4. Only this type of opposites is referred to itself, for there is no ‘greater’ unless it is compared with ‘lesser,’ and no ‘single’ unless with ‘double.’ Now one relative is opposed to another in such a way that the thing that is put in opposition may either be part of that to which it is opposed, or be related to it in some way. Hence ‘half’ is opposed to ‘double’ – and is the middle term of that ‘double’ – but is so opposed to it that it is part of thattowhichitisopposed.39 5.Thus‘small’isopposedto ‘great’insuchawaythataspecificsmallthingis‘small’in comparison with the great thing to which it is opposed. The oppositions mentioned above called contraries are so opposed to one another that they are not part of the things to which they are opposed nor related to them in any way. Indeed ‘iniquity’ is a contrary of ‘justice’ such that iniquity is not a part of that same justice, nor is iniquity related to it.
6.	The third type of opposites is possession (habitus) or lack (orbatio). Cicero names this type ‘privation’ (privatio),becauseitshowsthatsomeonepossessed(habere) something of which he has been deprived (privare). Of this type there are three species: the first is ‘in the thing’ (in re), the second ‘in the place’ (in loco), the third ‘at the appropriate time’ (in tempore congruo). ‘In the thing,’ as ‘blindness,’ ‘sight.’ ‘In the place,’ as the place of blindness and sight is ‘in the eyes.’ ‘At the appropriate time,’ as we do not speak of an infant as ‘toothless’ when his brief life so far has denied him teeth. Indeed, he has not been ‘deprived’ of teeth that have not yet erupted.
7.	The fourth type of contrary sets up an opposition‘from an affirmation and a negation’ (ex confirmatione et negatione), as “Socrates disputes, Socrates does not dispute.” This differs from the ones above because those can be spoken singly, whereas these cannot be spoken of except jointly. This fourth type of contrary has aroused muchcontroversyamonglogicians,andbythemiscalled ‘intensely opposite’ (valde oppositum), since indeed it takes no mediating term (tertium). 8. For some of these other oppositions can have a mediating term, as, among the contraries, ‘black’ and ‘white.’ The mediating term of this contrary is neither ‘white’ nor ‘black,’ but ‘dark’ or ‘pale.’ This is the case among relatives also, as ‘many’ and ‘few.’ Of this the mediating term is neither ‘many’ nor ‘few,’ but ‘a middling number.’ In ‘possession’ or ‘lack,’ as ‘sight’ and ‘blindness,’ the mediating term is neither ‘blindness’ nor ‘sight,’ but ‘weak eyes.’ But this one – ‘he reads, he does not read’ – has no mediating term at all.
38	The apparent (proximate?) source, Martianus Capella, is clearer: “Not all things that are opposed to one another are contraries, but all contraries are opposites.”
39	“Half . . . is the middle term of that double” is nonsense; the (proximate?) source in Martianus Capella reads “is the half of what is its double.”
 
Book III Mathematics (De mathematica)
 
Mathematics (Mathematica)
 
The learned body of knowledge that contemplates abstract quantities is called mathematics (mathematica) in Latin. An abstract (abstractus) quantity is something that we investigate (tractare) by reasoning alone, separating it by means of the intellect from matter or from accidental qualities such as even and odd, and other things of this kind. There are four types of mathematics, namely, Arithmetic (arithmetica), Music (musica), Geometry (geometria), and Astronomy (astronomia). Arithmetic is the study of numeric quantity in and of itself. Music is the study that is occupied with the numbers that are found in sounds. Geometry is the study of size and shapes. Astronomy is the study that contemplatesthecourseoftheheavenlybodiesandallthefigures and positions of the stars. We will cover these studies, each in turn, a little more fully, so that their principles can be suitably shown.
i.	Words belonging to the study of arithmetic (De vocabulo arithmeticae disciplinae) 1. Arithmetic (arithmetica) is the study of numbers, for the Greeks call numbers (numerus) . The writers of secular literature would have this discipline be the first among the mathematical disciplines, as this discipline relies on no other for its existence. 2. However, music, geometry, and astronomy, which follow arithmetic, require its support in order to exist and hold their place.
ii.	Originators of mathematics (De auctoribus eius)People say that Pythagoras was the first among the Greeks to commit the study of numbers to writing.
1 Ancientauthorsonbothmathematicsandphilosophyconceived of ‘one,’ or the unity, as a special, indivisible entity from which numbers were formed, but which itself was not a number.
89
Next, the subject was laid out more broadly by Nicomachus. Among the Latin speakers, first Apuleius and then Boethius translated mathematical works.
iii. Whatanumberis(Quidsitnumerus) 1. A number is a quantity that is made of units (unitas), for ‘one’ is the germ of number, but not a number itself.1 The term ‘coin’ (nummus) gave its name to ‘number’ (numerus) and from its pervasiveness, it bestowed the name. ‘One’ (unus)drawsitsnamefromGreek;fortheGreekscallone T (neuter U).Thusitisfor‘two’(duo)and‘three’(tres), which the Greeks call "  and  . 2. ‘Four’ (quattuor) takes up its name from the square (quadratus), but ‘five’ (quinque) did not take its name from nature, but rather from the arbitrary will of the one who bestowed the names upon numbers. ‘Six’ (sex) and ‘seven’ (septem) come from the Greek. 3. For we pronounce an s instead of the rough breathing sound (i.e. the h-sound) in many words that are aspirated in Greek. Thus, we have sex for U? and septem for K! , just as we say serpillum (i.e. a type of thyme) for the herb herpillum. But ‘eight’ (octo) is a direct translation, as we and the Greeks say it the same way. Similarly, they say B, we say novem (i.e. ‘nine’); they say "B and we say decem (i.e. ‘ten’).
4. Now ‘ten’ is said to derive from a Greek etymology, because it binds and conjoins numbers that lie below it, for " (“bond”) means to conjoin or to bind. Furthermore, ‘twenty’ (viginti) is so called because ten
‘occurs twice’ (bis geniti), with the letter v put in place of the b. ‘Thirty’ (triginta) is so called because it arises (gignere) from three (ternarius) tens, and so it goes up to ‘ninety’ (nonaginta). 5. ‘One hundred’ (centum) is so called from ‘iron wheel-tire’ (canthus) because it is circular; ‘two hundred’ (ducenti) comes from ‘two onehundreds’ (duo centum). Thus it is for the remaining
 
III.iv.1–v.8	Isidore of Seville
 
numbers up to one thousand. ‘One thousand’ (mille) comesfrom‘greatnumber’(multitudo),andwhencealso ‘the military’ (militia), as if the word were multitia; and whence also ‘thousands’ (milia), which the Greeks call myriada (i.e. “myriads”), with letters changed.
iv. What numbers do for us (Quid praestent numeri) 1. The reckoning of numbers ought not to be despised, for in many passages of sacred writings it elucidates how great a mystery they hold. Not for nothing it is said in praise of God (Wisdom 11:21), “Thou hast ordered all thingsinmeasure,andnumber(numerus),andweight.” 2.The[number]thatcontainssixunits(senarius),which is perfect in its own parts, declares the completion of the world by a certain signification of its number.2 Likewise for the forty days during which Moses and Elijah and the Lord himself fasted: without an understanding of numbers, the span of days is unintelligible.
3. So also there are other numbers in the Sacred Scriptures whose figurative meaning cannot be resolved except by those skilled in the knowledge of the mathematical art. It is even our lot to depend on the discipline ofnumberstosomeextentwhenthroughitwenamethe hours, when we dispute about the course of the months, and when we recognize the duration of the turning year. 4. Indeed, through numbers, we are provided with the means to avoid confusion. Remove numbers from all things, and everything perishes. Take away the computation of time, and blind ignorance embraces all things; those who are ignorant of the method of calculation cannot be differentiated from the other animals.
v. The first division, of even and odd numbers (De prima divisione parium et inparium) 1. Numbers are divided into even (pars) and odd (impars) numbers. Even numbers are subdivided into these categories: evenly even, evenly odd, and oddly even. Odd numbers are subdivided into these categories: the primary and simple; the secondary and compound; and the tertiary and mean, which in a certain way is primary and non-compound, but in another way is secondary and compound.
2. An even number is one that can be divided into two equal parts, like 2, 4, and 8.3 On the other hand, an odd number is one that cannot be divided into equal parts, since there is one in the middle (i.e. of the two equal parts) that is either lacking or superfluous, like 3, 5, 7, 9 and so on. 3. An evenly (pariter) even number is one that is divided equally into even numbers until it reaches the indivisible unity, as, for example, 64 has 32 at its midpoint; 32 has 16, 16 has 8, 8 has 4, 4 has 2, 2 has 1, which is an indivisible singularity.
4. An evenly odd number is one that can undergo a divisionintoequalparts,butthenitspartscannotimmediately be evenly dissected, like 6, 10, 38, 50. As soon as you divide this kind of number, you run into a number that you cannot cut evenly. 5. An oddly (impariter) even number is one whose parts can be divided equally, but the division does not go to the point of one (unitas), like 24. This number can be divided in half, making 12, and 12 can be divided in half, making 6, and then 6 can be divided in half, making 3. This last section cannot undergo further division, but rather there is a termination that you cannot cut before reaching number one. 6. An oddly odd number is one which is divided by an odd number an odd number of times, like 25 and 49. While these numbers are odd, they are divided into an odd number of parts, so that 49 is seven sevens, and 25 is five fives.
Some odd numbers are simple, some are compound, and some are mean (mediocris). 7. Simple odd numbers (i.e. prime numbers) are those that hold no other part exceptthenumberonealone,asforexamplethenumber 3,whichholdsonly3,andthenumber5,whichholdsonly 5, and the number 7, which holds only 7. These numbers have only a single part (i.e. factor). Compound numbers are those that are divided not only by the number one, but are also generated from another number – such numbers as 9, 15, and 21. So we speak of 3 times 3, or 7 times 3, or 3 times 5, or 5 times 5.
8.Meannumbersarethosethatseemtobesimpleand non-compound numbers in one way, but compound numbers in another. For example, when 9 is compared to 25, it is primary and not compound, because there is no number that divides into both 9 and 25 except the number one only. But if 9 is compared to 15, it is secondary and compound, since there is present in 15
2	On perfect numbers see v.11 below.
3	In this book we often translate Isidore’s term pars as “part,” where a modern equivalent would be “factor.” Isidore and his predecessors conceptualized multiplication not so much as a process that derives a product from factors, but rather as a set of static relationships among numbers.
 
The Etymologies	III.v.9–vi.8
 
a shared number besides the number one, that is, the number three, for 9 is 3 times 3 and 15 is 3 times 5.
9.Furthermore,someoftheevennumbersare‘superfluous,’ some are ‘diminutive,’ and some are ‘perfect.’ Superfluous (superfluus) numbers are those whose parts exceedtheirowntotalwhenaddedtogether,asforexample, 12. 12 has 5 parts: 1, which occurs 12 times; 2, which occurs 6 times; 3, which occurs 4 times; 4, which occurs 3 times; and 6, which occurs twice. Now 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 added together make 16, which by far surpasses 12. Thus it is for 12 and most other numbers similar to it, like 18, and many others. 10. Diminutive (diminutivus) numbers are those which, when computation is made of their parts, render a sum less than the total number, such as 10, which has 3 parts: 1, which occurs 10 times; 2, which occurs 5 times; and 5, which occurs twice. 1 and 2 and 5 added together make 8, well less than 10. Similar to 10 is the number 8, or many other numbers which, when their parts are added together, stop short of the number itself.
11. A perfect (perfectus) number is one that is completely filled up by its own parts, as, for example, 6, for it has 3 parts: 6, 3, and 2. The part that occurs 6 times is 1, the part that occurs 3 times is 2, and the part that occurs 2 times is 3. When these parts are added together, that is, when 1, 2, and 3 are summed up together, they make (perficere, ppl. perfectus) the number 6. Perfect numbers thatoccurwithin10include6;within100,28;andwithin 1000, 496.
vi. The second division of all numbers (De secunda divisione totius numeri) 1. Every number can be regarded either with respect to itself, or with respect to another number. The latter are divided thus: some numbers are equal, others are unequal. The latter are also divided this way: some are major, and some are minor.Majornumbersaredividedthus:multiples(multiplex), superparticulars (superparticularis), superpartients (superpartiens), multiple superparticulars, and multiple superpartients. Minor numbers are divided thus: submultiples, subsuperparticulars, subsuperpartients, submultiple subsuperparticulars, and submultiple subsuperpartients.
2. A number that is taken into account per se is one that is discussed without any sort of relationship, like 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on. A number that is taken into account with respect to another number is one that is compared relative to the other number, as, for example, when 4 is compared to 2, it is called ‘duplex’ (duplex) [and multiple (multiplex)], or when 6 is compared to 3, or 8 to 4, or 10 to 5. Again, when 3 is compared to 1, it is called ‘triplex’ (triplex), or when 6 is compared to 2, or 9 to 3, and so on. 3. Numbers that are equal with respect to quantity are called ‘equal’ (aequalis), as, for example, when 2 is compared to 2, 3 to 3, 10 to 10, and 100 to 100. ‘Unequal’ (inaequalis) numbers are those that show inequality when compared to another number, as when 3 is compared to 2, 4 to 3, 5 to 4, and 10 to 6. At all times, wheneveramajornumberiscomparedtoaminornumber, or when a minor number is compared to a major number, it is said to be ‘unequal.’
4.Amajor(maior)numberisonethatcontainswithin itself the minor number to which it is compared, and something more, as for example, the number 5 is greater thanthenumber3,becausethenumber5containswithin itself the number 3 and two of its parts; and so it is for othersuchcases.5.[Aminor(minor)numberisonethat iscontainedbyamajornumber,towhichitiscompared, along with some portion of itself, as when the number 3 is compared to the number 5. The number 3 is contained by 5, along with two parts of 3.] A multiple (multiplex) number is one that has within itself a minor number twice, or three times, or four, or a multiple number of times(multipliciter).Forexample,when2iscomparedto 1,itisduplex;3comparedtooneistriplex;fourcompared to one is quadruplex, and so on.
6. Opposite to this is the submultiple (submultiplex), a number that is contained within a multiple number twice, or three times, or four times, or a multiple number of times. For example, 1 is contained by 2 twice, by 3 three times, by 4 four times, by 5 five times, and by other numbers a multiple number of times. 7. A superparticular (superparticularis) number is one that, while being the greater number, contains within itself a lesser number, to which it is compared, and one part of the lesser number in addition. For example, when 3 is compared to 2, 3 contains within itself 2 and one other part that is half of 2; or when 4 is compared to 3, 4 contains in itself 3, and one other part, which is a third of 3. Again, when 5 is compared to 4, 5 has within itself the number 4, and one other number, which is said to be a fourth of the number 4, and so on with other numbers.
8. A superpartient (superpartiens) number is one that contains an entire lesser number within itself, and has
 
III.vi.9–viii.1	Isidore of Seville
 
beyond this 2, or 3, or 4, or 5, or more parts of the lesser number.Forexample,when5iscomparedto3,thenumber5haswithinitselfthenumber3,and,inaddition,two parts of 3. When 7 is compared to 4, 7 has in itself 4, and three other parts of 4; when 9 is compared to 5, 9 has withinitself5andfourotherpartsof5.9.Asubsuperpartient (subsuperpartiens) number is one that is contained within a superpartient number, along with two or three ormoreofitsownparts.Forexample,3iscontainedby5 along with two other parts of 3; 5 is contained by 9 along with four other parts of 5.
10. A subsuperparticular number is a minor number that is contained within a greater number along with one other part of itself – whether a half, or a third, or a fourth, or a fifth; as, for example, when 2 is compared to 3, or 3 to 4, or 4 to 5, and so on. 11. A multiple superparticular number is one that, when compared to a number less than itself, contains with itself the entire lesser number multiple times, along with another part of the lesser number. For example, when 5 is compared to 2, 5 contains within itself 2 two times, making 4, along with one part of 2; when 9 is compared to 4, 9 contains within itself 4 two times, making 8, and one other part of 4. 12. [A submultiple [sub]superparticular number is one that, when compared to a number greater than itself, is contained by that number a multiple of times along with one other part of itself; as for example, when 2 is compared to 5, 2 is contained by 5 two times, along with one part of 2.]
A multiple superpartional (superpartionalis) number is one that, when compared to a number less than itself, contains the lesser number a multiple number of times along with some other parts of the lesser number. For example, when 8 is compared to 3, 8 contains within itself 3 two times, plus two other parts of 3. When 14 is compared to 6, 14 contains 6 within itself two times, plus two other parts of 6; [when 16 is compared to 7, 16 contains 7 twice, plus two other parts of 7; when 21 is compared to 9, it contains 9 within itself twice, plus three other parts of 9].
13. A submultiple superpartional number is one which,whencomparedtoanumbergreaterthanitself,is contained by that number a multiple number of times, together with some other parts of itself. For example, when 3 is compared to 8, 3 is contained by 8 two times, plus two parts of 3; when 4 is compared to 11, 4 is contained two times, plus three parts of 4.
vii. The third division of all numbers (De tertia divisione totius numeri) 1. Numbers are either discrete, or continuous.Continuousnumbersaredividedintolinear (linealis), planar (superficialis), or solid (solidus) numbers. A discrete (discretus) number is one that is of separate (discretus) units, as for example 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on. 2. A continuous (continens) number is one that is composed of conjoined units, [as], for example, when the number 3 is understood in terms of its magnitude, that is, in its linear dimension, or is said to be containing (continens) either a space or a solid; likewise for the numbers 4 or 5.
3.Alinear(linealis)numberisonethatbeginsfromthe number one and is written in a linear fashion (linealiter) uptoinfinity.Whencetheletteralphaisusedtomarkthe measure of lines, since this letter signifies ‘one’ among the Greeks (a figure follows in manuscript).4
4. A planar (superficalis) number is one that is composed not only of length, but also of breadth, such as the triangular, quadrangular, pentagonal, or circular numbers, and so on, which always exist in a flat (planus) region, that is, a surface (superficies). Thus the triangular number: (a figure follows in manuscript). Thus the quadrangular number: (fig.). Thus the pentagonal: (fig.). 5. Thus the circular number (i.e. the square of a number), which, since it has been multiplied by like numbers, begins from itself and turns back to itself, as for example 5 times 5 is 25, thus: (fig.).
A solid (solidus) number is one that is consists of length, breadth, and height, like pyramids, which rise up in the manner of a flame: (fig.). 6. Cubes (cubus) are, for example, like dice: (fig.). Spheres (sphaera) have an equal roundness on all sides: (fig.). A spherical number (i.e. the cube of a number) is one that, when multiplied by a circular number, begins from itself and turns back to itself. For example, 5 times 5 is 25. When this circular number is multiplied on itself, it makes a sphere, that is, 5 times 25 is 125.
viii. The differences between arithmetic, geometry, and music (De differentia arithmeticae, geometriae et musicae) 1. There are differences between arithmetic, geometry, and music, in the way that you discover their
4 The illustrations found in early manuscripts show plane figures with alphas along the sides of the figures to indicate their linear measure.
 
means. First, you seek out means in arithmetic in this manner. You add together a low and a high number, you divide them, and you find the mean; take, for example, the low and high numbers 6 and 12: when you join them, they make 18; you divide this at its midpoint, and you make 9, which is an arithmetic proportion, in that the mean exceeds the low number by as many units as the mean is exceeded by the high number. Now 9 exceeds 6 by 3, and 9 is exceeded by 12 by the same amount. 2. But you seek out means in geometry in this way. The beginning and end numbers, when they are multiplied, make as much as the double of their means.5 Take, for example, 6 and 12. When multiplied, they make 72, and their means, 8 and 9, when multiplied make the same amount.6 3. Next, you seek out the means for music in this way. By whatever part the mean exceeds the low number, by the same part the mean is exceeded by the high number. Take, for example, 6 and 8. 8 exceeds 6 by two parts, and these two parts are the third midpoint, [8], which is exceeded by the final ninth.7
ix. How many infinite numbers exist (Quot numeri infiniti existunt) 1. It is quite certain that numbers are ‘withoutlimit’(infinitus),sinceatwhatevernumberyou think the limit has been reached, that same number can be increased – not, I say, by the addition of only one, but however large it is, and however huge a number it contains, by reason and by the science of numbers it can be not only doubled, but even further multiplied. 2. Yet each number is so bounded by its own properties that noneofthemcanbeequaltoanyother.Therefore,numbers are unlike and varied among themselves, and each one in itself is bounded (finitus), but taken all together they are unbounded (infinitus).
5	As the next sentence shows, Isidore means not “double” but “multiple.” Perhaps underlying his lapse is the fact that in arithmetic the sum of the end points is in fact double the sum of their mean.
6	FollowingBoethius,Isidoredescribesaproportionwhosemean (in modern terms) falls between two adjacent integers as possessing two means. In this case, the geometric mean of 6 and 12 in modern terms is the square root of 72, so Isidore describes this proportion as having the two means 8 and 9, whose product is 72.
7	The text appears to be corrupt here. Compare with ch. xxiii below, where Isidore provides a detailed and lucid description of the harmonic mean.
8	In the Timaeus Plato presents five solids, not five planar figures.
III.viii.2–xii.2
x.	Theinventorsofgeometry,anditsname(Deinven-toribusgeometriaeetvocabuloeius) 1.Itissaidthatthe discipline of geometry was first discovered by the Egyptians, because, when the Nile River flooded and everyone’s possessions were covered with mud, the onset of dividing the earth by means of lines and measures gave a name to the skill. And thereupon, when it was greatly perfected by the acumen of wise men, the expanses of the sea, sky, and air were measured. 2. Stimulated by their zeal, these sages began, after they had measured the land, to inquire about the region of the sky, as to how far the moon is from the earth, and even the sun from the moon; and how great a distance there is to the pinnacle of the heavens. And so, using reasoning capable of being tested and proved, they determined the distances of the vault of heaven and the perimeter of the earth in terms of the number of stadia. 3. But becausethedisciplinebeganwithmeasuringtheearth,it retained its name from its origin, for geometry (geometria)takesitsnamefrom‘earth’and‘measure.’InGreek, ‘earth’ is called H and ‘measure’ is B . The art of this discipline is concerned with lines, distances, sizes and shapes, and the dimensions and numbers found in shapes.
xi.	The fourfold division of geometry (De quadriper-tita divisione geometriae) 1. Geometry is divided into four parts: planes (planus), numeric size (magnitudo numerabilis), rational size (magnitudo rationalis), and solid figures (figura solida). 2. Planar figures are those that have length and breadth and are, following Plato, five in number.8 Numeric size is that which can be divided by the numbers of arithmetic. 3. Rational sizes are those whose measures we are able to know, but irrational sizes are those the quantity of whose measures cannot be known.
xii.	Geometrical figures (De figuris geometriae) 1. Solid figures are those that are composed of length, breadth, and height, as for example the cube (cubus). There are five types of figures that exist on a plane. A circle (circulus) is the first of the planar figures, and it is so called from going around (circumducere). It has a point in its middle, on which everything centers, which people call the geometric center, and which Latin speakers call the ‘point of the circle’ (punctus circuli) (a figure follows). 2. A four-sided figure on a plane is called a
 
III.xii.3–xiv.3	Isidore of Seville
 
quadrilateral (quadrilaterus) figure. It lies within four straight lines, thus (fig.). A dianatheton grammon is the plane figure [thus]: (fig.).9 An orthogonium (cf. C, “right”; A, “angle”) is a plane figure with a right angle (fig.). It is a triangle (triangulus), and it has a right angle.
An isopleuros (cf. V , “equal”; !, “side”) is a plane figure; it is upright and constructed from its base (fig.; apparently an isosceles or equilateral triangle). 3. A sphere (sphaera) is a figure fashioned in the round, with all parts equal (fig.). A cube (cubus) is, properly, a solid figure that consists of length, breadth, and height (fig.). 4. A cylinder (cylindrus) is a four-sided figure having a semicircular upper part (fig.).10 5. A cone (conon) is a figure that from a wide base narrows at the top, just like the orthogonium (fig.). 6. A pyramid (pyramidis) is a figure that rises up from a wide base to a point, like a tongue of fire, for ‘fire’ is called !N among the Greeks (fig.). 7. Just as every number is within 10, so the perimeter of every figure is enclosed within the circle
(fig.).11
Thefirstfigureofthisartisthepoint(punctus),which hasnoparts.Thesecondfigureistheline(linea),alength without breadth. A straight (rectus) line is one that lies evenly along its points. A plane (superficies) has length and breadth only. The boundaries of planes are lines. The forms of these are not placed in the preceding ten figures, because they are found among them.12
xiii. Geometric numbers (De numeris geometricae) Youseekoutnumbersaccordingtogeometryinthisway. Beginning and end numbers, when they are multiplied, make as much as the double of their means. Take, for example, 6 and 12. When multiplied, they make 72, and their means 8 and 9 when multiplied make the same amount (see viii.2 above).
[xiv.Expositionoffiguresillustratedbelow(Expositio figuraruminfrascriptarum)13 1. Likewise, one account concerning the motion of stars is gathered together in eight figures. These are the diametric (diametrus), or quadratic (quadratus, i.e. tetragonal), or triangular (trigonus),orhexagonal(hexagonus),orasyndetic(asyndetus),14 or coincident (simul), or circumferent (circumferre), that is, they are either ‘carry to a higher degree’ (superferre) or ‘are carried.’ Diagonals occur when five constellations intervene. Tetragonals (tetragonus) occur when two constellations intervene. Hexagonals occur when there is one. Asyndetic figures occur when no constellations intervene. Coincident figures occur when they are in the same small area. Figures ‘carry to a higher degree’ when they overtake another figure, or cause an action. Figures are ‘carried to a higher degree’ when they precede others. 2. Triangular figures occur when there are three intervening (constellations). Again, according to another account, there are eight differentiae, namely, the constellation (signum), its parts (pars), its boundaries (finis), by the way it is assembled (conventus), by its retrograde or straight paths, its latitude, and its longitude.
3. The calculation of interior shapes.15 This kind of inquiry concerning this point may arise. Although in the sequence of numbers 8 is prior, here one puts 9 first, since in the logic of arithmetic or geometry 8 is more
9	The meaning of dianatheton grammon remains obscure; a proposedemendationdiacathetonmightmean,elliptically,“rectangular figure,” from Greek   , “perpendicular.” The illustrative figure drawn in some early manuscripts seems to indicate a rectangle. See Fontaine 1959: 400–01.
10	The figure Isidore describes is an upright rectangle topped by a semicircle with its flat side down against the rectangle. This rectangle/semicircle figure may be viewed as a two-dimensional representation of a cylinder, the rectangle giving a side view of the cylinder tube, and the semicircle showing the curve of the cylinder.
11	Fontaine explains that Isidore refers to an Augustinian method, as used in arithmetical exegesis, of decomposing large numbers into numbers from one to ten: 1959:383–86, 398–99.
12	That is, the point, line, and plane are illustrated by the manuscript figures of the circle, the various planes, and the solids, respectively.
13	This chapter, found in only one family of manuscripts, is considered by Fontaine (1959:394) to be a collection of disparate fragments composed by followers of Isidore.
14	This truncated account is clarified by the illustrations provided by J. Fontaine (1959: following p. 450), from the Escorial manuscript P.I.6. Five circles are each divided by twelve radii into twelve wedges, and each wedge (in one example, for all) is labeled with the name of a sign of the zodiac. These indicate various relationships among the zodiacal signs by means of figures formed by connecting the points where the radii meet the perimeter of the circle. The circle labeled exagona, for example, connects every second such point, so that the figureofahexagonisformedbythesixsecantssodrawn.Whenevery second point is connected, Isidore considers that there is one intervening sign, i.e. one point intervening between connected points. When every third point is connected (tetragonals), he considers that there are two intervening signs, etc. The other circles are labeled tetragona, trigona, diametra, and asindeton. Manilius’s Astronomy (2.273–432) treats these relationships and their significance.
15	Fontaine (1959:400–11) suggests that sections 3–5 derive from scholia or a commentary on Plato’s Timaeus.
 
III.xiv.4–xvii.3
 
than 9, for 8 is a cube (cubus) or a solid, that is, it is a body of which one can find no more, but 9 is a plane
Music (De musica)
(superficies), that is, it is a thing that is not filled out; rather, it lacks perfection. 4. Here two cubes, that is, two solidities, are found in this manner. The number six is the first perfect number (see v.11 above); for it is divisible into equal numbers, so: divide by one, six parts; into three parts by two – three twos are six; in half, that is three two times, is six. You will find another perfect number that you may divide by equal numbers in this way, which accords with the preceding instance. 5. Within the first numeric order, that is, within 10, on accountofitsbeingthefirstperfectnumber,multiplying with the first turn sixes nine times gives 54; nines six times, 54.16 The material makes so many parts and it is known to have had so many parts not without reason, by twos, and from this it has one in an order such as this: 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8 and other numbers, including 27.]
 
xiv.	Music and its name (De musica et eius nomine)17 1. Music (musica) is the practical knowledge of modulation (modulatio) and consists of sound and song. Music issocalledthroughderivationfromtheword‘Muse,’for theMuses(Musae)werenamedfrom ,thatis,from ‘seeking’,18 because it was through them, as the ancients would have it, that the power of song and the modulation of the voice were sought. 2. Their sound, because it is something perceived by the senses, vanishes as the momentpassesandisimprintedinthememory.Whence came the invention of the poets that the Muses are the daughters of Jupiter and Memory, for unless sounds are held by the memory of man, they perish, because they cannot be written down.
xv.	The inventors of music (De inventoribus eius) 1. Moses says that Tubal, who was of the stock of Cain before the Flood, was the discoverer of the musical art. But the Greeks say that Pythagoras discovered the elements of this art from the sound of hammers and from the striking of taut strings. Others hand down the story that Linus the Theban and Zetus and Amphion were the first to become famous in the musical art. 2. After them, little by little, this discipline especially was regu-
16	This sentence and the remainder of this chapter are obscure and probably scribally corrupt.
17	Several early manuscripts present elaborate figures, of obscure meaning, illustrating various mathematical principles of music. Examples may be found in Lindsay’s edition, and in Fontaine (1959: followingp.450).Presumablybecausehisworkisincomplete,Isidore does not discuss these in his text.
18	The reading  is uncertain. Compare W, “searching,” proposed by Cornutus (first century ce) as the etymon of ‘Muse.’
lated and augmented in many ways, and it became as shameful to be ignorant of music as it was shameful not to be able to read and write. Moreover, music was introduced not only in sacred rites, but also in all celebrations, and in all joyful or sorrowful occasions. 3. Just as hymns were sung in veneration of the gods, there were also hymns to Hymen for weddings, dirges and lamentsatfunerals,allaccompaniedbytheflute.Atbanquets,alyreorcitharawaspassedaround,andaconvivial type of song was performed by each reclining diner in turn.
xvi. The power of music (Quid possit musica) 1. So it is that without music, no other discipline can be perfected, for nothing is without music. Indeed, it is said that the universe itself is composed from a certain harmony of sounds, and that the very heavens turn to the modulations of harmony. Music rouses emotions, and it calls the senses to a different state. 2. In battle, too, the sounding of the trumpet inflames the fighters, and the more ardent its blast, the braver grows the spirit for the contest. Since song urges even rowers on, music also soothes the spirit so that it can endure toil, and the modulation of the voice eases exhaustion from individual labors. 3. Music also calms excited spirits, just as one reads about David, who rescued Saul from the unclean spiritbytheartofmodulation.Musiccallsforththevery beasts to listen to its modulation, even serpents, birds, and dolphins. But further, however we speak, or however we are moved by the internal pulsing of our veins – these things are demonstrably linked, through their musical rhythms, to the power of harmony.
 
III.xviii.1–xx.12	Isidore of Seville
 
xvii.	The three parts of music (De tribus partibusmusicae) 1. Music has three parts, that is, the harmonic (harmonicus),therhythmic(rhythmicus),andthemetric (metricus). The harmonic part is that which differentiates high and low sounds. The rhythmic part inquires about the impact of words, whether the sound agrees well or badly. 2. The metrical part is that which recognizes, by means of a demonstrable system, the measure ofdifferentmeters,asforexampletheheroic,theiambic, the elegiac, and so on.
xviii.	The threefold division of music (De triformimusicaedivisione) 1.Itisacceptedthatallsound,which is the material of song, has three forms by its nature. The first division is the harmonicus, which consists of vocalsong.Theseconddivisionistheorganicus,whichis composed of blowing. The third is the rhythmic (rhythmicus), which takes its measures from the plucking of fingers. 2. For sound is emitted either by the voice, as through the throat, or by blowing, as through a trumpet or a flute, or by plucking,19 as with the cithara, or any other sort of instrument that is melodious when plucked.
xix.	The first division of music, which is called har-monic (De prima divisione musicae quae harmonica dicitur) 1. The first division of music, which is called harmonic (harmonicus), that is, the modulation of the voice, pertains to comedies, tragedies, or choruses, or to all who sing with their own voice. This makes a movement that comes from the mind and body together, and themovementproducesasound,andfromthisisformed the music that in humans is called ‘voice’ (vox). 2. Voice (vox) is air beaten (verberare) by breath, and from this also words (verbum) are named. Properly, voice is a human characteristic, or a characteristic of unreasoning animals. But in some cases, with incorrect usage and improperly, a sound is called a ‘voice,’ as for example
“the voice of the trumpet bellowed,” and (Vergil, Aen.
3.556):
. . . and voices broken on the shore.
For the word proper to rocks on the shore is ‘sound’ (sonare). Also, (Vergil, Aen. 9.503):
But the trumpet far off (made) a terrible sound with its sonorous brass.
Harmonics (harmonica) is the modulation of the voice and the bringing of many sounds into agreement, orfittingthemtogether.3.Symphony(symphonia)isthe blend of modulation made from low and high sounds in agreement with one another, either in voice, or blowing, or plucking. Through symphony, higher and lower voices are brought into harmony, so that whoever makes a dissonant sound offends the senses of the one hearing it. The opposite of symphony is diaphony (diaphonia), that is, when voices are discrepant, or dissonant. 4. Euphony (euphonia) is sweetness of voice. This word and ‘melody’ (melos) take their names from sweetness andhoney(mel).5.Diastema(diastema)istheappropriate vocal interval between two or more sounds. 6. Diesis (diesis) refers to certain intervals that lead the modulationdownward,andmovingdownwardfromonesound into another. 7. Tone (tonus) is the high enunciation of the voice. A tone (i.e. a modal scale) is also the variation and quantity of a mode (harmonia) which consists of vocal accent and tenor. Musicians have divided the tones into fifteen kinds, of which the hyperlydian (i.e. hypolydian) is the last and highest, and the hypodorian is the lowest of all.
8. A song (cantus) is the voice changing pitch, for soundiseven-pitched;andsoundprecedessong.9.Arsis (arsis) is elevation of the voice, that is, the beginning. Thesis (thesis) is lowering the voice, that is, the end. 10. Sweet (suavis) voices are refined and compact, distinct and high. Clear (perspicuus) voices are those that are drawn out further, so that they continually fill whole spaces, like the blaring of trumpets. 11. Delicate (subtilis) voices are those that have no breath, like the voices of infants, women, and sick people, and like plucking on strings. Indeed, the most delicate are the strings of musical instruments, which emit light, refined sounds. 12. Voices are rich (pinguis) when a great deal of breath is sent forth all at once, like the voices of men. A high (acutus) voice is light, and elevated, just as we see in the strings of musical instruments. A hard (durus) voice is one that emits sounds violently, like thunder, or like the soundoftheanvil,whenthehammerstrikesonthehard iron.
19 Latinspeaksofpluckingstringedinstrumentsas‘striking’(percutere, ppl. percussus) the strings; hence such instruments are classed withthepercussions.Organicuscanmean“instrumental”ingeneral, but here it obviously refers specifically to wind instruments.
 
13. A harsh (asperus) voice is hoarse, and uttered with brief irregular beats. A blind (caecus) voice is one that stops short as soon as it is emitted, and being stifled is notprolongedanyfurther,likethesoundofclayutensils. A charming (vinnolus) voice is soft and flexible; and it is so named from vinnus, that is, ‘softly modulated.’ 14. A perfect (perfectus) voice is high, sweet, and distinct: high, so that it can reach the high range; distinct, so that it fills the ears; sweet, so that it soothes the spirits of the listeners. If a voice lacks any of these qualities, it is not perfect.
xx. Theseconddivision,whichiscalledorganicus(De secunda divisione, quae organica dicitur) 1. The second division is organicus, and it is produced by those instruments that, when they are filled with the breath that is blown into them, are animated with the sound of a voice, like trumpets, reed pipes, pipes, organs, pandoria,20 and instruments similar to these. 2. Organum is thegeneralwordforallmusicalinstruments.TheGreeks call that instrument to which bellows are attached by a different name (i.e. X" ), but to call it an organ (organum) is rather the common usage of the Greeks.
3. The trumpet (tuba) was invented first by the Etruscans, about which Vergil says (Aen. 8.526):
And the Etruscan blaring of the trumpets (tuba) bellowed through the air.
Trumpets were employed not only for battles, but also for all festive days, thanks to their clarity in praise or joy. For this reason, the Psalter says (cf. Psalm 80:4, Vulgate), “Singwithatrumpet(tuba)attheonsetofthemonth,on thenoteddayofyoursolemnity”–foritwascommanded for the Jews to sound a trumpet at the onset of the new moon, and they do this even up to this day.
20	The pandorium or pandorius (see section 8 below) is usually in Latin not a wind instrument (pan-pipes?) but a kind of lute, the bandore.
21	The text has ablative Idi. This may be a corruption of Daphnis, ablative Daphnide, the legendary Sicilian inventor of pastoral song Alternatively,itmaybeacorruptionofIdas;theshepherdIdasboasts, in the second Eclogue (28–31) of Calpurnius Siculus (“the Sicilian”), that Silvanus introduced him to the fistula.
22	Isidore nods; he knows that W means “light” (see XV.ii.37, etc.), and that ‘vocal sound’ is A in Greek (VIII.xi.87).
23	Here a symphonia – a word used for several types of instruments – is a kind of flute, but a sambuca in classical Latin is a small harp, and sambucus is the elder-tree.
III.xx.13–xxii.2
4.	People say that flutes (tibia) were invented in Phrygia. For a long time, they were used only at funeral rites, and soon after at other sacred rites of the pagans. Moreover, people think that flutes were so named because at first they were fashioned from the leg-bones (tibia) of deer and the shin-bones of asses. Then, through incorrect usage, they began to be called by this name even when they were not made of shin-bones or other bones. Thus we also get ‘flute player’ (tibicen), as if from tibiarum cantus (“song of flutes”).
5.	‘Reed’ (calamus, i.e. the reed plant, and also a name for a reed-pipe) is the particular name of a tree, and comes from ‘rousing’ (calere), that is, from ‘pouring forth’ voices. 6. Some people think that the fistula (lit. “pipe,” also another name for a reed-pipe) was invented by Mercury, and others by Faunus, whom the Greeks call Pan. And not a few think that it was invented by Idis, a shepherd from Agrigentum in Sicily.21 The fistula is so named because it emits a voice, for voice is E in Greek,22 and   is the word meaning ‘sent forth.’ 7. Among musicians, the sambuca is a type of symphonia.23 It is made of the kind of fragile wood from which flutes are constructed. 8. The pandorius took its name from its inventor, and Vergil says (cf. Ecl. 2.32):
Pan was the first to teach joining many reeds together with wax, Pan whose concern is the flock and the keepers of the flock.
For among the pagans, Pan was the pastoral god, who was the first to fit together reeds of different lengths for the purpose of song, and he put them together with diligent art.
xxi. Thethirddivisionofmusic,whichiscalledrhythmic (De tertia divisione, quae rythmica nuncupatur) 1. The third division of music is called ‘rhythmic’ (rhythmicus), and it pertains to strings and percussion. Different types of cithara belong to this division, and also drums, cymbals, rattles, and bronze and silver vessels, and others that when struck produce a sweet ringing sound from the hardness of their metal, as well as other instruments of this sort.
2. Tubal is reputed to have been the discoverer of the cithara and the psaltery, as was mentioned above. However, according to the opinion of the Greeks it is believed that the use of the cithara was discovered by Apollo. The shape of the cithara is said to have been
 
III.xxii.3–xxiii.1	Isidore of Seville
 
similar to the human chest at first, so that song might be brought forth from the cithara as the voice is brought forth from the chest, and they say it was named for this same reason. 3. For in the language of the Dorian Greeks the chest is called . Little by little, many types of these instruments came into existence, such as psalteries, lyres, barbitons, phoenices and pectides, and those types called Indian, which are plucked by two performers at the same time. Some are made one way, and some another, with either a four-sided or triangular shape. 4. Indeed,thenumberofstringsmultiplied,andtypeswere changed as well. The ancients called the cithara fidicula orfidicen,24 becausethestringsofthisinstrumentagreed together among themselves in the same way as happens amongthosewhohavetrust(fides).Thecitharainantiquity had seven strings. Whence it is said in Vergil (Aen.
6.646):
. . . the seven different notes.
5. Vergil speaks of differences because no string gives a sound like that of the neighboring string. But there are seven strings either because they fill out the entire vocal range, or because heaven resonates with seven motions. 6. Strings (chorda) are so called from ‘heart’ (cor, gen. cordis)becausethethrobbingofthestringsinthecithara is like the throbbing of the heart in the chest. Mercury contrived them first, and he was the first to pluck sound from musical strings. 7. The psaltery (psalterium), which iscommonlycalledcanticum(lit.“song”),takesitsname from ‘singing to the psaltery’ (psallere), because the chorus responds in harmony with the voice of the psaltery. It has a characteristic shared with the foreign cithara, being in the shape of the letter delta; but there is this difference between the psaltery and the cithara, that the psaltery has the hollowed wooden box from which the sound resonates on its top side, so that the strings are struck from underneath and resonate from above, but the cithara has its wooden sound-box on the bottom. The Hebrews used the ten-string psaltery on account of the number of laws of the Decalogue.
8. The lyre (lyra) is so called from the word @ (i.e. “speak frivolously”), that is, from ‘variety of voices,’ because it renders diverse sounds. They say that the lyre wasfirstinventedbyMercuryinthefollowingway.When the Nile was receding into its channels, it left behind various animals on the plains, and a tortoise was one that was stranded. When it decomposed, and its tendons remained stretched out in the shell, it made a sound when Mercury plucked it. Mercury made a lyre of this shape and handed it over to Orpheus, who was by far its most zealous student. 9. Whence it is thought that by his art he controlled not only wild beasts but also the rocks and the woods by the modulation of his song. On account of his love of musical pursuits and praise of song, musicians have imagined, in the fictions of their tales, his lyre as being located among the stars.
The tympanum is a skin or hide stretched over one end of a wooden frame. It is half of a symphonia (i.e. another type of drum – see section 14 below and cf. xxi.7 above), and looks like a sieve. 10. The tympanum is so named because it is a half, whence the half-pearl is also called a tympanum. Like the symphonia, it is struck with a drumstick. 11. Cymbals (cymbalum) are certain vessels that make a sound when they are struck by touching one another. Cymbals are so called because they are struck simultaneously when there is dancing (ballematia), for the Greeks say  for “with” and  for “dancing.”
12. Sistrums (sistrum, i.e. a kind of metallic rattle) are namedaftertheirinventor,forIsis,anEgyptianqueen,is thoughttohaveinventedthistypeofinstrument.Juvenal says (Satires 13.93):
May Isis strike my eyes with her angry sistrum.
Whence women play these instruments, because the inventor of this type of instrument was a woman. Whence also it is said that among the Amazons, the army of women was summoned to battle by sistrums. 13. The tintinabulum takes its name from the sound of its voice, just like the ‘clapping’ (plaudere) of hands, and the ‘creaking’ (stridor) of hinges. 14. The symphonia in common usage is the name for a hollow wood instrument with hide stretched over both ends. Musicians strike them on both sides with drumsticks, and make a very melodious sound from the consonance of the high and low pitches.
xxii. Musical numbers (De numeris musicis) 1. You find numbers with respect to music in this way (see viii.3 above). When the high and low numbers have been set, as, for example, 6 and 12, you see by how many units 6 is exceeded by 12, and that is by 6 units.
24 In classical Latin fidicen means “lyre-player”; the lyre was fides.
 
III.xxiii.2–xxx
 
Astronomy (De astronomia)
You make this number into a square, and 6 six times makes 36. You add together the low and high numbers that you first took, 6 and 12, and together they make 18. You divide 36 by 18, and it makes 2. You add this to the low number, that is, 6, and it comes to 8. 8 is the mean between 6 and 12. Wherefore 8 exceeds 6 by two units, that is, a third of 6, and 8 is exceeded by 12 by four units, a third of 12. Thus, the high number exceeds the mean by the same proportion as the low number is exceeded by the mean. 2. But just as this proportion in the universe derives from the revolution of the spheres, so even in the microcosm it has such power beyond mere voice that no-one exists without its perfection and lacking harmony. Indeed, by the perfection of this same art of Music, meters are composed of arsis and thesis, that is, by rising up and setting down.
 
xxiv.	The name of astronomy (De astronomiaenomine) Astronomy (astronomia) is the law (cf.  , “law”)ofthestars(aster),which,byinvestigativereasoning, touches on the courses of the constellations, and the figures and positions of the stars relative to each other and to the earth.
xxv.	The inventors of astronomy (De inventoribuseius) 1. The Egyptians were the first to discover astronomy. However, the Chaldeans were the first to teachastrology(astrologia)andobservationsconcerning nativities. But the author Josephus asserts that Abraham instructed the Egyptians in astrology. The Greeks say that this art was earlier conceived by Atlas, and that is why he was said to have held up the sky. 2. Yet whoever the inventor was, he was stirred by the movement of the heavensandpromptedbythereasoningofhismind,and through the changing of the seasons, through the fixed and defined courses of the stars, through the measured expanses of their distances apart, he made observations ofcertaindimensionsandnumbers.Bydefininganddiscerning these things, and weaving them into a system, he invented astrology.
xxvi.	Those who established astronomy (De institu-toribus eius) In both languages, there are indeed volumes that have been written by diverse writers about astronomy. Among these writers, Ptolemy, the king of Alexandria,25 is thought to excel among the Greeks, for he established the canons whereby the courses of the stars are discovered.
25	IsidoreisconfusingClaudiusPtolemy(secondcenturyce)with the Ptolemys who ruled Egypt.
26	An illustration may have been planned at this point.
xxvii.	The difference between astronomy and astrol-ogy (De differentia astronomiae et astrologiae) 1. There is some difference between astronomy and astrology. Astronomy concerns itself with the turning of the heavens, the rising, setting, and motion of the stars, and where the constellations get their names. But astrology is partly natural, and partly superstitious. 2. It is natural as long as it investigates the courses of the sun and the moon, or the specific positions of the stars according to the seasons; but it is a superstitious belief that the astrologers (mathematicus) follow when they practiceaugurybythestars,orwhentheyassociatethetwelve signsofthezodiacwithspecificpartsofthesoulorbody, or when they attempt to predict the nativities and characters of people by the motion of the stars.
xxviii.	Astronomical reckoning (De astronomiae ratione) There are several kinds of astronomical reckoning.Indeed,itdefineswhattheworldis;whattheheavens are; what is the position and course of the sphere; what is the axis of the heavens and the pole; what are the zones of the heavens; what are the courses of the sun and the moon and the stars, and so on.
xxix.	The world and its name (De mundo et eiusnomine) The world (mundus) is that which consists of the heavens, the earth, the seas, and all of the stars. The world is so named, because is it always in motion (motus), for no rest is granted to its elements.
xxx.	The shape of the world (De forma mundi) The shapeoftheworldisshowninthisway.26 Justastheworld is raised up toward the northern region, so it declines toward the south. Its head and its face, as it were, is
 
III.xxxi.1–xl	Isidore of Seville
 
the eastern region, and its furthest part is the northern region.
xxxi.	The sky and its name (De caelo et eius nomine)1. The philosophers have said that the sky (caelum, “sky, heaven, the heavens”) is rounded, spinning, and burning; and the sky is called by its name because it has the figures of the constellations impressed into it, just like an engraved (caelare) vessel. 2. God distinguished the sky with bright lights, and he filled it with the sun and the gleaming orb of the moon, and he adorned it withbrilliantconstellationscomposedofglitteringstars. In Greek the sky is called  L from QY, that is, from “seeing,” from the fact that the air is clear and very pure for seeing through.
xxxii.	Thepositionofthecelestialsphere(Desphaeraecaelestis situ) 1. The sphere of the sky is a certain shape that is round in form, and its center is the earth, which is equallyenclosedonallsides.Theysaythatthisspherehas neitherabeginningnoranend,andthisissobecauseitis round, just like a circle, and it may not easily be comprehended at what point it begins, or where it ends. 2. The philosophers have proposed seven heavens belonging to the universe, that is, seven planets, from the coordinated motion of their spheres. They hold that everything is connected to the orbital paths of these planets, and they think that the planets are interconnected and in a way inserted within one another, and that they turn backwards and are carried by a motion that is opposite to the other heavenly bodies.
xxxiii.	The movement of this same sphere (De eius-dem sphaerae motu) 1. The movement of the sphere is caused by its turning on two axes, one of which is the northern, which never sets, and is called Boreus; and the other is the southern axis, which is never seen, and is calledAustronotius.2.Theysaythatthesphereofheaven moves on these two poles, and with its movement, the stars,whicharefixedinit,maketheircircuitfromtheeast to the west, with the northern stars completing shorter circular courses next to the turning point.
xxxiv.	The course of the same sphere (De eiusdemsphaerae cursu) The sphere of heaven turns from east to west once in the span of a day and night, consisting of twenty-four hours, during which the sun, in its own revolution, finishes its own course over the earth and under it.
xxxv.	The speed of the sky (De celeritate caeli) The sphere of heaven is said to run with a swiftness so great that if the stars did not run against its headlong course to delay it, it would make a ruin of the universe.
xxxvi.	The axis of heaven (De axe caeli) The northern axis is a straight line that stretches through the center of the ball of the sphere. It is called ‘axis’ (axis, i.e. “axle”) because the sphere turns on it, as though it were a wheel; or because the Wain (i.e. Ursa Major) is there.
xxxvii.	The celestial polar regions (De caelestibuspolis) The polar regions are circles that run around the axis. One of them is the northern, which never sets, and is named Boreus. The other is the southern, which is never visible, and is called Austronotius. They are called ‘polar regions’ (polus) because they are circles around the axis, after the usage of a wagon, named specifically from ‘polishing’ (polire) – but the polar region Boreus is always visible and Austronotius never, because the right side of the heavens is higher, and the southern side is pressed down.
xxxviii.	Thepolesoftheheavens(Decardinibuscaeli)The poles of the heavens are the extreme parts of the axis. They are called ‘poles’ (cardo, lit. “pivot”) because the heavens are turned on them, or because these poles are turned as if they were the heart (cor).
xxxix.	The vaults of heaven (De convexis caeli) The vaults (convexum) of the heavens are its edges, so called from their ‘curvature’ (curvitas), as in this line (source unidentified):
As often as the humid night enclosed the curved (convexus) heavens.
For a vault is ‘curved’ (curvus), as if the word were conversus (i.e. “upside down”), and sloping downward, and bent in the manner of a circle.
xl.	The doorways of heaven (De ianuis caeli) Heaven has two doorways, the eastern and the western. The sun proceeds from one portal, and another portal receives it.
 
xli.	The twin faces of the sky (De gemina facie caeli)The face of the sky, or its head, is the eastern region, and thefurthestpartisthenorthernregion.27 Lucansaysthis about it (Civil War 4.106):
Thus lies the deepest part of the world, which the snowy Zone and perpetual winters oppress.
xlii.	The four parts of heaven (De quattor partibuscaeli) 1. The regions (clima) of heaven, that is, the expanses or parts of it, are four in number, the first of which is the eastern, the region from where some stars rise. The second is the western, where, from our perspective,somestarsset.Thethirdisthenorthernregion, where the sun goes when the days are longer. The fourth is the southern, where the sun goes when the nights are longer. 2. The east (oriens) is the named for the rising (exortus) of the sun. The west (occidens) is so named because it makes the day perish (occidere, also meaning “set”) and come to an end, for it takes the light from the world and brings on shadows. The north (septentrio) axis is so called from the seven (septem) stars, which, revolving about it, wheel around. This properly is also called the ‘vertex’ (vertex), because it turns (vertere). 3. The southern (meridies) zone is so called, either because the sun spends the middle of the day (medius dies) there, asthoughthewordweremedi-dies,orbecausetheupper air is more pure there, for merus is the word for ‘pure.’
4. There are seven other regions in heaven, as if seven lines come from the east and end in the west. Under them, the disparate characters of humans and animals of diverse species are produced. They are named after certain famous places; the first is Merois; the second Syene; the third Catachoras, that is Africa; the fourth is Rhodes; the fifth, Hellespont; the sixth, Mesopontum; and the seventh, Borysthenes.
xliii. The hemispheres (De hemisphaeriis) A hemisphere (hemisphaerion) is a half part of a sphere. The
27	Here and in ch. xxx above Isidore attempts to reconcile views that orient the universe in different ways.
28	The primary sense of zona is “belt, girdle.”
29	Z appears to be a corruption of :, “equinoctial.”
30	Fontaine (1959:490) suggests that Isidore here imagines the zodiac as the ecliptic circle. This circle, conceived of as “one line” in planar projection, itself cuts at equal angles across the five parallel lines of the major circles: the equatorial, tropical, and polar circles.
III.xli–xlvii
hemisphere that is above the earth is all that part of the sky that is seen by us; the hemisphere under the earth is the part that cannot be seen as long as it is under the earth.
xliv.	The five circles of heaven (De quinque circuliscaeli) 1. There are five zones (zona) in the heavens, and based on their differences, certain regions are inhabited due to their temperate climate, and certain regions are uninhabitable from the brutality of the cold or heat. They are called zones or ‘circles’ (circulus) because they consist of a circular band (circumductio) of the sphere.28 2. The first of these circles is called   (i.e. “arctic”), because the conspicuous constellations called Arctos (i.e. the Bears) are enclosed within it. The second circle is called R   ! (i.e. “summer tropic”) because in this circle the sun makes it summer when it is at its northern limit, and it does not travel beyond this circle, but rather turns back at once. Whence it is called   ! (cf.   !, “turning”). 3. The third circle is called Z, and is called ‘equinoctial’ (aequinoctialis) by Latin speakers, because the sun, when it goes across to this zone, makes the day and night equal length (aequinoctium) – for the term Z means ‘day and night’ in Latin.29 The central part of the sphere is seen to be made up of this band. The fourth circle is called    (i.e. “antarctic”) because it is opposite to the circle that we call  . 4. The fifth circle is called 9R   ! (i.e. “winter tropic”). It is called ‘winter’ (hiemalis) or brumalis (i.e. another word for “winter”) by Latin speakers, because when the sun travels to this circle, it makes winter for those who are in the north, and summer for those who live in the southern regions.
xlv.	The circle of the zodiac (De zodiaco circulo) The circle of the zodiac (zodiacus circulus) consists of five angles made from lines, and one line.30
xlvi.	Thebrightcircle(Decandidocirculo) The Milky Circle (lacteus circulus, i.e. the Milky Way) is the road seen in the sphere of the sky, named for its brightness (candor), because it is white. Some people say that this road is where the sun makes its circuit, and that it shines from the splendor of the sun’s transit.
xlvii.	The size of the sun (De magnitudine solis) The size of the sun is greater than that of the earth, whence
 
III.xlviii–liv.1	Isidore of Seville
 
at that very moment when it rises, it appears equally at the same moment to a person in the east and to a person in the west. However, because it seems one cubit long to us, we need to consider how far the sun is from the earth, the distance that makes the sun seem small to us.
xlviii.	The size of the moon (De magnitudine lunae)The size of the moon is said to be less than that of the sun. Since the sun is higher than the moon, and yet it still seems larger than the moon from our perspective, if the sun were to come close to us, it would be obvious how much larger the sun is than the moon. Indeed, just as the sun is larger than the earth, so the earth is greater than the moon by a certain quantity.
xlix.	The nature of the sun (De natura solis) Since the sunisfiery,itgrowshotterduetotheexcessivemovement of its revolution. The philosophers say that its fire is nourished by water, and it receives the power of its light and heat from that opposing element. Whence we often see the sun moist and dewy.
l.	The course of the sun (De cursu solis) 1. The sun moves under its own power, and does not turn with the universe. If it were to remain fixed in the heavens, every day and night would be of equal length; but since we see that it will set in a different place tomorrow, and that it hadinadifferentplaceyesterday,itappearsthatitmoves throughitsownpower,anddoesnotturnalongwiththe universe. Furthermore, the sun makes its annual orbits with unequal intervals, on account of the changing of the seasons. When the sun rises, it makes the day; when it sets, it brings on the night. 2. Wandering farther to the southitmakeswinter,sothattheearthgrowsfertilewith wintry moisture and frost. When it approaches closer to thenorth,itbringssummerback,sothatcropsgrowfirm in ripeness, and what was unripened in damp weather mellows in its warmth.
li.	The effect of the sun (De effectu solis) 1. When the sun rises, it creates the day, and when it sets it brings on the night, for day is the sun over the earth, and night is the sun under the earth. The hours come from it: the day comes from the sun when it ascends: the night comes from it when it sets. The months and the years are numbered by it, and the changing of the seasons is caused by it. 2. When the sun runs across the south, it is the closer to the earth; but when it is near the north, it is raised higher in the sky.
[Thus God made diverse locations and seasons for the sun’s course, so that it does not consume everything with its daily heat by always tarrying in the same place. But, as Clement said, “The sun takes diverse paths, by means of which the temperature of the air is meted out according to the pattern of the seasons, and the order of its changes and permutations is preserved. Thus when the sun ascends to the higher reaches, it tempers the spring air; when it reaches its zenith, it kindles the summer heat; dropping again it brings back the temperance of autumn. But when it goes back to the lowest orbit, it bequeaths to us from the icy framework of the sky the rigor of winter cold.”]31
lii.	Thepathofthesun(Deitineresolis) Thesun,when it rises, holds a path through the south. Afterward, it goes to the west and plunges itself into the Ocean, and it travels unknown paths under the earth, and once again runs back to the east.
liii.	The light of the moon (De lumine lunae) 1. Some philosophers say that the moon has its own light; that one part of its orb emits light and the other is dark [thus: (a figure follows)] and that by gradually turning itself it makes different shapes. 2. Others maintain on the contrary that the moon does not have its own light, but is illuminated by the rays of the sun, and for this reason undergoes an eclipse when the earth’s shadow comes between it and the sun. [For the sun is located higher than the moon. Hence it happens that when the moon is beneath the sun, the upper part of the moon is lighted, but the lower part, which is facing the earth, is dark.]
liv.	The shapes of the moon (De formas lunae) 1. The first shape of the moon has two horns, thus: (a figure follows). The second [has] a section, [thus:] (fig.). The
31 The quotation is from Rufinus Tyrannius’s translation of the Clementine Recognitions, 8.45. A circular figure follows in some early manuscripts. It has in its center the words medium mundi, i.e. the “center of the universe,” and around it the stations of the sun are written thus: “here is the sunrise on the nativity of the Lord; the sixth hour of the day; sunset on the nativity of the Lord; sunset on the equinox; sunset on the nativity of John; perpetual midnight; sunrise on the nativity of John; here is the sunrise on the equinox.”
 
thirdhasahalf,thus:(fig.).Thefourthisfull,thus:(fig.). The fifth is half again, [from the full side], thus: (fig.). The sixth is a section again, thus (fig.). The seventh is two-horned, thus: (fig.). 2. The seventh lunar day, when the moon is a half, and the twenty-second, when it is a half, are the midpoints of its orbit (fig.), and the other days are proportional.
lv.	Interlunar intervals (De interluniis) The interlunar interval of the moon is the time between the waning and the waxing moon. This is the thirtieth day, when the moon does not shine. At that time the moon cannot be seen, because it is in conjunction with the sun and darkened. But it is seen the moment it is reborn by moving gradually away from the sun.
lvi.	The path of the moon (De cursu lunae) 1. The moon measures out the span of a month in its alternations of losing and receiving light. Therefore, it proceeds on an oblique path, not a straight one like the sun, indeed, lest it fall into the central plane of the earth and frequentlyundergoeclipse.2.Foritscircularpathisclose to theearth.Whenitiswaxing,itshornslooktotheeast, and when it is waning they look to the west, and justly so, since it is about to set and lose its light.
lvii.	Theproximityofthemoontotheearth(Devicini-tate lunae ad terras) The moon is nearer to the earth than the sun is. Whence, due to its shorter orbit, it completes its course more quickly, for the journey that the sun completes in 365 days the moon runs through in thirty days. Whence the ancients established months based on the moon, and years based on the course of the sun.
lviii.	Eclipse of the sun (De eclipsi solis) An eclipse of the sun occurs whenever the moon, on the thirtieth lunar day, comes to that line where the sun travels, and by interposing itself before the sun, conceals it. Thus to us the sun appears to vanish when the orb of the moon is set before it.
lix.	Eclipseofthemoon(Deeclipsilunae) 1.Aneclipse of the moon occurs whenever the moon runs into the
32 Isidore himself is among those who do not observe these differentiae.
III.liv.2–lxv
shadow of the earth. The moon is thought not to have its own light, but to be illuminated by the sun; hence it disappears if the earth’s shadow comes between it and the sun. 2. This happens to the moon on the fifteenth lunar day, until it leaves the central part and the shadow of the intervening earth and sees the sun, or is seen by the sun.
lx.	The differences between stars, star clusters, andconstellations (De differentia stellarum, siderum, et astrorum) 1.Stars(stella),starclusters(sidus),andconstellations(astrum)aredifferentfromeachother.Thusa star is any individual body, but star clusters are made up of several stars, such as the Hyades and the Pleiades. 2. Constellations are large patterns of stars, such as Orion and Bootes. But writers confuse these terms, and use astrum instead of stella, and stella instead of sidus.32
lxi.	The light of stars (De lumine stellarum) Stars are said not to possess their own light, but to be illuminated by the sun, as the moon is.
lxii.	Thelocationofthestars(Destellarumsitu) Stars areunmovingand,beingfixed,arecarriedwiththeheavens in perpetual motion. They do not set during the day, but they are obscured by the brightness of the sun.
lxiii.	Thecourseofthestars(Destellarumcursu) Stars are either carried or move. The ones that are fixed in the sky and turn with the sky are carried. But some [like] planets, that is, ‘wanderers,’ move. However, they carry out their roaming courses within a defined boundary.
lxiv.	The changing course of the stars (De vario cursustellarum) Because they are carried across the various orbits of the heavenly planets, some stars rise earlier and set later, while others rise later and reach the point of setting sooner. Some rise together but do not set at the same time. But all return to their proper course in their own time.
lxv.	The distances between the stars (De stellarumintervallis) Thestarsdifferfromeachotherintheirdistance from the earth, and for this reason they appear unequal to our eyes, being either brighter or less bright. Thus many stars are larger than the ones that we see as
 
III.lxvi.1–lxxi.7	Isidore of Seville
 
prominent,butsincetheyaresetfurtheraway,theyseem small to us.
lxvi.	The orbital number of the stars (De circularinumero stellarum) 1. The orbital number of stars is that number by which it is said that one may know how long a given star takes to complete its orbit, going either by longitude or by latitude. 2. For the moon is said to completeitsorbiteachyear,Mercuryeverytwentyyears, Lucifer every nine years, the sun every nineteen years, Vesper every fifteen years, Phaethon every twelve years, and Saturn every thirty years.33 When these periods of time have passed, they return to repeat their orbit across the same signs and regions. 3. Some stars become irregular when they are hindered by the sun’s rays, becoming retrograde or stationary, according to what the poet recalls when he says (cf. Lucan, Civil War 10.201):
The sun divides the seasons of time: it changes the day to night, and by its powerful rays prevents the stars from proceeding, and delays their roaming courses by its ordering.
lxvii.	Planets (De stellis planetis) Certain stars are called planets (planeta), that is, ‘wandering ones,’ because they range through the entire cosmos with a varying motion. It is because of their wandering that theyarecalledretrograde,orarerenderedirregularwhen theyaddorsubtractorbitaldegrees.Whentheypullback only they are called retrograde, and they make a ‘station’ (statio) when they stand still.
lxviii.	Precession and antegrade motion of stars (Depraecedentia et antegradatione stellarum) Precession (praecedentia), or antegrade motion, of stars occurs when the star seems to drive its own motion, and precedes (praecedere) something beyond what is usual.
lxix.	Recession or retrograde motion of stars (Deremotione vel retrogradatione stellarum) Recession (remotio), or retrograde motion, of stars occurs when a star, although driving its own motion, at the same time seems to move backward.
lxx.	The standing of stars (De statu stellarum) A standing (status) of stars occurs when, although a star alwaysmoves,itneverthelessseemstostandstillinsome places.
lxxi.	The names of the stars and the reasons forthese names (De nominibus stellarum, quibus ex causis nomina acceperunt) 1. The sun (sol) is so named because it appears alone (solus), with all the constellations obscured by its brilliance. The moon (luna) is so named as if the word were Lucina, but with the middle syllableremoved.Concerningthis,Vergilsays(Ecl.4.10): Chaste Lucina, show favor . . .
2. It has taken this name by derivation from the light (lux, gen. lucis) of the sun, because it receives light from the sun, and gives off what it has received. 3. Stars (stella) are named from ‘standing’ (stare), because they always stand fixed in the sky and do not fall. Indeed, when we seewhatlookslikestarsfallingfromthesky,thesearenot stars, but little pieces of fire fallen from the aether. They are produced when the wind, seeking higher altitudes, drags the aetherial fire with it, and with this dragging the fire mimics falling stars. Stars are not able to fall, since they are immobile, as has been said earlier, and are carried with the sky since they are fixed in it.
4. Constellations (sidus) are so named because sailors ‘take bearings on’ (considerare) them when they set their course, lest they be led elsewhere by deceptive waves and winds. And for that reason some stars are called signs (signum), because sailors observe them in steering their rowing, taking note of their keenness and brightness, qualities by which the future state of the sky is shown. 5. But everyone pays attention to them for predicting the qualities of the air in the summer, winter, and spring seasons, for by their rising or setting in specific places they indicate the condition of the weather.
6. The first of the signs is Arctos, which, fixed on the pole, rotates with its seven stars revolving around it. Its name is Greek (i.e. O  , “bear”), and in Latin it is called the Bear (Ursa). Because it turns like a wagon, we callittheSeptentriones(i.e.septem,“seven”+triones).7. For triones, strictly speaking, are plowing oxen, so called because they tread (terere) the soil, as if the word were teriones. Their proximity to the pole causes them not to set, because they are on the pole.
33 Of course the morning star, Lucifer, and the evening star, Vesper, are both actually the planet Venus. Emendation of Vesper to
Pyrois (= Mars) has been proposed, but Isidore elsewhere identifiesPhaethon see lxxi.18–21 below and
Vesper with Mars. On these and
V.xxx.6–7.
 
The Etymologies	III.lxxi.8–lxxi.22
 
8. Arctophylax (i.e. the “bear-keeper”) is so named because it follows Arctos, that is, the Great Bear. People have also called this constellation Bootes, because it is attachedtotheWain(cf.bos,“ox,”whichdrawsawagon;  E , “plowman”). It is a very noticeable sign with its many stars, one of which is Arcturus. 9. Arcturus is a star located in the sign of Bootes beyond the tail of the Great Bear. For this reason it is called ‘Arcturus,’ as if it were the Greek O    L (i.e. “tail of the bear”), because it is located next to the heart of Bootes. It rises in the season of autumn. 10. Orion shines in the south,infrontofthetracksofTaurus.Itisnamed‘Orion’ from urine (urina), that is, from a flood of waters, for it rises in the winter season, and troubles the sea and the land with waters and storms. 11. Latin speakers call this constellation the Jugula (cf. iugulum, “throat,” with a figurative sense “slaughter”) because it is armed, as if it has a sword, and is terrible and very brilliant in the light of its stars. If all of its stars are shining, then calm weatherisforecast,butiftheirsharpnessisblunted,then a storm is understood to loom.
12. The Hyades are named from the Greek X (i.e. theverb“rain”),thatis,frommoisture(sucus)andrains, for ‘rain’ in Greek is I , and the Hyades make rain when they rise. Whence also Latin speakers have named them Suculae, because when they arise, signs of rain are evident. Concerning them Vergil says (Aen. 1.744):
Arcturus and the rainy Hyades.
They are seven stars, in the forehead of Taurus, and they rise in the spring season. 13. The Pleiades (Pliades) are named from their plural number (pluralitas), because the Greeks name plural number from !@   (i.e. “most”). They are seven stars, in front of the knees of Taurus; six of them are visible and the seventh is hidden. Latin speakers call them Vergiliae, as an indication of the season when they arise, which is spring (ver). By their setting they show the winter, by their rising the summer, and they are the first to show the season for sailing.
14. The Dog Star (canicula stella), which is also called Sirius, is in the center of the sky during the summer months. When the sun ascends to it, and it is in conjunction with the sun, the sun’s heat is doubled, and bodies are affected by the heat and weakened. Hence also the ‘dog days’ are named from this star, when purgings are harmful. 15. It is called the ‘Dog’ (canis) Star because it afflicts the body with illness, or because of the brightness (candor) of its flame, because it is of a kind that seems to shine more brightly than the others. It is said they named Sirius so that people might recognize the constellaion better.
16. A comet (cometa) is a star, so named because it spreads out the ‘hair’ (coma) of its light. When this type of star appears it signifies plague, famine, or war. 17. Comets are called crinitae in Latin, because they spread theirflameslikehair(crines).TheStoicssaythatthereare morethanthirtycometswhosenamesandeffectscertain astrologers have written about. 18. Lucifer (i.e. Venus as morning star) is so named because it carries light (lucem ferre) more than the other stars. It is one of the planets. It is appropriately called Iubar (lit. “radiance”) because it emits a mane (iuba) of light, but the ‘splendor’ of the sunandmoonandstarsisalsocallediubar,becausetheir rays extend like a mane.
19. Vesperus (i.e. Venus as evening star) is a western star. People maintain that its name is taken from Hesperus, a king of Spain. It brings in the night and follows the sun, and is itself one of the five planets. It is said that this star turns into the morning star when it rises and the evening star when it sets. Concerning this Statius says (Thebaid 6.241):
And the one is derived from the other’s rising.
20.Planetsarestarsthatarenotfixedintheskyastherest are,butarecarriedthroughtheair.Theyarecalled‘planets’ (planeta) from the word !, that is, ‘wandering,’ for sometimes they are carried to the south and sometimes to the north, and they are often carried against the cosmos, and sometimes with it. Their Greek names are Phaethon, Phaenon, Pyrion, Hesperus, and Stilbon. 21. The Romans have consecrated them with the names of their gods, that is, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. Themselves deceived, and wishing to deceive others into the worship of those who had granted them something in accordance with their desires, they would point out the stars in the sky, and say that this one was Jupiter’s and that one was Mercury’s, and this vain belief was born. The devil strengthened this erroneous belief, and Christ overturned it.
22. Next, those constellations that are called signs (signum) by the pagans, in which the image of living beings is formed from stars, such as Arctos, Aries, Taurus, Libra and others of this type. In their study of the
 
III.lxxi.23–lxxi.39	Isidore of Seville
 
constellations these people, prompted by superstitious folly, imposed the shape of a body on the configuration of stars, making their appearance and names conform, through certain characteristics, to those of their gods. 23. Hence the first sign – through which, as also through Libra, people draw the middle line of the cosmos – they have named Aries (i.e. the Ram) on account of Ammon Jupiter,34 because those who made the idols fashioned the horns of a ram on his head. 24. The pagans placed this sign first among their signs because they say that the sun travels in this sign in the month of March, which is the beginning of the year. But they likewise place Taurus among the constellations, and this one also is in honor of Jupiter, because according to myth he was changed into a bull when he carried off Europa.
25. They also set Castor and Pollux after their death amongthemostnoteworthyconstellations;theycallthis sign ‘Gemini.’ 26. They named Cancer likewise, because when the sun reaches this sign in the month of June, it moves backward in the manner of a crab (cancer) and makes the days shorter. This animal has no definite forepart, but heads to either side, so that the front part becomes the back and the back becomes the front. 27. Hercules killed an enormous lion in Greece and set it among the twelve signs as a mark of his own valor. When the sun reaches this sign, it gives excessive heat to theworld,andcausestheannualEtesianwinds.28.They located the sign Virgo among the constellations because on the days when the sun runs through it the earth is parched by the heat of the sun and bears nothing, for this is the season of the dog days.
29.	They named Libra from the equal balance of thismonth because on September 24 the sun makes the equinoxwhilerunningthroughthissign.WhenceLucan also says (Civil War 4.58):
To the scales of just Libra.
30.	They named Scorpio likewise, and Sagittarius,because of the lightning bolts that fall in this month. Sagittarius is a man misshapen by having the legs of a horse, and they added a bow and arrow (sagitta) to him to indicate the lightning of his month; hence the sign is called Sagittarius. 31. They imagined the figure of Capricorn (i.e. “goat-horn”) among the constellations because of the goat that was Jupiter’s nurse. They made the rear part of its body in the image of a fish to indicate the rains of this season, which usually occur plentifully towards the end of this month. 32. Furthermore, they named Aquarius and Pisces from the rainstorms of that season, because in the winter, when the sun travels through these signs, more rain falls. And the mindlessness of the pagans is to be marveled at; they set not only fish, but even rams and goats and bulls, bears and dogs andcrabsandscorpionsintothesky.Further,becauseof the stories about Jupiter, they also located an eagle and a swan among the constellations of the sky, for the sake of his memory.
33. The pagans also believed that Perseus and his wife Andromedahadbeenreceivedintotheheavensafterthey died, and so they traced out their images in stars and did not blush to name these constellations after them. 34. They even set the charioteer Ericthonius among the stars of the sky, because they recognized him as the first to yoke a four-horse chariot. They marveled that his genius extended to an imitation of the sun (i.e. as charioteer), and on this account placed his name, after he died, among the constellations. 35. So it was with Callisto, daughter of King Lycaon, since according to legend she had been ravished by Jupiter and changed by Juno into a bear, which is O   in Greek; after her death Jupiter transferred her name, along with that of his son by her, into the Septentriones, and called her Arctus and her son Arctophylax (see sections 6–9 above). 36. Thus Lyra was placed in the sky on Mercury’s account, and thus the centaur Chiron, because he reared Aesculapius and Achilles, was counted among the stars.
37. But whatever the type of superstition with which they have been named by men, the stars are nevertheless things that God created at the beginning of the world, and he set them in order that they might define the seasons by their particular motions. 38. Therefore, observations of the stars, or horoscopes, or other superstitions thatattachthemselvestothestudyofthestars,thatis,for the sake of knowing the fates – these are undoubtedly contrary to our faith, and ought to be so completely ignored by Christians that it seems that they have not been written about. 39. But some people, enticed by the beauty and clarity of the constellations, have rushed headlongintoerrorwithrespecttothestars,theirminds blinded, so that they attempt to be able to foretell the results of things by means of harmful computations, which is called ‘astrology’ (mathesis).
34 The god Ammon, equated with Jupiter, was depicted as a ram.
 
The Etymologies	III.lxxi.40–lxxi.41
 
Not only those learned in the Christian religion, but also Plato, Aristotle, and others among the pagans, were moved by the truth of things to agree in condemning this in their judgment, saying that a confusion of matters was generated by such a belief. 40. For if humans are forced towards various acts by the compulsion of their nativity, then why should the good deserve praise, and why should the wicked reap the punishment of law?
And although these pagan sages were not devoted to heavenly wisdom, nevertheless they rightly struck down these errors by their witness to the truth. 41. But clearly that order of the seven secular disciplines was taken by the philosophers as far as the stars, so that they might draw minds tangled in secular wisdom away from earthlymattersandsetthemincontemplationofwhatis above.
 

 
Book IV Medicine (De medicina)
 
 
i.	Medicine (De medicina) 1. Medicine is the art that protects or restores the body’s health; its subject matter concerns illnesses and wounds. 2. To medicine belong not only things practiced by the skill of those properly called physicians (medicus), but also matters of food and drink, clothing and shelter. Ultimately, it consists of every defense and fortification by means of which our body is preserved [healthy] in the face of external blows and accidents.
ii.	The term ‘medicine’ (De nomine eius) The term ‘medicine’ (medicina) is thought to be drawn from ‘moderation’ (modus), that is, temperateness, in that medicine is applied not in full measure but little by little. Indeed, nature grieves at excess and rejoices at restraint. Hence those who drink potions and remedies copiously and unceasingly are troubled. Anything that is immoderate brings not health but danger.
iii.	The inventors of medicine (De inventoribusmedicinae) 1. Among the Greeks, Apollo is considered the author and discoverer of the art of medicine. His son Aesculapius expanded the art, whether in esteem or in effectiveness, 2. but after Aesculapius was killed by a bolt of lightning, the study of healing was declared forbidden, and the art died along with its author, and was hiddenforalmostfiftyyears,untilthetimeofArtaxerxes, king of the Persians. Then Hippocrates, a descendant of Asclepius (i.e. Aesculapius) born on the island of Cos, brought it to light again.
iv.	The three schools of medicine (De tribus haeresibus medicorum) 1. These three men established as many schools. First the Methodical school, which advocates remedies and charms, was founded by Apollo. Second,theEmpiricalschoolwasfoundedbyAesculapius;it is the most grounded in experience and depends not on thesymptomaticsignsbutonexperimentalresultsalone. Third, the Logical – that is, rational – school, founded by Hippocrates. 2. For by investigating the characteris-
109
tics of age, region, or type of illness, he deeply probed the study of the art in a rational way, so that he might use it to examine the causes of diseases with the application of reason: [he searched out cures by reasoning]. So theEmpiricistsadvocateexperiencealone;theLogicians add reasoning to experience; the Methodicians take no account of reasoning from principles, nor of circumstances, ages, and causes, but only of the actual diseases.
v.	The four humors of the body (De quattuor humoribus corporis) 1. Health is integrity of the body and a balance of its nature with respect to its heat and moisture,whichisitsblood–hencehealth(sanitas)isso called,asifitweretheconditionoftheblood(sanguis).2. All the sufferings of the body are covered by the general term ‘illness,’ because the ancients used the term illness (morbus) in order to point with this word to the power of death (mors), which is born from illness. The mean between health and illness is treatment, and unless it fits the disease it fails to bring health.
3.	All diseases come from the four humors, that is,from blood, bile, black bile, and phlegm. [By these, healthy people are governed, and feeble people are stricken, for when they increase beyond their natural course they cause sickness.] Just as there are four elements,sotherearefourhumors,andeachhumorresembles its element: blood resembles air, bile fire, black bile earth, and phlegm water. And as there are four elements, so there are four humors that maintain our bodies.
4.	Blood took its name from a Greek origin, becauseit is made vigorous, is nourished, and lives. The Greeks gave choler its name because it ends in the space of a day; hence it is called ‘cholera,’ that is, ‘little bile,’ being an effusion of bile – for the Greeks call bile 9 . 5. Black bile(melancholia)issocalledbecauseitisalargeamount of bile mixed with the dregs of black blood, for in Greek black is B and bile is 9 . 6. Blood (sanguis) is so called in Latin because it is sweet (suavis); hence people who are dominated by blood are sweet-tempered and pleasant. 7. They gave phlegm its name because it is cold,
 
IV.vi.1–vi.19	Isidore of Seville
 
for the Greeks call coldness  . Healthy people are governed by these four humors, and feeble people are afflicted as a result of them, for when they increase beyond their natural course they cause sickness. Acute sufferings, which the Greeks call C?B, arise from blood andbile,whereasfromphlegmandblackbilecomelongstanding conditions, which the Greeks call 9.
vi. Acute illnesses (De acutis morbis) 1. An C?@ is an acute illness that either passes quickly or kills rather quickly, such as pleurisis, or phrenesis, for in Greek C? means acute and swift.  is a prolonged illness of the body that lingers for a long time, such as gout or consumption, for 9  in Greek means time. Some afflictions have taken their name from their own causes. 2. Fever (febris) is named from heat (fervor), being an abundance of heat. 3. Frenzy (frenesis) is named either from an impediment of mind – for the Greeks call the mind B –orfromthesufferers’gnashingtheirteeth, since frendere is grinding of teeth. It is a disturbed state, accompanied by agitation and dementia, caused by an onslaught of bile. 4. Cardiaca takes its name from the heart (cor, gen. cordis), as the condition when the heart is afflicted by some fear or sorrow, for the Greeks call the heart ". It is a suffering of the heart accompanied by terrible fear.
5. Lethargy (lethargia) is named after the word for sleep (cf. , “drowsiness”). It is an overpoweringofthebrain,accompaniedbyforgetfulnessandincessant sleep like that of one who is snoring. 6. Synanchis is so called from constraint of breath and choking, for the Greeks say 9 for “constrain.” Whoever suffers from this ailment is choked by a pain in the throat. 7. Phleumon is a heat in the stomach accompanied by swelling and pain, [or   is feverishness accompaniedbyflushedskin,pain,spasm,hardness,andwasting away]. Fever follows the onset of phleumon, whence it is also called  , from B, that is, “causing inflammation.” Thus it took its name from the way it feels. 8. Pleurisy (pleurisis) is a sharp pain in the side accompanied by fever and bloody sputum. The side is called ! inGreek,andfromthisthepleuriticaffliction took its name. 9. Peripleumonia is an affliction of the lungs accompanied by severe pain and gasping, for the Greeks call the lungs !A, and the disease is named after this. 10. Apoplexy (apoplexia) is a sudden effusion of blood on which one chokes and dies. It is called apoplexy because sudden death occurs from its fatal stroke, and the Greeks call a stroke !!?. 11. Spasm (spasmus) in Latin is the sudden contraction of body parts or sinews, accompanied by severe pain. They say that this affliction is named after the heart, which contains the principal seat of our vitality. Spasm occurs in two ways, from surfeit or from emptiness.
12. Tetanus (tetanus) is a severe contraction of nerves from the neck to the back. 13. Telum (lit., “weapon”) is a pain in the side, so called by physicians because like a sword it whips through the body with pain. 14. Ileos is a pain of the intestines, whence they are also called ilia. In Greek ilios1 means “wrap around,” seeing that the intestines twist around themselves because of the pain. Intestines in this condition are also called turminosus, from their torment (tormentum). 15. [ϒ "   is fear of water, for the Greeks call water X"A and fear  ; hence Latin speakers also call this lymphaticus from fear of water (cf. lympha, “water”). It is caused either by the biteofarabiddogorfromitsfrothcastupontheground. If a human or beast should touch this foam he is either filled with madness or becomes rabid. 16. A carbuncle (carbunculus) is so called because at first it glows red, like fire, and then turns black, like an extinguished coal (carbo).
17. Pestilence is a contagion that as soon as it seizes on one person quickly spreads to many. It arises from corrupt air and maintains itself by penetrating the internal organs. Although this generally is caused by powers in the air, it never occurs without the consent of almighty God. 18. It is called pestilence (pestilentia) as if it were pastulentia, because it consumes (depascere, ppl. depastus) like fire, as (Vergil, Aen. 5.683):
The pestilence descends on the entire body.2
Again,contagion(contagium)isfrom‘touching’(contingere), because it contaminates anyone it touches. 19. The swellings (inguen) (i.e. of bubonic plague) are so called from their striking the groin (inguen). Pestilence is also called plague (lues), so called from destruction (labes) and distress (luctus), and it is so violent that there is
1	The text appears to be corrupt here. Greek :, : means “intestinal obstruction.” The Greek verb : means “wrap around.”
2	Vergiluses‘pestilence’heremetaphoricallytodescribetheburning of a Trojan ship.
 
no time to anticipate life or death, but weakness comes suddenly together with death.
vii. Chronic	illnesses	(De	chronicis	morbis) 1.
Chronicdisease(chronia)isanextendedillnessthatlasts for a long time, like gout or consumption, for 9  in Greek means “time.” 2. Headache (cephalea) has its name for a good reason, for it is an affliction of the head, and the Greeks call the head . 3. Scothomia takes its name by association, because it brings sudden darkness (cf.   , “darkness”) to the eyes, accompanied by vertigo of the head. Vertigo (“spinning”) occurs whenever the wind rises and sends the earth into a spin. 4. Similarly in the human vertex the arteries and veins produce turbulence from the release of moisture, and make a spinning sensation in the eyes; from this spinning, vertigo is named.
5. Epilepsy (epilemsia) took its name because it hangs over the mind as much as it possesses the body, and the Greeks call ‘hanging over’ !4. It arises from the melancholy humor, whenever it has been excessive and has moved into the brain. This ailment is also called ‘falling sickness’ (caduca), because the person ill with it falls (cadere) down and suffers spasms. 6. Common people call epileptics ‘lunatics’ (lunaticus), because they think that the insidious forces of demons follow them in accordance with the course of the moon (luna). They are also called ‘possessed by spirits’ (larvaticus, cf. larva, “an evil spirit”). It is also called the ‘comitial disease,’ that is, a major and divine illness by which epileptics are possessed. Its force is such that a strong person suffering from it falls down and froths at the mouth. 7. It is called comitial because among the pagans, when it occurred on any day of assembly (comitium), the assembly was dismissed. Among the Romans there was a regular day of assembly on the first day of January. 8. Mania (mania) is so called from insanity or madness, for the ancient Greeks used to call madness , either because of their unbalanced state, which the Greeks called manie,3 or from divination, because @ in Greek means “to
3	The text appears to be corrupt here; we find no manie with this meaning in Greek. Greek  means the same as the Latin mania.
4	Isidore here alludes to the front, middle, and back of the brain as traditionally conceived.
5	Latin splen is borrowed from Greek !; Latin lien is cognate with both; all three words mean ‘spleen.’
IV.vii.1–vii.23
divine.” 9. Melancholy (melancholia) is so called from blackbile,fortheGreekscallblack, B,andbile, 9 . Now epilepsy arises in the imagination, melancholy in the reason, and mania in the memory.4
10. Typus is a cold fever, and is improperly called tipus after the name of a plant that grows in the water. In Latin typus means “form” or “state.” It is a cycle of accesses andrecessions(i.e.offever)acrossfixedintervalsoftime. 11. Rheum (reuma) in Greek is called eruption (eruptio) ordischarge(fluor)inLatin.Catarrh(catarrhus)isacontinual discharge of rheum from the nostrils; it is called hoarseness (9 ) when it reaches the throat, and !  when it reaches the chest or lungs. 12. Coryza occurs whenever a draining from the head reaches the bones of the nose, and causes irritation accompanied by sneezing, whence it takes the name coryza (cf. ;, “nasaldischarge”).13.Branchosisachokingofthethroat caused by a cold humor, for the Greeks call the gullet, which the throat surrounds, 9 , and we incorrectly call it brancia. 14. Hoarseness (raucedo) is a loss of voice;itisalsocalledarteriasisbecauseitmakesthevoice hoarse and tight from damage to the windpipe (arteria). Wheezing (suspirium) got that name because it is a difficulty with inhaling, and the Greeks call it "! , that is, choking. 15. Peripleumonia took its name from the lungs (pulmo), for it is a swelling of the lungs accompanied by an effusion of bloody foam. 16. Haemoptysis (haemoptois) is an issuing of blood through the mouth; hence it got its name, for T means “blood.”
17. Consumption (tisis, i.e. phthisis) is an ulceration and swelling in the lungs, which is usually contracted moreeasilybyyoungpeople.Itiscalled  (lit.“wastingaway”)amongtheGreeks,becauseitinvolvesa‘wasting away’ (consumptio) of the entire body. 18. Cough (tussis) is named after the term for ‘depth’ in Greek, because it comes from deep in the chest, as opposed to higher in the throat, where the uvula tickles. 19. Apostem(apostoma)gotitsnamefrom‘abcess,’fortheGreeks call abcesses apostomas. 20. Empiesis (enpiis) is so called from‘abcesswithin’(apostomaintrinsecus),eitherinthe side or in the stomach, accompanied by pain, fevers, coughing, and copious frothing and purulence. 21. The disease hepaticus took its name from an affliction of the liver, because the Greeks call the liver \!. 22. Lienitis (lienosis) took its name from the spleen (splen), for the Greeks call the spleen (lien) !.5 23. Dropsy (hydropis) took its name from the aqueous humor of
 
IV.vii.24–viii.11	Isidore of Seville
 
the skin, for the Greeks called water X"A. It is a fluid below the skin, accompanied by swelling distention and fetid exhalation. 24. Nephrosis (nefresis) took its name fromillnessofthekidneys,fortheGreekscallthekidneys  .
25. Paralysis (paralesis) is so called from damage to the body caused by excessive chilling, occurring either in the entire body, or in one part. 26. Cachexia (cacexia) tookitsnamefrominjury[orcondition]ofthebody,for the Greeks called an unfortunate malady 9?. This disease is caused by a sick person’s intemperance, or by pooradministrationofmedicaltreatment–oritisaslow recovery following an illness. 27. Atrophy (atrofia) took itsnamefromawastingofthebody,fortheGreekscallan abstention from nourishment   . It is a weakness ofthebodyduetohiddencausesandslowconvalescence. 28. Sarcia is an excessive increase in flesh, by which a body grows fat beyond measure, for the Greeks call flesh  (i.e. ?).29.Sciatica(sciasis)isnamedafterthe part of the body that gives trouble, for the Greeks call the bones of the hip joints, whose tips reach to the edge of the pelvis, :9. This condition is caused by phlegm, whenever it descends into the vertical bones and causes glutination. 30. The Greeks say that gout (podagra) was named after its swelling of the feet (cf. ! , gen. ! ", “foot”) and its deadly pain. Indeed, we incorrectly call anythingthatisharsh‘brutal’(agrestis;asifpodagrawere ! "- + agrestis).
31. The disease arthritis (artriticus) drew its name from affliction of the joints (articulus). 32. A cauculus is a stone that occurs in the bladder, and it took its name from that (i.e. calculus, “pebble”). It is formed from phlegmatic matter. 33. Strangury (stranguria) is so called because it constricts (stringere), causing difficulty in passing urine (urina). 34. Satyriasis (satiriasis) is continualsexualdesireaccompaniedbyerectionofthenatural places (i.e. the genitals). This affliction is named after satyrs. 35. Diarrhea (diarria) is a continual flow from the bowels without vomiting. 36. Dysentery (disinteria) is a ‘separation of a continuity,’ that is, an ulceration of the intestine, for dis- means “separation” and intera means “intestines.”Itoccursfollowingthatdischargewhichthe Greeks call " . 37. Lientery (lienteria) is so called because it causes food to slide through the smoothness (lenis) of the intestines (cf.	  , “gut”), as it were, without any blockage. 38. The disease colic (colica) got its name from the intestine, which the Greeks call W  (i.e.  ). 39. Rhagades (ragadia) are so called because fissures are gathered in the wrinkles (ruga) around the anal orifice. These are also called hemorrhoids (emorroida) from their discharge of blood, for the Greeks call blood T.
viii. Illnesses that appear on the surface of the body (De morbis qui in superficie corporis videntur) 1. Alopecia (alopicia) is a loss of hair with a yellowing of the surrounding hair so that it has a bronze shade. It is called by this name from its resemblance to a little fox, which the Greeks call E!?. 2. Parotids (parotida) are areas of hardness or accretions that emerge in the vicinity of the ears, caused by fever or something else, whence they are called !A ", for ]  is the Greek word for ears. 3. Lentigo is a small speckling of spots in the form of a round, so called from its resemblance to a lentil(lenticula).Latinspeakerscallerysipelas(erisipela) ‘sacred fire’ – speaking in antiphrasis, as it should be cursed – inasmuch as the skin grows flame-red on its surface. Then neighboring places are invaded by a corresponding redness, as if by fire, so that a fever is raised. 5.Serpigo(serpedo)isarashaccompaniedbyprotruding pustules, and it took its name from ‘creeping’ (serpere), because it creeps over the limbs. 6. Impetigo (impetigo) is a dry scurf, rising from the skin with a rough surface in a round patch – the common word for this is sarna.
7. Prurigo is so called from burning up (perurere) and flaming.8.Nyctalopia(nyctalmos)isadiseasethatdenies sight to one’s open eyes during the day and returns it when darkness comes at night – or, as many people would have it, gives sight by day and denies it by night (nox, gen. noctis). 9. Warts (verruca) are one disease, satyriasis is another.6 Warts occur one at a time, whereas satyriasis consists of one more prominent blemish with many others around it. 10. Scabies and lepra (i.e. leprosy or psoriasis): either affliction presents a roughness of the skin with itching and scaliness, but scabies is a mild roughnessandscaliness.Scabiestookitsnamefromthis, in that it sheds its scabs, for the word scabies is as if it weresquamies(“scaliness”).11.Butlepraisascalyroughness of skin like the pepperwort (lepida herba), whence it took its name. At one time its color turns black, at another, white, at another, red. In the human body lepra
6 ‘Satyriasis,’ treated in vii.34 above, is here probably a mistake for a word like ‘phthiriasis.’
 
is recognized in this way: either when its various colors appear in different places among the healthy parts of the skin, or when it spreads all over, so that it makes the whole skin one color, although it is abnormal.
12.Thediseaseelefantiacusissocalledfromtheresemblance to an elephant – whose innately hard and rough skin gave its name to what is a disease in humans – becauseitmakesthesurfaceofthebodyliketheskinofan elephant, or because the disease is massive, like the same animal from which it derives its name. 13. The Greeks name jaundice (hicteris, i.e. ictericus) after the name of a certain animal that is of the color of bile. Latin speakers call this ‘rainbow-colored disease’ (morbus arcuatus) from its resemblance to the rainbow (arcus) – but Varro says it is to be called aurigo (i.e. aurugo) after its gold (aurum) color. People think that jaundice is called the royal(regius)diseasebecauseitmayfairlyeasilybecured with good wine and regal (regalis) food. 14. Cancer (cancer, lit. “crab”) is named from its resemblance to the sea animal. As physicians say, its lesion can be cured by no medication, and therefore the part of the body where it has arisen is customarily amputated, so that the body may live somewhat longer. However, death, even if it has been delayed, will come.
15. A furuncle (furunculus) is a tumor that rises to a point, so called because it is inflamed (fervere), as if the wordwerefervunculus.HenceinGreekitiscalled O? (lit. “charcoal”), because it is inflamed. 16. Ordeolus is a very small purulent accretion located in the eyelashes, broad in the middle and thinner on either side, resembling a grain of barley (hordeum), and from this it took its name. 17. Oscedo is a disease in which the mouth (os) of an infant develops sores, so called from the weariness of those who yawn (oscitare). 18. A frenusculus is an ulcer around the opening of the mouth, similar to ulcers in draft animals that are caused by the roughness of the bit (frenum). 19. An ulcer is putrefaction itself. A wound (vulnus) is so called because it is made by a weapon, as if it were ‘by violence’ (vis). And an ulcer (ulcus) is so called because it smells (olere), as if the term were olcus; hence also the plural formulcera. 20. A pustule (pustula) is a swelling or accretion on the surface of the body.
21.Apimple(papula)isaverysmallbumpontheskin, surroundedbyred–thuspapula,asifitwerepupula(i.e. “pupil of the eye”). 22. Fistula (syringio). . . . Sanies is so called because it arises from blood (sanguis), for blood is turned intosanies by the kindled heat of a wound. Sanies
IV.viii.12–ix.7
occurs nowhere but where blood has come, because nothing that grows putrid could putrefy unless it were hot and moist, which blood is. Sanies and tabes (i.e. two kinds of fluid produced by putrefaction) differ from eachotherinthatsaniesisadischargefromlivingpeople, tabes from the dead. 23. A scar (cicatrix) is the covering of a wound, preserving the natural color of the affected parts. It is so called because it covers the wound and hides (obcaecare) it.
ix. Remedies and medications (De remediis et medicaminibus) 1. The curing power of medicine should not be scorned, for we recall that Isaiah ordered something medicinal for Hezekiah when he was failing, and the apostle Paul said to Timothy that a moderate amountofwineisbeneficial.2.Thetreatmentofdiseases fallsintothreetypes:pharmaceutics(pharmacia),which Latin speakers call medication (medicamen); surgery (chirurgia),whichLatinspeakerscall‘workofthehands’ (manuum operatio) – for ‘hand’ is called 9 by the Greeks (cf. also	 , “work”); and regimen (diaeta), whichLatinspeakerscallrule(regula),thatis,thecareful observance of a regulated way of life. And every treatment has these same three characteristics: first, regimen; second, pharmaceutics; and third, surgery. 3. Regimen is thecarefulobservanceofaregulatedwayoflife.Pharmaceutics is treatment by medication. Surgery is incision by iron tools, for by the iron blade those things that have not responded to the medicinal power of pharmaceutics are cut out.
4. More ancient medicine was practiced using herbs andpotionsalone.Thepracticeofhealingbeganbyusing such things, and later started using the blade and other medications. 5. All treatment is applied by use either of opposites or of similarities. By means of opposites, as cold is applied to hot, or moist to dry – just as in a human pride cannot be cured unless it be cured by humility. 6. By means of similarities, as a round bandage is put on a round wound and an oblong bandage on an oblong wound – for the bandaging itself is not the same for all limbs and wounds, but a similar is suited to a similar. These two treatments make their types of assistance clear through their names. 7. The Greek word ‘antidote’ (antidotum) means ‘derived (datum) from the opposite’inLatin,foroppositesarecuredbyoppositesin accordance with the methodology of medicine. On the other hand there is treatment by similarity, as indicated
 
IV.ix.8–xi.6	Isidore of Seville
 
by the term ! (i.e. “remedy, bitter thing”), which is translatedas‘bitterness’(amara)becauseitstasteisbitter (amarus).Amaragotitsnameappropriately,becausethe bitterness (amaritudo) of disease is usually resolved by bitterness.
8.Allmedicationshavetheirnamesduetoappropriate reasons. The remedy hiera is so called as if it were ‘holy,’ (cf. , “holy”). Arteriace, so called because it is suitable for the channel of the gullet and alleviates swellings in the throat and windpipe (arteria). Tyriaca is an antidote made from snakes (cf. , “of venomous beasts”) that expels venom, so that poison is resolved by poison. Cathartics (catarticum) in Greek are called purgatives (purgatorium) in Latin. 9. Catapotia, because a little is drunk (potare) or swallowed down. Diamoron got its name from the juice of the mulberry (morum), from which it is made; likewise diacodion, because it is made from the poppy-head (codia; cf. E", “poppyhead”),thatis,fromthepoppy;andsimilarlydiaspermaton, because it is made from seeds (cf. !B, “seed”). 10.Electuariumissocalledbecauseitmeltsinthemouth. Lozenge (trociscos) is so called because it is shaped like a wheel, for in Greek   9 means “wheel.”
Collyria echoes a Latin word, because it clears flaws in the eye (oculus). Epitima, because it is administered ‘on top of’ (cf. !-, “upon”) other remedies that precede it. 11. Poultice (cataplasma), because it is only a covering. A plaster (inplastrum, i.e. emplastrum) because it is applied(inducere).Anemollient(malagma),becauseitis softened (macerare, and cf. mollis, “soft”) and absorbed without the use of fire (ignis). Enema (enema) in Greek is called ‘loosening’ (relaxatio) in Latin. A pessary (pessarium) is so called because it is put inside.
12.AcertainGreek,Chiron,inventedmedicalpractice for draft animals. For this reason he is pictured as half man, half horse. He was named Chiron from the term 9; (i.e. “operate by hand”), because he was a surgeon (chirurgus). Physicians speak of certain days as critical (creticus, cf.  ); I believe this name was assignedtothemwithregardtothejudgment(cf.cernere, ppl. cretus, “decide, determine”) of an illness, because they pass judgment, as it were, on a person, and either punish or free the person with their sentence.
x.	Medical books (De libris medicinalibus) 1. An aphorism (aphorismus) is a short saying that describes the entire meaning of the matter under consideration.
2.Aprognostic(prognosticon)isatreatiseontheforeseeing of the progression of diseases, so called from ‘foreknowing’(praenoscere),foraphysicianshouldrecognize the past, know the present, and foresee the future.7 3. A dinamidia describes the power of herbs, that is, their force and capability. In herbal medicine, potency itself is called ", whence also the books where herbal remediesareinscribedarecalleddinamidia.A‘botanical treatise’ (butanicum, i.e. botanicum, cf.  , “herb”) about plants is so called because plants are described in it.
xi.	The instruments of physicians (De instrumentismedicorum) 1. An enchiridion is so called because it is gripped in one’s hand while it contains many iron instruments, for in Greek, ‘hand’ is called 9.8 2. The lancet (phlebotomum, i.e. phlebotomus) is named from incision, since incision is called    in Greek. 3. Similaria . . . Angistrum . . . Spatomele . . . A ‘cupping glass’ (guva), which is called a ‘gourd’ (cucurbita) by Latin speakers for its resemblance to one, is also called ventosa (lit. “wind-like”) from its hiss. In brief, when it is livened in its breath (i.e. when the air within it is heated) by a small flame, it is immediately positioned so that it completely covers the place on the body where a cut has been made, which then heats up under the skin or deeper and draws either a humor or blood to the surface. 4. Clistere . . . Mortar (pila) from crushing (pisere, i.e. pinsere) seeds, that is, grinding them up. From this also‘crushedherbs’(pigmentum),becausetheyaremade (agere) in a mortar and with a pestle (pilum), as if the word were piligmentum. A mortar is a concave vessel suited to use by physicians, in which, properly, grains are usually ground for tisanes and herbs for drugs are crushed. 5. But Varro reports that there was a certain Pilumn[i]us in Italy who was first to grind (pinsere) the crop, whence [also] the terms ‘miller’ (pilumnus) and ‘baker’(pistor).Thereforeboththemortar(pila)andthe pestle (pilum), by which grain is crushed, were invented by this man, and are named after his name. The pestle is what crushes whatever is placed in the mortar. 6. The mortarium (“mortar”) is so called because seeds
7	Isidore may refer here to the collections of Hippocrates, the Aphorisms and the Prognostic.
8	The usual meaning for enchiridion is “handbook,” but Isidore here clearly refers to some kind of instrument case.
 
already desiccated (mortuus) and reduced to powder are tempered there. 7. A ‘small mortar’ (coticula) is that in whicheye-salves(collyrium)aredissolvedaftertheyhave been stirred around. It should be smooth, for a small mortar that is rough makes the salve shatter instead of dissolving.
xii. Scents and ointments (De odoribus et unguentis) 1. Scent (odor) is named after ‘air’ (aer). 2. It is called incense (thymiama) in the Greek language, because it is scented, for a flower that bears a scent is called thyme (thymum). With regard to this, Vergil (Geo. 4.169):
And (the honey) is redolent with thyme.
3.Incense(incensum)issocalledbecauseitis‘consumed by fire’ (igne consumere) when it is offered. 4. Tetraidos formulae is the name for small, elongated shapes of incense made from four ingredients, for in Greek  B   means “four,” and ^"  means “shape.” 5. Myrrh (stacten) is an incense that is exuded under pressure, and is so called by the Greeks from    (i.e. “oozing””), from the verb  ; (i.e. “trickle”), that is, exuded. 6. Balsam (mirobalanum) is so called because it is made from the scent-bearing nut of which Horace speaks (Odes 3.29.4):
The pressed ben-nut (balanus, i.e. the source of balsam) for your hair.
Oil(oleum)isapuresubstance,mixedwithnothingelse. Butointment(unguentum)isanythingmadefromcommon oil and enriched with a mixture of other ingredients, assuming a pleasant scent and producing odor for some time.
7. Some ointments are named after places, as was telinum, which Julius Caesar mentions, saying (Courtney fr. 2):
And we anoint our bodies with sweet telinum.
This used to be manufactured on the island of Telos, which is one of the Cyclades. 8. And some ointments are named after their inventors, as is amaracinum: some people report that a certain royal youth, Amaracus by name, fell by accident when he was carrying many kinds of ointments and created a greater scent from the mixing. Hence the finest ointments are now called amaricina, but these are from a kind of flower, (i.e.
IV.xi.7–xiii.5
amaracus, “marjoram”). 9. There are still others that are named from the aromatic quality of their material, such as ‘oil of roses’ (rosaceum) from ‘rose’ (rosa) and ‘henna ointment’ (quiprinum, i.e. cyprinum) from ‘henna’ (quiprum, i.e. cyprum) – hence these also carry the scent of their own material. 10. Some of these ointments are ‘simples’ – the ones that are made from only one kind of ingredient – and hence they also carry the scent associated with their name. An example is anetinum, for this is unmixed, from oil and dill (anetum) alone. ‘Composite’ ointments, however, are those made from many ingredients mixed together, and these do not bear a scent associated with their name, because the scent they produce is indeterminate, as the other ingredients that are mixed in persist in their own scents. 11. Cerotum . . . Calasticum . . . Marciatum . . .
xiii. The foundations of medicine (De initiis medicinae) 1. Some people ask why the art of medicine is not included in the other liberal disciplines. It is for this reason: the liberal disciplines treat individual topics, but medicine treats the topics of all. Thus the physician ought to know grammar, so that he can understand and explain what he reads. 2. Similarly he must know rhetoric, so that he is capable of summing up the cases he treats with true arguments. He must also know dialectic in order to scrutinize and cure the causes of disease with the application of reason. So also arithmetic, to reckon the number of hours in the onsets of illness, and their periods of days. 3. Likewise with geometry, so that from his knowledge of the qualities of regions and the location of places, he may teach what a person should attend to there. Then, music will not be unknown to him, for we read of many things that have been accomplished for sick people by way of this discipline – as we read of David who rescued Saul from an unclean spirit with the art of melody. The physician Asclepiades also restored a certain victim of frenzy to perfect health through harmonious sounds. 4. Finally, he will be acquainted with astronomy, through which he may observe the logic of the stars and the change of seasons. For, as a certain physician says, according to their mutations our bodies are also changed. 5. Thus medicine is called the Second Philosophy, for each discipline claims for itself the entire human: by philosophy the soul is cured; by medicine, the body.
 

 
Book V Laws and times (De legibus et temporibus)
 
 
i. The originators of laws (De auctoribus legum) 1. MosesoftheHebrewpeoplewasthefirstofalltoexplain thedivinelaws,intheSacredScriptures.KingPhoroneus was the first to establish laws and legal processes for the Greeks. 2. Mercury (i.e. Hermes) Trimegistus first gave laws to the Egyptians. Solon was first to give laws to the Athenians. Lycurgus first devised legal structures for the Spartans by the authority of Apollo. 3. Numa Pompilius, who succeeded Romulus to the throne, first established laws for the Romans. Then, when the population was no longer able to bear the factious magistrates, they brought the Decemvirs (lit. the “ten men”) intobeingtowritelaws;thesemensetforthintheTwelve Tablesthelawswhichhadbeentranslatedfromthebooks of Solon into the Latin language. 4. These men were: Appius Claudius, Genucius, Veterius, Julius, Manlius, Sulpicius, Sextius, Curatius, Romilius, and Postumius. These Decemvirs were selected to draw up laws. 5. The consul Pompey first wanted to undertake the collection of the laws into books, but he did not continue for fear of detractors. Then Caesar began to do this, but he was killed first. 6. And gradually the ancient laws became obsolete due to age and neglect; although none of them is still in use, nevertheless a knowledge of them seems needful. 7. New laws originated from Emperor Constantine and the others following him, but they were mixed and disordered. After this, Theodosius Augustus theyoungerinstitutedacode,madeinimitationofthose of Gregorius and Hermogenianus, of decrees from the time of Constantine, arranging them under the name of each emperor; he called it the Theodosian Code after his own name.
ii. Divine laws and human laws (De legibus divinis et humanis) 1. All laws are either divine or human. Divine
1 TheLatintermiushasabroadrangeofmeaningandapplication, with no single English equivalent. We have generally translated it as “jurisprudence,” but have also used the terms “right,” “law,” or “justice,” according to the context.
117
lawsarebasedonnature,humanlawoncustoms.Forthis reason human laws may disagree, because different laws suit different peoples. 2. Fas is divine law; jurisprudence (ius)ishumanlaw.Tocrossthroughastranger’sproperty is allowed by divine law; it is not allowed by human law.
iii.	Howjurisprudence,laws,andcustomsdifferfromeachother(Quiddifferuntinterseius,leges,etmores) 1. Jurisprudence is a general term, and a law is an aspect of jurisprudence. It is called jurisprudence (ius) because it is just (iustus).1 All jurisprudence consists of laws and customs. 2. A law is a written statute. A custom is usage tested by age, or unwritten law, for law (lex, gen. legis) is named from reading (legere), because it is written. 3. But custom (mos) is a longstanding usage drawn likewise from ‘moral habits’ (mores, the plural of mos). ‘Customary law’ (consuetudo) is a certain system of justice established by moral habits, which is taken as law when a law is lacking; nor does it matter whether it exists in writing or reasoning, since reason also validates law. 4. Furthermore, if law is based on reason, then law will be everything that is consistent with reason – provided that itagreeswithreligion,accordswithorderlyconduct,and is conducive to well-being. Customary law is so called because it is in ‘common use’ (communis usus).
iv.	What natural law is (Quid sit ius naturale) 1. Law is either natural, or civil, or of nations. Natural law (ius naturale) is common to all nations, and, because it exists everywhere by the instinct of nature, it is not kept by any regulation. Such is the union of a man and woman, the children’s inheritance and education, the common possession of everything, a single freedom for all, and the right to acquire whatever is taken from the sky, the earth, and the sea. 2. Also the return of something which was entrusted and of money which was deposited, and the repulsion of violence by force. Now this, or whatever is similar to it, is never unjust, but is held to be natural and fair.
 
V.v–xvi	Isidore of Seville
 
v.	What civil law is (Quis sit ius civile) Civil law (ius civile) is that which each individual population or city has established particular to itself, for human or divine reasons.
vi.	What the law of nations is (Quid sit ius gentium)1. The law of nations concerns the occupation of territory, building, fortification, wars, captivities, enslavements, the right of return, treaties of peace, truces, the pledge not to molest embassies, the prohibition of marriages between different races. And it is called the ‘law of nations’(iusgentium)becausenearlyallnations(gentes) use it.
vii.	Whatmilitarylawis(Quidsitiusmilitare) 1.‘Military law’ (ius militare) is the formalized practice of waging war, the bond of making treaties, the marching against or engagement with the foe at a given signal. Also the cessation of hostilities at a given signal, and the military discipline for the disgrace of deserting one’s post; also the method of distributing military pay, the hierarchy of ranks, the honor of rewards, as when a crown or torques are given. 2. Also the distribution of booty, and its equitable division based on the status and deeds of the individuals; also the leader’s share.
viii.	What public law is (Quid sit ius publicum) ‘Public law’ (ius publicum) concerns sacred things, priests, and magistrates.
ix.	Whatquiritallawis(Quissitiusquiritum) 1.‘Quirital law’ (ius quiritum) is, properly speaking, Roman law. No one except the Quirites, that is, the Romans, is governed by it. It concerns such things as legal inheritances, cretio (i.e. formal acceptance of an inheritance), guardianship, usucapio (i.e. acquisition of ownership by use): these laws are found among no other group of people, but are particular to the Romans and establishedforthemalone. 2.Quiritallawconsistsoflawsand plebiscites, decrees and edicts of rulers, or responses of jurists.
x.	What a law is (Quid sit lex) A law is a rule for a people – through it those who are nobler by birth, along with the common people, have ordained something.
xi.	What popular resolutions (i.e. plebiscites) are(Quidscitaplebium) Resolutionsareestablishedbythe common people alone, and they are called resolutions (scitum)becausethecommonpeopleknow(scire)them, or because something is sought (sciscere) and petitioned that it may take place.
xii.	What a senate decree is (Quid senatusconsultum)A senate decree is something that the senators alone decide, by consulting the interests of the people.
xiii.	What an order and an edict are (Quid constitutioet edictum) An order (constitutio) or edict (edictum) is that which a king or emperor orders (constituere) or decrees (edicere).
xiv.	What a response of jurists is (Quid responsa pru-dentium) Responsesarethosethingsthatjuristsaresaid toanswer(respondere)tothoseconsultingthem,whence theResponsesofPaulustaketheirname.2 Therewerecertain experienced people, and arbitrators of equity, who composed and issued instructions of civil jurisprudence by which they might settle the quarrels and disputes of parties in disagreement.
xv.	Consular and tribunitial laws (De legibus con-sularibus et tribunitiis) 1. Some laws are named from those who produced them, such as consular laws, tribunitial laws, Julian laws, Cornelian laws. Under Caesar Augustus the suffect consuls3 Papius and Poppaeus introduced a law that is called ‘Lex Papia Poppea’ from theirnames;thislawsetsuprewardsforfathersforbegetting children. 2. Under the same emperor, Falcidius, the plebeiantribune,alsoestablishedalawthatnoonemight inawillbequeathmoretopeopleoutsidethefamilythan would leave one quarter for the heirs. The law is called the‘LexFalcidia’fromhisname.Aquiliusalso[produced a law, which to this day is called ‘Lex Aquilia’].
xvi.	Replete law (De lex satura) A medly (satura) is a law which is concerned with many things at once; it is so called from the abundance of topics, and, as it were, from fullness (saturitas), whence also to write satires
2	TheRomanjuristJuliusPaulus(earlythirdcenturyce)compiled a Responsa consisting of legal opinions.
3	A suffect consul is one elected after the regular time.
 
The Etymologies	V.xvii–xxiv.9
 
(satura) is to compose richly varied poems, as those of Horace, Juvenal, and Persius. The laws called ‘Novels’ (Novella) . . .
xvii.	Rhodian laws (De legibus rhodiis) The Rhodian lawsarethelawsofnauticalcommerce,andaresonamed from the island of Rhodes, where the practice of commerce existed in ancient times.
xviii.	Private statutes (De privilegiis) Private statutes are the laws of individuals, private laws (privatae leges) as it were. It is called a ‘private statute’ (privilegium) because it is applied in private use (privatus).
xix.	What a law is capable of (Quid possit lex) Every law either allows something, as “A strong man may seek reward,” or it forbids, as “No one is allowed to seek marriage with a sacred virgin,” or it prescribes punishment, as “Whoever has committed murder shall suffer capital punishment.” Indeed, human life is regulated by the reward or punishment of law.
xx.	Whyalawisenacted(Quarefactaestlex) Laws are enacted in order to control human audacity through the feartheyarouse,andsothatinnocentpeoplemaybesafe in the midst of reprobates, and so that even among the impious the power of doing harm may be restrained by a dreaded punishment.
xxi.	What sort of law should be made (Qualis debetfieri lex) A law should be honorable, just, feasible, in agreement with nature, in agreement with the custom of the country, appropriate to the place and time, necessary, useful, and also clear, lest in its obscurity it contain something deceitful, and it should be written not for private convenience, but for the common benefit of the citizens.
xxii.	Cases (De causis) Y is a Greek term that means“case”(causa)inLatin,whencealsolegalbusiness is called pragmatica, and a person involved in cases or legal business is called a pragmaticus.
xxiii.	Witnesses (De testibus) Witnesses [are people through whom the truth is sought in a legal process]. Before the proceedings each litigant binds (alligare) witnesses to himself by covenants, so that afterward the witnesses may not be free to dissimulate or withdraw themselves, whence the witnesses are also called ‘bound’ (alligatus, ppl. of alligare). Also, they are called witnesses (testes)becausetheyareusuallyemployedforatestament (testamentum);theyarealsocalledsignatories(signator), because they sign (signare) the testament.
xxiv.	Legal instruments (De instrumentiis legalibus)1.Awill(voluntas)isthegeneralnameforalllegalinstruments, because it proceeds not by force, but by ‘free will’ (voluntas); hence it receives such a name. 2. A testament (testamentum) is so called because, unless the testator (testator) died, one could not confirm or know what was written in it, because it is closed and sealed, and it is also called ‘testament’ because it is not valid until after the setting up of the memorial of the testator (testatoris monumentum), whence also the Apostle (Hebrews 9:17): “The testament,” he says, “is of force after people are dead.” 3. Nevertheless, in Sacred Scripture, ‘testament’ is not only the term for that which is not valid until the testators be dead, but every pact and covenant was called a testament. Thus Laban and Jacob made a testament, which was certainly valid between living people, and in the Psalms it is written (82:6): “They have made a covenant (testamentum) together against thee,” that is, a pact; and innumerable such examples. 4. The tablets (tabula) of a testament are so called because before the use of papyrus sheets and parchment not only were testaments written on smoothed tablets, but even letters were so written. Hence those who carry these tablets were called tabellarii. 5. A testament in civil law is confirmed by the signatures of five witnesses. 6. A testament in praetorian law is sealed with the seals of seven witnesses; the former is made by citizens (civis), hence it is civil (civile) law; the latter is made in the presence of the praetors, hence it is of praetorian law. And to seal a testament is ‘to put a distinguishing mark’ (notare) on it so that what is written may be recognized (noscere, ppl. notus). 7. A ‘holograph testament’ (holographum testamentum) is entirely written and signed by the hand of the author, whence it receives its name, for the Greeks say S  for “entire,” and  for “writing.”
8. A testament is invalid (inritum) if he who has made thetestamenthaslosthisrightsofcitizenship,orifitwas not made ‘following prescribed procedures’ (rite). 9. An inofficiosus (lit. “undutiful”) testament is one that does not observe the duty (officium) of natural piety, and is
 
V.xxiv.10–xxiv.29
made to the benefit of non-family members, disinheriting the children for no good reason. 10. An annulled (ruptus) will is so named because it is broken (disrumpere, ppl. disruptus) by a child born posthumously, who was neither expressly disinherited, nor named as an heir. 11. A suppressed (suppressus) testament is one that wasnotopenlymadepublic,thusdefraudingtheheirsor the legatees or the freedmen. Even if it is not concealed, but nevertheless is not shown to the aforementioned people, then it appears to be suppressed (supprimere, ppl.suppressus).12.Aproclamationisthatwhichthetestatorreadsoutfromwaxtablets,saying“Thesethings,as they are written on these wax tablets, so I say them and so I read them, and so you, Roman citizens, bear witness forme.”Andthisiscalleda‘proclamation’(nuncupatio), because‘toproclaim’(nuncupare)istonameopenlyand to confirm. 13. The ius liberorum (lit. “law of children”) is a reciprocal arrangement of inheritance for couples without children, naming one another as heirs in their place. 14. A codicil (codicillum), as the ancients said, is doubtless named after the originator who instituted this kindofwriting.Andthewritingrequiresnoformalityof words, but only the desire of the testator, meaningfully expressed in any kind of writing. It is common knowledge that because of the difficulty of legal terminology, and the necessity of employing formalities, the wishes of the dead have been given support through the service of the codicil, so that whoever writes such a statement uses the heading of ‘codicil’ for what he writes. And just as a codicil is made in place of a testament, so also a letter can be made in place of a codicil. 15. A cretio is a certainnumberofdayswithinwhichthedesignatedheir either comes into the inheritance, or is excluded if the time of the cretio has elapsed, and there is no opportunity for him to receive the inheritance later. 16. Cretio is so called as if it were ‘decision’ (decretio), that is, deciding, or establishing – for example, “Let such and such a person be my heir,” and it is added “and let him ‘accept the inheritance’ (cernere, ppl. cretus) within so many days.” Moreover, a hundred-day period was established for coming into those inheritances to which a cretio was not added. 17. A fideicommissum (i.e. a request to an heir) is so called, as it specifies what ‘may be done’ (fiat) as commissioned (committere, ppl. commissum) by the deceased – for faith (fides) is so called because ‘it may be done’ (fiat); it is, however requested not in obligatory language, but as a wish.
18. A pact is a document of agreement between parties in a state of peace (pax, gen. pacis), approved by law and custom, and it is called pact (pactum) as if it were ‘made from peace’ (ex pace factum), from ‘come to an agreement’ (pacere), which also generates the form pepigit, “he has agreed.” 19. A placitum (“agreed condition”) is named similarly, because it pleases (placere). Some say a pact is what someone does willingly, but a placitum is what one is compelled to do even against one’s will, as for example when someone is brought into thecourttoanswer;noonecancallthisapact,butrather a placitum. 20. A mandatum (“consensual contract”) is so called because formerly, in a business transaction, one person would ‘shake hands’ (manus dabat) with the other. 21. And a ‘valid act’ (ratum) is, as it were, rational (rationabile) and just (rectus), whence he who pledges says “I declare this to be valid (ratum),” that is, firm and lasting. 22. Something done ‘by established procedure’ (rite) is not done ‘by right’ (recte), but according to custom. ‘Autograph surety’ (chirographum) . . . ‘Warranty’ (cautio) . . .
23.Buyingandsellingareexchangesofgoodsandcontracts taking place by agreement. 24. Buying (emptio) is socalledbecauseitis‘frommeforyou’(ametibi);selling (venditio), as if the word were venundatio, that is, from the marketplace (nundinae). 25. A donation is a settlement of any sort of property. And people say it is called donation (donatio) as if the word were ‘presentation of a gift’ (doni actio), and dowry (dos, acc. dotem) as if it were ‘I give likewise’ (do item) – for after the donation has taken place at the wedding, the dowry follows. 26. Indeed, there was an ancient ceremony of marriage, in which the husband and wife purchased each other, so that it did not seem that the wife was a handmaid, as we hold legally. Thence it is that after the donation of the husband takes place, the dowry of the wife follows. 27. A usufructuary donation (donatio usufructuaria) is so called for this reason, because the donor still retains the ‘useoftheyield’(ususfructu)fromthegift,withthelegal title reserved for the recipient. 28. A ‘direct donation’ (donatio directa) is so named because it is immediately transferred to another both in legal title and in use of the yield, and no part of it is diverted back to the legal right of the donor.
29. Covenants are, technically speaking, witnessed, and they are called covenants (condicio) from ‘talking together’ (condDcere), as if the word were condDcio,
 
because not just one witness swears there, but two or more. Indeed, every word stands not in the mouth of one witness alone, but of two or three witnesses (cf. Deuteronomy 19:15). Furthermore, they are called covenants, because the speeches of the witnesses agree with each other, as if the word were condictiones (lit. “joint utterances”). 30. A stipulation is a promise or a pledge, whence stipulators are also called promisors. And stipulation (stipulatio) is so called from straw (stipula), for the ancients, when they would promise each other something, would break a straw that they were holding; in joining this straw together again they would acknowledgetheirpledge.[Oritisbecausepeoplewould have called something firm stipulus, according to Paulus the jurist.] 31. A sacramentum is a bond given in support of a promise, and it is called a sacramentum (lit. “holy thing”) because to violate a promise is a breach of faith.
xxv. Property (De rebus) 1. An inheritance is property that passes to a person upon someone’s death, either bequeathed by a will, or retained through occupancy. And it is called ‘inheritance’ (hereditas) from ‘property entered in on’ (res adita), or from ‘money’ (aes, gen. aeris), because whoever possesses land also pays the tax; whence also property (res).4 2. Property is that which exists under our legal title. And ‘legal titles’ (ius) are things that are possessed by us lawfully (iuste), and do notbelongtosomeoneelse.3.Property(res)issonamed from holding rightly (recte), and ‘legal titles’ from possessing lawfully, for what is possessed ‘with title’ (ius), is possessed ‘lawfully’ (iuste), and what is possessed lawfully is possessed well. But what is possessed wrongly is that which is owned by someone else. Someone who either uses his own property improperly, or takes the property of another, possesses wrongly. He possesses lawfully who is not ensnared by greed. But whoever is held by greed is the possessed, not the possessor.
4. Goods are the possessions of honorable or noble people, and they are called ‘goods’ (bona) for that reason, because they have no base use, but people make use of them for good (bonus) purposes. 5. A peculium, properly speaking, relates to younger persons or slaves, for a peculium is something that a father allows his son, or a master his slave, to handle as his own. And it is called
4 The phrase inde et res, “whence also property,” seems to be scribally corrupt.
V.xxiv.30–xxv.20
peculium from ‘livestock’ (pecus), of which all the wealth of the ancients consisted. 6. The possession of goods is thelegalrightofpossession,acquiredfollowingacertain procedure and with a certain title.
7. An intestate (intestata) inheritance is one that has not been written in a testament, or, if it has, has not been legally entered upon. 8. An inheritance is called caduca (i.e. property without an heir), because its heirs have died (cadere). 9. Familia herciscunda is the division of the inheritance among the heirs, for division was called herciscunda by the ancients. 10. It is for dividing what is held in common among those who own property in common;thisactionrequiresthatamediatorbeassigned to the claimants, a mediator by whose arbitration the propertymaybedivided(dividere).11.Theactionoffines regundi is so called because through it the boundaries (fines) of each party may be drawn (regere), lest they be blurred, as long as the disagreement does not concern a place narrower than five feet.
12. Locatio is property lent out for use at a fixed price. 13. Conductio is property borrowed for use at an established price. 14. A res credita is property brought under terms of obligation in such a way that from the time when the contract was made it was determined that it is mortgaged. 15. Usura is the increment of interest, so called from the ‘use of money’ (usu aeris) that is lent. 16. Commodatum is that which is subject to our authority and is transferred temporarily to someone else ‘with a limit’ (cum modo) of the time during which he may have it, whence it is called commodatum. 17. A precarium exists when a creditor, having been requested by entreaty, allows the debtor to remain in possession of the cultivated land that is owing to him, and to have the fruits from it. And it is called precarium, because it ‘is entered into by means of entreaty’ (prece aditur), as if the word were precadium, with the letter r put for the d. 18. A mutuum (i.e. a kind of loan) is so called, because that which is given by me to you is turned ‘from mine to yours’ (ex meo tuum).
19. A ‘deposit’ (depositum) is a security entrusted for a set time, as though it were ‘set down for a long time’ (diu positum). And someone is seen to make a deposit when, for fear of theft or fire or shipwreck, he leaves (deponere, ppl. depositus) something with another person for safekeeping. 20. And there is a difference in usage between a pignus and an arra. A pignus is that which is given in place of something borrowed, and when the loan is
 
V.xxv.21–xxvi.8
returned, the pignus is immediately given back, but an arra is that which is given first, in partial payment for property purchased with a contract of good faith, and afterwardthepaymentiscompleted.21.Foranarramust be part of the complete payment, and not given back; whencewhoeverhasanarradoesnotreturnitashedoes a security, but, rather, desires the full payment, and it is called arra ‘from the thing’ (a re) for which it is paid.
Furthermore there is this difference between a pignus, a fiducia and a hypotheca. 22. For a pignus is that which is pledgedonaccountofaloan,andatthesettimethecreditor gets possession of the loan only; ownership of the pignus remains with the borrower. 23. The term fiducia (i.e. the transference of property on trust) is used when something is transferred or the right to it is forfeited for the sake of a loan. 24. Hypotheca is the term used when a thing is lent without the deposit of a pignus, with only an agreement or warranty being made. 25. Momentum is so called from shortness of time, requiring that the loan be returned as soon as the transaction is secured, and that there should be no delay in the recovery of the debt; just as a moment (momentum) possesses no space – its point in time is so short that it has no duration of any kind.
26. An ‘instrument’ (instrumentum) is what we use to make (construere) something, as a knife, a reed-pen, an axe. 27. An instructum is what is made by an instrument, such as a staff, a codex, a table. 28. Usus is that use to which we put the thing that is made, such as leaning on a staff, reading in a codex, gaming on a table; but even the fruit of the fields is also called usus, because we use (uti, ppl. usus) it. These are the three uses. 29. Usufructus is so called because only its yield (fructus) is held for use, and all the other rights remain with someone else. 30. Usucapio is the acquisition of ownership through the maintenance of legal possession, either for two years or for some other time. 31. Mancipatio is so called because the property is ‘taken in the hand’ (manu . . . capitur). Hence it is appropriate for whoever takes formal possession to grasp the property itself that is given into his possession.
32.Cessioisaconcession(concessio)ofone’sownproperty, such as this: “I cede by right of affinity,” for we say ‘cede’ (cedere) as if it were ‘concede’ (concedere), that is, those things that are our own; for we ‘restore’ the property of another, we do not ‘cede’ it. In fact, technically speaking, someone is said to cede when he gives in to another in spite of the truth, as Cicero (Defense of Ligarius 7.22): “He ceded,” he says, “to the authority of a very distinguished man, or rather, he obeyed.” 33. A ‘temporary injuction’ (interdictum) ‘is pronounced for the time being’ (interim dicitur) by the judge, not in perpetuity, but with the intention of changing the temporary order at the right time, when the conditions of the judgment are met. 34. Payment (pretium) is so called because we give ‘it first’ (prius eum), so that in return for it we may rightfully take possession of the property we are seeking. 35. Commerce (commercium) is named after merchandise (merx, gen. mercis), by which term we speak of things for sale. Whence an assembly of many people who are accustomed to sell and buy goods is called a market (mercatus). 36. Integri restitutio is the restoring of a case or of a property. 37. A case that has not been brought to a conclusion by the authority of the law is ‘reconstituted’ (redintegrare); property that has been taken or forcefully seized by the authority of the law is ‘restored’ (redintegrare).
xxvi. Crimeswritteninthelaw(Decriminibusinlege conscriptis) 1. Crime (crimen) has its name from lacking (carere) – like theft, deceit, and other actions that do not kill, but cause disgrace. 2. Misdeed (facinus) is so called from doing (facere) evil that harms another. 3. ‘Outrageous deed’ (flagitium) is so called from ‘urgently summoning’ (flagitare) the corrupting power of lust, by which one harms oneself. All wrongdoing belongs to one of these two categories. 4. Force (vis) is the strength (virtus) of a powerful person, through which a case or property is either carried off or extorted. 5. It is ‘private force’ (vis privata) if someone, before the trial, has used armed men to drive someone from his own property or overpowerhim.6.Itis‘publicforce’(vispublica)ifsomeonehasexecutedbeforethepopulaceacitizenmakingan appeal to a judge or a king, or tortured him or whipped him or fettered him. 7. Deception (dolus) is a cunning of the mind, so named from the fact that it deludes (deludere), for the deceiver does one thing and pretends to do another.Petroniusthinksotherwisewhenhesays“What, judges, is deception (dolus)? Surely it is when something is done that is painful (dolere) to read about. You have ‘deception’; now hear about evil.”5 8. Calumnia (i.e. the bringing of a charge in bad faith) is the contention of
5 The source of this passage has not been identified.
 
a hostile lawsuit, called from ‘using subterfuge’ (calvi), that is, deceiving. 9. Deceit (falsitas) is so called from saying (fari, ppl. fatus) something other than the truth. 10. Injury (iniuria) is injustice. Hence among the comic authors (Plautus, The Braggart Soldier 436): “You are an injury,” that is, someone who dares something against the rule of law (ius, gen. iuris).
11. A dissension on the part of citizens is called ‘sedition’ (seditio), because people divide (seorsum + ire, ppl. itus, lit. “go apart”) into different factions – for they greatly rejoice in disturbances and in tumult. 12. Sacrilege (sacrilegium), strictly speaking, is the theft of sacred objects. Later this term was applied to the worship of idols. 13. Adultery (adulterium) is a deception with regard to someone else’s marriage, which because it has defiled the ‘marriage bed of another’ (alterius torum), receives the name adultery. 14. ‘Illicit sex’ (stuprum). . . Rape (raptus), strictly speaking, is illegal intercourse, so called from corrupting (corrumpere, ppl. corruptus) whence also he who ‘gains submission over one he has taken by force’ (rapto potitur) delights in illicit sex. 15. The word ‘homicide’ (homicidium) is compounded from ‘man’ (homo) and ‘slaughter’ (caedes). For whoever was proven to have committed slaughter against a person, the ancients called a homicide (homicida). 16. The charge of parricide was brought not only against someone who had killed his parent, that is, his father or mother, but also against someone who had killed a brother; and it was called parricide (parricidium) as if it were ‘slaughter of a parent’ (parentis caedes). 17.Internecivumiudicium(i.e.murderousjudgment)was charged against someone who had given false testimony and had so caused a person’s death. Ownership of the dead man’s goods would pass to the accuser. And the significanceofinternecivusisthatisreferstothedestruction (enectio), as it were, of an individual – for they used to put the prefix inter- in place of e-: Naevius (fr. 55): “mare interbibere” (“to drain the sea”) and Plautus (fr. 188): “interluere mare” (“to wash away the sea”); that is, ebibere and eluere.
18. Theft (furtum) is the secret purloining of someone else’sproperty,namedfromgloomy(furvus),thatisdark (fuscus), because it takes place in the dark. Theft was a capital offense among the ancients, before the penalty of four-fold damages. Pervasio is the open appropriation of someone else’s property. Theft involves goods that can be carried from one place to another, 19. but
V.xxvi.9–xxvii.3
pervasio involves both those things that can be moved and those that are immovable. 20. Infitiatio is denial of liability for what is owed when it is sought by a creditor. Similarly abiuratio is the denial of liability for property that has been loaned. 21. The judgment of ambitus is made against someone who wins office by means of bribery and ‘canvasses for support’ (ambire, ppl. ambitus, lit. “go round”); he is likely to lose the position that he gains by graft. 22. The judgment of peculatus is made against those who commit fraud with respect to public funds and embezzle public money, for peculatus is so named from money (pecunia). And the theft of public property is not judged in the same way as the theft of private property, for the former is judged as sacrilege, becausethetheftisofsacredthings.23.Someonewhohas taken money from his associates is accused of extortion (repetundae).Iftheaccusedinsuchacasediesbeforethe verdict then judgment is delivered against his estate. 24. The judgment of incest (incestum) is made with regard toconsecratedvirginsorthosewhoarecloselyrelatedby blood, for those who have intercourse with such people are considered incestus, that is, ‘unchaste’ (incastus). 25. Those who have injured or violated royal majesty are liable on a charge of treason (maiestas), as are those who betray the state or connive with enemies. 26. The term piaculum (i.e. an act that demands expiation) is used for something that can be expiated (expiare), when crimes have been committed that need to be expiated according to some established practice.
xxvii. Punishments drawn up in the laws (De poenis in legibus constitutis) 1. Harm (malum) is defined in two ways: one definition being what a person does; the other,whathesuffers.Whathedoesiswrongdoing(peccatum), what he suffers is punishment. And harm is at its full extent when it is both past and also impending, so that it includes both grief and dread. 2. Punishment (poena) is so called because it punishes (punire). But it is a noun used with an epithet, and without this additional term it does not have a complete meaning; if you add ‘the punishment of prison,’ ‘the punishment of exile,’ ‘the punishment of death,’ you complete the meaning. 3.Thetermpenalty(supplicium),strictlyspeaking,isnot usedwithregardtosomeonewhoispunishedinanyway at all, but with regard to one who is sentenced in such a way that his goods are ‘set apart as sacred’ (consecrare) and are paid into the public treasury. For penalties were
 
V.xxvii.4–xxvii.26
once called ‘supplications’ (supplicamenta). It is also calledsuppliciumwhensomethingisofferedtoGodfrom someone’s fine, whence also ‘to supplicate’ (supplicare).
4. Cicero writes that eight types of punishment are contained in the laws, that is, fines, fetters, lashes, compensation in kind, disgrace, exile, slavery, and death (cf. On the Orator 1.194). By these punishments every crime that is committed is avenged. 5. Fine (damnum) is named from a diminution (diminutio) of property. 6. Fetters (vincula) are named from ‘fettering’ (vincire), that is, confining, because they confine and restrain, or because they ‘bind by force’ (vi ligare). 7. Foot-shackles (compes) are named because they ‘restrain the feet’ (continere + pes). 8. Peducae are nooses by which the feet are ensnared,namedfrom‘catchingthefeet’(pedemcapere). 9.Andchains(catena),becausethey‘catchholdof’(capiendo tenere) the feet to prevent walking. Also chains are so called because their many links catch hold of one another(secapere).10.Manacles(manicae,lit.“sleeves”) are chains by which the hands (manus) are bound – but manicae are also a part of tunics. 11. Thong-fetters (nervus) . . . 12. The boia is a collar for the condemned; it is like the yoke of an ox (bos), made out of a kind of chain. 13. Prison, the place in which criminals are held in custody, and it is called prison (carcer) because in it people are confined (coercere) and shut in, as if the word were arcer, that is, from enclosing (arcere). The place in which criminals are kept we call carcer, using the singular, but the place whence chariot-teams are released we call carceres (i.e. the starting gate at a race course), using the plural.
14.Whips(verber)aresocalled,becausewhentheyare wielded,theystrike(verberare)theair.Hencelashes(flagrum) and floggings and scourges (flagellum), because they resound on the body with a whistling (flatus) and a crack. There is flogging (plaga), as if the term were flaga: but plaga and flagrum are primary in form, and flagellum is made by forming the diminutive. 15. The anguilla (i.e. an eel-skin whip) is used to punish boys in schools; it is called scotica in common usage. 16. Cudgels (fustis) are used to beat young men for their crimes; they are so named because they may stand fixed in ditches (fossa); country people call them ‘stakes.’ 17. Crowbars (vectis) are so called because they are carried (vectare) in the hands, whence doors and stones are ‘pried loose’ (vellere), but they do not pertain to punishments of law.
18. Switches (virga) are the tips of branches and trees, so called because they are green (viridis), or because they possess the power of persuading (vis arguendi); if it is smooth, it is a switch, but if it is knotty and has points,itiscorrectlycalledbythetermscorpio(lit.“scorpion”),becauseitisdrivenintothebodyleavingacurved wound.19.Lashes(ictus),technicallyspeaking,belongto scourges, and are named from brandishing (agitare). 20. Ungulae (lit. “claws”) are so called because they dig out. Thesearealsocalledfidiculae(lit.“smalllutes”),because by them the accused are tortured on the rack (eculeus), so that the truth (fides) is discovered. 21. And the rack is so called because it stretches (extendere). 22. Tortures (tormentum) indeed are so called because they discover the intention (mens, gen. mentis) by twisting (torquere). 23. The quarry-prisons are a type of punishment associated with whipping, invented by Tarquin Superbus for the punishment of the wicked. Indeed, this Tarquin was first to invent quarry-prisons, torture, cudgels, mines, and exile, and was himself first of the kings to earn exile.
24. ‘Compensation in kind’ (talio) is a punishment resembling the act being punished, so that someone suffers‘insuchaway’(taliter)asheacted.Thisisestablished by nature and by law, so that (cf. Juvencus, Gospel Poem
1.549):
Let retribution of a similar kind fall to the one causing injury.
WhencealsothisissaidwithregardtotheLawoftheOld Testament (Matthew 5:38): “An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.” Compensation in kind is established for repaying not only injuries, but also favors, for this term is common to both injuries and favors. 25. Ignominy is so called because one who is apprehended in some crime ceases to have the reputation of honesty. And it is called ignominy (ignominium) as if it were the term for being sine nomine (“without reputation”), just as ignorant (ignarus) is without knowledge, and ignoble (ignobilis) is without nobilitas (“nobility”). 26. There is also infamy (infamium), as if it were ‘without good report’ (fama), and ‘report’ is so called because by speaking (fari), that is, talking, it roves about, creeping through the grapevine of tongues and ears. The term fama is also appropriate for both good and evil things, for ‘report’ is sometimes of good fortune, as in ‘illustrious report,’ which is praise. It is also of evils, as in Vergil (Aen. 4.174):
Report (fama), than which no other evil is more speedy.
 
27.	Report does not possess a trustworthy name, becauseit is especially untruthful, either adding many things to the truth, or distorting the truth. It lasts just as long as it is not put to the test, but whenever you put it to the test, it ceases to be, and after that is called fact, not report.
28.	Exile (exilium) is so called as if it were ‘outside the country’ (extra solum), for someone who is outside the country is called an exile (exul). Whence postliminium (i.e. the restoration of rank and privileges) for those who return, that is, those who are brought back from exile, who were cast out undeservedly, that is, cast out beyond the borders (limen) of their native land. Exile is divided into those who are relegatus and those who are deportatus. 29. A relegatus is one whose possessions accompany him; a deportatus is not so accompanied. 30. Proscription (proscriptio) is a condemnation of exile at a distance, as if it were a ‘writing afar’ (porro scriptio). Also, because it is ‘publicly drawn up’ (palam scriptus). 31. A mine (metallum) is where exiles are transported to dig out a vein of ore and hew out marble in slabs. 32. Slavery (servitus) is named from saving (servare), for among the ancients, those who were saved from death in battle were called slaves (servus). This alone is the most extreme of all evils; for free people it is worse than every kind of punishment, for where freedom is lost, everything is lost with it.
33. There are various possible means of execution; among them the cross (crux), or patibulum (i.e. forked gibbet), on which men who are hanged are tormented (cruciare)orsuffer(pati),whencethesetaketheirnames. 34.Thepatibulumiscommonlycalledthefork(furca),as if it were ‘supporting the head’ (ferre caput), for hanging onagibbetcausesdeathbystrangling;butthepatibulum is a lesser punishment than the cross. The patibulum immediately kills those who are hanged on it, but the cross torments those nailed to it for a long time; whence in the Gospel the legs of the thieves were broken, so that they might die and be taken from the cross before the Sabbath, because those hanged from a cross could not die quickly (John 19:32).
35. There are also differences in the types of dying. It is especially cruel to be drowned in water,6 to be burned in fire, to perish from cold and hunger, to be thrown to dogs and animals. Indeed, the earlier age preferred that
6 Our translation omits the problematic torquentes, a likely corruption.
V.xxvii.27–xxx.2
deathoccurbythesword,fortheswordunderstandshow to bring life to the finish with a quick death, without a moregrievoustorment.36.Aculleum(i.e.aleatherbagin which parricides were sewn up and drowned) is a container for parricides, named from covering (occulere), that is, enclosing. It is a bag made of skin, in which parricides were closed up along with an ape, a rooster, and a snake, and thrown into the sea. The type to which all these deaths belong is called censure. 37. Censure (animadversio)iswhatoccurswhenajudgepunishesaguilty man, and he is said to pass censure, that is, to ‘turn his attention’ (animum . . . advertere) in that direction, to focus on the punishing of the accused, because he is the judge. 38. For that reason the Romans forbade water and fire to certain condemned people – because air and water are free to all and given to everyone – so that the condemned might not enjoy what is given by nature to everyone.
xxviii.	The word for ‘chronicles’ (De chronicaevocabulo) ‘Chronicle’ (chronica) is the Greek term for what is called a ‘succession of times’ in Latin. Among the Greeks Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, compiled such a work, and the priest Jerome translated it into Latin.   in Greek means “time” in Latin.
xxix.	Moments and hours (De momentis et horis)1. Intervals of time are divided into moments, hours, days, months, years, lustrums, centuries, and ages. A moment (momentum) is the least and shortest bit of time, so called from the movement (motus) of the stars. 2.Itistheextremelimitofbrevityofthehour’ssegments, when one instant stops and another starts. Hour (hora) is a Greek term (cf. _), but it is pronounced in the same way in Latin. The hour is the boundary of time, just as the word ora means a boundary like the shore of thesea,orthebankofariver,ortheborderofagarment.
xxx.	Days (De diebus) 1. Day (dies) is the presence of thesun,orwhenthesunisovertheearth,asnightiswhen thesunisundertheearth–forwhetheritisdayornightis duetowhetherthesunisaboveorbelowtheearth.Aday properly so called is of twenty-four hours, and lasts as long as it takes a day and a night to complete the interval of their course through the turning of the sky, from one rising sun to the next. In poor usage, however, one day is the interval between sunrise and sunset. 2. Moreover, a day has two intervals: the diurnal and the nocturnal. A
 
V.xxx.3–xxx.18	Isidore of Seville
 
day is twenty-four hours long, the interval twelve hours long.3.Thewholeiscalled‘day’afteritssuperior,diurnal interval. Whence the usage is that, without thinking of nights, we speak of a ‘number of days,’ as is written in the divine Law (Genesis 1:5): “And there was made evening and morning, one day.” 4. A day according to the Egyptians begins at sunset; among the Persians, at sunrise; according to the Athenians, at the sixth hour of our day; according to the Romans, at midnight. Hence cockcrow is at that time, when their voice heralds the day, and when the midnight breeze rises.
5. Days (dies) are so called from ‘the gods’ (deus, ablative plural diis), whose names the Romans conferred upon certain astral bodies, for they named the first day from the sun, which is the chief of all the astral bodies, just as that day is head of all the days. 6. The second day is named from the moon, which is closest to the sun in brilliance and size, and it borrows its light from the sun. The third, from the star of Mars, called Vesper. The fourth, from the star of Mercury, which some call the ‘white circle.’ 7. The fifth, from the star of Jupiter, which they call Phaeton. The sixth, from the star of Venus, which they name Lucifer, which has the most light of all the stars. The seventh, from the star of Saturn, which, placed in the sixth heaven, is said to run its course in thirty years. 8. Hence the pagans took the names of the days from these seven stars because they thought that they were affected by these stars in some matters, saying that they received their spirit from the sun, their body from the moon, their intelligence and speech from Mercury, their pleasure from Venus, their blood from Mars, their disposition from Jupiter, and their bodily humors from Saturn. Such indeed was the stupidity of the pagans, who made up such ridiculous figments for themselves.
9. Among the Hebrews, however, the first day is called ‘one of the sabbath’ (una sabbati); this is our Lord’s Day (dies dominicus), which the pagans called the day of the sun. The ‘second of the sabbath’ is our second weekday (feria), which secular people call the day of the moon. ‘Thirdofthesabbath,’thethirdweekday,whichtheycall thedayofMars.‘Fourthofthesabbath,’thefourthweekday, which is called the day of Mercury by the pagans. 10. ‘Fifth of the sabbath’ is the fifth weekday, that is, fifth counting (i.e. inclusively) from the Lord’s Day, which is called the day of Jupiter among the pagans. ‘Sixth of the sabbath’ is what the sixth weekday is called, which is named the day of Venus among those same pagans. The sabbathistheseventhcounting(i.e.inclusively)fromthe Lord’s Day, and the pagans dedicated it to Saturn and named it the day of Saturn. ‘Sabbath’ is translated from Hebrew into Latin as “rest,” because on that day God rested from all his works. 11. Now, in a Christian mouth, the names for the days of the week sound better when they agree with the Church’s observance. If, however, it should happen that prevailing practice should draw someone into uttering with his lips what he deplores in his heart, let him understand that all those figures whose names have been given to the days of the week were themselves human. On account of certain mortal gifts they were very able and achieved distinction in this world, and so they were granted divine honors by their devotees both in the days and in the stars. But the stars were first named from the names of humans, and the days were named from the stars.
12. Weekdays (feria) were named from ‘speaking’ (fari), because on those days we have a time for speech, that is, to speak in the divine office or in human business. Of these there are festival days, instituted on behalf of humans, and holy days, for divine rites. 13. There are three parts of a day: morning, midday, and evening. 14. In the morning the light is advanced and full, no longer twilight. It is called morning (mane) from the adjective ‘good,’ because the ancients used manus as a word for ‘good’ – for what is better than light? Others think that morning is named from the ‘departed spirits’ (Manes), whose abode is between the moon and the earth. Others think the name is from ‘air,’ because it is manus, that is, rarified and transparent. 15. Midday (meridies) is so called as if the word were medidies, that is, the ‘middle of the day’ (medius dies), or because then the day is purer, formerummeans“pure.”Indeed,ofthewholedaynothing is brighter than midday, when the sun shines from the middle of the sky and lights the whole globe with equal clarity. 16. Evening (suprema) is the last part of the day, when the sun turns its course toward its setting – so called because it ‘still exists’ (superesse) up to the final part of the day. 17. The ‘late hour’ (serum) is so called from the ‘door-bars’ (sera) that are closed when night comes on, so that one may be safer in one’s sleep.
18. Today (hodie) is as if it were ‘on this day’ (hic dies, ablative hoc die). And the word is quotidie (i.e. “daily”),
 
notcotidie,seeingthatitis‘oneveryday’(quotdiebus).19. Tomorrow (cras, also meaning “in the future”), because it is ‘hereafter.’ 20. Yesterday (hesternum) is the day before, and called hesternum because that day is now apart (extraneus) and remote from us from its having passed by. 21. ‘The day before’ (pridie), moreover, as if it were ‘on the previous day’ (priori die). 22. ‘On the day before yesterday’ (perendie),7 that is, ‘beyond the day before’ (per ante diem) or ‘in advance,’ that is, beforehand.
xxxi. Night (De nocte) 1. Night (nox) is so called from ‘harming’ (nocere), because it impairs the eyes. It has the light of the moon and stars, so as not to be without adornment, and so that it may comfort all those who work at night, and so that it may have sufficient light for certain living creatures that cannot tolerate sunlight. 2. Further, the alternation of night and day is made to provide the shift between sleeping and waking, so that the resting time of night may temper the effort of daily work. 3. Night occurs either because the sun is wearied from its long journey, and when it has passed over to the last stretch of the sky, grows weak and breathes its last fires as it dwindles away, or because the sun is driven under the earth by the same force by which it carries its light over the earth, so that the shadow of the earth makes night. Hence Vergil (Aen. 2.250):
Night rushes from the Ocean, cloaking with its great shadow both earth and sky.
4.Therearesevenpartsofanight:earlyevening,dusk, late evening, the dead of night, cockcrow, early morning, and daybreak. 5. Evening (vesperum) is named for the western star (i.e. Vesper), which follows the setting sun and precedes the oncoming darkness. Concerning it, Vergil (cf. Aen. 1.374):
Sooner, as the heavens are closed up, does the evening star (Vesper) lay the day to rest.
7	Isidore seems to take perendie, “on the day after tomorrow,” as “on the day before yesterday.”
8	Isidore describes daybreak as ‘little’ because diluculum has the form of a diminutive.
9	The translation reflects the reading Eois from the received text of Vergil. The untranslatable Eoos of some early manuscripts seems to be corrupt.
V.xxx.19–xxxiii.1
6. Darkness (tenebrae) is so called because it ‘holds shadows’ (tenere umbras). 7. Dusk (crepusculum) is an uncertain light, for we call an uncertain thing ‘obscure’ (creper), that is, it is between light and darkness. 8. The ‘late evening’ (conticinium) is the time when all is silent, for to be silent is conticescere. 9. The ‘dead of night’ (intempestum) is the middle and inactive time (tempus) of night, when nothing can be done and all things are at rest in sleep, for time is not perceived on its own account, but by way of human activities, and the middle of the night lacks activity. 10. Therefore intempestus means “inactive,” as if it were ‘without time’ (sine tempore), that is, without the activity by which time is perceived. Whence the expression, “you have arrived ‘at an untimely moment’ (intempestive).” Hence the dead of night is so called because it lacks time, that is, activity.
11. Cockcrow (gallicinium) is so called from cocks (gallus), the heralds of light. 12. The ‘early morning’ (matutinum) falls between the passing of darkness and the coming of dawn, and it is called matutinum because this is the time of the beginning of morning (mane). 13. Daybreak (diluculum) is as if it were the little ‘light of day’ (diei lux) just now beginning.8 14. This is also called aurora, which comes before the sun. Thus aurora is the prelude of the day as it grows light and the first brightnessoftheair,whichiscalled `E (“dawn”)inGreek.By borrowing we name it aurora, as if it were eorora. Hence this verse (cf. Vergil, Aen. 2.417):
And the East Wind rejoicing in its horses of dawn (Eoos).9
And (Vergil, Aen. 1.489):
And the army from the east (Eous).
xxxii.	The week (De hebdomada) The week (hebdomada) is so called from its seven days, whose repetition makes up the months and years and centuries – for the Greeks call seven K! . We call this a septimana, as if it were ‘seven (septem) lights,’ for the morning (mane) is light. Now the eighth day is the same as the first, the day to which the sequence of the week returns, and from which it starts again.
xxxiii.	Months (De mensibus) 1. The name ‘month’ (mensis) is Greek, taken from the name of the moon, for the moon in Greek is called . Hence in Hebrew
 
V.xxxiii.2–xxxv.1	Isidore of Seville
 
the proper months are numbered not from the circuit of the sun but by the course of the moon, that is, from newmoontonewmoon.2.TheEgyptians,however,first reckoned the day of the month from the course of the sun, because of the swifter course of the moon, so that no error in computation would come about because of its speed, for the slower movement of the sun could be perceived more easily. 3. The month of January (Ianuarius) is so called from Janus, to whom it was consecrated by the pagans, or because January is the threshold and doorway (ianua) of the year. Hence Janus is depicted as two-faced, to display the entrance and the exit of the year. 4. February (Februarius) is named from Februus, that is, Pluto, for whom sacrifices were performed in that month – for the Romans consecrated January to the heavenly deities and February to the gods of the underworld. Therefore February was named from Februus, that is Pluto, not from ‘fever’ (febris), that is, a sickness. 5. March (Martius) was named after Mars, the founder of the Roman people, or because at that time all living things are stirred to virility (mas, gen. maris) and to the pleasures of sexual intercourse. 6. This month is also called the month of new things, because the month of March is the beginning of the year.10 It is also called the ‘newspring(ver),’fromitssignsofgermination,because in that month opportunity for business deals is signaled by the new crops ‘turning green’ (viridantibus).
7. April (Aprilis) is named for Venus, as if it were Aphrodis, for in Greek Venus is called J "  – or because in this month everything ‘is opened’ (aperire) into flower, as if it were Aperilis. 8. May (Maius) is named from Maia, the mother of Mercury, or from the elders (maior) who were the leading men of the state, for the Romans dedicated this month to older people, but the following one to younger people. 9. Hence the latter is called June (Iunius), because formerly the people were divided into ‘centuries’ of older and younger (iunior).10.ButJuly(Iulius)andAugust(Augustus)were named in honor of individual men, Julius and Augustus Caesar. Earlier these months were called Quintilis and Sextilis: Quintilis, because it was the fifth (quintus) month (counting inclusively) from March, which the Romans held to be the beginning of the year, and Sextilis likewise, because it was sixth (sextus). 11. September (September) takes its name from the number and from ‘rain’ (imber), because it is the seventh (septimus) from March and brings rain. Thus also October (October), November (November), and December (December) received their names from the number and imber. December finishes this run of numbers, because the tenth number (i.e. decem, “ten”) closes off the preceding numbers.
12. Moreover, the Romans established the Kalends, Nones, and Ides with reference to festival days, or with reference to the offices of their magistrates, for on those days there would be an assembly in the cities. 13. Some people think that the Kalends (i.e. the first day of the month) were named after ‘to worship’ (colere), for among the ancients the beginnings of every month wereworshipped,justasamongtheHebrews.MostLatin speakers think the Ides were so named after ‘eating’ (edere), because among the ancients those were days for feasting. 14. The Nones were so called from nundinae, which are days of public assemblies or markets.
xxxiv.	Solstices and equinoxes (De solstitiis et aequinoctiis) 1. A solstice (solstitium) is so called as if it were‘thestopping-placeofthesun’(solisstatio),because at that time, when the sun is standing still, either the day or the night begins to grow. An equinox (aequinoctium) is so called because at that time the day and the night have an equal period of hours. 2. There are two solstices: one is the estival, on June 24, from which time the sun begins to return to its lower altitudes; the other is the hibernal, December 25, when the sun begins to rise to its higher altitudes. Hence it follows that the hibernal solstice is the shortest day, and the estival is the longest. 3. Similarly,therearetwoequinoxes,theonevernalandthe other autumnal, and the Greeks call them the : (cf. V ,“equal”; a ,“day”).Theseequinoxesfallon March 25 and September 24, because the year formerly would be divided into two parts only, that is, the estival and hibernal solstices, as well as into the two celestial hemispheres.
xxxv.	Theseasonsoftheyear(Detemporibusanni) 1. There are four seasons of the year: spring, summer, fall, and winter. They are called seasons (tempus) from the ‘balance of qualities’ (temperamentum) that each shares, because each in turn blends (temperare) for itself the
10 In many regions during the ancient and medieval periods the year began with the month of March.
 
qualities of moisture, dryness, heat, and cold. The seasons are also called circuits (curriculum) because they do not stand still, but ‘run a course’ (currere). 2. Further, it is clear that after the world was made the seasons were divided into groups of three months because of the nature of the sun’s course. The ancients divided each season, so that in its first month spring is called ‘new,’ in its second ‘mature,’ and in its third ‘declining.’ 3. So in itsthreemonthssummerisnew,mature,declining;likewise the new, mature, and declining fall, and the new, mature, and declining or ‘extreme’ winter. Hence the verse (cf. Vergil, Geo. 1.340):
At the setting of extreme winter.
Spring (ver) is so called because it ‘is green’ (virere), for then, after winter, the earth is clothed with plants and everything bursts into flower. 4. Summer (aestas) takes its name from aestus, that is, “heat”; also aestas as if it were ‘burnt’ (ustus), that is, ‘burned out’ (exustus) and arid, for heat is arid. 5. Fall (autumnus) is so called from the season when the leaves of the trees fall and everything ripens.11 6. The condition of the celestial hemisphere (hemisphaerium) gave its name to winter (hiems), because at that time the sun wheels in a shorter course.Hencethisseasonisalsocalledbruma,asifitwere 9, that is, short (brevis). Or the name ‘winter’ is fromfood,becauseatthattimethereisagreaterappetite for eating, for ‘voracity’ in Greek is called W (lit. “food”) – hence also a person who is squeamish about food is called inbrumarius. 7. The ‘hibernal’ (hibernus) timeisbetweenwinterandspring,asifitwerehievernus; this commonly signifies “winter,” giving the name of its part to the whole season.
These seasons are ascribed to particular parts of the sky. 8. Thus spring is linked to the east (oriens), because at that time everything springs (oriri) from the earth; summer to the south, because that part is more flaming with heat; winter to the north, because it is numb with coldandcontinualfrost;falltothewest,becauseitbrings serious diseases, whence also at that time all the leaves
11	Isidore alludes to the ancient etymology, as recorded by Paulus Festus, linking autumnus with augere and auctare, both meaning “grow.”
12	Isidorelinksfallwiththewest,theocciduus,towardthe‘setting’ (occidere, also meaning “perish”) sun.
13	The site of the games was Olympia in the state of Elis. Elis was the name of both the state and its chief city.
V.xxxv.2–xxxvii.3
of the trees fall.12 The meeting of cold and heat and the conflictbetweendifferentkindsofairarethereasonwhy fall abounds with diseases.
xxxvi. Years (De annis) 1. The year is the orbit of the sun, when it returns to the same place in the heavens after the passage of 365 days. It is called a year (annus, cf. anus, “ring”) because it wheels back upon itself with the recurring months – hence also a ring (anulus) is so called, as if it were annuus, that is, a circle, because it returns upon itself. So Vergil (Geo. 2.402):
And the year (annus) wheels back upon itself along its own tracks.
2.	Thus, among the Egyptians before the invention ofletters, it was indicated by a dragon depicted as biting its own tail, because it turns back upon itself. Others call it annus from the term  N (i.e. “renew”), that is, from its renewal, for it is always renewed.
3.	There are three kinds of years. The lunar year isof thirty days; the solstitial year, which contains twelve months; or the great year, when all the heavenly bodies have returned to their original places, which happens after very many solstitial years. 4. The era (aera) of particular years was established by Caesar Augustus, when hefirstdescribedtheRomanworldbyconductingacensus. It was called an era because everyone in the world promised to render a coin (aes, gen. aeris) to the state.
xxxvii. Olympiads, lustrums, and jubilees (De olympiadibus et lustris et iubileis) 1. The Olympic games were established among the Greeks in the neighborhood of Elis, a Greek city, with the people of Elis performing a contest and competition every fifth year (i.e. counting inclusively), with four years intervening. Because of this they referred to the time cycle of the contest of the Elians as an olympiad (olympias), with a period of four years counted as one olympiad.13 2. But a lustrum is a !  , that is, a five-year period, because it is said to have been set in the fifth year by the Romans, following the example of the olympiads – for there was not yet a reckoning of time by consuls or by eras.Itisaperiodoffiveyears.Itiscalledlustrumbecause the city of Rome was purified (lustrare) every five years when the census was conducted in the state. 3. A jubilee (iubileus) is translated as “a year of forgiveness.” Both the term and the number are Hebrew. It is made up of
 
V.xxxvii.4–xxxix.6	Isidore of Seville
 
seven sets of seven years, that is, forty-nine years. On the jubilee trumpets blared, and their old holdings reverted to each person, debts would be forgiven, and liberties confirmed. 4. We ourselves celebrate this number still in the number of days of Pentecost after the resurrection of the Lord, with sin forgiven and the written record of our whole debt erased, as we are freed from every trammel, receiving the grace of the Holy Spirit coming upon us.
xxxviii.	Periods and ages (De saeculis et aetatibus)1. Saecula consist of generations, and hence the term saeculum,becausethey‘follow’(sequi)oneafteranother, for when some pass away, others take their place. Some callasaeculumaperiodoffiftyyears,whichtheHebrews call a jubilee. 2. It was for this reason that the Hebrew who – on account of his wife and children, and loving his master – was kept in slavery with his ear pierced, was commanded to serve for a saeculum, that is, up to the fiftieth year (see Exodus 21:5–6). 3. An ‘age’ commonly means either one year, as in the annals, or seven, as one of the ages of a human, or a hundred – or any period. Hence an age is also a time composed of many centuries. And an age (aetas) is so called as if it were aevitas, that is, something similar to an aeon (aevum). 4. For an aeon is a perpetual age, whose beginning or end is unknown. The Greeks call this an :E, and they sometimes use this word for ‘century,’ sometimes for ‘eternity’ – and from Greek it was borrowed by Latin speakers. 5. The term ‘age’ properly is used in two ways: either as an age of a human – as infancy, youth, old age – or as an age of the world, whose first age is from Adam to Noah; second from Noah to Abraham; third from Abraham to David; fourth from David to the exile of Judah to Babylon; fifth from then, [the Babylonian captivity], to the advent of our Savior in the flesh; sixth, which is now under way, to when the world itself comes to an end. The succession of these ages through generations and reigns is thus reviewed.14
xxxix.	Adescriptionofhistoricalperiods(Dedescrip-tionetemporum) 1. The first age has the creation of the world as its beginning, for on the first day God, with the name of ‘light,’ created the angels; on the second, with the name of the ‘firmament,’ the heavens; on the third, with the name of ‘division,’ the appearance of waters and the earth; on the fourth, the luminaries of the sky; on the fifth, the living creatures from the waters; on the sixth, the living creatures from the earth and the human being, whom he called Adam.
The first age
2.	230	In the year 230 Adam begot Seth, from whom descended the children of God.
435	In his 205th year Seth begot Enosh, who began to call upon the Name of the Lord.
	625	In his 190th year Enosh begot Kenan.
	795	In his 170th year Kenan begot Mahalalel.
3.	960	In his 165th year Mahalalel begot Jared.
1122	In his 162nd year Jared begot Enoch, who was translated to heaven.
	1287	In his 165th year, Enoch begot Methuselah.
4.	1454	In his 167th year, Methuselah begot Lamech.
1642	In his 188th year, Lamech begot Noah. The ark is built.
5.	2242 In the 600th year of Noah occurred the Flood. [Indeed, when Noah was 500 years old he begot three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth. In the 600th year of his life occurred the Flood. From Adam to this cataclysm there are 2252 years.]
The second age
2244 Two years after the Flood, [when he was 100 years old,] Shem begot Arphachshad, from whom sprang the Chaldeans.
2379	In his 135th year Arphachshad begot Shelah, from whom sprang the Samaritans and the
Indians.
2509 In his 130th year Shelah begot Eber, from whom sprang the Hebrews.
6. 2643	In his 134th year Eber begot Peleg. The tower is built [and in this time occurred the division of languages, and the people were dispersed through the whole earth because of the building of the tower].
2773	In his 130th year Peleg begot Reu. The gods are first worshiped.
14 Some manuscripts add here mention of several historians who described the ages of history in detail.
 
2905 In his 132nd year Reu begot Serug. The kingdom of the Scythians begins.
7.	3035	In his 130th year Serug begot Nahor. The kingdom of the Egyptians is born.
3114	In his 79th year Nahor begot Terah. The kingdoms of the Assyrians and Sicinians arise.
3184	In his 70th year Terah begot Abraham. Zoroaster invented magic.
The third age
8.	3284	In his 100th year Abraham begot Isaac and Ishmael, from whom sprang the Ishmaelites.
3344	In his 60th year Isaac begot Jacob. The kingdom of the Argives begins.
3434	In his 90th year Jacob begot Joseph. Phoroneus gave laws to Greece.
9.	3544	Joseph is 110 years old. Greece begins to cultivate crops.
3688	The Hebrews’ slavery [in Egypt], for 144 years. Atlas invented astronomy.
3728	Moses, 40 years. The Hebrews began to use letters.
10.	3755	Joshua, 27 years. Ericthonius in Troy [first] yoked a chariot.
3795	Othniel, 40 years. Cadmus gave letters to the Greeks.
	3875	Ehud, 80 years. The fables were composed.
3915	Deborah, 40 years. Apollo [invented the art of medicine and] invented the cithara.
11.	3955	Gideon, 40 years. Mercury constructed the lyre.
3958	Abimelech, 3 years. The chorus was invented in Greece.
	3981	Tola, 23 years. Priam reigned in Troy.
4003 Jair, 22 years. Carmentis invented the Latin letters.
4009 Jephthah, 6 years. Hercules cast himself into the flames.
4016	Ibzan, 7 years. Alexander (i.e. Paris) seized Helen.
4024 Abdon, 8 years. Troy was seized.
4044 Samson, 20 years. Ascanius founded Alba Longa.
12.	4084 Eli [the priest], 40 years. The Ark of the Covenant is seized.
V.xxxix.7–xxxix.19
4124	Samuel and Saul, 40 years. Homer is thought to have lived.
The fourth age
13.	4164	David, 40 years. Carthage is founded by
Dido. [Gad, Nathan, and Asaph prophesied.]
4204 Solomon, 40 years. The Temple of Jerusalem is built.
14.	4221	Rohoboam, 17 years. The kingdoms of Israel and Judah are divided.
4224 Abijam, 3 years. Abimelech was chief priest under him.
4265	Asa, 41 years. Ahijah, Amos, Jehu, Joel, [and Azariah] prophesied.
15.	4290 Jehoshaphat, 25 years. Elijah, Abdiah, and Micaiah prophesied.
4298	Jehoram, 8 years. Elijah and Elisha prophesied.
4299	Ahaziah, 1 year. Elijah is taken up to heaven.
4306 Athaliah, 7 years. The priest Jehonadab became famous.
16.	4346 Jehoash, 40 years. Elisha dies.
	4375	Amaziah, 29 years. Carthage founded.
4427 Uzziah, 52 years. The Olympic games are instituted by the Greeks.
4443 Jotham, 16 years. Romulus is born.
17.	4459 Ahaz, 16 years. Rome is founded.
4488 Hezekiah, 29 years. The Senate is founded in Rome.
4543	Manasseh, 55 years. The Sibyl of Samos flourished.
	4555	Amon, 12 years. The first census is taken.
18.	4587	Josiah, 32 years. The philosopher Thales is well known.
4598 Jehoiakim, 11 years. Nebuchadnezzar captures Judea.
4609 Zedekiah, 11 years. The Temple of Jerusalem is burnt.
The fifth age
19. 4679 The Captivity of the Hebrews, 70 years. The story of Judith is written.
4713	Darius, 34 years. The Captivity of the Judeans ends.
 
V.xxxix.20–xxxix.35	Isidore of Seville
 
4733	Xerxes, 20 years. Sophocles and Euripides are honored tragedians, [and they are considered very famous and distinguished].
20.	4773	Artaxerxes, 40 years. Ezra redacts the Law which had been burnt.
4792 Darius, [also named Nothus] 19 years. This age included Plato.
4832	Artaxerxes, 40 years. The story of Esther is completed.
21.	4858	Artaxerxes, [also named Ochus] 26 years.
Demosthenes and Aristotle are published.
4862 Xerxes [the son of Ochus], 4 years.
Xenocrates becomes distinguished.
4868 Darius [the son of Arsamus], 6 years. Alexander took Jerusalem.
22.	4873	Alexander [of Macedon], 5 years. [Alexander] conquered Asia.
4913	Ptolemy, 40 years. The first Book of the Machabees begins.
4951	Philadelphus, 38 years. The Septuagint translators become well known.
4977 Evergetes, 26 years. Jesus composes the Book of Wisdom.
23.	4994 Philopater, 17 years. The narration of the second Book of the Machabees.
5018	Epiphanes, 24 years. The Romans conquered the Greeks.
	5053	Philometer, 35 years. Scipio conquered
Africa.
24.	5082	Evergetes, 29 years. Brutus subdued Spain.
5099 Soter, 17 years. The Thracians are subjected to Roman rule.
5109	Alexander, 10 years. Syria is subjected to Roman rule.
25.	5117	Ptolemy, 8 years. The art of rhetoric begins in Rome.
	5147	Dionysius, 30 years. Pompey takes Judea.
5149	Cleopatra, 2 years. Egypt comes under Roman sway.
5154	Julius [Caesar], 5 years. He first assumed sole rule.
The sixth age
26.	5210	Octavian, 56 years. Christ is born.
	5233	Tiberius, 23 years. Christ is crucified.
5237	Gaius Caligula, 4 years. Matthew wrote [his] Gospel.
27.	5251	Claudius, 14 years. Mark published his Gospel.
	5265	Nero, 14 years. Peter and Paul are murdered.
5275	Vespasian, 10 years. Jerusalem is sacked by Titus.
28.	5277	Titus, 2 years. He was eloquent and pious. 5293	Domitian, 16 years. John is banished to Patmos.
5294	Nerva, 1 year. John returns to Ephesus. 5313	Trajan, 19 years. The apostle John dies.
29.	5334	Hadrian, 21 years. The scholar Aquila lives.
5356	Antoninus [Pius], 22 years. Valentinus and Marcion are recognized.
5375	Antoninus [Verus], 19 years. The heresy of the Cataphrygae arises.
30.	5388	Commodus, 13 years. The scholar Theodotion lives.
5389	Helius Pertinax, 1 year. It has nothing of interest for history.
5407	Severus, 18 years. The scholar Symmachus lives.
31.	5414	Antoninus, 7 years. The fifth reconstruction of Jerusalem is devised.
5415	Macrinus, 1 year. His short life contains no noteworthy deeds.
	5418	Aurelius, 3 years. Sabellius appears.
32.	5431	Alexander, 13 years. The famous Origen lives. 5434	Maximus, 3 years. He conquered the Germans.
5441	Gordianus, 7 years. He triumphed over the Parthians and Persians.
33.	5448 Philippus, 7 years. He was the first Christian emperor.
5449 Decius, 1 year. The monk Antony flourished. 5451	Gallus, 2 years. Novatus founded his heresy.
5466 Valerian, 15 years. Cyprian is crowned with martyrdom.
34.	5468 Claudius, 2 years. He expelled the Goths from Illyricum.
5473	Aurelian, 5 years. He persecutes Christians.
5474	Tacitus, 1 year. [He did nothing memorable.] 35. 5480 Probus, 6 years. The Manichean heresy arose. 5482 Carus, 2 years. He triumphed over the
Persians.
 
The Etymologies	V.xxxix.36–xxxix.42
 
5502	Diocletian, 20 years. After sacred books were burnt, he made martyrs.
5504	Galerius, 2 years. [He performed nothing worthy of recounting.]
36.	5534	Constantine, 30 years. The Nicene synod is assembled.
5558	Constantius, 24 years. The Anthropomorphite heresy rises.
5560	Julian, 2 years. From being a Christian, he became a pagan.
37.	5561	Jovianus, 1 year. He converted back to
Christianity.
5575	Valentinian, 14 years. The Goths convert to heresy.
5581	Gratian, 6 years. Priscillian becomes well known.
5590	Valentinian, 9 years. Jerome is commended in Bethlehem.
5593	Theodosius, 3 years. John Anachorite became famous.
38.	5606 Arcadius, 13 years. John Chrysostom flourished.
5621	Honorius, 15 years. Bishop Augustine became famous.
5648	Theodosius, 27 years. The heresiarch Nestorius lived.
15 The complex manuscript variants at the end of this book are treated by Reydellet 1966: 417–19.
39.	5654	Marcian, 6 years. The synod of Chalcedon is gathered.
5670 Leo the Elder, 16 years. Egypt rants with the error of Dioscorus.
5687	Zenon, 17 years. The heresy of the Acephalites arose.
40.	5714	Anastasius, 27 years. Bishop Fulgentius is acclaimed.
5722	Justinus, 8 years. The heresy of the Acephalites is rejected.
5761 Justinian, 39 years. The Vandals are destroyed in Africa.
5772 Justinus, 11 years. The Armenians accept faith in Christ.
41.	5779	Tiberius, 7 years. The Langobards seize Italy.
5800 Mauricius, 21 years. The Goths convert to the Catholic faith.
5807	Phocas, 7 years. The Romans are slaughtered by the Persians.
42.	5824	Heraclius governs for the seventeenth year. [During the fourth and fifth year of the most religious ruler Sisebut] the Jews in Spain convert to Christianity.
[Thus is summarized the whole period, from the beginningoftheworlduptothepresenttenthyearofthemost glorious prince Recesvintus, which is the year 696 of our era, the year 5857.] The remaining time of the sixth age is known to God alone.15
 

 
Book VI Books and ecclesiastical offices (De libris et officiis ecclesiasticis)
 
 
i. TheOldandNewTestament(DeVeterietNovoTestamento) 1. The Old Testament is so called because it ceased when the New came. The apostle Paul reminds us of this, saying (II Corinthians 5:17): “Old things have passed away, and behold, new things have come about.” 2. One testament is called New (Novus) because it innovates (innovare). Indeed, the only ones who come to know it are those who are renewed (renovatus) from the old by grace and who belong now to the New Testament, which is the kingdom of heaven.
3. The Hebrews take the Old Testament, with Ezra as its redactor, as consisting of twenty-two books, correspondingtothenumberoflettersintheiralphabet.They divide these books into three classes: Law, Prophets, and Sacred Writings. 4. The first class, Law (Lex), is taken as being five books: of these the first is Bresith,1 which is Genesis; second Veelle Semoth, which is Exodus; third Vaiicra, which is Leviticus; fourth Vaiedabber, which is Numbers; fifth Elleaddebarim, which is Deuteronomy. 5. These are the five books of Moses, which the Hebrews call Torah (Thora), and Latin speakers call the Law. That which was given through Moses is properly called the Law.
6.ThesecondclassisofProphets(Propheta),inwhich are contained eight books, of which the first is Josua Benun, called Iesu Nave in Latin (i.e. the book of Joshua ‘ben Nun,’ the son of Nun). The second is Sophtim, which is Judges; third Samuel, which is First Kings; fourth Malachim, which is Second Kings; fifth Isaiah; sixth Jeremiah; seventh Ezekiel; eighth Thereazar, which is called the Twelve Prophets, whose books are taken as one because they have been joined together since they are short.
7. The third class is of Sacred Writings (Hagiographa), that is, of ‘those writing about holy things’ (sacra scribens; cf. b , “holy”; , “write”), in which
1 RetainedhereareIsidore’sformsoftransliterationoftheHebrew names for the books of the Bible: Bereshit, Weelleh Shemot, etc.
135
there are nine books: first Job; second the Psalter; third Masloth, which is the Proverbs of Solomon; fourth Coheleth, which is Ecclesiastes; fifth Sir hassirim, which is the Song of Songs; sixth Daniel; seventh Dibre haiamim, which means ‘words of the days’ (verba dierum), that is Paralipomenon (i.e. Chronicles); eighth Ezra; ninth Esther.
All together these books – five, eight, and nine – make up the twenty-two as was reckoned above. 8. Some add Ruth and Cinoth, which in Latin is the Lamentations (Lamentatio) of Jeremiah, to the Sacred Writings, and make twenty-four books of the Old Testament, corresponding to the twenty-four Elders who stand present before the face of God (Apocalypse 4:4, etc.).
9.	We also have a fourth class: those books of the OldTestamentthatarenotintheHebrewcanon.Ofthesethe first is the Book of Wisdom, the second Ecclesiasticus; the third Tobit; the fourth Judith; the fifth and sixth, the books of Maccabees. The Jews hold these separate among the apocrypha (apocrypha), but the Church of Christ honors and proclaims them among the divine books.
10.	In the New Testament there are two classes: firstthe Gospel (evangelicus) class, which contains Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and second the Apostolic (apostolicus) class which contains Paul in fourteen epistles, Peter in two, John in three, James and Jude in single epistles, the Acts of the Apostles and the Apocalypse (i.e. Revelation) of John. 11. The entire content of both Testaments is characterized in one of three ways, that is, as narrative (historia), moral instruction (mores), or allegorical meaning (allegoria). These three are further divided in many ways: that is, what is done or said by God, by angels, or by humans; what is proclaimed by the prophetsaboutChristandhisbody[thatis,theChurch], about the devil and his members, about the old and the new people, about the present age and the future kingdom and judgment.
 
VI.ii.1–ii.19
ii. The writers and names of the Sacred Books (De scriptoribus et vocabulis sanctorum librorum) 1. According to Hebrew tradition the following are accepted as authors of the Old Testament. First Moses producedthecosmography(cosmographia)ofthedivine story in the five scrolls that are called the Pentateuch. 2. The Pentateuch is so called from its five scrolls, for !B  is “five” in Greek, and  N9  is “scroll.” 3. The book of Genesis is so called because the beginning of the world and the begetting (generatio) of living creatures are contained in it. 4. Exodus recounts the exit (exitus) or egress ofthepeopleIsraelfromEgypt,whenceittakesitsname. 5. Leviticus is so named because it describes the services and the variety of sacrificial rites of the Levites, and in it the whole Levitical order is commented on.
6. The book of Numbers is so called because in it the tribes of the exodus from Egypt are enumerated (dinumerare), and the description of the forty-two journeystagesinthewildernessiscontainedinit(Numbers33:1– 49). 7. Deuteronomy is named with a Greek term (cf. "  , “second”;  , “law”) which in Latin means “second law” (secunda lex), that is, a repetition and a prefiguration of the Gospel law; the Gospel contains the earlier matters in such a way that all things that are replicated in it are nevertheless new. 8. The book of Joshua takes its name from Jesus son of Nave, whose story it contains – in fact the Hebrews claim that its writer was thissameJoshua.Inthistext,afterthecrossingoftheJordan the kingdoms of the enemy are destroyed, the land is divided for the people, and the spiritual kingdoms of the Church and the Heavenly Jerusalem are prefigured through the individual cities, hamlets, mountains, and borders.
9. Judges is named from those leaders of the people who presided over Israel after Moses and Joshua and before David and the other kings were alive. Samuel is believed to have produced this book. The book of Samueldescribesthebirth,priesthood,anddeedsofthis same Samuel, and therefore takes its name from him. 10. Although this book contains the story of Saul and David, both are still connected to Samuel, because he anointed Saul into his kingship, and he anointed David as the future king. Samuel wrote the first part of this book, and David wrote the sequel, up to its conclusion. 11. Likewise the book of Malachim is so called because it recounts in chronological order the kings of Judah and the nation of Israel along with their deeds, for Malachim is a Hebrew word that means ‘Kings’ (Reges) in Latin. Jeremiah first gathered this book into one volume, for earlier it was dispersed as the narratives of the individual kings. 12. Paralipomenon (i.e. Chronicles) is named with a Greek word; we can call it the book ‘of omissions’ or ‘of leftovers’ (cf. !!, ppl. !! ,
“pass over”), because what was omitted or not fully told in the Law or the books of Kings is recounted there in brief summary.
13. Some say Moses wrote the book of Job, others say one of the prophets, and some even consider that Job himself, after the calamity he suffered, was the writer, thinking that the man who underwent the struggles of spiritual combat might himself narrate the victories he procured. 14. The beginning and end of the book of Job in Hebrew is composed in prose, but the middle of it, from the place where he says (3:3), “Let the day perish whereinIwasborn”upto(42:6),“ThereforeIreprehend myself, and do penance” all runs in heroic meter.
15. The book of Psalms is called in Greek the Psalter (Psalterium),inHebrewNabla,andinLatinOrganum.It is called the book of Psalms because one prophet would sing to a psaltery-lute and the chorus would respond in the same tone. Moreover the Hebrew title heading the psalms is this: Sepher Thehilim, which means “scroll of hymns.” 16. The authors of the psalms are those whose names are given in the titles, namely Moses, David, Solomon, Asaph, Ethan, Idithun, the sons of Core, Eman, Ezraitha and the rest, whom Ezra gathered into the one scroll. 17. Furthermore, all the psalms of the Hebrews are known to have been composed in lyric meter; in the manner of the Roman Horace and the Greek Pindar they run now on iambic foot, now they resound in Alcaic, now they glitter in Sapphic measure, proceeding on trimeter or tetrameter feet.
18. David’s son Solomon, king of Israel, produced threescrollsinaccordancewiththenumberofhisnames (see VII.vi.65). The first of these is Masloth, which the Greeks call Parabolae, and the Latins call Proverbs (Proverbia), because in it he displayed figures of words (verbum)andimagesofthetruth(veritas)bywayofanalogy. 19. Moreover he reserved the truth for his readers to interpret. He called the second book Coheleth, which in Greek means Ecclesiastes, in Latin ‘The Preacher’ (Contionator), because his speech is not directed specifically to one person, as in Proverbs, but generally to everyone, teaching that all the things that we see in the world are
 
fleeting and brief, and for this reason are very little to be desired. 20. He designated the third book Sir hassirim, which is translated in Latin as the song of songs; there he sings mystically, in the form of a wedding song, of the union of Christ and the Church. It is called the song of songs because it is preferred before all other songs contained in the Sacred Scriptures, just as certain things in the Law are called ‘holy,’ whose superiors are called the ‘holy of holies.’2 21. The poems in these three books are said to be composed, in their own language, in hexameters and pentameters, as Josephus and Jerome write.
22. Isaiah, an evangelist more than a prophet, produced his own book, whose whole text advances in an elegantstyle.Itspoetryrunsalonginhexameterandpentameter verse. 23. Jeremiah likewise published his own book together with its dirges (threnus), which we call Lamentations (Lamenta), because they are employed in times of sadness and funerals. Among them he composed four ‘acrostic poems’ (alphabetum) in varied meter. The first two of these were written in a quasiSapphic meter, because the three short verses that are joined to each other and begin with only one letter conclude with a heroic period. 24. The third alphabetpoem was written in trimeters, and each tercet’s verses begin with a repeated triad of initial letters. The fourth alphabet-poem is said to be like the first and second. 25. Ezekiel and Daniel are held to have been written by certain wise men. Of these, Ezekiel has its opening and close wrapped up in much obscurity, whereas with clear speech Daniel proclaims the kingdoms of the world and designates the time of Christ’s advent in a thoroughly open pronouncement. 26. These are the four prophets who are called Major Prophets, because they produced long scrolls.
Each book of the twelve prophets is entitled with the name of its own author. They are called the Minor Prophets because their discourses are short. 27. Hence they are joined together and contained in one scroll. Their names are Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.
2	Isidore refers to the Hebrew use of the genitive plural to express the superlative degree.
3	Alternatively this clause may mean, “They say that this book is by Philo Judaeus.”
VI.ii.20–ii.36
28. The book of Ezra is entitled after its own author; in its text are contained the words of Ezra himself and of Nehemiahaswell.Letitnotdisturbanyonethatwespeak about a single book of Ezra, because the second, third, and fourth are not accepted among the Hebrews, but are counted among the apocrypha. 29. Ezra is thought to have written the book of Esther, in which that queen is described as having snatched her people, as a figure of the Church of God, from slavery and death. Because Aman, who signifies wickedness, was killed, the celebration of that day (i.e. Purim) has been passed down to posterity.
30. The book of Wisdom (Sapientia) never existed in Hebrew, whence even its title is more redolent of Greek eloquence. The Jews say this book is by Philo,3 and it is appropriately named Wisdom because in it the advent of Christ, who is the Wisdom of the Father, and his passion are clearly expressed. 31. Jesus the son of Sirach, of Jerusalem, grandson of the high priest Jesus, of whom Zechariah makes mention (Zechariah 3:1, etc.), most surely composed the book Ecclesiasticus. Among Latin speakers this book is designated with the superscription of Solomon, because of the similarity of its style. 32. It is called Ecclesiasticus because, with great care and orderliness, it has been published about the teaching of the religious way of life of the whole Church (Ecclesia). This book is found among Hebrew speakers, but is regarded as belonging to the apocrypha. 33. By what authors the books of Judith, Tobit, or Maccabees were written has not been established at all. They take their titles from the names of those whose deeds they inscribe.
34. The four Evangelists (Evangelista) wrote severally the four Gospels (Evangelium). 35. First Matthew wrote hisGospelinHebrewcharactersandwordsinJudea,taking as his starting point for spreading the gospel (evangelizare) the human birth of Christ, saying (1:1): “The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham” – meaning that Christ descended bodily from the seed of the patriarchs, as was foretold in the prophets through the Holy Spirit. 36. Second, Mark, in Italy, filled with the Holy Spirit, wrote in Greek the Gospel of Christ, having followed Peter as a disciple. He began his Gospel with a prophetic spirit, saying (1:3, quoting the prophet Isaiah 40:3): “A voice of one crying in the desert: Prepare ye the way of the Lord” – so that he might show that after his assumption of flesh Christ
 
VI.ii.37–iii.2
preached the Gospel in the world. Now Christ also has beencalledaprophet,asiswritten(Jer.1:5):“Imadethee a prophet unto the nations.”
37. Third, Luke, most polished in his Greek of all the evangelists, in fact wrote his Gospel in Greece, where he wasaphysician.HewroteittoBishopTheophilus,beginning with a priestly spirit, saying (1:5): “There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a priest, Zechariah” – so that he might show that Christ after his birth in the flesh and his preaching of the Gospel was made a sacrificial victim for the salvation of the world. 38. For Christ himself is the priest of whom it is said in Psalms (109:4): “Thou art a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedech.” When Christ came, the priesthood of the Jews grew silent, and their law and prophecy ceased. 39.Fourth,JohnwrotethelastGospelinAsia,beginning with the Word, so that he might show that the same Savior who deigned to be born and to suffer for our sake was himself the Word of God before the world was, the same who came down from heaven, and after his death went back again to heaven.
40. These are the four Evangelists, whom the Holy Spirit symbolized through Ezechiel (1:10) as four animals. The animals are four because, by their preaching, the faith of the Christian religion has been disseminated through the four corners of the earth. 41. They are moreover called animals (animalia) because the Gospel of Christ is preached for the sake of the soul (anima) of a person. And they are full of eyes inside and outside, because they foresee the Gospels which have been spoken by the prophets, and which he promised in former times. 42. Further, their legs are straight, because there is nothing crooked in the Gospels. Their wings are sixfold, covering their legs and faces, because things that were hidden until the coming of Christ have been revealed. 43. Moreover, ‘Gospel’ (evangelium) means “good news” (bona adnuntiatio), for in Greek c means ‘good,’  means ‘news.’ Hence ‘angel’ (angelus) means “messenger.”
44.PaultheApostlewrotefourteenepistlesofhisown. He wrote nine of them to seven churches, and the rest to his disciples Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. 45. Most Latin speakers are doubtful whether the Epistle to the HebrewsisbyPaul,becauseofthedissonanceofitsstyle, and some suspect that Barnabas collaborated in its writing, and others that it was written by Clement. 46. Peter wrote the two epistles under his name, which are called the Catholic (i.e. ‘universal’) Epistles because they were written not to one people or city only, but generally to every nation. 47. James and John and Jude wrote their own epistles.
48. The Acts of the Apostles sets down the beginnings of the Christian faith among the gentiles and the story of the nascent Church. Luke the Evangelist is the writer of the Acts of the Apostles; in this work the infancy of the youngChurchiswoven,andthehistoryoftheapostlesis contained – whence it is called the Acts of the Apostles. 49. John the Evangelist wrote the Apocalypse during the period when, exiled for his preaching of the Gospel, he was sent to the isle of Patmos. Apocalypsis is translated from Greek into Latin as ‘revelation’ (revelatio), and a revelation means a manifestation of things that were hidden,asJohnhimselfsays(Apoc.1:1):“TheRevelation (Apocalypsis) of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to make known to his servants.”
50. These are the writers of the sacred books who, speakingthroughtheHolySpirit,foroureducationdrew up in writing both precepts for living and the pattern for belief. 51. The other volumes aside from these are called apocrypha. They are called the apocrypha, that is, the secret things (cf. ! , “hidden”), because they have come into doubt; their origin is hidden and is not evidenttotheChurchFathers,fromwhomtheauthority of the true scriptures has come down to us by a very sure and well-known succession. 52. Although some truth is found in the apocrypha, nevertheless because of their many falsities there is no canonical authority in them. Thesearerightlyjudgedbythewiseasnottoberegarded as the works of those to whom they are ascribed. 53. Indeed, many works are produced by heretics under the names of prophets, and more recently under the names ofapostles,allofwhichhave,asaresultofdiligentexamination, been set apart by canonical authority under the name of apocrypha.
iii.	Libraries(Debibliothecis) 1.Alibrary(bibliotheca) takes its name from Greek, because books are deposited there, for A means “of books” (liber) and  means “repository.” 2. After the Law (i.e. Torah) was burned by the Chaldeans, the scribe Ezra, inspired with the divine spirit, restored the library of the Old Testament when the Jews had returned to Jerusalem, and he corrected all the scrolls of the Law and Prophets, which had been corrupted by the gentiles, and he ordered
 
the whole Old Testament into twenty-two books, so that there might be as many books in the Law (i.e. the Old Testament) as they had letters of the alphabet. 3. Among the Greeks, however, the Athenian tyrant Pisistratus is thought to have been the first to establish a library. Afterwards, when Athens was burned, Xerxes brought this library, which had been augmented by the Athenians, to Persia; after a long time Seleucus Nicanor brought it back to Greece. 4. Hence arose, in kings and in other cities, a desire to procure the scrolls of diverse nations and to render them into Greek by translators. 5. Thus Alexander the Great and his successors set their minds to building libraries with every book. Ptolemy in particular, known as Philadelphus, and very perceptive about all kinds of literature, collected for his library not only pagan authors, but even divine literature, because he emulated Pisistratus in his zeal for libraries. In his time seventy thousand books could be found in Alexandria.
iv.	Translators (De interpretibus) 1. This Ptolemy, moreover, seeking from the pontifex Eleazar the writings of the Old Testament, was responsible for the translation from Hebrew into Greek, by seventy scholars of those writings that he held in the Alexandrian library. 2. Although they were separated, each apart in his own chamber, through the Holy Spirit they translated everything in such a way that nothing was found in the manuscript of any of them that was different from the rest, even in the order of words. 3. There were also other translators who translated the sacred writings from Hebrew into Greek, such as Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, and also that common (vulgaris) translation (i.e. the early Latin translation called Itala or Vetus Latina), whose authorship is not evident – for this reason the work is designated the Fifth Edition (Quinta Editio) without the name of the translator. 4. Furthermore, Origen provided a sixth and seventh edition with amazing diligence, and compared them with the other editions. 5. Also the priest Jerome, skilledinthreelanguages,translatedthesameScriptures from Hebrew into Latin speech, and rendered them eloquently. His translation (i.e. the Vulgate) is deservedly preferred over the others, for it is closer in its wording, and brighter in the clarity of its thought, [and, inasmuch as it is by a Christian, the translation is truer].
VI.iii.3–viii.2
v.	The one who first brought books to Rome (De eo quiprimumRomamlibrosadvexit) 1. Aemilius Paulus first brought a good supply of books to Rome after he hadconqueredPerses,kingofMacedonia;thenLucullus, fromthePonticspoils.Afterthese,CaesargavetoMarcus Varrothetaskofconstructingthelargestlibrarypossible. 2. Pollio first made libraries, Greek as well as Latin, for public use at Rome, with statues of the authors added in an atrium that he had built most magnificently from spoils.
vi.	Those who established libraries among us Christians (Qui apud nos bibliothecas instituerunt) 1. Among us the martyr Pamphilus, whose life Eusebius of Caesarea wrote, first strove to equal Pisistratus in his zeal for a sacred library. He had about thirty thousand volumes in his library. 2. Also Jerome and Gennadius, searching systematically through the whole world, hunteddownecclesiasticalwriters,andtheyenumerated their works in a one-volume catalogue.
vii.	Those who have written many things (Qui multascripserunt) 1. Among Latin speakers, Marcus Terentius Varro wrote innumerable books. Among the Greeks likewise Chalcenterus (i.e. Didymus) is exalted with great praise because he published so many books that any of us would be hard put merely to copy out in our own hand such a number of works by another. 2. From us (i.e. Christians) also Origen, among the Greeks, in his labor with the Scriptures has surpassed both Greeks and Latins by the number of his works. In fact Jerome says that he has read six thousand of his books. 3. Still, Augustine with his intelligence and learning overcomes the output of all these, for he wrote so much that not only could no one, working by day and night, copy his books, but no one could even read them.
viii.	The types of literary works (De generibus opus-culorum) 1. There are three genres of ‘literary works’ (opusculum). The first kind are extracts (excerptum), which in Greek are called scholia, in which things that seem obscure or difficult are outlined in brief summary. 2. The second kind are homilies (homilia), which Latin speakers call ‘talks’ (verbum), which are delivered before the public. Third are tomes (tomus), which we call books or volumes. Homilies are spoken to the
 
VI.viii.3–ix.2
common people, but tomes, that is, books, are longer discourses.
A dialogue (dialogus) is a conversation of two or more people; Latin speakers call it a discussion. What the Greeks call dialogues we call discussions. 3. A discussion (sermo) is so called because it is interwoven (serere) between each of the two participants. Whence in Vergil (Aen. 6.160):
They interwove many things in varied discussion (sermo) between themselves.
A treatise is . . . 4. One may distinguish a discussion, a treatise (tractatus), and a talk (verbum): a discussion requiresasecondperson,atreatiseisspecificallydirected toward oneself, but a talk is directed toward everyone. Whence it is said, “He addressed a talk to the public.” 5. Commentaries (commentarium) are so called as if the term were ‘with the mind’ (cum mente); they are interpretations, like comments on the law, comments on the Gospel. 6. An apology (apologeticum) is an excusing (excusatio),inwhichsomepeoplearewonttorespondto their accusers. It is presented in defense or denial only; the term is Greek. 7. A panegyric (panegyricum) is an extravagant and immoderate form of discourse in praise of kings; in its composition people fawn on them with many lies. This wickedness had its origin among the Greeks, whose practised glibness in speaking has with its ease and incredible fluency stirred up many clouds of lies.
8. The books of festival-registers (fasti) are those in which kings or consuls are registered, so called from fasces (fasces), that is, from their power. Whence Ovid’s books are called the Fasti, because they were published on the subject of kings and consuls. 9. A proem (prooemium) is the beginning of a discourse, for proems are the first parts of books, which are joined on before the presentation of the main matter in order to prepare the ears of the audience. Many, skilled in their Latinity, usethename‘proem’withouttranslation,butamongus the translated term has the name ‘preface’ (praefatio; cf. praefari, ppl. praefatus, “speak beforehand”), as it were a pre-speaking (praelocutio).
10.Commandments(praeceptum)arestatementsthat teach what ought to be done or what ought not to be done. What ought to be done, as “love [the Lord] thy God” and “honor thy father and thy mother.” What ought not to be done, as “thou shalt not commit adultery,” “thou shalt not steal.” 11. Similarly the commandments of the pagans either enjoin or forbid.
They order that something be done, as (Vergil, Geo.
1.299):
Naked plow, naked sow.
They forbid, as (Vergil, Geo. 2.299):
Do not sow the hazel among the vines, nor reach for the highest shoot.
12.	Among the Hebrews Moses first wrote command-ments; among Latin speakers the soothsayer Marcius first devised commandments, among which is this (1): “Be the last to speak, the first to grow silent.”
13.	Parables (parabola) and enigmas (problema) indicate by their names that they need to be examined rather deeply. A parable in fact displays the likeness of some thing. Although it is a Greek term, it has been appropriated into Latin. It is known that in parables what are called likenesses of the things are compared with the things in question. 14. But enigmas, which are called posers (propositio) in Latin, are questions involving a matter that must be resolved by disputation. 15. A question (quaestio) is an inquiry (quaesitio), when one inquires whether a thing exists, what it is, and what sort of thing it is. 16. An argument (argumentum) is so called as if it were sharp (argutus), or because it is keenly (argute) devised for verifying things. 17. Greeks speak appropriately of a ‘letter’ (epistola) – and it is translated “missive” (missa) in Latin – for   or    are ‘things sent off’ (missa) or ‘people sent off’ (missi). 18. Before the use of papyrus sheets or parchment, the contents of letters were written on shingles hewn from wood, whence people called the bearers of these ‘tabletcouriers’ (tabellarius).
ix. Wax tablets (De ceris) 1. ‘Wax tablets’ (cera) are the stuff of letters, the nourishers of children; indeed (Dracontius, Satisfactio 63),
They give intelligence to boys, the onset of sense.
The Greeks are reported as first to have passed down the use of wax tablets, for Greeks and Etruscans first wrote on wax tablets with an iron stylus. Afterwards the Romans commanded that no one should own an iron stylus (graphium ferreum). 2. Hence it was said
 
among scribes, “You shall not strike wax with iron.”4 Afterwards it was established that they would write on wax tablets with bones, as Atta indicates in his Satura, saying (12):
Let us turn the plowshare and plow in the wax with a point of bone.
The Greek term graphium is scriptorium in Latin, for
 is “writing.”
x.	Papyrus sheets (De cartis) 1. Egypt first provided the use of papyrus sheets, initially in the city of Memphis. Memphis is the Egyptian city where the use of papyrus sheets was first discovered, as Lucan says (Civil War 4.136):
The sheet of Memphis is made from the bibulous papyrus.
He called papyrus bibulous (bibulus) because it drinks (bibere) liquid. 2. A ‘papyrus sheet’ (carta) is so called because the stripped rind of papyrus is glued together ‘piece by piece’ (carptim). There are several kinds of such sheets. First and foremost is the Royal Augustan, of rather large size, named in honor of Octavian Augustus. 3. Second, the Libyan, in honor of the province of Libya. Third the Hieratic, so called because it was selected for sacred books (cf. , “sacred”) – like the Augustan,buttinted.4.FourththeTaeneotic,namedfor the place in Alexandria where it was made, which is so called. Fifth the Saitic, from the town of Sais. 5. Sixth the Cornelian, first produced by Cornelius Gallus, prefect of Egypt. Seventh the commercial, because merchandise is wrapped in this type, since it is less suitable for writing.
xi.	Parchment (De pergamenis) 1. Because the kings of Pergamum lacked papyrus sheets, they first had the idea of using skins. From these the name ‘parchment’ (pergamena), passed on by their descendents, has been
4	The maxim plays on ferrum, “iron object, sword.”
5	The lighter and darker faces of parchment sheets correspond to the flesh and hair side of the skin. But Isidore, perhaps along with Persius, refers to tinted parchment.
6	Isidore refers to deluxe books, some still extant, made with gold and silver lettering on purple sheets.
7	A word for ivory (elephantus) also means “elephant,” perhaps causing a confusion registered here.
8	Or, “. . . in a dry little book of smooth mallow-leaves.”
VI.ix.2–xii.3
preserved up to now. These are also called skins (membranum) because they are stripped from the members (membrum) of livestock. 2. They were made at first of a muddy color, that is, yellowish, but afterwards white parchment was invented at Rome. This appeared to be unsuitable, because it soils easily and harms the readers’ eyesight – as the more experienced of architects would not think of putting gilt ceiling panels in libraries, or any paving stones other than of Carystean marble, because the glitter of gold wearies the eyes, and the green of the Carystean marble refreshes them. 3. Likewise those who are learning money-changing put dark green cloths under the forms of the coins, and carvers of gems look repeatedly at the backs of scarab beetles, than which nothing is greener, andpainters[dothesame,inorderthattheymayrefresh the labor of their sight with the greenness of these scarabs].
4. Parchment comes in white or yellowish or purple. Thewhiteexistsnaturally.Yellowishparchmentisoftwo colors, because one side of it is dyed, that is yellowed, by the manufacturer. With regard to this, Persius (Satires
3.10):
Now the book and the two-colored parchment with its hair scraped smooth.5
5. But purple parchment is stained with purple dye; on it melted gold and silver on the letters stands out.6
xii. Bookmaking(Delibrisconficiendis) 1.Amongthe pagans, certain categories of books were made in fixed sizes. Poems and epistles were in a smaller format, but histories were written in a larger size. They were made not only on papyrus sheets or on parchment, but also on the intestinal membranes of elephants7 or on the interwoven leaves of mallows or palms. 2. Cinna mentions this type thus (fr. 11):
On Prusias’s boat I have brought as a gift for you these poems through which we know the aerial fires, poems much studied over with Aratus’s midnight lamps, written on the dry bark of smooth mallow.8
3. It first became usual to trim books in Sicily, for at first they were smoothed by pumice, whence Catullus says
(1.1):
To whom am I giving my charming little book just now smoothed with dry pumice?
 
VI.xiii.1–xv.5
xiii.	The terminology of books (De librorum vocabu-lis) 1. A codex is composed of many books; a book is of onescroll.Itiscalledacodex(codex)bywayofmetaphor from the trunks (codex) of trees or vines, as if it were a wooden stock (caudex, i.e. an older form of the word codex), because it contains in itself a multitude of books, as it were of branches. 2. A scroll (volumen) is a book so called from rolling (volvere), as we speak of the scrolls of the Law and the scrolls of the Prophets among the Hebrews. 3. Liber is the inner membrane of bark, which clings to the wood. With regard to this, Vergil thus (cf. Ecl. 10.67):
The bark (liber) clings to the high elm.
Whencewhatwewriteoniscalledabook(liber)because before the use of papyrus sheets or parchment, scrolls were made – that is, joined together – from the inner barkoftrees.Whencethosewhowritearecalledcopyists (librarius) after the bark of trees.
xiv.	Copyists and their tools (De librariis et eoruminstrumentis) 1. Formerly they called copyists bibliopolae, for the Greeks call a book  . Copyists are called by that name, and also ‘antiquarians’ (antiquarius), but copyists write both new and old things, antiquarians only old things, whence they have taken their name. 2. The scribe (scriba) got his name from writing (scribere), expressing his function by the character of his title. 3. The scribe’s tools are the reed-pen and the quill, for by these the words are fixed onto the page. A reed-pen is from a tree; a quill is from a bird. The tip of a quill is split into two, while its unity is preserved in the integrity of its body, I believe for the sake of a mystery, in order that by the two tips may be signified the Old and New Testament, from which is pressed out the sacrament of the Word poured forth in the blood of the Passion. 4. The reed-pen (calamus) is so called because it places liquid, whence among sailors ‘to place’ is calare. 5. A quill (pinna) is so called from ‘hanging’ (pendere), that is, flying, for it comes, as we have said, from birds. 6. The leaves (folia, i.e. folium) of books are so called from their likeness to the leaves (folium) of trees, or because they are made of leather sacks (follis), that is, of the skins thatarecustomarilystrippedfromslaughteredlivestock. Thesidesofleavesarecalledpages(pagina)becausethey are bound (compingere, perfect tense compegi) to one another.
7. A verse (versus, also meaning “furrow”) is commonly so called because the ancients would write in the samewaythatlandisplowed:theywouldfirstdrawtheir stylusfromlefttoright,andthen‘turnback’(convertere) the verses on the line below, and then back again to the right – whence still today country people call furrows versus. 8. A slip (scheda) is a thing still being emended, and not yet redacted into books; its name is Greek, as is tomus (i.e. “piece of papyrus”).9
xv. Canon-tables of the Gospels (De canonibus Evangeliorum) 1. Ammonius of Egypt first devised the canon-tables (canon) of the Gospels; following him, Eusebius of Caesarea drew them up more fully.10 These were made so that we can find out and know where one Gospel writer said things similar to the others, or where a passage was his alone. 2. These canon-tables are ten in number, of which the first contains the numbers indicating passages where the four say the same things: Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. The second, where three: Matthew, Mark, Luke. The third, where three: Matthew, Luke, John. The fourth, where three: Matthew, Mark, John. 3. The fifth, where two: Matthew, Luke. The sixth, where two: Matthew, Mark. The seventh, where two: Matthew, John. The eighth, where two: Luke, Mark. The ninth, where two: Luke, John. 4. The tenth, in which individual evangelists say certain things of their own.11
Theexplanationofthesethingsisthis.Eachpassageof the Gospels has been assigned a number, and this number is noted down beside the passage. Under each of these passage-numbers there is a certain table-number (aera)inred,indicatingwhichcanontable(i.e.oftheten canon-tables listed above) contains the passage-number under which this table-number has been placed. 5. For example, if the table-number is 1, then the passagenumber is in the first canon-table (i.e. the table where parallel passages in all four Gospels are found); if it is 2,
9	Here Isidore seems to use tomus in its classical sense, whereas in viii.2 above he uses the term in its later sense, “tome.”
10	Eusebius’s canon-tables, compiled ca. 330, regularly preceded the Gospels; they were a set of keys, arranged in columns, that indicatedparallelpassagesintheGospels.Eusebiusalsoassignedsequential numbers to passages in the Bible; our chapter and verse divisions were made much later.
11	ThemissingcombinationsofGospelreadingscommontomore than one Gospel – e.g., to Mark and John only – are rare.
 
then the passage-number is in the second canon-table; if 3,thenitisinthethirdcanon-table,andsooninorderup to 10. 6. Therefore, if you have one of the Gospels open and want to know which of the evangelists say similar things, start with the passage-number lying alongside the text, and then look for that same passage-number in the canon table indicated by the table-number. There youwillfindhowmanyevangelistssaidthispassage,and which ones. So, precisely because they are indicated by their own numbers, you will find in the body of the text of each of the Gospels those places that you have looked for that have said the same things.
xvi. The canons of Councils (De canonibus Conciliorum) 1. Canon (canon) is a Greek word; in Latin, ‘measuring rod’ (regula). A measuring rod is so called becauseitdraws‘inastraightline’(recte),andnevergoes astray. Some say a measuring rod is so called because it rules (regere), or because it offers a norm of living correctly (recte), or because it corrects (corrigere) anything distorted or wicked. 2. The canons of general councils began in the time of Constantine, for in earlier years, with persecution raging, there was little opportunity for teaching the common people. 3. For this reason Christianity was rent with diverse heresies, because there was no freedom [for bishops] to assemble as a unity until the time of the aforementioned emperor – for he gave Christiansthepowertocongregatefreely.4.UnderConstantine the holy Fathers, gathering from all the world in the Nicene Council, promulgated in accordance with evangelic and apostolic faith the second (Nicene) Creed, following after the Apostles’ Creed.
5. Of the councils of the church the venerable synods which were foremost in encompassing the whole faith are four, like the four Gospels, or the four rivers of Paradise. 6. The first of these, the Nicene synod of 318 bishops, took place while Constantine Augustus was emperor. In it was condemned the blasphemy of the Arian treachery about the inequality of the holy Trinity, championed by that same Arius. This holy synod established through its creed that God the Son is consubstantial with God the Father. 7. The second synod, of 150 Fathers, was gathered at Constantinople under the elder Theodosius.CondemningMacedonius,whodeniedthat the Holy Spirit was God, it showed that the Holy Spirit is consubstantial with the Father and the Son, rendering the form of the creed that the whole [confession] of
VI.xv.6–xvii.2
Latin and Greek speakers proclaim in churches. 8. The third, the first Ephesian synod, of 200 bishops, was held under Theodosius Augustus the younger. It condemned with a just charge of anathema Nestorius, who claimed that there were two persons in Christ; it showed that in two natures abides the one person of [our] Lord Jesus
Christ.
9. The fourth, the synod of Chalcedon, of 630 priests, was held under the emperor Marcian. In this synod a single judgment of the Fathers condemned Eutyches, an abbot of Constantinople, who preached that there was one nature both of the Word of God and of his flesh, and his defender Dioscorus, formerly bishop of Alexandria, and again Nestorius with the other heretics. ThissamesynodpreachedthatChristtheLordwasborn of the Virgin, and consequently we acknowledge that in Christ is the substance of both divine and human nature. 10. These are the four principal synods, most abundantly preaching the doctrine of our faith; and any other councils that the holy Fathers, filled with the spirit of God, sanctified endure in all their vigor supported by the authority of these four, whose accomplishments are recorded in this work.
11. ‘Synod’ (synodus), from the Greek, is translated “company”or“assembly.”12.Theterm‘council’isdrawn from Roman custom, for when issues were under discussion everyone would gather together and deliberate with common vigilance. Whence ‘council’ (concilium) takes its name from common (communis) vigilance, as if it were comcilium, for the Latin cilia (i.e. “eyelids”) pertain to eyes. Whence a ‘court of justice’ (considium) is a council, with the letter d changing to l. 13. An assembly (coetus) is a gathering (conventus) or congregation, from the verb gather (coire, ppl. coitus) that is, ‘coming together’ (convenire) in one. From this a convent (conventum, i.e. a monastic convent, usually conventus) is named, just as a conventus is a gathering, an assembly, from the association of many in one.
xvii. The Easter cycle (De cyclo Paschali) 1. Hippolytus, bishop in the times of the emperor Alexander, first wrote out the Easter cycle. After him those most esteemed authorities Eusebius of Caesarea, Theophilus of Alexandria, together with Prosper of Aquitaine and Victorius, with their extended reckonings of that same feast, promulgated many cycles. 2. The most blessed Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, calculating the reckoning
 
VI.xvii.3–xvii.19
of Easter Day over ninety-five years as a result of five nineteens, indicated with the greatest brevity at what point in the calendar or at what day of the lunar cycle the Easter feast should be celebrated. 3. It is called a cycle (cyclum) because it is set out in the form of a wheel, and arranged as if it were in a circle (circulum) it comprises the order of the years without variation and without any artifice. 4. Whence it happened that poems on any subject made with a single verse-form may be called cyclic. It is called a table (laterculum, lit. “brickwork”) because it lays out the order of the years in rows.12
5. The first cycle of nineteen:
Ofthemoon
B.	C. ii Ides	April xx
	C. vi Kalends	April xvi
	E. xvi Kalends	May xvii
	C. vi Ides	April xx
B.	C. x Kalends	April xv
	E. ii Ides	April xvi
	C. ii Nones	April xix
	E. viii Kalends	May xx
B.	C. v Ides	April xv
When this cycle is complete one returns to the beginning. [The years are computed from the creation of the world up to this most recent cycle.] 10. In ancient times the Church would celebrate the paschal season with the Jewsonthefourteenthdayofthemoon,onwhateverday of the week it fell. The holy Fathers prohibited this celebration at the Nicene synod, legislating that one should seek out not only the paschal moon and month, but also should observe the day of the Lord’s resurrection; and because of this they extended the paschal season from the fourteenth day of the moon to the twenty-first day, so that Sunday would not be passed over.13
11. The term ‘pasch’ (pascha, i.e. Easter Day) is not Greek but Hebrew, and it derives not from ‘suffering’ – for !9 in Greek means “suffer” – but from the Hebrew word pasch, meaning “passover” (transitus), becauseatthattimethepeopleofGodpassedover(transire, ppl. transitus) out of Egypt. Whence the Gospel (John 13:1) says, “Jesus knowing that his hour was come, that he should pass out (transire) of this world to the Father.” 12. Easter Eve is held as a continuous vigil because of the coming of our king and God, so that the time of his resurrection might find us not sleeping but vigilant. The reason for this night’s vigil is twofold: it is because on that night he then received life, although he suffered death, or because at the same hour at which he was resurrected he will afterwards come for the Judgment. 13. Moreover we celebrate Easter Day in that manner not only to call to mind the death and resurrection of Christ, but also to ponder the other things that are attested concerning him, with regard to the meaning of the sacraments. 14. This is for the sake of the beginning ofanewlifeandforthesakeofthenewpersonwhomwe are commanded to put on, taking off the old, purging out “the old leaven” that we may be “a new dough . . . for Christ our pasch is sacrificed” (I Corinthians 5:7).
Therefore because of this newness of life the first month of the new things (i.e. the new crops; see Exodus 23:15 etc.) in the months of the year is mystically attributed to the paschal celebration. 15. Indeed, that Easter Day is celebrated on a day of the third week – that is on a day that falls from the fourteenth to the twentyfirst–signifiesthatinthewholetimeoftheworld,which is accomplished in seven periods of days, this holy event has now opened up the third age. 16. For the first age is before the Mosaic law, the second under the law, and the third under grace; where the sacrament is now manifest, earlier it was hidden in prophetic enigma. It is also because of these three ages of the world that the resurrection of the Lord is on the third day. 17. That we find Easter Day among the seven days from the fourteenth to the twenty-first of the new moon is because of that numberseven,bywhichameaningofwholenessisoften figured. That number is even given to the Church itself because of its image of wholeness, whence the apostle John in the Apocalypse writes to seven churches. 18. But theChurch,stillsetinthatmortalityoftheflesh,because of its own mutability is designated by the name of the moon in Scripture.
19. Different observance produces from time to time anerrorofopinionsabouttheEasterfeastday.TheLatin
12	At this point Isidore supplies an Easter calendar for the ninetyfive year period from 627 through 721, giving in two columns the day of the month in Roman reckoning with the corresponding day of the lunar month, always in April or May. We print here only the first few entries; Isidore’s table displays five lunar cycles of nineteen years each, for a total of ninety-five rows. In this calendar the “common” years, of twelve lunar months, are marked ‘C.,’ the “embolismic” years, of thirteen lunar months, are marked ‘E.,’ and the “bissextile” or leap years, ‘B.’ Each 19-year cycle contains twelve common years and seven embolismic years. For these terms, see below.
13	That is, henceforth Easter Day was to be celebrated on Sunday, whatever the date of the Jewish Passover.
 
The Etymologies	VI.xvii.20–xviii.5
 
Church locates the moon of the first month (i.e. of the Roman calendar’s year) from March 5 through April 3, and if the fifteenth day of the new moon should fall on a Sunday, Easter Day is moved forward to the next Sunday. 20. The Greek Church observes the moon of the first month from March 8 through April 5, and if the fifteenth day of the new moon should fall on a Sunday, they celebrate holy Easter then. Dissension of this kind between the two camps confuses the Easter liturgy.
21. A year that has only twelve lunar months, that is, 354 days, is called ‘common.’ It is called common (communis) because often two occur so ‘connected together’ (coniunctus)thattheyimmediatelyfollowoneanotherin the (table for calculating the) Easter celebration – for an embolismic (i.e. intercalated) year always occurs alone. 22. An embolismic (embolismus) year has thirteen lunar months, that is, 384 days. That year was prophetically revealed to the holy Moses; in an embolismic year those who lived long ago were ordered to celebrate the pasch in the second month. 23. Further ‘embolism’ is a Greek term that is translated ‘further addition’ (superaugmentum) in Latin because it fills out the count of days of the common years, in which eleven lunar days are observed to be missing. 24. Moreover, embolismic and common years are found in this way. If there have been 384 days from the fourteenth day of the new moon of one Easter Day to the fourteenth day of its successor, the year is embolismic; if 354, common.
25.The‘bissextus’isthedayaddedeveryfouryears,for in each year it grows a quarter of a whole unit, but when it has completed a unit in the fourth year, the bissextile day is made. 26. It is called the bissextus because twice six (bis sexies) reckoned up makes a whole unit (i.e. of the twelve ounces in a Roman pound), which is one day – just as a quarter-unit (quadrans) is reckoned up by four times (quater) – because a bissextus is how far the sun goes beyond the course of the days in the year, [or because it is not able to be intercalated in its own year unless you compute ‘twice the sixth’ (bis sextus) day before the nones of March, that is, both with the first day as the sixth day before the nones of March and, with the bissextus added, with the second day repeated as the sixth day before the nones of March]. 27. Further, from the sixth day before the nones of March through the day before the Kalends of January the bissextus is taken into account in the course of the moon, and afterwards it is removed.
28. Intercalary (intercalaris) days are so called because they are interposed (interponere) so that the reckoning of the sun and the moon may be reconciled, for calare means “pose,” and intercalare means “interpose.” 29. What Greeks call ‘epacts’ (epacta) the Latins call ‘annual lunar additions,’ which run through a cycle from eleven to thirty days. The Egyptians add epacts to make the lunar measurement equal to the reckoning of the sun. 30. For the moon in its course is known to shine twentynine and a half days, so that there are 354 (i.e. 12×29.5) days in a lunar year; there remain in the course of a solar year eleven days, which the Egyptians add (adicere). 31. Hencetheyarecalledadditions(adiectio).Withoutthese epacts you would not find what point of the lunar cycle corresponds to a given year and month and day. Those epacts are always added on March 21, on the same day of the moon that falls on that date. 32. There are nineteen years in the (Metonic) cycle, but when the epacts add up to twenty-nine, which is in the nineteenth year of the cycle, at that point you do not add eleven epacts to the twenty-nine in the following year, such that you would get ten after subtracting thirty, but you start again with eleven.
xviii. The other liturgical feasts (De reliquis festivitatibus) 1. A ‘festal celebration’ (festivitas) is so called from ‘festal days’ (festus dies), as if the word were festiditas, because during those days only sacred activities are carried out. The contrary to these are court-days (fasti), on which the law ‘speaks’ (fari, ppl. fatus), that is, is pronounced. A ‘solemn feast’ (sollemnitas) is so called from its holy rites, a day adopted in such a way that for religious reasons it ought not to be changed. It is named from ‘customary’ (solitus), that is, firm and solid (solidus), [or because it is customarily (solere) performed in the church year]. 2. A celebration (celebritas) moreover is so called because during it earthly activity is not carried out, but only celestial (caelestis) activities.
3. Easter Day is the first of all the feasts; we have spoken of this term above. 4. Like Easter Day, Pentecost was a feast day among the Hebrews, because it was celebrated five tens of days after Easter Day – whence it takes its name, for !B  means “five” in Greek. On that day according to the Law the ‘loaves of proposition’ would beofferedfromthenewcrops(Exodus25:30,etc.).5.The jubilee year in the Old Testament adumbrated this, and
 
VI.xviii.6–xix.2
nowinturnitprefigureseternalrestthroughitsfigureof redemption.14 6.TheGreekterm‘Epiphany’(Epiphania) is ‘appearance’ (apparitio) [or ‘manifestation’] in Latin, foronthatday,whenthestarledtheway,Christappeared to the Magi to be worshipped. This was a figure of the beginningsofgentilebelievers.7.[Also]onEpiphanyday were manifest the sacrament of the Lord’s baptism and the water changed into wine, the first of the signs performedbytheLord.8.Thereare,infact,twoepiphanies: the first, in which, when the angel announced it, the newborn Christ appeared to the Hebrew shepherds; the second, in which a star, by its guidance, caused Magi from the pagan peoples to come to worship at the cradle that was a manger.
9. Scenopegia is a feast day of the Hebrews, translated from the Greek into Latin as ‘Feast of Tabernacles.’ It is celebrated by Jews in memory of their sojourn, when they were living in tabernacles after they advanced out of Egypt, and from that, scenopegia, because  in Greek means “tabernacle.” This feast is celebrated among the Hebrews in the month of September. 10. The neomeniawecallkalends(i.e.thefirstdayofthemonth), butthisistheHebrewusage,becausetheirmonths(mensis) are computed according to the lunar course, and in Greek the moon is called , hence neomenia, that is, thenewmoon.11.Thosekalendsweresolemnamongthe Hebrews on account of a legal statute, concerning which it is said in the Psalter (Psalm 80:4 Vulgate), “Blow up the trumpet on the first of the month, on the noted day of your solemnity.”15
12. Encaenia is a new dedication of the Temple, for in Greek  means“new.”Whensomethingnewisdedicated, it is called an encaenia. Jews celebrated this feast ofthededicationoftheTempleinthemonthofOctober. 13.PalmSundayissocalledbecauseonthatdayourLord and Savior, as the prophet sang, is said to have sat on an ass’s colt while heading for Jerusalem. Then a multitude ofthecommonpeoplewalkingbeforehimwithbranches of palms shouted (John 12:13), “Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, the king of Israel.” 14. Further, common people call this day Capitilavium because [on that day] the custom then was for the heads (caput, plural capita) of infants who were to be anointed to be washed (lavare) so that in their observation of Lent they would not approach the anointing dirty. 15. Moreover on this day the creed is taught to the catechumens, because of the adjoining celebration of Easter, so that those who already are hastening to receive the grace of God may come to know the faith that they profess.
16. The Lord’s Supper is so called because on that day the Savior celebrated the pasch with his disciples. This is stillcelebratedjustasithascomedowntous,andonthat daytheholychrismisprepared,andthebeginningofthe New Testament and cessation of the Old is declared. 17. Sabbath, according to the meaning of its Hebrew name, is called ‘rest’ (requies) because when the creation of the world was finished, God rested on that day. 18. And indeed on that day the Lord rested in his tomb, in order that he might confirm the mystery of that rest, for, in a foreshadowing of future things, this day was mandated tobeobservedbytheJews.However,afterChristfulfilled the figure of the sabbath in his tomb, the observation of that day ceased.
19. From that point on Sunday is called the Lord’s (Dominicus) day, because on that day the joy of the resurrection of our Lord (Dominus) is celebrated. This day was authorized, not by Jews but by Christians, as the day of the resurrection of the Lord, and from that time it began to have its own liturgical celebration. 20. For the Jews, only the sabbath was passed down as a solemn day, because before that time there was the repose (requies) of the dead, but there was no resurrection for anyone who, rising from the dead, might not die. 21. But after the resurrection of the body of the Lord took place in such a way that he might go before, at the head of the Church, demonstrating what the body of the Church could hope for at the last, then Sunday, the Lord’s day, that is the eighth day, which is also the first day, began to be celebrated.
xix. Offices (De officiis) 1. There are many kinds of offices, but the chief one is that service which is held for holy and divine matters. An office (officium) is so called from performing (efficere), as if it were efficium, with one letter in the word changed for the sake of euphony, or rather that each person should do those things that interfere (officere) with nobody but are of benefit to all. 2. The office of Vespers takes place at the beginning of night, and is named for the evening star Vesper, which
14	The jubilee, every fifty years, was a year when slaves were freed and debts cancelled.
15	ForIsidore’s‘thefirstofthemonth’(initiummensis)theVulgate reads neomenia.
 
rises when night falls. 3. But the office of Matins occurs at the beginning of daylight, and is named after the star Lucifer, which rises when morning begins. By the token of these two times of day it is shown that God is to be praisedalways,dayandnight.4.Themass(missa)occurs atthetimeintheeucharisticserviceofthesacrificewhen the catechumens are sent (mittere, ppl. missus) outside, while the deacon calls out, “If any catechumen remains, lethimgooutside.”Andhencethetermismissa,because those who are not yet known to be regenerate (i.e. the unbaptized) cannot be present at the sacraments of the altar.
5. A choir (chorus) is a multitude gathered for sacred rites, and it is called a choir because in the beginning they would stand around an altar in the shape of a crown (corona) and thus sing. Others say the word ‘choir’ is from the ‘concord’ (concordia) that exists in charity, because without charity it is impossible to sing responses harmoniously. 6. Further, when one person sings (canere), it is called a monodia in Greek, a sicinium in Latin; when two sing, it is called a bicinium; when many,achoir.Achoreaisatriflingentertainmentinsong or the steps of a dancing band. 7. The term ‘antiphon’ (antiphona) translated from the Greek, means “reciprocal voice,” specifically when two choruses alternate in singing with their order interchanged, that is, from one to the other. The Greeks are said to have invented this kind of singing. 8. The Italians handed down responsory singing; they called these chants ‘responsories’ (responsorius) because when one breaks off the other responds (respondere). There is however this distinction between responsories and antiphons, that in a responsory one person says the verse, whereas in antiphons the choruses alternate in the verses.
9. A lesson (lectio) is so called because it is not sung, like a psalm or hymn, but only read (legere, ppl. lectus). In singing we look for tunefulness; in a lesson, only enunciation. 10. A canticle (canticum) is the voice of one singing(cantare)injoy.11.Apsalm(psalmus)isthename for what is sung to the psaltery (psalterium). History records that the prophet David played this instrument, in a great mystery.16 These two terms are used together in certain titles of psalms, with their order alternating
16	The mystery of David’s psalms is their prophesying of Christ.
17	These are presumably singers in the low, middle, and high ranges.
VI.xix.3–xix.21
depending on the musical technique. 12. Thus a ‘canticle ofapsalm’occurswhenwhatamusicalinstrumentplays, the voice of the singer afterwards sounds, but a ‘psalm of a canticle’ when the art of the instrument being played imitates what the human voice sounds first. ‘Psalm’ is named from the instrument called a psaltery, whence the custom is for it not to be accompanied by any other kind of playing.
13.Therearemoreoverthreerangesinsinging:firstthe succentor, second the incentor, and third the accentor.17
14. Some would call diapsalma a Hebrew word, meaning “always”; that is, they assert that those words among which the diapsalm is inserted are unchanging. 15. But others consider it a Greek word, meaning “an interval in psalm-chanting”;asapsalmiswhatispsalm-chanted,so a diapsalm is the silence interposed in psalm-chanting – just as a synpsalma is a joining of voice in singing, so a diapsalm is a disjunction of vocal sounds, where a kind of rest set off from the continuation of sound is marked. 16. Hence thoughts probably should not be run together in singing at the point where a diapsalma is interposed, because it is placed there so that a change of thought or of speaker may be recognized.
17. A hymn (hymnus) is the song of those giving praise (laudare), whence it is translated from the Greek as “praise” (laus) in Latin, being a song of joy and praise. Properly, then, hymns contain praise of God. Therefore if it is praise, but not of God, it is not a hymn; if it is both praise and praise of God, but it is not sung, it is not a hymn. Therefore if it is both uttered in praise of God and sung, then it is a hymn. 18. Its contrary is a threnody (threnum), which is a song of grief and death.
19. Alleluia is an expression of two words, that is, ‘God’s praise,’ and is Hebrew, for Ia is one of the ten names by which God is addressed among the Hebrews. 20. Amen means “truly” or “faithfully,” and it too is Hebrew.ItisnotpermittedforGreek,Latin,orbarbarian speakers to translate these two words, alleluia and amen, whollyintotheirownlanguage,ortopronouncethemin any other language, for although they can be translated, the antiquity of their own language has been preserved in them from apostolic times because of their especially sacredauthority.21.Forsoholyarethesewordsthateven JohnintheApocalypsetellsthatwhentheSpiritrevealed it to him he saw and heard the voice of the heavenly host likethevoiceofmanywatersandmightythunder,saying
 
VI.xix.22–xix.40
amen and alleluia (Apoc. 19:4, 6). And because of this it is fitting for both words to be spoken on earth just as they resound in heaven.
22. Osanna (i.e. hosanna) cannot entirely be translated into another language: osi means “save!”; anna is an interjection expressing the emotion of someone in a state of passionate beseeching. 23. In its entirety, moreover,thewordisosianna,whichwepronounceasosanna, with the middle vowel degraded and elided just as happens in poetic lines when we scan them, for the initial vowel of a following word excludes the final vowel of the preceding word. In Hebrew it is spoken osanna, which means “save!” with its object understood as either ‘thy people’ or ‘the whole world.’
24. The offertory (offertorium) gets its name for the following reason: a fertum (sacrificial cake) is the name of an oblation which is offered (offerre) and sacrificed at the altar by high priests, and from this the offertory is named, as if ‘because of the fertum.’ 25. An oblation is so called because it is offered (offerre, ppl. oblatus). 26. Properly speaking ‘gifts’ (donum) refer to divine things, whereas‘presents’(munus)areofhumans.27.Formunus is a term used of the services poor people pay to the rich in place of presents (munus). So, a present is given to a human, a gift to God – whence in temples we speak of
‘votive gifts’ (donaria). Further, they are called presents (munus) because they are received or given with one’s hands(manus).28.Therearetwothingsthatareoffered: a gift or a sacrifice. 29. We call a gift whatever is made of gold or silver or any other valuable. 30. But a sacrifice is a victim and whatever is burnt or placed on an altar. Further, everything that is given to God is either dedicated or consecrated. That which is dedicated (dedicare) is‘givenwithspeaking’(dare,“give”anddicere,“speak”), whence it is so called. Therefore those who think a consecration means a dedication are wrong. 31. An immolation (immolatio) is so called by the ancients because a victim would be slain when it was placed ‘on the mass’ (in mole) of the altar. Whence also the slaughtering is after the immolation. But now an ‘immolation’ of the bread and chalice is proper usage, but a libation (libatio) is an offering of the chalice only. 32. Hence is that saying (Ecclesiasticus 50:16), “He offered (libavit) of the blood of the grape.” Similarly one of the secular poets (Vergil, Aen. 7.133) says,
Now offer your libation-bowls to Jove.
To make a libation (libare) therefore is properly to pour out, and its name is taken from a certain Liber (i.e. Bacchus), who in Greece discovered the use of grapevines.
33. Among the ancients the sacrifice made before they proceeded against the enemy (hostis) was called a hostia. 34. But after a victory (victoria), when the enemy were defeated (devincere, ppl. devictus), the sacrifices they would slaughter were ‘victims’ (victima). Victims are larger sacrifices than hostiae. Others think that a victimissocalledbecauseitwouldfalldeadwhenstruckby ablow(ictus),orbecauseitwouldbebroughttothealtar bound (vincio, ppl. vinctus). 35. A holocaust (holocaustum)isasacrificeinwhichallthatisofferedisconsumed byfire,forwhentheancientswouldperformtheirgreatest sacrifices, they would consume the whole sacrificial victim in the flame of the rites, and those were holocausts, for S  in Greek means “whole,” N means “burning,” and holocaust, “wholly burnt.”
36. All those sacred rites that in Greek are called ‘religious revels’ (orgia) are called ‘ceremonies’ (caerimonia) in Latin. Properly, however, it has been perceived by learned people that ceremonies were so called from ‘doing without’ (carere), as if the word were carimonia, becausewhateverthingsareofferedinsacredritualspeopledowithoutfortheirownuse.Thistermisusedevenin sacredwritings.37.OthersbelievethatceremoniesproperlybelongamongtheobservationsofJews–specifically, abstainingfromcertainfoodsinaccordancewiththeOld Law – because those who are observant do without the things from which they abstain. 38. The sacrifice (sacrificium, i.e. of the mass) is so called as if it were a ‘sacred deed’ (sacrum factum), because by a mystic prayer it is consecrated in commemoration of the Lord’s suffering for us, whence we call this sacrifice, at his command, the body and blood of Christ. Although it consists of the fruits of the earth, it is sanctified and made a sacrament with the Spirit of God invisibly working. The Greeks call the sacrament of this bread and chalice the ‘Eucharist’ (Eucharistia), which in Latin means ‘good favor’ (bona gratia) – and what is better than the blood and body of Christ?
39. A ‘sacrament’ takes place in a particular liturgical rite when an action is performed in such a way that it is understood to signify something that ought to be receivedinaholyway.Sacraments,then,arebaptismand unction,andthebodyandblood[oftheLord].40.These
 
things are called sacraments (sacramentum) for this reason, that under the covering of corporeal things the divine virtue very secretly brings about the saving power of those same sacraments – whence from their secret (secretus) or holy (sacer) power they are called sacraments. 41. Sacraments are fruitfully performed under the aegis of the Church because the Holy Spirit dwelling intheChurchinahiddenwaybringsabouttheaforesaid effect of the sacraments. 42. Hence, although they may be dispensed through the Church of God by good or by bad ministers, nevertheless because the Holy Spirit mystically vivifies them – that Spirit that formerly in apostolic times would appear in visible works – these gifts are neither enlarged by the merits of good ministers nor diminished by the bad, for (I Corinthians 3:7), “neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase.” For this reason in Greek a sacrament is called a ‘mystery,’ because it has a secret and recondite character.
43. The Greek term ‘baptism’ (baptismum, cf. !7  ), is the equivalent of the Latin tinctio (“dipping,” “dyeing”) because in it a person is changed by the spirit of grace into a better thing, and is made a far different thing than he was. 44. For we were filthy before with the ugliness of sins, but in that bathing we become beautiful in the whitening of the virtues, whence it is written in the Song of Songs (8:5, in an older version), “Who is this that cometh up whitened?” 45. The mystery of baptism is not completed unless one is named, accompanied by the naming of the Trinity, that is, of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as the Lord said to the apostles (Matthew 28:19), “Go, teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” 46. Thus, just as every statement is confirmed by three witnesses, so the threefold number of divine names confirms this sacrament. 47. This is the reason why baptism is enacted by water: the Lord desired that invisible thing to be granted through the congruent but definitely tangible and visible element over which in the beginning the Holy Spirit moved (Genesis 1:2). 48. For justastheouterbodyiswashedbywater,sothespiritalso ispurifiedbytheHolySpiritinahiddenwaythroughthe mystery of baptism. The baptismal water is made holy
18 In this passage Isidore treats baptism by water, anointing, and imposition of hands as all parts of the sacrament of Baptism; each act may also be an independent sacrament.
VI.xix.41–xix.57
in this way: 49. when God is invoked the Holy Spirit descends from heaven and, when the waters have been purified, sanctifies them from itself, and they receive the power of purgation, so that in them both flesh and soul, befouled by sins, may be cleansed.
50. The Greek term ‘chrism’ (chrisma) is ‘unction’ (unctio) in Latin. The word ‘Christ’ (Christus) is also derived from this word, and a person is sanctified after theapplicationofunction.51.Forjustasremissionofsins is granted in baptism, so the sanctification of the spirit is administered through unction. This sacrament derives fromtheancientcustomaccordingtowhichpeopleused to be anointed into the priesthood or the royal office, for which reason Aaron was anointed by Moses. 52. When this is done in the flesh, it benefits in the spirit, just as in the gift of baptism also there is a visible act, that we are submerged in water, but a spiritual effect, that we are cleansed of sins. 53. This is what that ointment signifies, which a sinful woman is written to have poured on the feet of Jesus (Luke 7:37–50), and which she who is said not to have been a sinner, is written to have poured on his head (Matthew 26:7–13, etc.).
54.Thesacramental‘layingonofhands’(manusimpositio) is done to bid the Holy Spirit come, invoked by means of a blessing, for at that time the Paraclete, after the bodies have been cleansed and blessed, willingly descends from the Father and as it were settles on the water of baptism, as if in recognition of its settling on its original seat – for it is read that in the beginning the Holy Spirit moved over the waters (Genesis 1.2).18
55. The Greek term ‘exorcism’ (exorcismus) is ‘conjuration’ (coniuratio) in Latin, or a ‘speech of rebuke’ directed against the devil, that he should depart, as in this passage in Zechariah (3:1–2): “And the Lord showed me Jesus the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord: and Satan stood on his right hand to be his adversary. And the Lord said to Satan: The Lord rebuke thee, OSatan:andtheLordthatchoseJerusalemrebukethee.” 56. Exorcism is this, to rebuke and conjure against the devil, whence it should be understood that it is no creature of God that is exorcized or breathed out in infants, butthatdevil,towhomallaresubjectwhoarebornwith sin – for he is the prince of sinners.
57. The word ‘creed’ (symbolum) from Greek means “sign” or “token of recognition,” for the apostles, about to disperse for preaching the gospel among the nations, proposed the creed for themselves as a sign or guidepost
 
VI.xix.58–xix.74
for preaching. 58. Moreover it contains the profession of the Trinity and the unity of the Church and the whole holy order of Christian teaching. This creed of our faith and hope is not written on papyrus sheets and with ink, but on the fleshly tablets of our hearts. 59. A ‘prayer’ (oratio)meansa“petition”(petitio),fortopray(orare)is tobeseech(petere),justasto‘praysuccessfully’(exorare) is to obtain (impetrare). Further, prayer has a proper place and time. Place, because not everywhere, since we are prohibited by Christ from prayer in public, except where opportunity grants it or necessity requires it. The apostles are not believed to have prayed against Jesus’ command when they prayed and sang to God in prison in the hearing of their guards. 60. With regard to time it has truly been said (I Thessalonians 5:17), “Pray without ceasing,” but this applies to individuals; in a religious community there is a service at certain hours to signal the divisions of the day – at the third hour, the sixth, and the ninth (i.e. Terce, Sext, and Nones) – and likewise the divisions of the night.
61. These hours of prayers are apportioned so that, if weshouldbychancebeoccupied,thespecifictimewould draw our attention to the divine office. These times are found in Scripture. 62. First, the Holy Spirit was poured into the gathered disciples at the third hour (Acts 2:15). Peter, on the day in which he experienced the vision of communication in the vessel, had ascended in order to pray at the sixth hour (Acts 10:9–16). Likewise Peter with John went to the temple at the ninth hour when he healedtheparalytic(Acts3:1–8).63.Butwealsoreadthat Daniel observed these times in his prayer (Daniel 6:13), and in any case it is the teaching from the Israelites that we should pray not less than three times a day, for we are debtors of three – Father, Son, and Holy Spirit – not counting, of course, other prayers as well, which are due without any notice being given, at the onset of day or of night or of the watches of the night. But we are also not to consume food before we have interposed a prayer, 64. for refreshment of the spirit should come first, because heavenly things come before earthly. Moreover, he who wishes for his prayer to fly to God should make two wings for it, fasting and almsgiving, and it will ascend swiftly and be clearly heard.
65. Fasting (ieiunium) is parsimony of sustenance and abstinence from food, and its name is given to it from a certain portion of the intestines, always thin and empty, which is commonly called the jejunum (ieiunum). Whence the name of fasting is believed to have derived, because by the starvation of the jejunum the intestines are empty and cleaned out. 66. Fasting is also called a station (statio, i.e. a “watch”). This watch takesitsnamefromamilitaryanalogy,becausenohappy festivity occurring in a camp rescinds the watch-duty (statio) of soldiers. For happiness maintains discipline morereadily,griefmorecarefully;whencesoldiers,never unmindful of their sworn duty, keep their watches all the sooner. 67. Some however distinguish between fasting and a station, for fasting is abstinence on any day indifferently, not in accordance with a rule but following one’s own will, whereas a station is an observance of predetermined days or seasons. 68. Of days, as the fast on Thursday and Saturday mandated by the Old Law. Concerning this station the man said in the Gospel (Luke18:12),“Ifasttwiceinaweek,”thatis,onthefourth and sixth days of the week. 69. Of seasons also, which were established by legal and prophetic customs at fixed times, as the fast of the fourth, fifth, seventh, and tenth month (Zechariah 8:19); or, as in the Gospel (Matthew 9:15), the days for fasting on which the bridegroom has been taken away; or as the observance of Lent, which is observed in the whole world, according to the apostolic institution, leading up to the time of the Lord’s Passion. 70. Some add a third type to these, which they call ‘dryeating’(xerophagia),thatis,abstinencefrommoistfood. It takes its name from this, because some make use of dry food.
71.Penitence(poenitentia)issocalledasifitwerepunitentia,becausebymeansofhisownrepenting(poenitere, i.e. paenitere) a person punishes (punire) the wrong he hasdone.Indeed,theywhotrulydopenancedonothing other than not permit what they have done wrong to go unpunished. Indeed, he whose high and just judgment no scoffer evades is sparing in proportion as they do not spare themselves. 72. Further, perfect penitence is to weep for past sins and not allow future ones. This penitential weeping bears the likeness of a fountain, because if by chance, when the devil attacks, some sin creeps in, bythesatisfactionofpenitenceitiswashedaway.73.Satisfaction (satisfactio) moreover, is to shut out the causes and urgings of sins and not to repeat the sin further. 74. But reconciliation (reconciliatio) is what is granted after the completion of penitence, for as we are won over
 
(conciliare) to God when we are first converted from paganism, so we are reconciled (reconciliare) when after sinning we return by penitence.
75. The Greek term exomologesis means what in Latin istermed‘confession,’atermthathasadoublesignification. A confession can either be understood as of praise, as in “I will confess you to be the Lord, the Father of heaven and earth,” or as when someone confesses his sins so that they will be forgiven by him whose mercy is unfailing. 76. Therefore we express and make use of this Greek term exomologesis for that act by which we confess (confiteri, ppl. confessus) our sin to the Lord – not indeed as if he were ignorant, for nothing is hidden from his knowledge; but a confession (confessio) is an ‘explicit acknowledgment’ (professa cognitio) of a thing, namely of that which is unknown. 77. For suppose a person has thought it profitable and pleasant to commit rapine, adultery, or theft, but when he recognizes that these things are liable to eternal damnation, as these things are acknowledged (cognoscere, ppl. cognitus) he confesses his error. 78. Moreover a confession is an affirmation of the cessation of error; therefore there should be cessation of sin when there is confession. Further, confession precedes, and forgiveness follows. But the person is beyond forgiveness who knows his sin but
VI.xix.75–xix.82
does not confess what is known to him. 79. And so exomologesis is the discipline of a person’s prostrating and humiliating himself in dress and food, to lie in sackcloth and ashes, to smear his body with filth, to cast down his spirit in mourning, to transform with harsh treatment those things which are at fault.
80. Litanies (litania) are the Greek names for what are called ‘rogations’ in Latin. But between litanies and exomologesis is this distinction, that exomologesis is performed only for the confession of sins, whereas litanies are ordained for beseeching God and procuring his mercy in some case. 81. But nowadays either term designates one thing, and commonly there is no distinction whether ‘litanies’ or exomologesis is spoken of. The term ‘supplication’ is now retained in a certain way from paganism. 82. Among the pagans the festival days were either ‘customary’ (legitimus) or ‘specially decreed’ (indictus, also meaning “criminally indicted”). And indictus because the poor of ancient Rome would make sacrifice from a confiscation, or indeed out of the goods of the condemned. Hence ‘propitiatory offerings’ (supplicium) that were made from the goods of people who had suffered punishments (supplicium) are called ‘supplications’ (supplicatio): thus holy things took their being from the belongings of the accursed.
 

 
Book VII God, angels, and saints (De deo, angelis et sanctis)
 
 
i. God(Dedeo) 1.ThemostblessedJerome,amosterudite man and skilled in many languages, first rendered the meaning of Hebrew names in the Latin language. I have taken pains to include some of these in this work along with their interpretations, though I have omitted many for the sake of brevity. 2. Indeed, exposition of words often enough reveals what they mean, for some hold the rationale of their names in their own derivations.
First, then, we present the ten names by which God is spoken of in Hebrew. 3. The first name of God in Hebrew is El. Some translate this as “God,” and others as :9, that is, “strong” (fortis), expressing its etymology, because he is overcome by no infirmity but is strong and capable of accomplishing anything. 4. The second name is Eloi (i.e. Elohim), 5. and the third Eloe, either of which in Latin is ‘God’ (Deus). The name Deus in Latin has been transliterated from a Greek term, for Deus is from "B  in Greek, which means  , that is, “fear,” whence is derived Deus because those worshipping him have fear. 6. Moreover ‘God’ is properly the name of the Trinity, referring to the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. To this Trinity are referred the remaining terms posited below of God.
7. The fourth name of God is Sabaoth, which is rendered in Latin “of armies” or “of hosts,” of whom the angels speak in the Psalm (23:10 Vulgate): “Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts.” 8. Now there are in the ordination of this world many hosts, such as angels, archangels, principalities, and powers, and all the orders of the celestial militia, of whom nevertheless he is Lord, for all are under him and are subject to his lordship. 9. Fifth, Elion, which in Latin means “lofty” (excelsus), because he is above the heavens (caelum), as was written of him (Psalm 112:4 Vulgate): “The Lord is high (excelsus) . . . his glory above the heavens (caelus).” Further,
1 The Tetragrammaton actually consists of the Hebrew consonants yodh, he, waw, he.
153
excelsus is so called from ‘very lofty’ (valde celsus), for ex is put for valde, as in eximius (“exceptional”), as it were valde eminens (“very eminent”).
10. Sixth, Eie, that is, ‘He who is.’ For only God, because he is eternal, that is, because he has no origin, truly holds the name of Being. Now this name was reported to the holy Moses by an angel, 11. for when Moses asked what was the name of the one who was commanding him to proceed with the liberation of his people from Egypt, he answered him (Exodus 3:14): “I am who I am: and thou shalt say to the children of Israel: ‘Hewhois’hathsentmetoyou.”Itisjustasifincomparison with him, who truly ‘is’ because he is immutable, thosethingsthataremutablebecomeasiftheywerenot. 12. That of which it is said, “it was,” ‘is’ not, and that of which it is said, “it will be,” ‘is’ not yet. Further, God has knownonly‘is’,anddoesnotknow‘was’and‘willbe.’13. For only the Father, with the Son and Holy Spirit, truly ‘is.’ Compared with his being, our being is not being. And for this reason we say in conversation, “God lives,” because his Being lives with a life that death has no hold over.
14. Seventh, Adonai, which broadly means “Lord” (Dominus), because he has dominion (dominari) over every creature, or because every creature is subservient to his lordship (dominatus). Lord, therefore, and God, either because he has dominion over all things, or because he is feared by all things. 15. Eighth, Ia (i.e. Yah), which is only applied to God, and which sounds as the last syllable of ‘alleluia.’ 16. Ninth, the Tetragrammaton, that is, the ‘four letters’ that in Hebrew are properly appliedtoGod–iod,he,iod,he–thatis,‘Ia’twice,which when doubled forms that ineffable and glorious name of God.1 The Tetragrammaton is called ‘ineffable’ not because it cannot be spoken, but because in no way can it be bounded by human sense and intellect; therefore, becausenothingcanbesaidworthyofit,itisineffable.17. Tenth,Shaddai,thatis,“Almighty.”HeiscalledAlmighty (omnipotens)becausehecandoallthings(omniapotest), but by doing what he will, not by suffering what he does
 
VII.i.18–i.34
not will. If that were to happen to him, in no way would he be Almighty – for he does whatever he wishes, and therein he is Almighty. 18. Again, ‘Almighty’ because all things in every place are his, for he alone has dominion over the whole world.
Certain other names are also said for God substantively, as immortal, incorruptible, immutable, eternal. Whence deservedly he is placed before every creature. 19. Immortal, as was written of him (I Timothy 6:16): “Who only hath immortality,” because in his nature there is no change, for every sort of mutability not improperly is called mortality. From this it follows that the soul also is said to die, not because it is changed and turned into body or into some other substance, but because everything is considered mortal that in its very substance is now, or once was, of a different sort, in that it leaves off being what it once was. And by this reasoning only God is called immortal, because he alone is immutable. 20. He is called incorruptible (incorruptibilis) because he cannot be broken up (corrumpere,ppl.corruptus)anddissolvedordivided.Whatever undergoes division also undergoes passing away, but he can neither be divided nor pass away; hence he is incorruptible.
Heisimmutable(incommutabilis)becauseheremains forever and does not change (mutare). 21. He neither advances, because he is perfect, nor recedes, because he is eternal. 22. He is eternal because he is without time, for he has neither beginning nor end. And hence he is ‘forever’ (sempiternus), because he is ‘always eternal’ (semper aeternus). Some think that ‘eternal’ (aeternus) is so called from ‘ether’ (aether), for heaven is held to be his abode. Whence the phrase (Psalm 113:16 Vulgate), “The heaven of heaven is the Lord’s.” And these four terms signify one thing, for one and the same thing is meant, whether God is called eternal or immortal or incorruptible or immutable.
23. ‘Invisible,’ because the Trinity never appears in its substance to the eyes of mortals unless through the form of a subject corporeal creature. Indeed, no one can see the very manifestation of the essence of God and live, as it was told to Moses (Exodus 33:20), whence the Lord says in the Gospel (John 1:18), “No man hath seen God at any time.” Indeed, he is an invisible thing, and therefore should be sought not with the eye, but with the heart. 24. ‘Impassible,’ because he is affected by none of the disturbances to which human fragility succumbs, for none of the passions touch him, not desire, wrath, greed, fear, grief, envy, and the other things with which the human mind is troubled. 25. But when it is said that God is angry or jealous or sorrowful, it is said from the human point of view, for with God, in whom is utmost tranquillity, there is no disturbance.
26. Further he is called ‘single’ (simplex), either from not letting go of what he has, or because what he is and what is in him are not distinct, in the way that being and knowing are distinct for a human. 27. A human can be, andatthesametimenothaveknowledge.Godhasbeing, and he also has knowledge; but what God has he also is, and it is all one. He is ‘single’ because there is nothing accidental in him, but both what he is and what is in him are of his essence, except for what refers to each of thethreepersons.28.Heisthe‘ultimatelygood’(summe bonus)becauseheisimmutable.Whatiscreatedisgood, to be sure, but it is not consummately good because it is mutable. And although it may indeed be good, it still cannot be the highest good. 29. God is called ‘disembodied’ (incorporeus) or ‘incorporeal’ (incorporalis) because he is believed or understood to exist as spirit, not body (corpus, gen. corporis). When he is called spirit, his substance is signified.
30. ‘Immeasurable’ (immensus) because he encompasses all things and is encompassed by nothing, but all things are confined within his omnipotence. 31. He is called ‘perfect’ (perfectus) because nothing can be added to him. However, ‘perfection’ is said of the completion of some making; how then is God, who is not made
(factus), perfect (perfectus)? 32. But human poverty of diction has taken up this term from our usage, and likewise for the remaining terms, insofar as what is ineffable can be spoken of in any way – for human speech says nothing suitable about God – so the other terms are also deficient. 33. He is called ‘creator’ because of the matter of the whole world created by him, for there is nothing that has not taken its origin from God. And he is ‘one’ (unus) because he cannot be divided, or because there can be no other thing that may take on so much power. 34. Therefore what things are said of God pertain to the whole Trinity because of its one (unus) and coeternalsubstance,whetherintheFather,orinhisonlybegotten Son in the form of God, or in the Holy Spirit, which is the one (unus) Spirit of God the Father and of his only-begotten Son.
 
35. There are certain terms applied to God from human usage, taken from our body parts or from lesser things, and because in his own nature he is invisible and incorporeal, nevertheless appearances of things, as the effects of causes, are ascribed to him, so that he might more easily make himself known to us by way of the usage of our speech. For example, because he sees all things, we may speak of his eye; because he hears all, we may speak of his ear; because he turns aside, he walks; because he observes, he stands. 36. In this way and in other ways like these a likeness from human minds is applied to God, for instance that he is forgetful or mindful. Hence it is that the prophet says (Jeremiah 51:14), “The Lord of hosts hath sworn by his soul” – not that God has a soul, but he speaks in this way as from our viewpoint. 37. Likewise the ‘face’ of God in Holy Scriptureisunderstoodnotasflesh,butasdivinerecognition, in the same way in which someone is recognized when his face is seen. Thus, this is said in a prayer to God (Psalm 79:4 Vulgate), “Shew us thy face,” as if he were to say, “Grant us thy recognition.”
38.Thusthe‘traces’ofGodarespokenof,becausenow God is known through a mirror (I Corinthians 13:12), but he is recognized as the Almighty at the culmination, when in the future he becomes present face to face for each of the elect, so that they behold his appearance, whose traces they now try to comprehend, that is, him whom it is said they see through a mirror. 39. For in relation to God, position and vesture and place and time are spoken of not properly, but metaphorically, by way of analogy. For instance (Psalm 98:1 Vulgate), “He that sittethonthecherubims”issaidwithreferencetoposition; and (Psalm 103:6 Vulgate) “The deep like a garment is its clothing,” referring to vesture; and (Psalm 101:28 Vulgate) “Thy years shall not fail,” which pertains to time; and (Psalm 138:8 Vulgate) “If I ascend into heaven, thou art there,” referring to place. 40. Again, in the prophet (Amos 2:13), “As a wain laden with hay,” an image is used of God. All these refer to God figuratively, because nothing of these things refers properly to his underlying being.
ii. The Son of God (De Filio Dei) 1. In the divine writings Christ is also found to be named in many ways, for he, the only-begotten Son of God the Father, although he was the equal of the Father, took the form of a slave (Philippians 2:7) for our salvation. Whence some names
VII.i.35–ii.11
are given to him with regard to the substance of his divinity, and some with regard to the dispensation of his assumed humanity.
2. He is named ‘Christ’ (Christus) from ‘chrism’ (chrisma), that is, ‘anointed one,’ for it was a precept among the Jews that they would confect a sacred ointment by which those who were called to the priesthood or the kingship might be anointed. Just as nowadays for kings to be clothed in the purple is the mark of royal dignity, so for them anointing with sacred ointment would confer the royal title and power. Hence they are called ‘anointed ones’ (christus) from chrism, which is unction, 3. for the Greek chrisma is ‘unction’ (unctio) in Latin. When this anointing was done spiritually, it accommodated the name ‘Christ’ to the Lord, because he was anointed by the Spirit from God the Father, as in Acts (4:27): “For there assembled together in this city against thy holy child . . . whom thou hast anointed” – by no means with visible oil, but by the gift of grace, for which visible ointment is a sign. 4. ‘Christ’ is not, however, a proper name of the Savior, but a common-noun designation of his power. When he is called ‘Christ,’ it is a common designation of his importance, but when he is called ‘Jesus Christ’ it is the proper name of the Savior. 5. Further, the name of Christ never occurred at all elsewhere in any nation except in that kingdom alone where Christ was prophesied, and whence he was to come. 6. Again, in Hebrew he is called ‘Messiah’ (Messias), in Greek ‘Christ,’ in Latin ‘the anointed’ (unctus).
7. The Hebrew ‘Jesus’ is translated A  in Greek, and “healer” (salutaris) or “savior” (salvator) in Latin, becausehehascomeforallnationsasthe‘bearerofsalvation’ (salutifer). 8. The Evangelist renders the etymology of his name, saying (Matthew 1:21), “And thou shalt call his name Savior (salvator; cf. Vulgate Iesus), for he shall savehispeople.”Justas‘Christ’signifiesaking,so‘Jesus’ signifies a savior. 9. Not every kind of king saves us, but a savior king. The Latin language did not have this word salvator before, but it could have had it, seeing that it was able to when it wanted. 10. The Hebrew Emmanuel in Latin means “God is with us,” undoubtedly because, born of a Virgin, God has appeared to humans in mortal flesh, that he might open the way of salvation to heaven for the inhabitants of earth.
Christ’s names that pertain to the substance of his divinity are as follows: God (Deus), Lord (Dominus). 11. He is called God because of his unity of substance with
 
VII.ii.12–ii.31
the Father, and Lord because of the creation subservient to him. 12. And he is God and man, for he is Word and flesh.WhenceheiscalledtheDoubly-Begotten(bisgenitus), because the Father begot (gignere, ppl. genitus) him withoutamotherineternity,andbecauseamotherbegot him without a father in the temporal world. 13. But he is called the Only-Begotten (unigenitus) according to the peerlessqualityofhisdivinity,forheiswithoutbrothers; heiscalledtheFirst-Begotten(primogenitus)withregard to his assuming of human nature, in which he deigned through the grace of adoption to have brothers, among whom he was the first begotten.
14. He is called ‘of one substance’ (homousion, i.e. Q   )withtheFatherbecauseoftheirunityofsubstance, because in Greek substance or essence is called  L and Q - means “one.” The two joined together therefore denote ‘one substance.’ For this reason he is called Homousion, that is (John 10:30), “I and the Father are one” – that is, of the same substance with the Father. 15. Although this name is not written in Sacred Scripture, nevertheless it is supported in the formal naming of the whole Trinity because an account is offered according to which it is shown to be spoken correctly, just as in those books we never read that the Father is theUnbegotten(Ingenitus),yetwehavenodoubtthathe shouldbespokenofandbelievedtobethat.2 16.Homoeusion (i.e. Q   ), that is “similar in substance,” because as God is, so also is God’s image. Invisible is God, and invisible his image (i.e. the divinity latent in
Jesus).
17. The Beginning (Principium), because all things are from him, and before him nothing was. 18. The End (Finis), either because he deigned at the end (finis) of time to be born and to die humbly in the flesh and to undertaketheLastJudgment,orbecausewhateverwedo we refer to him, and when we have come to him we have nothing further to seek. 19. He is the ‘Mouth of God’ (Os Dei) because he is his Word, for just as we often say ‘this tongue’ and ‘that tongue’ for ‘words,’ which are made by the tongue, so ‘Mouth’ is substituted for the ‘Word of God,’becausewordsarenormallyformedbythemouth. 20. Further, he is called the Word (Verbum) because through him the Father established or commanded all things. 21. Truth (Veritas), because he does not deceive, but gave what he promised. Life (Vita) because he created.HeiscalledtheImage(Imago)becauseofhisequivalent likeness to the Father. 22. He is the Figure (Figura) because although he took on the form of a slave, he portrayed in himself the Father’s image and immeasurable greatness by his likeness to the Father in his works and powers.
23. He is the ‘Hand of God’ (Manus Dei) because all things were made through him. Hence also the ‘Right Hand’ (Dextera) because of his accomplishment of the workofallcreation,whichwasformedbyhim.TheArm (Brachium), because all things are embraced by him. 24. The Power (Virtus), because he contains in himself all the authority of the Father, and governs, holds, and rulesthewholecreationofheavenandearth.25.Wisdom (Sapientia), because he himself reveals the mysteries of knowledge and the secrets of wisdom. But although the Father and the Holy Spirit may be ‘Wisdom’ and ‘Power’ and‘Lamp’and‘Light,’neverthelessstrictlyspeakingitis the Son who is designated by these names. 26. Again, he is called Clarity (Splendor) because of what he plainly reveals. Lamp (Lumen), because he illuminates (illuminare). Light (Lux), because he unlocks the eyes of the heart for gazing at the truth. Sun (Sol), because he is the illuminator. 27. The Orient (Oriens, i.e. “East,” “Sunrising”) because he is the source of light and the brightener of things, and because he makes us rise (oriri) to eternal life. 28. The Fount (Fons), because he is the origin of things, or because he satisfies those who thirst.
He is also the # and 3. He is Alpha because no letter precedesit,foritisthefirstoftheletters,justastheSonof God is first, for he answered the Jews interrogating him that he was the beginning (John 8:25). Whence John in the Apocalypse, properly putting down the letter itself, says (22:13), “I am # and 3, first and last.” First, because before him nothing is. Last, because he has undertaken the Last Judgment. 29. Mediator (Mediator), because he has been constituted a mean (medius) between God and humanity, so that he might lead humanity through to God – whence the Greeks also call him   (“mediator”). 30. Paraclete, that is, advocate, because he intercedes for us with the Father, as John says of him (I John 2:1), “We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just.” 31. For Paraclete (Paracletus) is a Greek word that means “advocate” in Latin. This name is ascribed to
2 Isidore’s care with the concept of the unity of substance of Jesus and the Father reflects the recent conversion of the Visigothic king from Arianism, which was heretical on this point, to Catholicism. Isidore’s brother Leander was instrumental in this conversion.
 
both the Son and the Holy Spirit, as the Lord says in the Gospel (John 14:16), “I will ask the Father, and he shall give you another Paraclete.”
32. Also the Son is called Intercessor (Intercessor), becausehedevotescaretoremoveoursins,andheexerts effort to wash away our crimes. 33. Bridegroom (Sponsus), because descending from heaven he cleaves to the Church, so that by the grace of the New Covenant they might be two in one flesh. 34. He is called an Angel (Angelus, i.e. ‘messenger’) because of his announcing of his Father’s and his own will. Whence it is read in the Prophet (cf. Isaiah 9:6), “Angel of great counsel,” although he is God and Lord of the angels. 35. He is called the ‘One Sent’ (Missus) because he appeared to this world as the Word made flesh, whence also he says (John 16:28), “I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world.” 36. He is also called the ‘Human Being’(Homo)becausehewasborn.Prophet(Propheta), because he revealed future things. Priest (Sacerdos), because he offered himself as a sacrifice for us. Shepherd (Pastor), because he is a guardian. Teacher (Magister), because he shows the way. Nazarene (Nazarenus) from his region, but Nazarite (Nazareus) is an earned title meaning “holy” or “clean,” because he did no sin.
37. Further, Christ attracts to himself types of names from other lesser things so that he might more easily be understood. 38. For he is called Bread (Panis) because he is flesh. Vine (Vitis), because we are redeemed by his blood. Flower (Flos), because he was picked. The Way (Via), because by means of him we come to God. The Portal (Ostium), because through him we make our approach to God. Mount (Mons), because he is mighty. Rock (Petra), because he is the strength of believers. 39. Cornerstone(Lapisangularis),becausehejoinstwowalls coming from different directions, that is from the circumcised and the uncircumcised, into the one fabric of the Church, or because he makes peace in himself for angels (angelus) and humans. 40. The Stumbling-stone (Lapis offensionis), because when he came in humility unbelievers stumbled (offendere) against him and he became a ‘rock of scandal’ (Romans 9:33), as the Apostle says (I Corinthians 1:23), “Unto the Jews indeed a stumbling block (scandalum).”
41. Further he is called the Foundation (Fundamentum) because faith on him is most firm, or because the Catholic Church was built upon him. 42. Now Christ is the Lamb (Agnus) for his innocence, and the Sheep
VII.ii.32–iii.2
(Ovis) for his submissiveness, and the Ram (Aries) for his leadership, and Goat (Haedus) for his likeness to sinful flesh, 43. and the Calf (Vitulus) because he was made a sacrificial victim for us, and Lion (Leo) for his kingdom and strength, and Serpent (Serpens) for his death and his sapience (sapientia), and again Worm (Vermis) because he rose again, 44. Eagle (Aquila) because after his resurrection he returned to the stars.
Nor is it a wonder that he should be figured forth by meansoflowlysigns,hewhoisknowntohavedescended even to the indignities of our passions or of the flesh. 45. For although he is coeternal with God the Father before worldly time, when the fullness of time arrived, the Son for our salvation took the form of a slave (Philippians 2:7),andtheSonofGodbecameasonofhumankind.46. For this reason some things are said of him in Scripture according to the form of God, some according to the form of a slave. Two of these should be kept in mind for an example, so that particular instances may severally be connected with these particular forms. So, he spoke of himself according to the form of God (John 10:30), “I and the Father are one”; according to the form of a slave (John 14:28), “For the Father is greater than I.”
47. But people who little understand how one thing may be said for another wish to transfer to the Son’s character as God what has been said with regard to his character as a slave. Again, they want what has been said relating the Persons to one another to be names for God’s nature and substance, and they make an error in their faith. 48. For human nature was so conjoined to the Son of God that one Person was made from two substances. Only the man endured the cross, but because of the unity of Person, the God also is said to have endured it.49.Hencewefinditwritten(ICorinthians2:8),“Forif they had known it, they never would have crucified the Lord of glory.” Therefore we speak of the Son of God as crucified, not in the power of his divinity but in the weakness of his humanity, not in his persistence in his own nature but in his acceptance of ours.
iii. The Holy Spirit (De Spiritu Sancto) 1. The Holy Spirit is proclaimed to be God because it proceeds from the Father and the Son, and has God’s substance, for no other thing could proceed from the Father than what is itself the Father. 2. It is called the Spirit (spiritus, i.e. ‘breath’ or ‘spirit’) because when it is breathed (spirare, ppl. spiratus) it is transferred to something else;
 
VII.iii.3–iii.19
moreover, its action inspires with its breath, so to speak, and consequently it is called the Spirit. It is called the Holy Spirit for a certain appropriate reason, in that the term is related to the Father and the Son, because it is their spiritus. 3. Now this name ‘Spirit’ is also conferred not because of what is imparted to something, but because of what signifies some kind of nature. 4. Indeed, every incorporeal nature in Holy Scripture is called spirit, whence this term suits not only the Father and Son and Holy Spirit, but also every rational creature and soul. 5. Therefore the Spirit of God is called Holy, becauseitistheholinessoftheFatherandSon.Although the Father is spirit and the Son is spirit, and the Father is holy and the Son is holy, properly nevertheless this one is called Holy (sanctus) Spirit, as the co-essential and consubstantial holiness (sanctitas) of both the others.
6. The Holy Spirit is not spoken of as begotten (genitus) lest it should be thought that there are two Sons in the Trinity. It is not proclaimed as unbegotten (ingenitus), lest it should be believed that there are two Fathers in that same Trinity. 7. It is spoken of, however, as proceeding(procedere),bythetestimonyoftheLord’ssaying (cf. John 16:12–15), “I have yet many things to say to you, but you cannot hear them now. But he, the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father, will come, and he shall receive of mine; he shall show everything to you.”3 ThisSpiritmoreoverproceedsnotonlybyitsnature,but it proceeds always in ceaselessly performing the works of the Trinity. 8. Between the Son who is born and the Holy Spirit who proceeds is this distinction, that the Son is born from one, the Holy Spirit proceeds from both. Therefore the Apostle says (Romans 8:9), “Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his.”
9.InitsworktheHolySpiritisalsounderstoodtobean angel, for it is said of it (John 16:13), “And the things that are to come, he shall announce (adnuntiare) to you” – andtheGreekterm‘angel’means“messenger”(nuntius) in Latin. Hence also two angels appeared to Lot, and to these the name ‘Lord’ was given in the singular; we understand them to have been the Son and the Holy Spirit, for we never read that the Father is ‘sent.’
10.TheHolySpirit,becauseitiscalledtheParaclete,is namedfrom‘consolation,’fortheGreekterm !7  in Latin means “consolation.” Thus Christ sent the Spirit to the mourning apostles, after he ascended from theireyestoheaven.11.Foritissentasaconsolertothose whogrieve,andaccordingtothesayingofthesameLord (Matthew 5:5), “Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be consoled.” Again he said (Matthew 9:15), “Then the children of the bridegroom shall mourn, when the bridegroom shall have been taken away from them.” 12. Again, Paraclete, because it offers consolation to souls that have lost temporal joy. Others say that ‘Paraclete’ in Latin means “orator” or “advocate,” for one and the same Holy Spirit speaks; it teaches; through it are given wordsofwisdom;byitHolyScripturehasbeeninspired.
13. The Holy Spirit is named the Sevenfold (septiformis) because of the gifts that all have a claim to attain from the fullness of its unity, one by one, according as theydeserve.ThusitistheSpiritofwisdomandintellect, theSpiritofcounselandcourage,theSpiritofknowledge andholiness,theSpiritofthefearoftheLord(Isaiah11:2– 3). 14. Further, we read of the ‘perfect Spirit’ (principalis Spiritus) in the fiftieth Psalm, where because spiritus is repeated thrice, some understand the Trinity, since it is written (John 4:24), “God is a spirit.” Indeed, because he is not a body, and yet he exists, it seems to remain that he is a spirit. Some understand that the Trinity is signified in Psalm 50: in the “perfect Spirit” (vs. 14) the Father, in the “right Spirit” (vs. 12) the Son, in the “holy spirit” (vs. 13) the Holy Spirit.
15. The Holy Spirit is called a Gift because it is given, for ‘gift’ (donum) takes its name from ‘giving’ (dare). Now it is very well known that our Lord Jesus Christ, when he had ascended into heaven after his resurrection from the dead, gave the Holy Spirit, and filled with this Spirit the believers spoke in the tongues of all nations. 16. Moreover it is a gift of God to the extent that it is given to those who love God through the Spirit. In itself, it is God; with regard to us, it is a gift – but the Holy Spirit is forever a Gift, handing out the gifts of grace to individualsasitwishes.17.Itimpartsthegiftofprophecy towhomeveritwishes,anditforgivessinsforwhomever it wishes – for sins are not pardoned without the Holy Spirit.18.TheHolySpiritisappropriatelynamedCharity (caritas) either because by its nature it joins with those from whom it proceeds and shows itself to be one with them, or because it brings it about in us that we remain in God and he in us. 19. Whence among the gifts of God nothingisgreaterthancharity,andthereisnogreatergift
3 The second sentence quoted departs from the Vulgate.
 
of God than the Holy Spirit. 20. It is also Grace (gratia), and has this name because it is given freely (gratis) not according to our merits, but according to divine will.
Further, just as we speak of the unique Word of God properly by the name of Wisdom, although generally both the Holy Spirit and the Father himself are wisdom, sotheHolySpiritisproperlynamedbythewordCharity, although both the Father and the Son are in general charity. 21. The Holy Spirit is very clearly declared in the books of the Gospel to be the Finger (Digitus) of God, forwhenoneEvangelistsaid(Luke11:20),“Ibythefinger of God cast out devils,” another said the same thing in this way (Matthew 12:28), “I by the Spirit of God cast out devils.” Wherefore also the law was written by the finger of God, and it was granted on the fiftieth day after the slaughter of the lamb, and on the fiftieth day after the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ came the Holy Spirit. 22. Moreover it is called the Finger of God to signify its operative power with the Father and the Son. Whence also Paul says (I Corinthians 12:11), “But all these things one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing to every one accordingashewill.”JustasthroughBaptismwedieand arereborninChrist,sowearesealedbytheSpirit,which is the Finger of God and a spiritual seal. The Holy Spirit is written to have come in the form of a dove (columba) in order that its nature might be expressed through a bird of simplicity and innocence. Whence the Lord said (Matthew 10:16), “Be ye simple as doves” – for this bird is without bile in its body, and has only innocence and love.
23. The Holy Spirit is referred to by the name of Fire (ignis) because it appeared as fire in the distribution of tongues in the Acts of the Apostles (2:3), and it settled on each of them. 24. Moreover it gave the gift of diverse tongues to the apostles so that they might be made capable of instructing the faithful people. 25. But the Holy Spiritisrememberedashavingsettleduponeachofthem so that it may be understood not to have been divided into many, but to have remained whole with respect to each one, as is generally the way with fire. 26. For a kindled fire has this nature, that however many should behold it, however many should behold that mane of purple splendor, to that same number would it impart the sight of its light, and offer the ministry of its gift, and still it would persist in its integrity.
27. The Holy Spirit is referred to by the name Water (aqua)intheGospel,astheLordcriesoutandsays(John
VII.iii.20–iv.4
7:37–38), “If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink. He that believeth in me, Out of his belly shall flow riversoflivingwater.”Moreover,theEvangelistexplained his words, for in the following sentence (39) he says, “NowthishesaidoftheSpiritwhichtheyshouldreceive, whobelievedinhim.” 28.Butthewaterofthesacrament (i.e. of Baptism) is one thing, and the water that signifies the Spirit of God is another, for the water of the sacrament is visible, the water of the Spirit is invisible. Theformercleansesthebody,andsymbolizeswhattakes place in the soul; but through the latter, the Holy Spirit, the soul itself is purified and fed.
29. As the apostle John witnesses, the Holy Spirit is called Unction (unctio) because, just as oil floats above every liquid because of its physical weight, so in the beginningtheHolySpiritfloatedabovethewaters(Genesis1:2).WhencewereadthattheLordwasanointedwith the ‘oil of gladness’ (Hebrews 1:9, etc.), that is with the Holy Spirit. 30. But the apostle John also calls the Holy Spirit ‘unction,’ saying (I John 2:27): “And as for you, let the unction, which you have received from him, abide in you. And you have no need that any man teach you; but as his unction teacheth you of all things.” Now that is the Holy Spirit, an invisible unction.
iv. The Trinity (De Trinitate) 1. The Trinity (Trinitas) is so named because from a certain three (tres) is made one (unum) whole, as it were a ‘Tri-unity’ (Triunitas) – just like memory, intelligence, and will, in which the mind has in itself a certain image of the divine Trinity. Indeed, while they are three, they are one, because while they persist in themselves as individual components, they are all in all. 2. Therefore the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are a trinity and a unity, for they are both one and three. They are one in nature (natura), three in person (persona). One because of their shared majesty,threebecauseoftheindividualityofthepersons. 3.FortheFatherisoneperson,theSonanother,theHoly Spirit another – but another person (alius), not another thing (aliud), because they are equally and jointly a single thing (simplex), immutable, good, and coeternal. 4. Only the Father is not derived from another; therefore heiscalledUnbegotten(Ingenitus).OnlytheSonisborn of the Father; therefore he is called Begotten (Genitus). Only the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son; therefore it alone is referred to as ‘the Spirit of both the others.’
 
VII.iv.5–v.10
5.ForthisTrinitysomenamesareappellative(appellativus), and some are proper (proprius). The proper ones name the essence, such as God, Lord, Almighty, Immutable, Immortal. These are proper because they signify the very substance by which the three are one. 6. But appellative names are Father and Son and Holy Spirit, Unbegotten and Begotten and Proceeding. These samearealsorelational(relativus)becausetheyhavereference (referre, ppl. relatus) to one another. When one says“God,”thatistheessence,becauseheisbeingnamed with respect to himself. But when one says Father and SonandHolySpirit,thesenamesarespokenrelationally, because they have reference to one another. 7. For we say ‘Father’ not with respect to himself, but with respect to his relation to the Son, because he has a son; likewise we speakof‘Son’relationally,becausehehasafather;andso ‘Holy Spirit,’ because it is the spirit of the Father and the Son. 8. This relationship is signified by these ‘appellative terms’ (appellatio), because they have reference to one another, but the substance itself, in which the three are one, is not thus signified.
Hence the Trinity exists in the relational names of the persons. Deity is not tripled, but exists in singleness, for if it were tripled we would introduce a plurality of gods. 9. For that reason the name of ‘gods’ in the plural is said with regard to angels and holy people, because they are not his equal in merit. 10. Concerning these is the Psalm (81:6 Vulgate), “I have said: You are gods.” But for the FatherandSonandHolySpirit,becauseoftheironeand equal divinity, the name is observed to be not ‘gods’ but ‘God,’ as the Apostle says (I Corinthians 8:6): “Yet to us thereisbutoneGod,”oraswehearfromthedivinevoice (Mark 12:29, etc.), “Hear, O Israel: the Lord thy God is one God,” namely inasmuch as he is both the Trinity and the one Lord God.
11. This tenet of faith concerning the Trinity is put in this way in Greek: ‘one  L,’ as if one were to say ‘one nature’ (natura) or ‘one essence’ (essentia); ‘three I! ,’whichinLatinmeans“threepersons”(persona) or “three substances” (substantia). 12. Now Latin does not speak of God properly except as ‘essence’; people say ‘substance,’ indeed, but metaphorically, for in Greek the term ‘substance’ actually is understood as a person of God, not as his nature.4
v. Angels (De angelis) 1. Angels (angelus) are so called in Greek (i.e. O ); they are malachoth in Hebrew, but translated in Latin as “messengers” (nuntius), becausetheyannounce(nuntiare)thewillofGodtopeople. 2. The term for angels is thus the name of their function, not of their nature. Indeed they are always spirits, but when they are commissioned they are called angels. 3. For this reason the license of artists makes wings for them, to signify their swift course on all their missions, just as in poetic fiction the winds are said to have wings to indicate their speed. Whence also Holy Scripture says (Psalm 103:3 Vulgate), “Who walketh upon the wings of the winds.”
4. Holy Scripture witnesses moreover that there are nine orders of angels, that is Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Principalities, Powers, Cherubim,andSeraphim(angelus,archangelus,thronus, dominatio, virtus, principatus, potestas, cherub, seraph). Astowhythesenamesaregiventotheiroffices,Ishallgo through them with explanations. 5. Angels are so called because they are sent from heaven in order to announce (nuntiare)thingstohumans,fortheGreek‘angel’means “messenger” (nuntius) in Latin.
6. Archangels are translated from Greek as “highest messengers”(summusnuntius),forthosewhoannounce small or trifling things are Angels, but those who announce the highest (summus) things are named Archangels. Archangels are so called because they hold primacy among the angels, for 9 in Greek is translated “prince” (princeps) in Latin. Indeed they are the leaders and princes, and under their Archangel order the tasks for each of the Angels are assigned. 7. That Archangels take precedence over Angels the prophet Zechariah bears witness, saying (2:3–4), “Behold the angel that spoke in me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him. And he said to him: Run, speak to this young man, saying: Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls.” 8. But if the higher powers did not assign their duties as angels to the lower ones, in no way would one angel have come to know from another what he should say to a human.
9. Moreover certain archangels are called by individual names, so that how they successfully discharge their duties might be designated through their names themselves. 10. ‘Gabriel’ in Hebrew is rendered in our language“StrengthofGod,”becausewheredivinepoweror
4 Isidore here speaks of the potentially misleading literal translation of the Greek I!-  as the Latin sub-stans.
 
strengthisdisplayed,Gabrielissent.11.Henceatthetime when the Lord was about to be born and triumph over the world, Gabriel came to Mary to announce him who deignedtocomeasahumblepersontoconquertheaerial powers.12.‘Michael’means“WhoislikeGod,”forwhen something of wonderful power is done in the world, this archangel is sent. And his name comes from the work itself, because no one is strong enough to do what God can do. 13. ‘Raphael’ means “Healing” or “Medicine of God,” for whenever there is need of healing and curing this archangel is sent by God – hence he is called “Medicine of God.” 14. Hence this same archangel, sent to Tobit, brought healing to his eyes, and restored his sight to him as his blindness was wiped away. Thus the office of the angel is designated by the interpretation of his name. 15. ‘Uriel’ means ‘Fire of God,’ as we read that he appeared as a fire in a bush (cf. Exodus 3:2). We read, indeed, that as fire he was sent from above, and fulfilled what was commanded.
16.Further,ThronesandDominationsandPrincipalities and Powers and Virtues are understood to be orders and ranks of angels, in which orders the apostle Paul includes the whole heavenly company (Ephesians 1:21, Colossians 1:16, etc.). Because of this same distribution of offices some are called Thrones, some Dominations, somePrincipalities,somePowers,forthesakeoftheparticular ranks by which they are distinguished from one another.
17.AngelicVirtuesarenamedasthespecificministries throughwhichsignsandmiraclesaremadeintheworld, and because of this they are called Virtues (Virtutes). 18. The Powers are those angels to which opposing forces are subject, and hence they are named with the term Powers (Potestates) because evil spirits are restrained by their power (potestas) so that they may not do as much harm in the world as they wish. 19. Principalities (Principatus) are those who preside over the bands of angels, and they take the name of Principality because they charge the angels below them with fulfilling the divine ministry. Thus there are some who administer (administrare)andotherswhoassist(adsistere),asissaid in Daniel (7:10), “Thousands of thousands ministered (ministrare) to him, and ten thousand times a hundred thousand stood before (adsistere) him.”
20. Dominations are those who surpass even Virtues and Principalities. They are called Dominations (Dominationes)becausetheydominate(dominari)otherbands
VII.v.11–v.30
of angels. 21. Thrones are bands of angels that in Latin are called ‘seats’ (sedes), and they are called Thrones because the Creator ‘sits over’ (praesidere) them, and discharges his judgments through them. 22. Cherubim too are reckoned as lofty powers indeed in heaven, and an angelic retinue. Translated from Hebrew into Latin they are ‘Multitude of Knowledge’ (multitudo scientiae), for they are a higher band of angels, and because, placed nearer, they have been more amply filled with divine knowledge than the others, they are called Cherubim, that is, “Fullness (plenitudo) of Knowledge.” 23. They are represented in metal as the two animals resting on the mercy seat of the ark in order to signify the presence of angels in whose midst God is manifested.
24. Likewise the Seraphim are a multitude of angels whose name, translated from Hebrew into Latin, is “Ardent Ones” or “Fiery Ones.” They are called ‘Ardent Ones’becausenoangelsarestationedbetweenthemand God,andtherefore,themorenearlytheyarestationedto hispresence,themoretheyareinflamedwiththebrightness of the divine light. 25. Whence they veil the face and feet of the one who sits on the throne of God (Isaiah 6:2); for that reason the crowd of other angels cannot fully see the essence of God, because the Cherubim (sic, for ‘Seraphim’) cloak it.
26. These terms for the bands of angels are specific for the individual orders in such a way that they still may be to some extent common to all. Thus, whereas the Thrones are specifically designated as the seats of God in a particular order of angels, nevertheless the Psalmist says (79:2 Vulgate), “Thou that sittest upon the cherubims.” 27. But these orders of angels are called by their individual names because they have more fully received that particular function in their own order. Although common to them all, still these names are strictly speaking assigned to their own orders. 28. For to each order, as has been said, has been enjoined its proper functions, which they are known to have deserved at the beginning of the world.
Because angels preside over both places and humans an angel witnesses through a prophet, saying (Daniel 10:13), “The prince of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me.” 29. Whence it is apparent that there is no place over which angels are not set. Moreover they have charge of the outcome of all endeavors. 30. This is the hierarchy or the array of the angels who stood in their celestialvigoraftertheFallofthebadangels,forafterthe
 
VII.v.31–vi.17
apostate angels fell, these were made firm in the steadfastness of eternal blessing. Whence we find, after the creation of heaven in the beginning (Genesis 1:6, 8), “Let there be a firmament (firmamentum) . . . and the firmament was called, Heaven.” 31. This is surely the saying of one who is showing that after the Fall of the bad angels those who were steadfast strove for the firmness (firmitas) of eternal perseverance; diverted by no lapse, falling in no pride, but firmly (firmiter) holding steady in the love and contemplation of God, they consider nothing sweet except him by whom they were created.
32. Further, we read of two Seraphim in Isaiah (6:2); theyfigurativelysignifytheOldandNewTestaments.We alsoreadthattheycoverthefaceandfeetofGod,because we cannot know the past before the world or the future after the world, but we contemplate only the middle by their witness. 33. Each of them has six wings because in this present age we know concerning the fabric of this world only those things that were made in the six days. That each cries “Holy” three times to the other (Isaiah 6:3) shows the mystery of the Trinity in the one divinity.
vi. Peoplewhoreceivedtheirnamefromacertainpresaging (De hominibus qui quodam praesagio nomen acceperunt) 1.Manyoftheearlyhumanstaketheorigin of their names from conditions specific to them. Their nameswereimpartedtothempropheticallyinsuchaway thattheyconcordwiththeirfutureortheirpreviousconditions. 2. While a holy and spiritual character abides in thesenames,wearenowdescribingthemeaningoftheir stories only with regard to the literal. Moreover, where we have not touched on the meaning of the etymology, we have merely set it forth in Latin. 3. Further, because of the diversity of accents and letters, it happens that one Hebrew name is transliterated in one way or another, so that the names are rendered with various meanings.
4. Adam, as blessed Jerome informs us, means “human” or “earthling” or “red earth,” for from earth was flesh made, and humus (humus) was the material from which the human (homo) was made. 5. Eve (Eva) means “life” or “calamity” or “woe” (vae).5 Life, because she was the origin of being born; calamity and woe because by her lying she was the cause of death – for ‘calamity’ (calamitas) takes its name from ‘falling’ (cadere).6.ButotherssayEveiscalled‘life’and‘calamity’ because often a woman is the cause of salvation for a man,oftenthecauseofcalamityanddeath,whichiswoe.
7. Cain is interpreted as “possession,” whence, expressing this very etymology, his father says ‘Cain,’ that is (Genesis 4:1), “I have gotten (lit. ‘I have possessed,’ possidere) a man through God.” And the same name means “lamentation,” because he was killed for the killing of Abel, and he paid the penalty for his own crime. 8. Abel means “mourning,” and by this name it was prefigured that he would be killed. Likewise it means “emptiness,” because he was quickly removed and taken away.
9. Seth is translated “resurrection,” because he was born after the killing of his brother, as if he triggered the resurrection of his brother from the dead. It also means “putting,” because God put him in place of Abel. 10. Enos in a variation in his own language means “human being” or “man,” and he had this name fittingly, for it is written of him (Genesis 4:26), “Then was the beginning of calling upon the name of the Lord” – although many of the Hebrews think rather that it was at that time that idols were first made in the name of the Lord and in his likeness. 11. Enoch means “dedication,” for afterwards Cain built a city in his name (Genesis 5:17). 12. Cainan (i.e. Kenan) means “lamentation” or “possession of those,” for as Cain means “possession,” so the derivative name, which is Cainan, forms “possession of those.” 13. Methuselah is translated “he has died.” The etymologyofhisnameisobvious,forsomethinkthathe was translated with his father6 and that he lived past the time of the Flood. Against this it is significantly translated “he has died” to show that he did not live beyond the Flood, but died in that same cataclysm. Indeed, only the eight humans in the ark escaped the Flood.
14. Lamech means “striking down,” for he struck down and killed Cain, and indeed afterwards he confessestohiswivesthathedidthis(cf.Genesis4:23–24).15. Noah means “rest,” since under him all past works came to rest because of the Flood. Whence his father, calling hisnameNoah,said(Genesis5:29),“Thissamemakesus rest from all our works.” 16. Shem means “renowned,” becausehegothisnameasapresagingofhisposterity,for out of him came the patriarchs and apostles and people of God. Also from his stock came Christ, whose name is great among the nations from the rising of the sun to its setting. 17. Cham (i.e. Ham) means “warm,” and he was
5 The ancient anagram connects Eva and vae. 6 Methuselah’s father Enoch was thought, on the basis of Genesis 5:24, to have passed on without death.
 
The Etymologies	VII.vi.18–vi.43
 
so named as a presaging of his future, for his posterity possessed that part of the land which is warmer because the sun is near. Hence still today Egypt, in the Egyptian language, is called Kam. 18. Japheth means “width,” for from him were born the pagan nations, and because wide is the multitude of believers from among the gentiles, Japheth was named from that width. 19. Canaan the son of Ham is translated “their movement” – and what is this other than “their action”? – for because of the “motion” of his father Ham, that is, because of his action, he was cursed (Genesis 9:25).
20. Arpachshad means “the healer of the ravaging.” 21. Cush in Hebrew is interpreted “the Ethiopian”; his name was allotted him from the posterity of his family, for from him issued the Ethiopians. 22. Nimrod means “tyrant,” for first he seized unwonted tyrannical power among the people, and then himself advanced against God to build the tower of impiety. 23. Heber (i.e. Eber) means “passage.” His etymology is mystical, becauseGodpassedawayfromhisstock,norwouldGod remain among them when his grace was transferred to the gentiles – for from Heber rose the Hebrews. 24. Peleg means “division,” and his father imposed such a name on him because he was born when the earth was divided byitslanguages.Terahmeans“investigationoftheascension.”25.Melchizedechmeans“righteousking.”“King,” becauseafterwardsheruledSalem.“Righteous,”because distinguishing between the sacraments of the Law and the Gospel, he offered as a sacrifice not victims of cattle, but an oblation of bread and the chalice. 26. Lot means “shunning,” for he did not consent to the doings of the Sodomites, but he shunned their illicit passions of the flesh. 27. Moab means “from the father.” And the (compound) name as a whole has this etymology, for Lot’s firstborn daughter conceived him from her father.
28. Ammon, whose name for good reason is rendered “the son of my people,” is so derived that partly its sense is of a proper name, and partly it is an expression in itself, for ammi, after which the Ammonites are named, is the word for “my people.” 29. Sarai means “my princess,” because she was the materfamilias of only one household. Afterwards, as the rationale for her name has changed, with the letter i taken away from the end, she is called Sara (i.e. Sarah), that is, “princess.” Indeed she was to be the princess of all nations, as the Lord had promised to Abraham (Genesis 17:16), “I will give thee from Sara a son, whom I will bless, and he shall become nations, and kings of people shall spring from her.” 30. Hagar is “alien” or “turned back,” for she was [as an alien given to the embrace of Abraham for the sake of bearing children, and after her display of contempt, when the angel rebuked her, she turned back to Sara]. 31. Keturah, “incense.” 32. Ishmael is translated “listening of God,” for thus it is written (Genesis 16:11), “And she called his name Ishmael, because God listened to him.”
33. Esau is three-named, and is variously named for appropriate reasons. He is called Esau, that is, “red,” so namedforhisstewingspecificallyoftheredlentil,forthe eating of which he lost his birthright. Also he was called Edom,whichmeans“bloody”inLatin,fortheruddiness ofhisbody.ButSeir,becausehewasbristlyandhairy,for whenhewasbornhewasallhairyasifwithahide.34.So he was named with three names: Esau, that is, “red”; Edom, that is, “bloody”; Seir, that is, “hairy,” because he did not have smooth skin. 35. Rebecca, “patience,” or “she who accepts much.” 36. Leah, “burdened by labor” as of childbearing, for she in her fecundity of childbearing experienced more pangs than Rachel. 37. Rachel means “sheep,” for Jacob put the sheep of Laban to pasture for her sake. 38. Zilpah, “yawning mouth.” Bilhah, “inveterate.” Dinah is translated as “cause,” for she was the cause of the quarrel in Shechem. 39. Tamar, “bitterness,” because of the death of her husbands, and also “she who changes,” because she changed herself into the garb of a prostitute when she lay with her father-in-law.
40. Perez (Phares), “division”: because he divided the membrane of the afterbirth, he was allotted the name of “divider,” that is, phares. Whence also the Pharisees, whowouldseparatethemselvesfromthepeopleasifthey wererighteous,werecalled“thedividedones.”41.Perez’s brother Zerah, in whose hand was the scarlet thread, is interpreted “rising.” Either because he appeared first, or because many righteous people sprang from him, as is contained in the book of Paralipomenon (I Chronicles 9:6), he was called Zerah, that is, “rising.” 42. Job is rendered in Latin as “the grieving one,” and rightly the grieving one (dolens), for the smiting of his flesh and his endurance of afflictions (dolor). Indeed the etymology of his name prefigured his calamities.
43. Pharaoh is the name not of a person, but of a positionofrank,justasamonguskingsarecalled‘Augustus,’ although they are listed by their proper names. Further, in Latin ‘Pharaoh’ expresses “one denying him,” to wit, God, or “his scatterer,” for he was the afflicter of the
 
VII.vi.44–vi.70
people of God. 44. Jannes, “the mariner,” or “where is thesign,”forhissignceasedandfailedbeforethesignsof Moses, whence the magicians said (Exodus 8:19), “This is the finger of God.” 45. Mambres (i.e. Jambres), “the sea made of skins” or “the sea in the head.” 46. Then, Moses means “taken from the water.” The daughter of Pharaoh found him exposed at the bank of the river, and picking him up she adopted him for herself, and she called his name ‘Moses’ because she took him from the water.
47.Aaronmeans“mountainofstrength,”becausetaking his censor he stood in the way between the survivors andthosewhohadbeenkilled,andasakindofmountain ofstrengthhepreventedthedestructionofdeath(Numbers 16:46–48). 48. Eleazar, “the help of God.” Balak, “the one falling headlong” or “the devouring one.” Balaam, “the idle people.” 49. Phinehas, “one who spares the mouth,” for with a dagger he pierced Zimri along with his Madianite harlot, and appeased the fury of the Lord, so that he might be sparing (Numbers 25:6–15). 50. This Zimri is “the provoker” or “the one who causes bitterness,”andhisnameisappropriatelyfiguredbybitterness, because by sinning he embittered the people. 51. Rahab, “breadth” or “hunger” or “onslaught.”
Joshua means “savior,” for he, adumbrating Christ, saved the people from the wilderness and led them into the promised land. 52. Caleb, as it were “heart” or “dog.” Othniel, “his time, God” or “the answer of God.” Ehud, “glorious.” Barak, “one who sends lightning.” 53. Deborah, “bee” or “the talkative one.” “Bee,” because she was most quick to act, as she was struggling against Sisera, at whose slaying she sang her song – hence “the talkative one.” Jael, “ascension.” 54. Gideon, “proof of their iniquity,” for he was informed, with repeated instances, by what kind of forewarning he might achieve a future victory over his enemies; from this proof of what would happen he got the etymology of his name.
Abimelech, “my father the king.” 55. Tola, “little worm” or “scarlet cloth.” Jair, “one who sheds light.” Jephthah, “the opener” or “the one opened.” Ezbon, “thought” or “fetters of grief.” Abdon “his slave.” 56. Samson, “their sun” or “the strength of the sun,” for he was famous for his strength and liberated Israel from its enemies. Dalilah, “poor girl” or “bucket.” Boaz, “in strength”[or]“inwhomistoughness.”57.Naomi,which we can interpret as “she who is consoled,” because when her husband and children had died in a foreign country she clung to her Moabite daughter-in-law as a consolation for herself. 58. Ruth means “hastening,” for she was an alien from a non-Israelite people, who hastened, her homeland abandoned, to cross into the land of Israel, saying to her mother-in-law (Ruth 1:16), “Whithersoeverthoushaltgo,Iwillgo.”59.Hannahisinterpretedas “his grace” because, while first she was sterile by nature, afterwards by the grace of God she became fertile.
Eli, “my God.” 60. Hophni, “unshod,” for this son of Eli was chosen for the ministry of priesthood, and he represented his loss of the priesthood by his own name, for the Apostle says (Ephesians 6:15), “Your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.” 61. And the Prophet (cf. Isaiah 52:7), “How beautiful are the feet that bringeth tidings of peace!” Therefore the name means “unshod,” in order that by his name might be signified theremovalofthepriesthoodoftheOldTestamentfrom the ancient nation. 62. Phinehas, the brother of Hophni, means “mute mouth,” in which is signified the silence of the old priesthood and doctrine.
Samuel, “his name God.” Jesse, “sacrifice of the island”or“incense.”63.Saul[means]“petition,”foritis wellknownhowtheHebrewpeoplepetitionedforhimas a king for themselves, and received him not according to God, but according to their own will. 64. David, “strong inhishand,”inthathewasverystronginbattles.Andthe name means “desirable,” namely in his progeny, about which the Prophet made his prediction (Haggai 2:8), “And the desired of all nations shall come.” 65. Solomon is said to have three names. His first name is Solomon, that is, “peacemaking,” because there was peace in his reign. His second name was Jedidiah, because he was esteemed and beloved of the Lord. His third name was Coheleth, which in Greek is called ‘Ecclesiastes,’ in Latin ‘the Preacher,’ because he would speak to the people.
66. Jonathan, “gift of a dove.” 67. Absalom, “peace of the father” by antiphrasis, because he waged war against his father, or because in that war David is read to have been brought to peace with his son, so much that he lamented his death with huge grief. 68. Rehoboam, “breadth of the people,” and that signification by antiphrasis, because when the ten tribes were separated from him, only two remained for him. 69. Abijam, “father Lord” or “he was father.” Asa, “one who lifts” or “one who raises up.” Jehoshaphat, “judgment of the Lord.” Jehoram, “he who is lofty.” Ahaziah, “he who grasps the Lord.” 70. Athaliah, “time of the
 
The Etymologies	VII.vi.71–vii.10
 
Lord.” Joash, “he who breathes” or “the toughness of the Lord.” Amaziah, “he who lifts up the people.” 71. Uzziah, “strength of the Lord.” Azariah, “help of the Lord.” Uzziah and Azariah are the same person with two names.Itishewho,havingtriedtolayclaimtoanunlawful priesthood for himself, was stricken with leprosy in the face.
72. Jotham, “he is perfect,” making a fine etymology of his name, for he did right in the sight of the Lord, and built a lofty gate for the Temple. 73. Ahaz, “he who grasps.” Hezekiah, “strong Lord.” Manasseh, “forgetful,” for with many impieties and sacrileges he forsook and was forgetful of God, [or because God was forgetful of his sins]. 74. Amon, “faithful” or “burdened.” Josiah, “where is the kindling of the Lord” – an appropriate etymology for his name, for it was he who burnt up the idols. 75. Jehoahaz, “tough.” Jehoiakim, “where is the
preparation.”
Eliakim, “resurrection of God.” Jehoiachin, “preparation of the Lord.” Zedekiah, “righteous of the Lord.” 76. Jeroboam, “judgment” or “cause of the people,” or, as some say, it means “division,” because in his reign the people of Israel were divided and cut off from the reign of the line of David – for he stood out as the cause of the division of the people. 77. Zimri, “psalm” or “my song.” Omri, “my curled one.” Ahab, “brother of the father.” 78. Jezebel, “flux of blood,” or “she who streams with blood”; but better, “where is the dung-heap” – for when she was hurled down headlong, dogs devoured her flesh, as Elijah had predicted (IV Kings 9:37 Vulgate): he said, “And the flesh of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the earth.”
79.Ahaziah,“hewhograspsGod.”Jehu,“thatone”or “heis.”Jotham,“thetoughone.”Shallum,“hisshadow,” or“petition.”Menahem,“theconsoler.”Pekah,“hewho opens.” 80. Nebuchadnezzar, “prophecy of the narrow flask,” or “one who prophesies” a symbol of this kind, namely with regard to the dream of future things that he is reported to have seen, which Daniel interpreted; or, “a lingering in the recognition of difficulties,” with regard tothosewhowereledbyhimintocaptivity.81.Thename Zerubbabel is said to have been composed in Hebrew from three whole words: zo, “that,” ro, “master,” babel, properly “Babylonian”; and the name is compounded Zorobabel, “that master from Babylon,” for he was born in Babylon, where he flourished as prince of the Jewish people.
vii. Thepatriarchs(Depatriarchis) 1.Theetymologies of certain patriarchs ought to be noted, so that we may know what is reflected in their names, for many of them tooktheirnamesfromspecificcauses.‘Patriarchs’means “chiefsamongthefathers”(patrumprincipes),for 9 inGreekmeans‘chief’(princeps).2.Atfirst“Abram”was so called – ”father seeing the people” – with regard to Israel only. Afterwards he was called ‘Abraham,’ which is translated “father of many nations,” which was yet to come to pass through faith. However, “nations” is not contained in the name but is understood, according to this(Genesis17:5):“ThynameshallbeAbraham,because I have made thee a father of many nations.” 3. Isaac took his name from “laughter,” for his father had laughed when Isaac was promised to him, astonished in joy. And his mother laughed, doubting in joy, when Isaac’s birth was promised by the three men. Therefore he took the name Isaac for this reason, for it means “laughter.”
4. It should moreover be known that four people in the Old Testament were given their names without any concealment before they were born: Ishmael, Isaac, Solomon, and Josiah. Read the Scriptures (Genesis 16:11, Genesis 21:6, II Kings 12:25, III Kings 13:2 Vulgate – see vi.74 above). 5. Jacob means “the supplanter,” either because in birth he clutched the heel (planta) of his newborn brother, or because afterwards he deceived his brother by a stratagem. Whence Esau said (Genesis 27:36), “Rightly is his name called Jacob, for he hath supplanted me lo this second time.” 6. Israel, “the man seeing God,” for he received this name at the time when having wrestled all night he beat the angel in a struggle, and was blessed at daybreak. Hence because of his vision of God he was called Israel, as he himself says (Genesis 32:30), “I have seen God and my soul has been saved.” 7. ‘Reuben’ means “son of the vision.” Indeed, when Leah gave birth to him, she called his name Reuben, saying (Genesis 29:32), “For God saw my affliction.”
8. ‘Simeon’ is interpreted “the hearing,” for thus Leah said when she gave birth to him (Genesis 29:33), “For God heard me.” 9. Levi, “the added one,” for Leah said when she gave birth to him, not doubting the love of her husband(Genesis29:34),“Nowmyhusbandwillbewith me, because I have borne him three sons.” 10. Judah is called “the proclamation,” for when Leah gave birth to him she offered up praise to the Lord, saying (Genesis 29:35), “Now over this I will proclaim the Lord,” and for this he was called Judah. Accordingly his name was so
 
VII.vii.11–viii.9
called from “proclamation,” because it is a rendering of thanks.
11. Issachar means “he is a recompense”; is indeed means “he is,” and sachar means “recompense.” This is because Leah purchased for herself intercourse with her husband,whichwasowedtoRachel,withthemandrakes ofhersonReuben.WhencewhenIssacharwasbornLeah said (Genesis 30:18), “God hath given my recompense.” 12. Zebulun means “dwelling place,” for Leah gave birth to him as her sixth son, and therefore now assured she said (Genesis 30:20), “My husband shall dwell with me.” Whence her son was called “habitation.” 13. Naphtali: the principle in his name has to do with “conversion” or “comparison” (comparatio), whence Rachel said, when hermaidBilhahhadgivenbirthtohim,“Godhathmade me live in a dwelling with my sister.”7
14. Dan means “judgment,” for when Bilhah gave birth to him, her mistress Rachel said (Genesis 30:6), “The Lord hath judged for me, and hearing my voice he hath given me a son.” She expressed the principle in his name in that, because the Lord had judged, she imposed the name ‘judgment’ on the son of her maidservant. 15. Gad was named from “outcome” or “disposition,” for when Zilpah had given birth to him, her mistress Leah said (Genesis 30:11), “Happily,” that is, meaning with regard to his disposition or to his outcome. 16. Asher means “blessed,” for when Zilpah had given birth to him, Leah said (Genesis 30:13), “Blessed am I, and women bless me.” She called Asher ‘blessed’ in the etymology of his name because she is called blessed.
17. Joseph: because his mother had wanted to add another for herself, she called him “the addition.” Pharoah called him Zaphanath, which in Hebrew signifies “discoverer of hidden things,” because he laid bare the obscure dreams and predicted the blight. 18. Still, because this name was imposed on him by the Egyptian, it ought to have a rationale in the Pharoah’s own tongue. Therefore in Egyptian speech Zaphanath is interpreted “savior of the world,” because he liberated the land from imminent destruction by famine. 19. Benjamin means “son of the right hand,” that is, “of valor,” for the right hand is called iamin. Indeed his dying mother gave him the name Benoni, that is, “son of my pain.” His father changed this, naming him “son of the right hand.” 20. Manasseh was so called because his father was unmindful of his hardships, for this is the word for “unmindfulness” in Hebrew. 21. Ephraim, because God added him on, and the name is translated in our language as
“addition.”
viii. The prophets (De prophetis) 1. Those whom the pagan world calls bards (vates) we call prophets (propheta), as if they were ‘pre-speakers’ (praefator), because indeed they speak (fari, ppl. fatus) and make true predictions about the future. Those whom we call prophets were called ‘seers’ (videns) in the Old Testament, because they saw (videre) things that others did not see, and would foresee things that were hidden in mystery. 2. Hence it is written in Samuel (I Kings 9:9), “Let us go to the seer (videns).” Hence Isaiah says (6:1), “I saw (videre) the Lord sitting on a throne high and elevated,” and Ezekiel (1:1), “The heavens were opened and I saw (videre) the visions of God.”
3. The etymologies of the names of certain prophets should be remarked, for their names well display what they foretold about future things by their deeds and words. 4. Elijah means “the Lord God.” He was so called as an omen of the future, for when he contended about the sacrifice with the four hundred priests of Baal, as the name of the Lord was invoked, fire descended from heaven on the burnt offering (III Kings 18:39), “And when all the people saw this, they fell on their faces and said: The Lord he is God.” 5. For this reason he received such a name beforehand, because afterwards through him the people recognized the Lord God. The samenamemeans“strongLord,”eitherbecausehekilled those same priests, or because he endured the enmity of Ahab.
6.Elishameans“salvation(salus)oftheLord.”Hetoo got his name as an omen of the future, and accordingly worked many miracles, and in driving away the famine he saved (salvare) the people from death. 7. Nathan, “he gave”or“ofthegiver.”Isaiahmeans“savioroftheLord,” and deservedly, for more fully than others he heralded the Savior of the whole world and his holy mysteries. 8. Jeremiah, “lofty of the Lord,” because of what was said to him (Jeremiah 1:10), “I have set thee over the nations, and over kingdoms.” 9. Ezekiel, “strength of God.” Daniel, “judgment of God,” either because in his judgmentoftheeldershedeliveredajudgmentbasedon divinely inspired consideration when he freed Susanna
7 ThereceivedtextofGenesis30:8,towhichIsidorealludes,reads, “God hath compared (comparare) me with my sister.”
 
The Etymologies	VII.viii.10–viii.28
 
from destruction by uncovering their falsity, or because, discerning with shrewd intelligence, he disclosed visions and dreams in which the future was revealed by certain details and riddles. And he was called (Daniel 9:23) “a man of desires,” because he did not eat the bread of desire, nor drink the wine of concupiscence.
10. Hosea, “savior,” or “he who saves” (salvans), for when he prophesied the wrath of God against the people Israelfortheircrimeofidolatry,heannouncedthesafety (salus) of the house of Judah. Because of this Hezekiah, king of Judah, is shown to have purged and purified the Temple of the Lord once the idols that preceding kings had consecrated were removed. 11. Joel, “Lord God,” or “beginning in God,” or “he was of God” – these because hisnamereflectsanuncertainetymology.12.Amos,“the people torn away,” for his prophecy was directed toward the people Israel, because they were already torn away from the Lord, and worshipped golden calves, or they were torn from the reign of the line of David.
13. Nahum, “the groaning one” or “the consoler,” for he cries out against the “city of blood” (Nahum 3:1), and after its overthrow he consoles Zion, saying (Nahum 1:15), “Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, and that preacheth peace.” 14. Habakkuk, “the one who embraces.” He is either called “embrace” because he was beloved of God, or, because he engaged in contention with God, he was allotted the name of “the one who embraces,” that is, of “the one who wrestles.” Indeed, no other dared with such bold voice to provoke God to a debate about justice, as to why such great iniquity is involved in human affairs and in the affairs of this world.
15.	Micah, “who is this?” or “who is that one?”
16.	Zephaniah is interpreted “looking-glass” (speculum) or “hidden thing of the Lord”; either is appropriate for a prophet because they know the mysteries of God. Whence it is said to Ezekiel (3:17), “I have made thee a watchman (speculator).” And elsewhere (cf. Amos 3:7), “For the Lord will do nothing without revealing to his servants the prophets.” 17. Obadiah, “slave of the Lord,” forasMoseswasservantoftheLordandtheapostlePaul was the slave of Christ, so Obadiah, sent as the “ambassador to the nations” (Obadiah 1:1), comes and preaches whatbefitshispropheticministryandservitude–hence, “slave of the Lord.”
8 The reading festivus, “festive,” seems preferable.
18. Jonah means “dove” or “the mourner.” “Dove” for his groaning, when he was in the belly of the huge fish for three days, and “the mourner” either because of the grief he felt for the safety of the Ninevites or because of the suddenly withered ivy in the shade of which he took cover againsttheheatofthesun. 19. And he is also, as the Jews affirm, Amittai, the son of the widow of Zarephath whom Elijah resuscitated, as his mother afterwards said to him (III Kings 17:24 Vulgate), “Now I know that thou art a man of God, and the word of God in thy mouth is of truth.” For this reason the boy was called Amittai, for Amittai, from the Hebrew, means “truth” in Latin, and because Elijah spoke a true thing, the boy who was resuscitated was named “the son of truth.”
20. Zechariah, “memory of the Lord,” for at the end of the seventieth year after the destruction of the Temple was finished, while Zechariah was preaching, the Lord remembered his people, and by the command of Darius the people of God returned, and both the city and the Temple were rebuilt. 21. Haggai in Latin signifies “hasty” (festinus)8 and “joyful,” for he prophesies that the destroyed Temple is to be built, and after the grief of the captivity he preaches the joy of the return. 22. Malachi means “angel of the Lord,” that is, “messenger,” for whatever he said was trusted as if commanded by the Lord. Hence the Septuagint translates his name in this way, saying (Malachi 1:1), “The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by the hand of his angel.”
23. Ezra, “the helper.” Nehemiah, “the consoler from the Lord.” These names were allotted as a certain omen of the future, for they were a help and a consolation for his whole people as they returned to their homeland. Indeed these same two rebuilt the Temple of the Lord, and they restored the works of the walls and towers. 24. Hananiah, “the grace of God.” The same person is also Shadrach in the Chaldean language, which means “my handsome one.” 25. Azariah, “help of the Lord,” and he is the same as Abednego, which is turned into Latin as “as a slave I am silent.” 26. Mishael, “who is the people of the Lord,” and he is also Meshach, which means “laughter” or “joy.”
27.Ahijah,“mybrother.”Shemaiah,“hewhohearsthe Lord.” Asaph, [“he who gathers”]. Ethan, [“the tough one” or “he who has ascended”]. 28. Jeduthun, “he who leapsacrossthose”or“hewhojumpsthose,”forthisperson called ‘the leaper across’ leapt by his singing across certain people who were cleaving to the ground, bent
 
VII.viii.29–ix.5
down to the earth, thinking about things that are at the lowest depths, and putting their hope in transient things. 29. Heman, “he who accepts” or “their dread.” Ethan,“thetoughone.”Berechiah,“blessedoftheLord” or “blessed Lord.” Huldah, “distraction” or “diversion.” Judith,“shewhopraises”or“shewhoproclaims.”Esther, “the hidden one.”
30. Zechariah, [“memory of the Lord,” for what he sings (Luke 1:72), “to remember his holy testament”]. 31. John [the Baptist, “grace of the Lord,” because he was the end of prophecy, the herald of grace, or the beginning of baptism, through which grace is administered]. 32. These are the prophets of the Old and New Testament, of whom the last is Christ, to whom it is said by the Father (Jeremiah 1:5), “I made thee a prophet unto the nations.”
33. Moreover, there are seven kinds of prophesy. The first kind is ecstasy (ecstasis), which is a passing beyond ofthemind,aswhenPeterinastunnedstateofmindsaw that vessel let down from heaven with various animals (see Acts 10:11–12). 34. The second kind is vision (visio), as when Isaiah says (Isaiah 6:1), “I saw (videre, ppl. visus) the Lord sitting upon a high throne.” The third kind is dream(somnium),asJacobwhilesleepingsawtheladder reaching up to heaven. The fourth kind is through a cloud, as God speaks to Moses and to Job after he was stricken. 35. The fifth kind is a voice from heaven, like that which sounded to Abraham saying (Genesis 22:12), “Lay not thy hand upon the boy,” and to Saul on the road (Acts 9:4), “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” 36. The sixth kind occurs when an oracle (parabola) is received, as with Solomon in Proverbs, and with Balaam when he was called upon by Balak. The seventh kind is being filled (repletio) with the Holy Spirit, as with nearly all the prophets.
37.Othershavesaidthattherearethreekindsofvisions (visio). One, according to the eyes of the body, as Abraham saw three men under the holm-oak of Mambre, and Moses saw the fire in the bush, and the disciples saw the transfigured Lord on the mountain between Moses and Elijah, and others of this kind. 38. A second, according to the spirit, in which we imagine what we sense through the body, as Peter saw the dish sent down from heaven with the various animals (Acts 10:11– 12), and as Isaiah saw God on the highest seat, not bodily but spiritually (Isaiah 6:1). 39. For no bodily form limits God, but in the same way that many things are said not properly but figuratively, so also many things are shown figuratively.
40.Thenthereisathirdkindofvision,whichisneither bybodilysensesnorbythatpartofthesoulwhereimages of corporeal things are grasped, but by insight (intuitus) of the mind where intellectual truth is contemplated, as the gifted Daniel saw with his mind what Belshazzar had seen with his body. Without this kind of vision the other two are either fruitless or positively lead into error. Still, the Holy Spirit governs all these kinds of vision. 41.Further,notonlyagoodperson,butalsoabadperson canhaveprophecy,forwefindthatKingSaulprophesied, for he was persecuting the holy David, and filled with the Holy Spirit he began to prophesy.
ix. The apostles (De apostolis) 1. Apostle (apostolus) means “one who is sent,” for the name indicates this. Just as in Greek O  means “messenger” (nuntius) in Latin, so ‘one who is sent’ is called an ‘apostle’ in Greek (i.e. !   ), for Christ sent them to spread the gospel through the whole world, so that certain ones would penetrate Persia and India teaching the nations andworkinggreatandincrediblemiraclesinthenameof Christ,inorderthat,fromthosecorroboratingsignsand prodigies,peoplemightbelieveinwhattheApostleswere saying and had seen. Most of them receive the rationale for their names from these activities.
2. Peter (Petrus) took his name from ‘rock’ (petra), that is, from Christ, on whom the Church is founded. Now petra is not given its name from Petrus, but Petrus from petra, just as ‘Christ’ is so called not from ‘Christian,’ but ‘Christian’ from ‘Christ.’ Therefore the Lord says(Matthew16:18),“ThouartPeter,anduponthisrock (petra) I will build my church,” because Peter had said (Matthew 16:16), “Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.” Then the Lord said to him, “Upon this rock” which you have proclaimed “I will build my church,” for (I Corinthians 10:4) “the rock was Christ,” on which foundation even Peter himself was built.3. He was called Cephas because he was established as the head (caput) of the apostles, for  in Greek means ‘head,’ and CephasistheSyriannameforPeter.4.Simon‘Bar-Jonah’ in our tongue means “son of a dove,” and is both a Syrian and a Hebrew name, for Bar in the Syrian language is “son,” ‘Jonah’ in Hebrew is “dove,” and BarJonah is composed of both languages. 5. Some people simply take it that Simon, that is Peter, is the son of
 
The Etymologies	VII.ix.6–ix.23
 
John, because of that question (John 21:15), “Simon of John, lovest thou me?” – and they consider it corrupted by an error of the scribes, so that Bar-Iona was written for Bar-Iohannes, that is, ‘son of John,’ with one syllable dropped. ‘Johanna’ means “grace of the Lord.” 6. So Peter was three-named: Peter, Cephas, and Simon Bar-Jonah; further ‘Simon’ in Hebrew means “he who
listens.”
7.SaulinHebrewspeechmeans“temptation,”because he was at first involved in temptation of the Church, for he was a persecutor; hence he had that name when he waspersecutingChristians.8.Afterwards,withthename changed, from Saul was made Paul, which is interpreted “the wonderful one” or “the chosen one.” Wonderful, because he performed many signs or because from east towesthepreachedthegospelofChristtoallthenations. 9. Chosen, as the Holy Spirit says in the Acts of the Apostles (13:2), “Separate me Barnabas and Paul, for the work whereunto I have chosen them.” Further in Latin speech Paul (Paulus; cf. paulus, “little”) is so called from “little,”whencehehimselfsays(ICorinthians15:9),“For I am the least of all the apostles.” Thus when he was Saul he was proud and haughty; when Paul, humble and little. 10. Therefore we speak thus, “after a little (paulo) I will see you,” that is, after a short time. Now because he became little, he himself says (cf. I Corinthians 15:8), “For I am the last [of all] the apostles,” and (Ephesians 3:8), “To me, the least of all the saints.” Both Cephas and Saul, then, were called by a changed name so that they would indeed be new even in their names, like Abraham and Sarah.
11. Andrew, the brother of Peter in the flesh, and his co-heir in grace; according to its Hebrew etymology ‘Andrew’ means “handsome one” or “he who answers,” and further in Greek speech he is called “the manly one” from the word for “man” (cf. Greek , gen. ", “man”). 12. John with a certain prophetic foresight deservedly got his name, for it means “in whom is grace” or “grace of the Lord.” Indeed, Jesus loved him more fully than the other apostles. 13. James of Zebedee has his surname from his father, and leaving his father he with John followed the true Father. These are (Mark 3:17) the “Sons of Thunder” who were named ‘Boanerges’fromthestrengthandgreatnessoftheirfaith.This James is the son of Zebedee, the brother of John, who is revealed to have been killed by Herod after the ascension of the Lord.
14. James of Alphaeus, surnamed so as to be distinguished from the other James who is called the son of Zebedee, as this second one is the son of Alphaeus. Therefore both took their surnames from their fathers. 15. The latter is James the Less, who is called the brother of the Lord in the Gospel, because Mary the wife of AlphaeuswasthesisterofthemotheroftheLord,andthe evangelist John surnamed the former Mary ‘of Clopas’ after her father, assigning her this name either from the nobility of her family or for some other reason. Further, ‘Alphaeus’ in Hebrew speech means “the thousandth” or “the learned one” in Latin. 16. Philip, “mouth of lamps” or “mouth of hands.” Thomas, “the abyss” or “the twin,” whence in Greek he is also called Didymus. Bartholomew, “son of the one supporting the waters” or “son of the one supporting me.” This is Syriac, not Hebrew. 17. ‘Matthew’ in Hebrew expresses “the one granted.” This same person was also called Levi after the tribe from which he sprang. Further, in Latin he got the name of ‘the publican’ from his work, for he was chosen from among the publicans and brought into the apostolate.
18.SimontheCananean,asdistinctfromSimonPeter, is named after the Galilean township Cana where the Lord changed water into wine. It is this one who by another evangelist is designated ‘the Zealot’; indeed ‘Cana’ means “zeal.” 19. Judas of James, who elsewhere iscalledLebbaeus,hashissymbolicnamefromtheword for‘heart,’whichwecancall“littleheart”inthediminutive. Another Gospel writer (Matthew 10:3) calls this Judas ‘Thaddaeus.’ Church history relates that he was sent to Edessa to the king of the Abgars. 20. Judas Iscariot got his name either from the township in which he was born or from the tribe of Issachar, with a certain omen of the future as to his own condemnation, for
‘Issachar’ means “payment,” to signify the traitor’s price for which he sold the Lord, as it is written (cf. Matthew 27:9), “And they took” my payment, “the thirty pieces of silver, the price that I was prized by them.”
21. Matthias, who is considered the only one among the apostles to be without a surname, means “the one granted,” so that it may be understood: “in place of Judas,”forhewaselectedinJudas’splacebytheapostles, when lots were cast to decide between two people. 22. Mark,“loftyinhismandate,”especiallyfortheGospelof the Most High that he preached. 23. Luke, “the one who rises” or “the one lifting up” [because he lifted up the
 
VII.ix.24–xii.8
preaching of the gospel after the others]. 24. Barnabas,
“son of the prophet” or “son of consolation.”
x. Other names in the Gospel (De reliquis in Evangelio nominibus) 1. Mary, “she who illuminates” or “star of the sea (mare),” for she gave birth to the light of the world. Further, in Syrian speech ‘Mary’ means “mistress” – and beautifully – for she gave birth to the Lord.
2. Elizabeth, “fullness of my God” or “oath of my God.” 3. Magdalene, “tower.” Martha, “one who incites” or “one who provokes,” and in Syrian speech it means “one who dominates.” 4. Nathanael, “gift of God” [because by the gift of God there was no guile, that is, pretense, in him]. 5. Zebedee, “the one granted” or “the one who flows.” Zacchaeus, “the just one” or “the justified one” or “the one who should be justified.” It is a Syrian, not Hebrew, name. 6. Lazarus, “the one helped” [because he was resuscitated from death]. Herod, “the hairy one’ or ‘the vainglorious one.”
7. Caiaphas, “the investigator” or “the shrewd one” or “he who vomits from the mouth” – for wickedly he condemned the righteous one with his mouth, although he had announced this by a prophetic mystery. 8. Pontius, “he who shuns counsel,” especially that of the Jews, for, taking water, he washed his hands, saying (Matthew 27:24), “I am innocent of the blood of this just man.” 9. Pilate, “mouth of the hammerer” [because when he both justified and condemned Christ with his mouth, he struck on both sides in the manner of a hammerer]. 10. Barabbas, “son of their teacher,” doubtless “of the teacher of the Jews,” who is the devil, the instigator of the murderers, who reigns among them still today.
xi. Martyrs (De martyribus) 1. ‘Martyrs’ (martyr) in the Greek language (i.e.  ) are called ‘witnesses’ (testis)inLatin,whence‘testimonials’arecalledmartyria in Greek. And they are called witnesses because for their witness (testimonium) of Christ they suffered their passions and struggled for truth even to the point of death. 2.Butbecausewecallthemnot testes,whichwecertainly could do, using the Latin term, but rather ‘martyrs’ in the Greek, this Greek word sounds quite familiar in the ears of the Church, as do many Greek terms that we use in place of Latin.
3.ThefirstmartyrintheNewTestamentwasStephen, whosenameinHebrewspeechisinterpreted“standard,” because in his martyrdom he was the first standard for the imitation of the faithful. The same name is rendered from the Greek tongue into Latin as “the crowned one,” and this by way of prophecy, because through a certain foreseeing of the future his name signified beforehand what would come to pass, for he suffered, and what he was called, he received. Thus ‘Stephen’ means “crown”; he was in humility stoned, but in sublimity crowned.
4. Further there are two kinds of martyr: one in manifestpassion,theotherinhiddenvalorofthesoul.Indeed, many people, suffering the snares of the enemy and resisting all carnal desires, because they sacrificed themselves in their hearts for almighty God, became martyrs even in times of peace – those indeed who, if a period of persecution had occurred, could have been martyrs.
xii. Clerics (De clericis) 1. The clergy (clerus) and clerics (clericus) are so called because Matthias, who as we read was the first person ordained by the apostles, was chosenbylot–for H  inGreekmeans“allotment”or “inheritance.”2.Thereforetheyarecalledclericsbecause they are of the allotment of the Lord, or because they have a portion of the Lord. And in general all who serve in the Church of Christ are named ‘clerics.’ Their ranks and names are these: 3. doorkeeper (ostiarius), psalmist (psalmista), reader (lector), exorcist (exorcista), acolyte (acolythus), subdeacon (subdiaconus), deacon (diaconus), priest (presbyter), bishop (episcopus).
4. The order of bishops is fourfold, that is, of patriarchs,archbishops,metropolitans,andbishops(patriarcha, archiepiscopus, metropolitanus, episcopus). 5. ‘Patriarch’ in the Greek language means “chief of the fathers,” because he holds the chief, that is, the apostolic place. And therefore, because he is employed in the office of highest honor, he is judged worthy of such a name as the ‘Roman’ or ‘Antiochene’ or ‘Alexandrian’ patriarch. 6. ‘Archbishop’ is so named with a Greek term because he is “highest of the bishops,” for he holds an apostle’s place and presides over metropolitans as well as other bishops. 7. [‘Metropolitan’ is so called from “the measure of cities.”] Archbishops are placed above the several provinces, and other priests are subject to their authority and doctrine, and without them the other bishops may do nothing; indeed the care of the whole province is committed to archbishops.
8. Moreover, all the orders designated above are named by one and the same term, ‘bishop,’ but beyond
 
The Etymologies	VII.xii.9–xii.28
 
that some use a particular name to distinguish the powers that they have received individually. 9. Patriarch, “father of chiefs,” for O9A is ‘chief.’ 10. Archbishop, “chief of bishops.” Metropolitan . . . 11. Further, the term ‘episcopacy’ (episcopatus) is so called because he who is placed over it has oversight (superintendere), exercising pastoral care, that is, over his subjects, for the term  !@ in Latin means “watch over” (intendere). 12. ‘Bishop,’ then, in Greek, means “overseer” (speculator) in Latin, for he is set over the Church as an overseer. He is so called because he keeps watch (speculari), and oversees (praespicere) the behavior and lives of the people placed under him.
13. The ‘pontifex’ is the chief of priests, as if the word were ‘the way’ of his followers.9 And he is also named the ‘highest priest’ and the pontifex maximus, for he createspriestsandlevites(i.e.deacons);hehimselfdisposes all the ecclesiastical orders; he indicates what each one should do. 14. Indeed, in former times pontifexes were also kings, for this was the custom of our ancestors, that the king was himself a priest or pontifex – hence the Roman emperors were also called pontifexes.
15.Vatesaresocalledfrom‘forceofmind’(vismentis), and the meaning of the word is manifold, for now it means “priest,” now “prophet,” now “poet.” 16. A ‘high priest’ (antistes sacerdos) is so called because he ‘stands before’ (ante stare), for he is first in the hierarchy of the Church, and he has no one above him.
17. A priest (sacerdos) has a name compounded of Greek and Latin, as it were ‘one who gives a holy thing’ (sacrum dans), for as king (rex) is named from ‘ruling’ (regere), so priest from ‘making sacrifice’ (sacrificare) – for he consecrates (consecrare) and sanctifies (sanctificare). 18. Further, priests of the gentiles were called flamens. They wore on their heads a felt cap (pilleus), and on top of this there was a short stick holding a piece of wool. Because they could not bear it in the heat, they began to bind their heads with a fillet only, 19. for it was an abomination for them to go about with a completely bare head. Hence from the fillet (filum) that they used they were called flamens (flamen, plural flamines), as if it were filamines. But on feast days, with the fillet laid aside they would put on the pilleus out of respect for the eminence of their priesthood.
9 Isidorealludestothepresumedetymologyof pontifexfrompons, ‘bridge,’ hence ‘way.’
20. ‘Priest’ (presbyter) in Greek is interpreted “elder” (senior) in Latin. They are named elders not because of their age, or their exhausted senility, but rather for the honorandstatusthattheyhavereceived.21.Elders(presbyter) are also called priests (sacerdos), because they perform the sacraments (sacrum dare), as do bishops; but although they are priests (sacerdos) they do not have the highest honor of the pontificate, for they neither mark the brow with chrism nor give the Spirit, the Comforter, which a reading of the Acts of the Apostles shows may be donebybishopsonly.Whence,amongtheancients,bishops and priests (presbyter) were the same, for the former name is associated with rank, the latter with seniority.
22. Levites were named after their originator, for the levites descended from Levi, and by them the ministries of the mystic sacraments were performed in the Temple of God. In Greek these are called deacons (diaconus), in Latin ministers (minister), for just as sacerdos is related to ‘consecration (consecratio), diaconus (cf. " @, “minister,” “do service”) is related to ‘dispensing of service’ (ministerii dispensatio). 23. Hypodiacones in Greek are what we call subdeacons (subdiaconus), who are so called because they are subject to the regulations and offices of levites. They receive offerings from the faithful in the Temple of God, and bring them to the levites for placing on the altars. In Hebrew they are called Nathanians (Nathaneus).
24. Readers (lector) are named from ‘reading’ (legere, ppl. lectus) and psalmists (psalmista) from singing psalms, for the former pronounce to the people what they should follow, and the latter sing to kindle the spirits of their audience to compunction – although some readers also declaim in so heart-rending a way that they drive some people to sorrow and lamentation. 25. These same people are also called ‘announcers’ (pronuntiator) because they announce from far away (porro adnuntiare), for their voice will be so loud and clear that they fill the ears even of those placed far away.
26. Further, a chanter (cantor) is so called because he modulates his voice in singing (cantus). There are said to be two types of chanter in the art of music, corresponding with the names learned people have been able to give them in Latin, the precentor (praecentor) and the succentor (succentor). 27. The precentor is so called, naturally, because he leads the singing; the succentor because he follows in response. 28. We also speak of a co-chanter (concentor), one who ‘sings at the same time’
 
VII.xii.29–xiv.10
(consonare), but he who sings at the same time but does not‘singjointly’(concinere)willnotbecalledco-chanter.
29. ‘Acolytes’ (acolythus) in Greek are called torchbearers (ceroferarius) in Latin, from their carrying candles (cereus) when the Gospel is to be read or mass is to beoffered.30.Foratthattimelightsarekindledandcarried by them, not in order to put darkness to flight, since at the same time there is daylight, but in order to display a symbol of joy, so that under the figure of the physical candlelight that light may be displayed concerning which it is read in the Gospel (John 1:9), “That was the true light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh into this world.”
31.‘Exorcists’(exorcista)arerenderedfromGreekinto Latin as “swearers” (adiurans) or “rebukers,” for they invoke, upon the catechumens or upon those who have an unclean spirit, the name of the Lord Jesus, swearing (adiurare) through him that it may depart from them. 32.Doorkeepersarethesameasporters(ianitor),whoin the Old Testament were chosen to guard the Temple, lest someone unclean in any way should enter it. They are called doorkeepers (ostiarius) because they are present at the doors (ostium) of the Temple. 33. Keeping the key, they watch over everything inside and out, and making judgment between the good and the bad they receive the faithful and reject the unfaithful.
xiii.	Monks (De monachis) 1. The term ‘monk’ (monachus) has a Greek etymology, because a monk is alone (singularis), for   in Greek means “oneness” (singularitas). Therefore if the word for monk means ‘a solitary’ (solitarius), what is someone who is alone (solus) doing in a crowd? There are, however, several kinds of monks. 2. Cenobites (coenobita), whom we can callthoseliving‘inacommunity’(incommune),because a convent (coenobium) is of several people. 3. Anchorites (anchorita)arethosewhoafteracommunitylifeseekout deserted places and live alone in the wilderness. Because they withdraw far from people (cf. 9A@, “withdraw”) they are named with this name. Anchorites imitate Elijah and John (the Baptist), cenobites imitate the apostles. 4. Hermits (eremita) are also anchorites who, removed (removere, ppl. remotus) from the gaze of people, seek out the desert (eremum) and deserted solitary places, for the term eremum is used as if it were ‘remote’ (remotum). 5. Abbot (abba), moreover, a Syriac term, signifies “father” in Latin, as Paul made clear in writing to the Romans (8:15), “Whereby we cry: Abba, Father,” having used two languages for the one name, for he says “Father” with the Syriac word abba, and then again names the same person in Latin, Pater.
xiv.	Other faithful people (De ceteris fidelibus)1. ‘Christian’ (Christianus), as the meaning of the word indicates, is derived from ‘unction’ (unctio) or from the name of their originator and creator. Now Christians are surnamed from Christ, as Jews (Iudaei) from Judah (Iuda). Indeed, the surnames of adherents have been given from the name of their teacher. 2. Further, Christians were formerly called Nazarenes (Nazaraeus) by the Jews as if in opprobrium, because our Lord and Savior was called ‘the Nazarene’ after a certain township of Galilee. 3. Let no one glorify himself as a Christian, however, who has the name and does not have the deeds. But where the name accords with one’s work, most surely that person is a Christian, because he shows himself to be a Christian by his deeds, one who walks as Christ walked, from whom he took the name.
4. ‘Catholic’ (catholicus) means “universal” or “general,” for the Greeks call the universal  . 5.An‘orthodoxperson’(orthodoxus)isonewhobelieves rightfully, and who lives [righteously] as he believes. Now CW in Greek means “rightly” (recte), "? is “good repute” (gloria): an orthodox person is a man “of good and right repute” (recta gloria). He who lives otherwise than as he believes cannot be called by this name.
6. ‘Neophyte’ (neophytus) from the Greek can be translated into Latin as “a new beginner” and “of uncultivated faith” or “one recently born again.” 7. A catechumen is so called because he is still hearing (audire) the teaching of the faith, and has not yet received baptism, for  9   in Greek means “auditor.” 8. A ‘fit seeker’ (competens) is so called because after instruction inthefaithhe‘fitlyseeks’(competere)thegraceofChrist; hence from ‘seeking’ (petere) they are called ‘fit seekers.’ 9. ‘Lay’ (laicus) means “of the people” (popularis), for  in Greek means “people” (populus). 10. ‘Proselyte’ (proselytus) – that is, one who is a foreigner and circumcised,whoismixedinwiththepeopleofGod–isaGreek term.
 
Book VIII The Church and sects (De ecclesia et sectis)
 
 
i. TheChurchandtheSynagogue(Deecclesiaetsynagoga) 1. ‘Church’ (ecclesia) is a Greek word that is translated into Latin as “convocation” (convocatio), because it calls (vocare) everyone to itself. ‘Catholic’ (catholicus) is translated as “universal” (universalis), after the term  S , that is, ‘with respect to the whole,’ for it is not restricted to some part of a territory, like a small association of heretics, but is spread widely throughout the entire world. 2. And the apostle Paul assents to this when he says to the Romans (1:8): “I give thanks to my God for all of you, because your faith is spoken of in the whole world.” Hence the Church is given the name ‘the universal entity’ (universitas) from ‘one’ (unus), because itisgatheredintoaunity(unitas).WhencetheLordsays, in the Gospel according to Luke (11:23): “He that gathereth not with me, scatters.” 3. But why is the Church described by John (Apoc. 1:4) as seven, when it is one, unless a single and universal church, filled with a sevenfold Spirit, is meant? We know Solomon spoke of the Lord like this (Proverbs 9:1): “Wisdom hath built herself ahouse,shehathhewnheroutsevenpillars.”Thereisno doubt that wisdom, although it is seven, is also one, as the Apostle says (I Timothy 3:15): “The church of the living God, which is the pillar and ground of truth.” 4. And the Church began from the place where the Holy Spirit came from heaven, and filled those who were sitting in one (unus) place (Acts 2:1–4).
5. In accordance with its present-day wandering the Church is called Zion, because from the imposed distance of this wandering one may ‘watch for’ (speculari) the promise of celestial things, and for that reason it takes the name ‘Zion’ (Sion), that is, watching (speculatio). 6. And in accordance with the future peace of the homeland it is called Jerusalem, for ‘Jerusalem’ (Hierusalem) is translated as “vision of peace.” There, when all hostility has been overwhelmed, one will possess peace, which is Christ, by gazing upon him face to face. 7. The Greek word ‘synagogue’ (synagoga cf. , “gather together”), which the Jewish people have taken as their own term, means “congregation”
173
(congregatio). Their gathering is properly called a synagogue, although it may also be called a church. 8. The apostles, on the other hand, never said “our synagogue,” but always “our church,” either so as to make a distinctionbetweenthetwo,orbecausethereissomedifference between ‘congregation,’ from which synagogue takes its name, and ‘convocation,’ from which church takes its name: no doubt because cattle, which we properly speak of in ‘herds’ (grex, gen. gregis), are accustomed to ‘congregate’ (congregare); and it is more fitting for those who use reason, such as humans, to be ‘convoked.’
ii. Religion and faith (De religione et fide) 1. Philosophers have named dogma (dogma) from ‘thinking’ (cf. " @, “think, suppose, believe”), that is, “I think this is good,” “I think this is true.” 2. Religion (religio) is so called because through it we bind (religare) by the chain of service our souls to the one God for the purpose of divine worship. The word is composed from relegere (“pick out”), that is, eligere (“select”), so that the Latinwordreligiomayseemtobelikeeligio(“selection”). 3. There are three things that are required of people for worshippingGodinthepracticeofreligion,thatis,faith, hope,andcharity.Infaith,whatistobebelieved;inhope, what is to be hoped for; in charity, what is to be loved. 4. Faith is that by which we truly believe what we are not able to see at all, for we cannot ‘believe’ what we actually see. The term ‘faith’ (fides) is correctly used therefore, if what was said or promised all ‘comes to pass’ (fieri). It is called fides because what has been agreed between two parties – that is, between God and the human being – is ‘brought about’ (fieri, 3rd person fit). From fides also comes the word foedus (“pact”).
5. Hope (spes) is so called because it is a foot for someone going forward, as if it were est pes (“there is a foot”). Desperation (desperatio) is its contrary, for in that term the ‘foot is lacking’ (deest . . . pes), and there is no ability to go forward, because as long as someone loves sin, he does not hope for future glory. 6. ‘Charity’ (caritas) is a Greek word, and is translated into Latin as ‘love’
 
VIII.ii.7–iv.7
(dilectio), because it binds (ligare) two (duo) in itself. Indeed, love begins from two things, because it is the love of God and the neighbor. Concerning this the apostle Paul says (Romans 13:10): “Love is the fulfilling of the law.” 7. It is greater than the other two, because he who loves also believes and hopes. But he who does not love, although he may do many good things, labors in vain. Moreover every carnal love (dilectio carnalis) is customarilycallednotlove(dilectio)but‘desire’(amor).Weusuallyusethetermdilectioonlywithregardtobetterthings.
iii. Heresy and schism (De haeresi et schismate) 1. Heresy (haeresis) is so called in Greek from ‘choice’ (electio,cf. @,“choose”),doubtlessbecauseeachperson chooses (eligere) for himself that which seems best to him, as did the Peripatetic, Academic, Epicurean, and Stoic philosophers – or just as others who, pondering perverse teachings, have withdrawn from the Church by their own will. 2. Hence, therefore, ‘heresy,’ named with a Greek word, takes its meaning from ‘choice,’ by which each person, according to his own judgment, chooses for himself whatever he pleases to institute and adopt. But we are permitted to introduce nothing based on our own judgment, nor to choose what someone else has introducedfromhisownjudgment.3.Wehavetheapostles of God as authorities, who did not choose anything themselves to introduce from their own judgment, but faithfully bestowed on the world the teaching received from Christ. And if even an angel from heaven preaches otherwise, he will be termed anathema.
4. A sect (secta) is named from ‘following’ (sequi, ppl. secutus) and ‘holding’ (tenere), for we use the term ‘sects’ of attitudes of mind and institutions associated with a precept or premise which people hold and follow when in the practice of religion they believe things that are quite different from what others believe. 5. Schism (schisma)issocalledfromthedivision(scissura)ofopinions, for schismatics believe with the same worship, the samerite,astherest;theydelightinmeredissension(discidium) in the congregation. And schism occurs when people say “we are the righteous ones,” “we are the ones who sanctify the unclean,” and other similar things. 6. Superstition(superstitio)issocalledbecauseitisasuperfluous or superimposed (superinstituere) observance. Others say it is from the aged, because those who have lived (superstites) for many years are senile with age and go astray in some superstition through not being aware of which ancient practices they are observing or which they are adding in through ignorance of the old ones. 7.AndLucretiussayssuperstitionconcernsthings‘standingabove’(superstare),thatis,theheavensanddivinities that stand over us, but he is speaking wrongly.1 So that the teachings of heretics can be recognized easily, it is appropriate to point out their motives and names.
iv. Heresies of the Jews (De haeresibus Iudaeorum) 1. The name ‘Jew’ (Iudaeus) can be translated as “confessor” (confessor), for confession (confessio) catches up withmanyofthosewhomwrongbeliefpossessedearlier. 2. Hebrews (Hebraeus) are called journeyers (transitor). With this name they are reminded that they are to journey (transire) from worse to better, and abandon their original errors. 3. The Pharisees (Pharisaeus) [deny that the Christ came, nor do they have any share in prophesied events]. [Pharisees and Sadducees (Saducaeus) are opposites, for ‘Pharisee’ is translated from Hebrew into Latin as “divided” (divisus), because they give precedencetotherighteousnessoftraditionsandobservances, which they call "  (i.e. the “secondary obligations”). Hence they are called ‘divided’ from the people, as if by their righteousness.] 4. Sadducees [deny the resurrection, noting that it is said in Genesis (cf. 3:19) “But now earth thou art, into earth thou shalt return”]. [‘Sadducee’ means “righteous,” and they claim to be righteous, which they are not – they deny the resurrection of the body, and they preach that the soul perishes with the body. They accept only the five books of the Law (i.e. Torah), and reject the predictions of the Prophets.] 5. The Essenes (Esseus) say that it is Christ himself who taught them complete abstinence. [The Galileans (Galilaeus) say that Christ came and taught them that they should not call Caesar ‘Lord,’ or heed his commands.]
6. The Masbothei say that it was Christ himself who taught them to keep the Sabbath in every aspect. 7. The Genistae [presume that they are of the family (genus) of Abraham]; [and they are so called because they are proud to be of the family of Abraham. When the people of God came into Babylon, many of them abandoned their wives and took up with Babylonian women; but somewerecontentwithIsraelitewivesonly,ortheywere
1 The word superstitio is not found in Lucretius. For his attacks on religion see, e.g., On the Nature of Things 1.62–79.
 
born (genitus) from these, and when they returned from Babylon, they separated themselves from the population as a whole and claimed for themselves this boastful name.] 8. The Meristae are so called because they separate(separare;cf.pars,“part”)theScriptures,nothaving faith in all the Prophets and saying that they prophesied by means of one sort of spirit or another. [For meris is from the Greek (cf. Bo, “part”).] 9. Samaritans (Samarita) [who were transported to that place, when Israel was captive and led off to Babylon, coming to the land of the region of Samaria, kept the customs of the Israelites in part, which they had learned from a priest who had been brought back, and in part they kept the pagan custom that they had possessed in the land of their birth. They differ entirely from the Jews in their observances, and their superstition is doubtless known toall].[TheyarecalledSamaritanbecausethey‘preserve’ (custodire; see IX.ii.54) only the Law (i.e Torah), for they do not accept the Prophets.] 10. [The Herodians (Herodianus). This heresy arose in the time of the Savior. They glorified Herod, saying that he was the Christ.] 11. The Hemerobaptistae [who wash their bodies and home and domestic utensils daily,] [so called because they wash their clothes and body daily (cf. ZB, “day,” and !7  ;, “to wash”)].
v. Christian heresies (De haeresibus Christianorum) 1. Some heretics, who have withdrawn from the Church, are named from the name of their founder, and some from the positions that they have selected and established. 2. The Simonians (Simonianus) are so called from Simon, skilled in the discipline of magic, whom Peter condemned in the Acts of the Apostles, because he wished to purchase the grace of the Holy Spirit from the Apostles with money (Acts 8:18–23). His followers say that the creation was created, not by God, but by a certain celestial power. 3. The Menandrians (Menandrianus) are named from the magician Menander, a student of Simon; they assert that the world was made not by God but by angels. 4. The Basilidians (Basilidianus) are named from Basilides; among other blasphemies, they deny the Passion of Jesus. 5. The Nicolaites (Nicolaita) are so called from Nicolas, deacon of the church of Jerusalem, who, along with Stephen and the others, wasordainedbyPeter.Heabandonedhiswifebecauseof her beauty, so that whoever wanted to might enjoy her; thepracticeturnedintodebauchery,withpartnersbeing
VIII.iv.8–v.17
exchanged in turn. John condemns them in the Apocalypse, saying (2:6): “But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaites.” 6. The Gnostics (Gnosticus) wish to call themselves thus because of the superiority of their knowledge (cf. W, “knowledge”). They say Soul is the nature of God, and they fashion a god that is both good and evil in their doctrine. 7. The Carpocratians (Carpocratianus) are named from a certain Carpocrates, who said that Christ was only a human being, and born from a man and a woman.
8. The Cerinthians (Cerinthianus) are named from a certain Cerinthus. Among other things, they practice circumcision; they say there will be one thousand (mille) years of enjoyment of the flesh after resurrection, whence they are also called Chiliasts (Chiliasta; cf. 9, “thousand”) in Greek and Miliasts (Miliastus) in Latin. 9. There are ones called Nazarenes (Nazaraeus) who, while they acknowledge Christ, who is called the Nazarene from his village, as the Son of God, nevertheless preserve everything of the Old Law. 10. Ophites (Ophita) are so called from the serpent, for the Greek word d means “serpent.” They worship the serpent, saying that it introduced the knowledge of virtue into paradise.11.TheValentinians(Valentinianus)arenamed fromacertainValentinus,afollowerofPlato,whointroduced :W (“theAeons”),thatis,certainkindsofages, into the origin of God the creator; he also asserted that Christ took on nothing corporeal from the Virgin, but passed through her as if through a pipe. 12. There are the Apellites (Apellita), of whom Apelles was the leader; he imagined that the creator was some sort of glorious angel of the supreme God, and claimed that this fiery being is the God of the Law of Israel, and said that Christ was not God in truth, but appeared as a human being in fantasy. 13. The Archontics (Archontiacus; cf. O9A, “ruler”) are named from ‘Principalities’ (i.e. one of the angelicorders)–theyclaimthattheuniverse,whichGod made, is the work of archangels.
14. The Adamites (Adamianus) are so named because they imitate the nakedness of Adam; hence they pray naked, and men and women meet with each other naked. 15. In a like manner the Cainites (Caianus) are so named because they worship Cain. 16. The Sethians (Sethianus) take their name from the son of Adam who was called Seth, saying that he was the Christ. 17. The Melchizedechians (Melchisedechianus) are so called because they reckon that Melchizedech, the priest of
 
VIII.v.18–v.39
God,wasnotahumanbeing,butaVirtue(i.e.amember of the angelic order of Virtues) of God. 18. The Angelics (Angelicus) are so called because they worship angels. 19. The Apostolics (Apostolicus) claimed that name for themselves because they possess nothing of their own, and they do not accept those who possess anything in thisworld.20.TheCerdonians(Cerdonianus)arenamed from a certain Cerdo; they assert that there are two opposing Principles. 21. The Marcionites (Marcionista) are named from the Stoic philosopher Marcion, who followed the teaching of Cerdo, and asserted that one God was good and the other just, as if there were two Principles: that of the creator and that of goodness.
22. The Artotyrites (Artotyrita) are so called from ‘offering,’ for they make an offering of bread and cheese (cf. O   “bread”;   “cheese”),sayingthattheoffering celebrated by the first humans was of the products of the earth and of sheep. 23. The Aquarians (Aquarius) are so called because they offer only water (aqua) in the sacramental chalice. 24. The Severians (Severianus), who originated from Severus, do not drink wine; they do not accept the Old Testament or resurrection. 25. The Tatianites (Tatianus) are named from a certain Tatian; they are also called the Encratites (Encratita), because they abhor meat (cf.  , “self-control”). 26. The Alogi(Alogius)arenamedasifitwere‘withouttheWord’ – ‘word’ is   in Greek – for they do not believe that God is the Word, rejecting John the Evangelist and the Apocalypse.27.TheprovincePhrygiagaveitsnametothe Cataphrygians (Cataphrygius), because they lived there. Their founders were Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla.2 They assert that the Holy Spirit was passed on, not to the apostles, but to them. 28. The Cathars (Catharus)3 call themselves so because of ‘cleanliness’ (cf. , “clean”), for, boasting of their merits, they deny forgiveness of sins to penitents; they condemn widows, if they remarry, as adulterers; they preach that they are cleaner than the rest. If they wished to know their proper name, they would call themselves ‘worldly’ (mundanus) rather than ‘clean’ (mundus).
29. The Paulians (Paulianus) originated from Paul of Samosata, who said that Christ did not always exist, but took his origin from Mary. 30. The Hermogenians (Hermogenianus) are so called from a certain Hermogenes, who, maintaining that matter was not born, compared it to God, who was not born, and asserted that there is a goddess and mother of the elements. The apostle Paul condemns them (cf. II Tim. 1:15) as being devoted to the elements.31.TheManichees(Manicheus)originatefrom a certain Persian who was called Manes. He maintained that there are two natures and substances, that is, good andevil,andassertedthatsoulsflowfromGodasiffrom some fountain. They reject the Old Testament, and they accept the New Testament only in part. 32. The Anthropomorphites (Anthropomorphita) are so called because, with rustic simple-mindedness, they think that God has human limbs, which are mentioned in divine Scripture, for OA!  in Greek is translated as ‘human being’ in Latin. They disregard the word of the Lord who says (John 4:24): “God is a Spirit.” Indeed, God is incorporeal, and not characterized by limbs, and is not to be thought of with the weight of a body. 33. The Heraclites (Heraclita) originate from the founder Heracleon. They accept only monks, reject marriage, and do not believe that children possess the kingdom of heaven. 34. The Novatians (Novatianus) originated from Novatus, priest of the city of Rome, who, in opposition to Cornelius, dared to usurp the priestly chair. He established his heresy, being unwilling to receive apostates and rebaptizing the baptized.
35. The Montanist (Montanus) heretics are so called because during the time of persecution they hid in the mountains(mons,gen.montis);forthisreasontheyseparated themselves from the body of the Catholic Church. 36. The Ebionites (Ebionita) are named from Ebion.4 Theyaresemi-JewishandsotheyaccepttheGospelwhile theyfollowaphysicalobservanceoftheLaw(i.e.Torah). The Apostle turns out to be writing in criticism of them inhislettertotheGalatians.37.ThePhotinians(Photinianus) are named from Photinus, the bishop of Sirmium inGallograecia,whoencouragedtheheresyoftheEbionites and asserted that Christ was conceived by Mary with Joseph in conjugal union. 38. The Aerians (Aerianus) are named from a certain Aerius. They scorn to offer a sacrament for the deceased. 39. The Aetians (Aetianus) are called from Aetius. They are also called Eunomians (Eunomianus) from a certain dialectician Eunomius, a discipleofAetius,bywhosenametheyarebetterknown:
2	Isidore seems to be describing the Montanists, who were also known as the Phrygians, see section 35 below.
3	Thesamenameisappliedtoalater,apparentlyunrelated,heresy.
4	The name of sect actually derives from a Hebrew word meaning “poor.” Tertullian makes the first recorded reference to a supposed person named Ebion.
 
theyassertthattheSonisnotliketheFatherandtheHoly Spirit not like the Son. And they say no sin should be imputed to those who remain in the faith. 40. The Origenians(Origenianus)beganwiththeirfounder,Origen; they say that the Son cannot see the Father, nor the Holy Spirit see the Son. They also say that souls sinned at the beginning of the world and went from heaven to earth, where they earned a variety of bodies, like shackles, according to the variety of their sins – and the world was created for this very reason.
41. The Noetians (Noetianus) are named from a certain Noetus, who used to say that Christ and the Father andtheHolySpiritwerethesame;theyaccepttheTrinity itself as the names of functions, but not as persons. Whence they are also called Patripassians (Patripassianus), because they say that the Father (Pater) suffered (pati, ppl. passus). 42. The Sabellians (Sabellianus) are said to have sprouted from this same Noetus, whose disciple, they say, was Sabellius, by whose name they are chiefly known – hence they are called Sabellians. They attribute a single person to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. 43. The Arians (Arianus) originated from Arius, an Alexandrian priest, who did not recognize the Son as co-eternal with the Father and asserted that there are distinct substances in the Trinity, in contradiction to which the Lord said (John 10:30): “I and the Father are one.” 44. The Macedonians (Macedonianus) are so called from Macedonius, the bishop of Constantinople; they deny that the Holy Spirit is God. 45. The Apollinarists (Apollinarista) are so called from Apollinaris; they say that Christ took on merely a body, without a soul. 46. The Antidicomarites (Antidicomarita; lit. “litigant against Mary”) are so called because they deny the virginity of Mary, asserting that she had intercourse with her husband after Christ was born.
47. The Metangismonites (Metangismonita) receive suchaname,because‘vessel’iscalled O  inGreek,for they assert that the Son is within the Father, as a smaller vessel within a larger. 48. Patricians (Patricianus) have their name from a certain Patricius; they say the substance of the human body was made by the devil. 49. The Coluthians (Coluthianus) are named from a certain Coluthus; they say God did not create evil, contrary to that which is written (cf. Isaiah 45:7): “I am God, creating evil.” 50. The Florians (Florianus), from Florinus; they say, on the contrary, that God created badly, contrary to that which is written (cf. Genesis 1:31): “God
VIII.v.40–v.60
made all things good.” 51. The Donatists (Donatista) are named from a certain African, Donatus, who, coming fromNumidia,deceivednearlyallAfricawithhispersuasiveness, asserting that the Son was less than the Father, and the Holy Spirit less than the Son, and rebaptizing Catholics. 52. The Bonosiacs (Bonosiacus) are reported to have originated from a certain bishop Bonosus; they assert that Christ is the adoptive son of God, not the true son. 53. The Circumcellians (Circumcellia, lit. “around the chambers”) are so called because they live out in the open;peoplecallthemCotopitae,andtheypossessadoctrine of heresy named above. They kill themselves out of their desire for martyrdom, so that in dying a violent death they may be called martyrs.
54. The Priscillianists (Priscillianista) are named from Priscillian, who created a dogma in Spain, combined from the errors of the Gnostics and Manicheans. 55. The Luciferians (Luciferianus) originated from Lucifer, bishop of Syrmia (i.e. Sardinia); they condemn the Catholic bishops who, under the persecution of Constantius, consented to the faithlessness of the Arians and later, after this, repented and chose to return to the Catholic Church. They condemn these bishops either because they believed in Arianism, or because they pretended to believe. The Catholic Church received these in her maternal bosom, just as she did Peter after he lamented his denial of Christ. The Luciferians, proudly accepting this maternal love, but not willing to accept thosewhohadrepented,withdrewfromthecommunion of the Church and they deserved to fall, along with their founder, a Lucifer indeed, who would rise in the morning(i.e.asifhewereLucifer,themorningstarandaname for the devil). 56. Jovinianists (Iovinianista) are so called fromacertainmonkJovinian;theyassertthatthereisno difference between wives and virgins, and no distinction betweenthosewhoareabstinentandthosewhoblatantly carouse. 57. The Elvidians (Elvidianus) are named from Elvidius; they say that after Christ was born, Mary had other sons by her husband Joseph. 58. The Paternians (Paternianus) originated from a certain Paternus; they believethatthelowerpartsofthebodyweremadebythe devil. 59. The Arabics (Arabicus) are so named because theyoriginatedinArabia;theysaythatthesouldieswith the body, and each one will rise again in the last age.
60. The Tertullianists (Tertullianista) are so called from Tertullian, a priest of the African province, of the city of Carthage; they preach that the soul is immortal,
 
VIII.v.61–vi.2
but corporeal, and they believe the souls of human sinners are turned into demons after death. 61. The Tessarescaedecatites (Tessarescaidecatita) are so called because they contend that Easter should be observed with the Jewish Passover, on the fourteenth of the lunar month, for  B means “four” and "B, “ten”. 62. The Nyctages (Nyctages) are named from sleep (cf. ?, gen.  , “night”), because they reject night vigils, saying that it is a superstition to violate divine law, which assigns night to resting. 63. The Pelagians originated with the monk Pelagius. They put free will before divine grace, saying that will is sufficient to fulfill the divine commands. 64. The Nestorians (Nestorianus) are named from Nestorius, bishop of Constantinople, who asserted that the blessed Virgin Mary was the mother not of God, but of a mere human, so that he would make one person of the flesh and the other of the godhead. He did not believe that one and the same Christ existed in the Word of God and in the flesh, but he preached that there was one separate and distinct Son of God and another of humankind. 65. The Eutychians (Eutychianus) are so called from Eutyches, abbot of Constantinople,whodeniedthatChristconsistedoftwo natures after his human incarnation, but asserted that the divine nature alone was in him. 66. The Acephalites (Acephalus) are so called (cf. B  ‘headless’), that is, without a head (i.e. a leader) whom these heretics follow – for their founder, from whom they originated, is not known. Opposing the three tenets (capitulum, cf. caput,‘head’)oftheCouncilofChalcedon,theydenythe individuality of the two substances in Christ and preach that there is a single nature in his person.
67. The Theodosians (Theodosianus) and the Gaianites(Gaianita)arenamedfromTheodosiusandGaianus, whowereordainedasbishopsonasingledaybytheselectionofaperversepopulaceinAlexandriaduringthetime of the ruler Justinian. Following the errors of Eutyches and Dioscorus, they rejected the Council of Chalcedon. TheyassertedthatthereisinChristonenaturefromtwo, which nature the Theodosians contend is corrupt and the Gaianites incorrupt. 68. The Agnoites (Agnoita) and Tritheites (Tritheita) originated from the Theodosians; of these, the Agnoites are so called from ignorance (cf. O , “ignorance”), because to that perversity from which they arise they add this: that the divinity of Christ is ignorant of the things to come, which are written concerning the last day and hour – they do not recall the person of Christ speaking in Isaiah (cf. 63:4): “The day of judgment is in my heart.” And the Tritheites (cf.  -, “three”; , “god”) are so called because they add that just as there are three persons in the Trinity, so also therearethreegods,contrarytothatwhichiswritten(cf. Deuteronomy 6:4): “Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God.”
69.	There are also other heresies without a founderand without names. Of these some believe that God is triform, others say that the divinity of Christ was capable of suffering, others assign the beginning of time to Christ’s nativity from the Father, others [do not] believe thattheliberationofthepeopleinhellwasaccomplished by the descent of Christ,5 others deny that the soul is the image of God, others suppose that souls are turned into demons and all sorts of animals. Others disagree concerning the state of the world: some believe in countless worlds, some assert that water is co-eternal with God. Somewalkbarefoot,othersdonoteatwithotherpeople.
70.	These are heresies that have arisen in oppositionto the catholic faith, and have been condemned by the apostles and Holy Fathers, or by the Councils. These heresies, although they disagree with each other, differing among themselves in many errors, nevertheless conspire with a common name against the Church of God. But also, whoever understands the Holy Scriptures otherwise than the meaning of the Holy Spirit, by whom they were written, requires, even if he does not depart from the Church, nevertheless can be called a heretic.
vi. Pagan philosophers (De philosophis gentium) 1. Philosophers are called by a Greek name that is translated in Latin as “lovers of wisdom” (amator sapientiae). Indeed, a philosopher is one who has knowledge of divine and human matters, and follows every path of living well. 2. The term ‘philosopher’ (philosophus) is reported to have originated from Pythagoras. Although earlier the ancient Greeks would quite boastfully name themselves sophists (sophista), that is, ‘wise ones’ or ‘teachers of wisdom,’ when Pythagoras was asked what he professed, he responded with a modest term, saying that he was a ‘philosopher,’ that is, a lover of wisdom – for to claim that one was wise seemed very arrogant.
5 Some manuscripts read, “others believe that the liberation of all those in hell was accomplished by the descent of Christ” – a heresy promulgated by Origen.
 
3. So henceforth it was pleasing to later generations that, however much someone might seem, to himself or to others, to excel in his teaching about matters pertaining to wisdom, he would not be called anything but
‘philosopher.’ Philosophers are divided into three kinds: they are natural philosophers, ethicists, or logicians. 4. ‘Natural philosophers’ (physicus) are so called because they treat of nature, for in Greek ‘nature’ is called . 5.Theethicists(ethicus),becausetheydiscussmorals,for moralsarecalled e bytheGreeks.6.Andthelogicians (logicus), because they bring reasoning to the treatment of both nature and morals, for in Greek ‘reason’ (ratio) is called  .
They are divided into their own schools, some having names from their founders, such as the Platonists, the Epicureans, and the Pythagoreans. Others take their names from the site of their meetings and their abodes, such as the Peripatetics, the Stoics, and the Academics. 7. The Platonists (Platonicus) are named from the philosopher Plato. They assert that God is the creator of souls, and angels the creators of bodies; they say that souls return in different bodies through many cycles of years. 8. The Stoics (Stoicus) are so called from a place. There wasaporticoinAthensthattheycalledthe !     (“painted portico”) in which were painted the deeds of wise people and the histories of great men. In this portico,wisepeopleusedtophilosophize,andconsequently they were called Stoics, for in Greek, a portico is called   . Zeno first established this sect. 9. They deny that anyone may be made happy without virtue. They assert that all sin is uniform, saying, “He who has stolen chaff will be as culpable as one who has stolen gold; he who kills a diver-bird as much as one who kills a horse – for it is not the nature of the animal (animal), but the intention (animus), that constitutes the crime.” 10. They also say that the soul perishes with the body, the soul also.6 They deny the virtue of temperance. They aspire to eternal glory, although they say that they are not eternal. 11. The Academics are so called from the villa of Plato, the
6	The faulty text here may be emended: “. . . perishes with the body. They also love the virtue of temperance. They aspire to . . .” The emendation would obviously accord with Stoicism.
7	Arcesilaus or Arcesilas, founder of the Middle Academy, was from Pitane in Aeolia, not Cyrene in Libya, but there was a line of kings in Cyrene with the name Arcesilas. There was also a school known as Cyrenaics, but Arcesilaus was apparently not a member of this. Further, he was born about 150 years after Democritus.
VIII.vi.3–vi.18
Academy of Athens, where this same Plato used to teach. They believe that everything is doubtful, but, just as it must be said that many things are doubtful and hidden, which God has wished to be beyond the intelligence of humans, nevertheless there are many things that can be grasped by the senses and understood by reason. 12. The philosopher Arcesilaus of Cyrene founded this school; his follower was Democritus, who said that truth lies hidden, as if in a well so deep that it has no bottom.7
13. The Peripatetics (Peripateticus) are so called from ‘walking about’ (cf. !!  ), because Aristotle, their founder, was accustomed to engage in disputation whilewalkingabout.Theysaythatacertainsmallpartof the soul is eternal; concerning the rest, it is in large part mortal. 14. The Cynics (Cynicus) are named from the foulness of their shamelessness. For, contrary to human modesty, it was their custom to copulate publicly with their wives, insisting that it is lawful and decent to lie openly with one’s wife, because it is a lawful union; they preach that this should be done publicly in the streets or avenues like dogs. Whence they drew their epithet and name from the dogs (cf. A, “dog”) whose life they imitated. 15. The Epicureans (Epicureus) are so called from a certain philosopher Epicurus, a lover of vanity, not of wisdom, whom the philosophers themselves named ‘the pig,’ wallowing in carnal filth, as it were, and asserting that bodily pleasure is the highest good. He also said that the world was not constructed or regulated by any divine forethought. 16. But he assigned the origin of things to atoms, that is, to solid and indivisible bodies, from whose chance collisions all things originate and have originated. And they assert that God does nothing; everything consists of bodies; the soul is nothing other than the body. Whence also he said, “I will not exist after I have died.” 17. The Gymnosophists (Gymnosophista) are said to philosophize naked (cf. , “naked”) in the shady solitudes of India, wearing garments only over their genitals. Thus a ‘gymnasium’ is so called because on a field, young men exercise naked, covering only their private parts. The Gymnosophists also restrain themselves from procreation.
18. There are Deists (Theologus) who are the same as natural philosophers. They are called ‘Deists’ because they spoke of God in their writings. In their investigations there are various ideas about the nature of God. Thus some, like Dionysius the Stoic, said that God is this world of the four elements visible to the bodily sense.
 
VIII.vi.19–vii.8
Others, like Thales of Miletus, understood spiritually that God is mind. 19. Some, like Pythagoras, said God is a lucid consciousness immanent in everything. Some, like Plato, that God is unchangeable and timeless. Some, like Cicero, that he is unfettered mind. Some, like Maro (i.e. Vergil), that he is both spirit and mind. Indeed, they explained only the God that they found, not how they found him, because they have come to nothing in their cogitations. By saying they were wise, they became fools.
20.[Again,]thePlatonistsatanyrateassertthatGodis guardian and ruler and judge. The Epicureans, that God is uninvolved and inactive. Concerning the world, the Platonistsaffirmthatitisincorporeal,theStoicsthatitis corporeal, Epicurus that it is made of atoms, Pythagoras that it is made from numbers, Heraclitus, from fire. 21. Whence also Varro says that fire is the soul of the world; just as fire governs all things in the world, so the soul governs all things in us. As he says most vainly, “When it is in us, we exist; when it leaves us, we perish.” Thus also when fire departs from the world through lightning, the world perishes.
22. These errors of the philosophers also introduced heresies within the Church. Hence the :W (see v.11 above) and certain ‘forms,’ hence the ‘Trinity of the name’ of Arius, and the Platonic madness of Valentinus.23.HencetheGodofMarcion,‘betterwithregardto tranquillity,’whichcamefromtheStoics.Thatthesoulis said to die is the influence of Epicurus. The denial of the resurrection of the flesh is taken from the empty teachingofallthephilosophers.Wherematterisequatedwith God,itistheteachingofZeno,andwherewereadabouta fiery God, Heraclitus has intervened. The same material is rolled about among the heretics and the philosophers, and the same repeated statements are involved.
vii. Poets (De poetis) 1. Whence poets (poeta) are so called, thus says Tranquillus (i.e. Suetonius, On Poets 2) “Whenpeoplefirstbegantopossessarationalwayoflife, having shaken off their wildness, and to come to know themselves and their gods, they devised for themselves a humble culture and the speech required for their ideas, and devised a greater expression of both for the worship of their gods. 2. Therefore, just as they made temples more beautiful than their homes, and idols larger than their bodies, so they thought the gods should be honored by speech that was, as it were, loftier, and they raised up their praises with more brilliant words and more pleasing rhythms. This kind of thing was given the name ‘poem’ (poema) because it is fashioned with a certain beauty known as !  (i.e. “quality”), and its makers were called ‘poets’ (poeta).” 3. Varro is the originator of the idea that ‘seers’ (vates) are so called from the force (vis) of the mind, or from plaiting (viere) songs, that is, from ‘turning’ or modulating them; accordingly the poets in Latin were once called vates, and their writings called ‘prophetic’ (vaticinius), because they were inspiredtowritebyacertainforce(vis),amadness(vesania), as it were; or because they ‘link’ words in rhythms, with the ancients using the term viere instead of vincire (“bind”). Indeed, through madness the prophets had this same name, because they themselves proclaimed many things in verse.
4.Lyric(lyricus)poetsarenamedaftertheGreekterm @ (lit. “speak trifles”) that is, from the variety of their songs. Hence also the lyre (lyra) is named. 5. Tragedians (tragoedus) are so called, because at first the prize for singers was a goat, which the Greeks call   . Hence also Horace (Art of Poetry 220):
Who with a tragic song vied for a paltry goat.
Now the tragedians following thereafter attained great honor, excelling in the plots of their stories, composed in the image of truth. 6. ‘Writers of comedies’ (comoedus) are so called either from the place, because people performed them in rural districts, which the Greeks call E, or from revelry (comissatio), for people used to cometohearthemafterameal.Writersofcomediesproclaim the deeds of private people, but tragedians, public matters and stories of kings. Again, the plots of tragedians are of sorrowful subjects; those of the writers of comedies,cheerfulones.7.Therearetwotypesofwriters of comedies, that is, the Old and the New. The Old, who wouldamusebymeansofajoke,suchasPlautus,Accius, Terence.TheNew,whoarealsocalledsatirists(satiricus), by whom vices are generally flayed, such as Flaccus (i.e. Horace), Persius, Juvenal, and others. These latter seize upon the transgressions of everyone, and they do not refrain from describing any very wicked person, or from censuring the wrongdoings and morals of anyone. They are pictured naked because by them individual faults are laid bare.
8. Satirists (saturicus) are so called either because they are filled with all eloquence, or from fullness (saturitas) and abundance – for they speak about many things at
 
the same time – or from the platter (i.e. satura) with various kinds of fruit and produce that people used to offer at the temples of the pagans, or the name is taken from‘satyrplays’(satyrus),whichcontainthingsthatare said in drunkenness, and go unpunished. 9. And some poets are called theological (theologicus), because they composed songs about the gods.
10. The function of poets is this, to transform things thathaveactuallytakenplaceintootherforms,modified with some grace by means of indirect representations. Whence Lucan on that account is not placed among the number of poets, because he is seen to have composed histories, not a poem. 11. Moreover, among the poets there are three modes of speaking: one, in which the poetalonespeaks,asinVergil’sbooksoftheGeorgics;the secondmodeisdramatic,inwhichthepoetneverspeaks, as in comedies and tragedies; the third is mixed, as in the Aeneid, for there both the poet and the characters who are represented speak.
viii. Sibyls (De Sibyllis) 1. In the Greek language all female seers are generally called Sibyls (sibylla), for in theAeoliandialecttheGreekscalledGod ,andmind  ;themindofGod,asitwere.Hence,becausethese seers would interpret the divine will for humans, they were named Sibyls. 2. And just as every man who prophesiesiscalledeitheraseer(vates)oraprophet(propheta), soeverywomanwhoprophesiesiscalledaSibyl,because it is the name of a function, not a proper noun.
3. It is reported by the most learned authors that there were ten Sibyls. The first of these was from Persia; the second is the Libyan Sibyl; the third, the Delphic, born in the temple of Apollo at Delphi. She prophesied before the Trojan Wars, and Homer inserted many of her verses into his own work. 4. The fourth was the Cimmerian, in Italy; the fifth, the Erythraean, Herophila by name, who camefromBabylon–sheforetoldtotheGreeksattacking Troy that it would perish and that Homer would write lies. She is called Erythraean because in that same island hersongswerefound.ThesixthistheSamianSibyl,who is called Phemonoe, from the island of Samos – hence she was so named.
5. The seventh is the Cumanan Sibyl, Amalthea by name, who delivered to the Tarquin Priscus the nine books in which the Roman decrees were drawn up. She isalsotheCumaeanSibylofwhomVergilwrote(Ecl.4.4):
Now the final age of Cumaean song has come on.
VIII.vii.9–ix.6
She is called Cumana (cumana) after the city Cumae, which is in Campania; her sepulcher remains in Sicily to this day. 6. The eighth, the Hellespontian, was born on the Trojan plain; it is written that she lived in the time of Solon and Cyrus. The ninth is the Phrygian, who prophesied in Ancyra; the tenth the Tiburtinan, with the name Albunea. 7. Songs by all of them are published in which they are attested to have written many things most clearly even for the pagans about God and Christ. The Erythraean Sibyl is considered more honored and noble than the rest.
ix. Magicians (De magis) 1. The first of the magicians was Zoroaster (Zoroastres), king of the Bactrians, whom Ninus, king of the Assyrians, killed in battle. About him Aristotle writes that the two million verses composed by him are made evident by the catalogues of his volumes. 2. Democritus expanded this art after many centuries, when Hippocrates also flourished with the discipline of medicine. Among the Assyrians the magic arts are abundant, as Lucan bears witness (cf. Civil War 6.427):
Who could know of deeds by means of entrails, who interpret the birds, who might observe the lightning of the sky, and examine the constellations with Assyrian skill?
3. Consequently, this foolery of the magic arts held sway over the entire world for many centuries through the instruction of the evil angels. By a certain knowledge of things to come and of things below, and by invoking them, divinations (aruspicium) were invented, and auguries (auguratio), and those things that are called oracles (oraculum) and necromancy (necromantium). 4. There is nothing surprising about the trickery of the magicians, since their skills in magic advanced to such a point that they even countered Moses with very similar signs, turning staffs into serpents and water into blood. 5. A certain sorceress (maga) is also reported, the very famous Circe, who turned the companions of Ulysses into beasts.
We also read about the sacrifice that the Arcadians burnt in offering to their god Lycaeus; whoever consumed this was turned into the shape of a beast. 6. This does not appear to have been completely doubtful, because the noble poet writes of a certain woman who excelled in the magic arts (Vergil, Aen. 4.487):
 
VIII.ix.7–ix.24
She promises with her spells to soothe whichever minds she wishes, but to bring hard cares to others; to make the water of rivers stand still, to turn the stars back, and to raise night ghosts; you will see the earth groan underfoot, and wild mountain-ashes descend from the hills.
7. Further, if one may credit it, what of the Pythoness (I Kings 28:7–19 Vulgate), when she called up the spirit of the prophet Samuel from the recesses of the lower region and presented him to the view of the living – if, however,webelievethatthiswasthespiritoftheprophet and not some fantastic illusion created by the deception of Satan? 8. Prudentius also spoke thus about Mercury (Against the Oration of Symmachus 1.90):
It is told that he recalled perished souls to the light by the power of a wand that he held, but condemned others to death,
and a little later he adds,
For with a magic murmur you know how to summon faint shapes and enchant sepulchral ashes. In the same way the malicious art knows how to despoil others of life.
9.Therearemagicianswhoarecommonlycalled‘evildoers’ (maleficus) by the crowd because of the magnitude of their crimes. They agitate the elements, disturb the minds of people, and slay without any drinking of poison, using the violence of spells alone. 10. Hence also Lucan (Civil War 6.457):
The mind, polluted by no poison of swallowed venom, yet perishes under a spell.
With their summoning of demons, they dare to flaunt how one may slay his enemies with evil arts. They make use of blood and victims, and often handle the bodies of the dead. 11. Necromancers (necromantius) are those by whose incantations the dead, brought back to life, seem to prophesy, and to answer what is asked, for  means “dead” in Greek, and divination is called  . The blood of a corpse is applied for the crossquestioning, for demons are said to love blood. And for this reason, whenever necromancy is practiced, gore is mixed with water, so that they are called more easily by the gore of the blood. 12. Hydromancers (hydromantius) aresocalledfromwater,forhydromancyiscallingupthe shades of demons by gazing into water, and watching their images or illusions, and hearing something from them, when they are said to consult the lower beings by use of blood. 13. This type of divination is said to have been brought from Persia.
Varro says that there are four kinds of divination: earth, water, air, and fire. Hence are named geomancy (geomantia), hydromancy (hydromantia), aeromancy (aeromantia), and pyromancy (pyromantia). 14. Diviners (divinus) are so named, as if the term were ‘filled with god’ (deo plenus), for they pretend to be filled with divine inspiration, and with a certain deceitful cunning they forecast what is to come for people. There are two kinds of divination: craft and madness. 15. Those who accomplish their craft with words are called enchanters (incantator). 16. Arioli are so called because they utter abominable prayers around the ‘altars of idols’ (ara idolorum), and offer pernicious sacrifices, and in these rites receive the answers of demons. 17. Haruspices are so named as if the expression were ‘observers (inspector) of the hours (hora)’; they watch over the days and hours for doing business and other works, and they attend to what a person ought to watch out for at any particular time. They also examine the entrails of animals and predict the future from them. 18. Augurs (augur) are those who give attention to the flight and calls of birds (avis), and to other signs of things or unforeseen observations that impinge on people. These are the same as ‘observers of auspices’ (auspex). 19. For auspicious signs are what those who are making a journey take heed of. Theyarecalled‘auspicioussigns’(auspicium)asifitwere ‘observations of birds’ (avium aspicium), and ‘auguries’ (augurium), as if it were ‘bird calls’ (avium garria), that is, the sounds and languages of birds. Again, augurium as if the word were avigerium, that is, how ‘birds behave’ (avis gerit). 20. There are two types of auspicious signs, one pertaining to the eyes and the other to the ears. To the eyes, as the flight of birds; to the ears as the voice of birds.
21.Pythonesses(Pythonissae)arenamedfromPythian Apollo, because he was the inventor of divination. 22. Astrologers (astrologus) are so called, because they perform augury from the stars. 23. Genethliaci are so called on account of their examinations of nativities, for they describe the nativities (genesis) of people according to the twelve signs of the heavens, and attempt to predict the characters, actions, and circumstances of people by the course of the stars at their birth, that is, who was born under what star, or what outcome of life the person who is born would have. 24. These are commonly
 
called astrologers (mathematicus); the Romans call this kindofsuperstition‘constellations’(constellatio),thatis, observation of the stars – how they relate to each other when each person is born. 25. The first interpreters of the stars were called Magi (magus), as we read of those who made known the birth of Christ in the Gospels; afterwards they only had the name mathematicus. 26. Knowledge of this skill was permitted only up until the time of the Gospel, so that once Christ was born no one thereafter would interpret the birth of anyone from the heavens. 27. ‘Drawers of horoscopes’ (horoscopus) are so called because they examine (speculari) the times (hora) of people’s nativities with regard to their dissimilar and varied destiny.
28.‘Interpretersoflots’(sortilegus)arethosewhoprofess the knowledge of divination under the name of a false religion, using what they call ‘lots (sors, gen. sortis) of the saints,’ or those who foretell the future by examining one passage of scripture or another.8 29. The salisatores are so called because whenever any part of their limbs leaps (salire), they proclaim that this means somethingfortunateorsomethingunfortunateforthem thereafter. 30. Associated with all these arts are amulets consisting of curse-charms. The art of physicians condemns these, whether used with incantations, or magical characters, or whatever is hung on or bound to a person. 31. In all these the craft of demons has issued from a certain pestilential alliance of humans and evil angels. Hence all these things are to be avoided by a Christian, and entirely repudiated and condemned with every curse. 32. The Phrygians were the first to discover the auguries of birds, but Mercury is said to have first invented illusions. 33. They are called illusions (praestigium) because they dull (praestringere) the sharpness of one’s eyes. 34. A certain Tages is said to have first given the art of aruspicina (i.e. divination by inspection ofentrails;see17above)totheEtruscans.Hepronounced divinationsorally,andafterthatdidnotshowhimself.35. It is said in fable that when a certain rustic was plowing, he suddenly leapt up from the clods and pronounced a
8	A sortilegus would predict the future by examining a randomly selected verse of the Bible or another authoritative text.
9	Jews speak of gentiles as any non-Jews; Christians use the term for those both non-Jewish and non-Christian. Latin uses both the term gentilis and (in the plural) gentes, lit. ‘nations, tribes,’ for gentiles. We generally translate the ‘gentiles’ of the Greco-Roman world as ‘pagans,’ but sometimes as ‘heathens.’
VIII.ix.25–xi.4
divination, and on that day he died. The Romans translated these books from the Etruscan language into their own.
x.	Pagans (De paganis) 1. Pagans (paganus) are named from the districts (pagus) of the Athenians, where they originated, for there, in rural places and districts, the pagans established sacred groves and idols, and from such a beginning pagans received their name.2. Gentiles are those who are without the Law, and have not yet believed.9 Andtheyarecalled‘gentiles’(gentilis)because theyremainjustastheywereborn(gignere,ppl.genitus), that is, just as they descended into the body governed by sin, in other words, worshipping idols and not yet reborn. 3. Accordingly, they were first named gentiles. In Greek they are called ethnici. The Latin word gentiles is translated as ethnici in Greek, for the Greek	  means “tribe” (gens). 4. But after their conversion, those from the tribes who believe ought not to be called gentes or gentiles, just as after conversion a Jew can no longer be called a Jew, as the apostle Paul testifies when he says to the Christians (I Corinthians 12:2): “That when you were heathens (gentes),” that is, infidels. 5. Those people are called apostates (apostata) who, after the baptism of Christ has been received, return to the worship of idols and pollution of sacrifices. And this is a Greek term.
xi.	Gods of the heathens (De diis gentium) 1. Those who the pagans assert are gods are revealed to have once been humans, and after their death they began to be worshipped among their people because of the life and merit of each of them, as Isis in Egypt, Jupiter in Crete, Iuba among the Moors, Faunus among the Latins, and Quirinus among the Romans. 2. It was the same with Minerva in Athens, Juno in Samos, Venus in Paphos, Vulcan in Lemnos, Liber in Naxos and Apollo in Delos. Poets joined in their praises of these, and by the songs theycomposedcarriedthemuptothesky.3.Inthecaseof some of them people are said to have brought about the discoveryofartsthroughtheircults:thereismedicinefor Aesculapius,forgingforVulcan.Further,theyarenamed from their activities, as Mercury (Mercurius), because he excels at commerce (merx), Liber (Liber) from liberty (libertas). 4. Again, there were certain powerful men, or founders of cities, for whom, after they had died, the people who had been fond of them made likenesses, so that they might have some solace from contemplating
 
VIII.xi.5–xi.21
these images. However, at the urging of demons, this error gradually crept into later generations in such a way that those, whom people had honored only for the memory of their name, their successors deemed as gods and worshipped.
5. The use of likenesses arose when, out of grief for the dead, images or effigies were set up, as if in place of those who had been received into heaven demons substituted themselves to be worshipped on earth, and persuaded deceived and lost people to make sacrifices to themselves. 6. And ‘likenesses’ (simulacrum) are named from ‘similarity’(similitudo),because,throughthehandofan artisan, the faces of those in whose honor the likenesses areconstructedareimitatedinstoneorsomeothermaterial. Therefore they are called likenesses either because they are similar (similis), or because they are feigned (simulare) or invented, whence they are false. 7. And it shouldbenotedthattheLatinwordalsoexistsamongthe Hebrews,forbythemanidolorlikenessiscalled‘Semel.’ The Jews say that Ishmael first made a likeness from clay. 8. The pagans assert that Prometheus first made a likeness of humans from clay and that from him the art of making likenesses and statues was born. Whence also the poets supposed that human beings were first created by him – figuratively, because of these effigies. 9. Among the Greeks was Cecrops, during whose reign the olive tree first appeared on the citadel, and the city of Athens received its name from the name of Minerva. 10. He was the first of all to call on Jupiter, devise likenesses, set up altars, and sacrifice offerings, things of this kind having never before been seen in Greece.
11.Idolatry(idolatria)meanstheserviceorworshipof idols, for   in Greek is translated in Latin as servitude (servitus), which as far as true religion is concerned is owed only to the one and only God. 12. Just as impious pride in humans or demons commands or wishes for this service to be offered to itself, so pious humility in humans or holy angels declines it if it is offered, and indicates to whom it is due. 13. An idol (idolum) is a likeness made in the form of a human and consecrated, according to the meaning of the word, for the Greek term ^"  means “form” (forma), and the diminutive idolum derived from it gives us the equivalent diminutiveformula(“replica,”i.e.animagemadeinamold).14. Therefore every form or replica ought to be called idol. Therefore idolatry is any instance of servility and subservience to any idol. Certain Latin speakers, however, not knowing Greek, ignorantly say that ‘idol’ takes its name from ‘deception’ (dolus), because the devil introduced to creation worship of a divine name. 15. They say demons (daemon) are so called by the Greeks as if the word were "A, that is, experienced and knowledgeable in matters,10 for they foretell many things to come, whence they are also accustomed to give some answers.16.Indeed,theyhavemoreknowledgeofthings than does human weakness, partly through a more subtle acuity of sense, partly through the experience of an extremely long life, and partly through angelic revelation at God’s command. They flourish in accordance with the nature of aerial bodies. 17. Indeed, before their fall they had celestial bodies. Now that they have fallen, they have turned into an aerial quality; and they are not allowed to occupy the purer expanses of the air, but only themurkyregions,whicharelikeaprisonforthem,until the Day of Judgment. They are the prevaricator angels, of whom the Devil is the ruler. 18. Devil (diabolus) in Hebrew is translated as “sinking downwards,” because he disdained to stand quiet in the height of the heavens, but, due to the weight of his pride, sinking down he fell. In fact, in Greek an accuser is called diabolus, either because he brings before God the crimes into which he himself lures people, or because he accuses the innocence of the elect with fabricated crimes – whence also in the Apocalypse (12:10) it is said by the voice of an angel: “The accuser of our brethren is cast forth, who accused them before our God day and night.”
19. Satan (Satanas) means “adversary,” or “transgressor” in Latin. He is indeed the adversary who is the enemy of truth, and he always strives to go against the virtues of the holy. He is also the transgressor, because as a complete prevaricator, he did not continue in the truth in which he was created. Also he is the tempter, because he claims that the innocence of the righteous mustbetempted,asitiswritteninJob.20.Heiscalledthe Antichrist (Antichristus), because he is to come against Christ. He is not, as certain simpletons suppose, called theAntichristbecauseheistocomebefore(ante)Christ, that is, that Christ would come after him. This is not the case, but rather he is called Antichrist in Greek, which is ‘against Christ’ (contrarius Christo) in Latin, for   in Greek means ‘against’ in Latin. 21. When he comes he
10 Greek"Acanmean“demon,”and"Ameans“know-
ing, experienced.”
 
will pretend that he is Christ, and there will be a struggle againsthim,andhewillopposethesacramentsofChrist in order to destroy the gospel of his truth. 22. For he will attempt to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem and restore all the rites of the old Law. But Antichrist is also one who deniesthatChristisGod,forheistheoppositeofChrist. So all those who depart from the Church and are cut off from the unity of faith are themselves Antichrists.
23. Bel is a Babylonian idol whose name means “old.” He was Belus, the father of Ninus, the first king of the Assyrians, whom some call Saturn. His name was worshipped among both the Assyrians and the Africans; hence in the Punic language ‘god’ is called Bal. And among the Assyrians, Bel is also called Saturn and Sol in a certain aspect of his rites. 24. Belphegor is translated as “likeness of ignominy,” for Moab, with the cognomen Baal, was an idol on Mount Phegor; Latin speakers call him Priapus, the god of gardens. 25. He was from Lampsacus, a city on the Hellespont, whence he was banished, andonaccountofthesizeofhismalemembertheGreeks translated him to the roster of their gods and held him sacred as the deity of gardens. Accordingly, he is said to preside over gardens for the sake of their fertility. 26. Belzebub was the idol of Accaron, and the word is translated as “man of flies,” for a fly is called zebub. The most impure idol, therefore, was called ‘man of flies’ because of the filth of idolatry, or its uncleanness. Belial . . . 27. Behemoth, from the Hebrew language, means ‘animal’ in Latin, because he fell from the heights to the earth, and for his offense was made brutish, like an animal. He is also Leviathan, that is, a ‘serpent from the seas,’ because in the undulating sea of this world he winds his way with cunning. 28. Leviathan means ‘their additional factor.’ Whose, indeed, if not the ‘additional factor’ of human beings, to whom he once introduced the sin of deceit in Paradise, and in whom by persuasion he daily adds to or extends this deceit up to the point of eternal death?
29. By empty stories the pagans attempt to connect some of the names of their gods to physical causes, and they interpret these names as involved in the origins of theelements.Butthishasbeenentirelymadeupbypoets, with the intention of enhancing their gods with certain figuresofspeech,whilehistoriesrevealthesegodstohave been lost and full of the infamy of shame. Indeed, when truth leaves off, room for fiction is wide open. 30. Saturn (Saturnus) is designated by the pagans as the origin of
VIII.xi.22–xi.39
the gods and of all posterity. Latin speakers declare that he is named from sowing (satus), as though the sowing of all things pertains to him, or from the length of time, because he is filled (saturare) with years. 31. Whence the Greeks say he has the name Cronos, that is, “time” (cf. 9 ), because he is said to have devoured his sons: that is, he rolls back into himself the years that time has brought forth; or it is because seeds return again to the place from where they arose. 32. They say that he cut off the genitals of his father, the Sky (Caelus), because nothingintheskyisbornofseed.Hegraspsascythe,they say, in order to signify agriculture, or to signify the years andseasons,becausescythesturnbackonthemselves;or to signify knowledge because it is sharp on the inside. 33. In some cities the pagans used to sacrifice their children to Saturn, because the poets reported that Saturn was accustomed to devour his own children.
34. Jove (Iovis) is said to be named from ‘helping’ (iuvare), and Jupiter (Iuppiter) is as if the name were iuvans pater (“helping father”), that is, providing for all. Theyalsocalledhim,withaspecialtitle,‘JupitertheBest’ (Iuppiter Optimus), although he was incestuous among his own family, and shameless among others. 35. They imagine that he was at one time a bull on account of the rape of Europa, for he was in a ship whose standard was a bull. At another time he sought to lie with Danae by means of a shower of gold, where it is understood that the modesty of a woman was corrupted by gold. At another time he appeared in the likeness of an eagle because he carried off a boy for defilement; at another time a serpent, because he crawled, and a swan, because hesang.36.Andthereforethesearenotfiguresofspeech, but crimes in plain truth. Whence it was shameful that gods should be believed to be such as humans ought not to be. 37. They call Janus (Ianus) the door (ianua), as it were, of the world or the sky or the months. They imagine two faces for Janus, standing for the east and the west. And when they make him with four faces and call him the double Janus, they refer to the four corners of the world or to the four elements or to the seasons. But when they imagine this, they make him a monster, not a god.
38. They proclaim that Neptune is the waters of the world, and Neptune (Neptunus) is named by them as if it were ‘roaring in the mist’ (nube tonans). 39. They would have it that Vulcan is fire, and he is named Vulcan (Vulcanus), as ‘flying radiance’ (volans candor), or as if
 
VIII.xi.40–xi.55
thewordwerevolicanus,becausehefliesthroughtheair– for fire is born from clouds. 40. Whence also Homer says that he fell headlong down from the air to the earth, because all lightning falls from the air. For that reason Vulcan is imagined to have been born from Juno’s thigh, becauselightningboltsoriginateinthelowerpartsofthe air. 41. Vulcan is also called lame, because fire by nature is never straight, but has an appearance and motion as if it were lame. So also they say that this same Vulcan is the originator of the smithy, because without fire no kind of metal can be cast and beaten out. 42. Pluto in Greek is Diespiter or ‘Father of Dis’ (Ditis Pater) in Latin.11 Some call him Orcus, receiver of the dead, as it were – whence the vessel that receives water is called orca. He is also Charon in Greek.
43.TheyholdthatLiber(Liber)isnamedfrom‘release’ (liberamentum), because it is as if males were released (liberare) by his favor when their seed is ejaculated in copulation, since this same Liber is depicted with a delicate feminine body. Indeed, they say that women are assigned to him, and also wine, for the sake of arousing desire. 44. Whence his brow is wreathed with vines. But he holds a crown of vines and a horn, because when wine is drunk in moderation and acceptably it confers happiness, but when it is drunk immoderately it stirs up quarrels – that is, it is as if it gives horns. And he is also called Lyaeus after the term  (“loosen”) because the limbs are loosened by a great deal of wine. And in Greek he is called   from the mountain Nysa in India, where he is said to have been brought up. Otherwise there is also the city Nysa, in which Liber is worshipped, from which he is called Nysaeus.
45. Mercury (Mercurius) is translated as “speech,” for Mercury is said to be named as if the word were mediuscurrens(“go-between”),becausespeechisthegobetween for people. In Greek he is called [H, because ‘speech’ or ‘interpretation,’ which pertains especially to speech, is called K. 46. He is also said to preside overcommerce(merx,gen.mercis),becausethemedium between dealers and buyers is speech. So he is imagined to have wings, because words run to and fro quickly. Whence also he is represented as rapid and roving; the wings on his head and feet signify speech taking flight through the air. 47. He is called the messenger, because all thoughts are expressed by speech. They also say he is themasteroftrickery,becausespeechdeceivestheminds of those who listen. He holds a staff with which he separates serpents, that is, poisons.12 48. Thus, opponents and antagonists may be calmed by the speech of mediators,whence,accordingtoLivy,legatesofpeacearecalled caduceatores(lit.“bearersoftheherald’scaduceus”).Just as wars were declared through fetiales,13 so peace was made through caduceatores. 49. Hermes is named after the Greek term K (“interpretation”) in Greek, in Latin ‘interpreter’; on account of his power and knowledge of many arts he is called Trimegistus (i.e. Trismegistus),thatis,thricegreat(termaximus).Andtheyimagine him with a dog’s head, they say, because among all animals the dog is held to be the most intelligent and acute species.
50. They call the god of war Mars, and he is called Mars because he fights using men, as if Mars were ‘male’ (mas,gen.maris).However,therearethreepracticescustomary in war: that of the Scythians, where both men and women go into battle; of the Amazons, where only women go; and of the Romans and other peoples, where only men go. 51. He is also called Mars as the author of deaths, for death (mors) is named after Mars. They also call him the adulterer, because he is fickle towards warriors. 52. And in fact he stands bare-chested, so that each person may expose himself to war without fear in his heart. Mars is also called Gradivus among the Thracians, because those who fight direct their step (gradus) into battle, or because they advance (gradi) readily.
53. Although they considered Apollo a diviner and physician, they also called him Sun (Sol), as if ‘alone’ (solus). They called him Titan, as if he were that one of the Titans who did not oppose Jupiter. 54. And they called him Phoebus, a youth (ephebus), as it were, that is, an adolescent. Whence the sun is also pictured as a youth, because it rises daily and is born with a new light. They say that this same Apollo is called Pythius from the Python, a serpent of immense size, whose size was as terrifying as its venom. 55. Apollo, overpowering it with arrow shots, took its name as booty, so that he is called
11	Diespiter is actually an archaic nominative of Iuppiter. Isidore is identifying Diespiter with Pluto because he is connecting the word with Dis, the Latin name of the god of the underworld.
12	Mercury was said to have separated a pair of fighting serpents withhisstaff,whichthusbecamehisfamiliarattribute,thecaduceus, a staff with a pair of snakes twined around it.
13	The fetiales were a college of Roman priests charged with making formal declarations of war.
 
Pythius. Whence also he established the Pythian rites to be celebrated as a sign of victory.
56. They also say that Diana, his twin, in a similar way is the moon, and guardian of roads – whence they consider her a virgin, because a road gives birth to nothing. They are both imagined to have arrows, because the two celestial bodies cast rays to the earth. Diana (Diana) is so called, is if the word were Duana (cf. duo, “both”), becausethemoonmayappearbothduringtheday(dies) and at night. 57. They also maintain that she is Lucina, becauseshegiveslight(lucere).AndtheysaysheisTrivia, because she takes on three (tres) appearances. Concerning her, Vergil says (Aen. 4.511):
Three faces of the virgin Diana, because this same goddess is called Luna, Diana, and Proserpina. 58. But when Luna is imagined (Prudentius, Against the Oration of Symmachus 1.365):
She shines with a glimmering cloak. When, girded up, she shoots her arrows, she is the virgin Latonia. When seated resting on her throne, she is Pluto’s wife.
And Diana is Latonia, because she was the daughter of Latona.
59. They maintain that Ceres, that is, the earth, is so called from the creating (creare) of crops, and they call herbymanynames.TheyalsosaysheisOps(i.e‘plenty’), because the earth is made better by her work (opus). 60. Proserpina, because from her the fruits ‘spread forth’ (proserpere). 61. Vesta, because she is clothed (vestire) with plants and various things, or from ‘enduring by her own power’ (vi sua stare). They imagine this same one as both Earth (Tellus) and the Great Mother (Mater Magna), turret-crowned with drum and cock and clash ofcymbals.Sheiscalled‘Mother’becauseshebearsmany offspring; ‘Great’ because she produces food; ‘the Bountiful’ (Alma) because she nourishes all animals with her produce – for earth is the nursery of food. 62. Her image is imagined with a key because the earth is locked up in the winter, and is opened in the spring so that crops are born. She holds a drum because they wish to signify the orb of the earth. 63. She is said to be drawn in a wagon because she is the earth, and earth hangs in the air. She is carried on wheels because the world rotates and spins.
14 Isidore here identifies Ceres with Vesta, goddess of the hearth, whose priestesses were the Vestal Virgins.
VIII.xi.56–xi.71
They furnish her with tame lions below to show that no kind of beast is so wild that it cannot be subjugated and ruled by her.
64.Thatshewearsaturretedcrownonherheadshows the cities set upon the earth, characterized, as it were, by their towers. Seats are imagined around her because while everything moves she herself does not move. 65. The Corybantes, her servants, are imagined with swords to signify that everyone ought to fight for his own land. They depicted cocks as serving this goddess to signify that whoever lacks seed should follow the earth; in her depththeymayfindallthings.66.Thatpeopleareshown flinging themselves about before her is a warning, they say, that those who till the earth should not rest, for there is always something for them to do. The clashing of bronze cymbals is the clattering of iron implements in tilling a field – but they are of bronze because the ancients used to till the earth with bronze before iron had been discovered. 67. They call this same one both Vesta and fire, because there is no doubt that the earth possesses fire, as can be seen from Etna and Vulcanus. And they thought she was a virgin because fire is an inviolable element, and nothing can be born from it; indeed it consumes all that it seizes.14 68. Ovid in the Fasti (6.291):
Understand Vesta as no other than living flame – you see no bodies born from flame.
Furthermore,virginsaresaidtowaitonher,becausejust asnothingisbornfromavirgin,sonothingisbornfrom fire.
69.TheysayJuno(Iuno),asifthenamewereIano,that is,‘door’(ianua),withregardtothemenstrualdischarge of women, because, as it were, she lays open the doors of mothers for their children, and of wives for their husbands. But this is what the philosophers say. The poets claim that Juno is the sister and wife of Jupiter; for they explain Jupiter as fire and air, and Juno as water and earth. By the mixture of these two, all things came into being. 70. And they say she is the sister because she is partoftheworld,andthewifebecausewhenunitedwith him she brings harmony. Whence Vergil (Geo. 2.325):
Then the omnipotent father, the air, descends with fertile showers into the lap of his wife.
71. Among the Greeks Minerva is called J, that is, woman. Among the Romans she is called Minerva
 
VIII.xi.72–xi.86
(Minerva),asthegoddessandgift(munus,gen.muneris) of various crafts. They claim she was an inventor of many skills, and thus they explain her as art and reason, because nothing can be comprehended without reason. 72. Because this reason is born from the mind alone, and because they think the mind is in the head and brain, therefore they say she was born from the head of Jove, because the sense of a wise person, who discovers all things, is in his head. 73. On her chest the head of the Gorgon is pictured, because all prudence is in that spot – prudence that dazzles other people, and confirms them as ignorant and stone-like.15 We also see this in the ancient statues of the emperors, in the middle of their breastplates, in order to imply wisdom and strength. 74. She is called both Minerva and Tritonia, for Triton is a swamp in Africa, around which it is reported that she appeared at a maidenly age, on account of which she is called Tritonia. Thus the less her origin is known, the more readily is she believed to be a goddess. 75. She is called Pallas either from the island Pallene in Thrace, on which she was raised, or after the Greek term !  R " (“brandishing a spear”), that is, from striking with a spear, or because she slew the giant Pallas.
76. They say Venus (Venus) is so named because a woman does not leave off being a virgin without force (vis). The Greeks call her J "  on account of the generating foam of blood, for foam is called  in Greek.77.TheyimaginethatSaturncutoffthegenitalsof his father, the Sky (Caelus), so that the blood flowed into thesea,andthatVenuswasbornfromitasthefoamofthe seasolidified.Theysaythisbecausethesubstanceofasalt humorcomesintobeingthroughcoition,whenceVenus is called J " , because in coition there is a foam of blood that consists of a liquid and salt secretion of the internal parts. 78. They call Venus the wife of Vulcan because the act of Venus does not take place without heat, whence (Vergil, Geo. 3.97): Grown older, he is cold in love.
79.	Now, it is said that Saturn cut off the male organs ofhis father, the Sky, and that these created Venus when they fell into the sea; this is imagined because, unless moisture descends from the sky to the land, nothing is created.
80.	They say that Cupid is so called because of love(amor; cf. cupido, “desire”), for he is the demon of fornication. He is pictured with wings because nothing more fleeting, nothing more changeable is found than lovers. He is pictured as a youth because love is foolish and irrational. He is imagined to hold an arrow and a torch; an arrow because love wounds the heart, and a torch becauseitinflames.81.TheGreekscallthegodofcountry people, whom they fashioned in the likeness of nature, Pan; Latin speakers call him Silvanus. He is called Pan, that is, ‘everything’ (cf. !Y, ‘everything’), for they fashion him out of every sort of element. 82. He has horns in the likeness of the rays of the sun and moon. He has a pelt marked by spots, on account of the stars of the sky. His face is ruddy in likeness to the ether. He holds a pipe of seven reeds, on account of the harmony of heaven, in whichthereareseventonesandsevenintervalsofsound. 83. He is hairy, because the earth is clothed and agitated by the winds.16 His lower half is bestial, representing trees and brutes like livestock. He has goat’s hooves, so as to show the solidity of the earth. They claim he is the god of things and of all nature, whence they say Pan, ‘everything’ as it were.
84.InthelanguageoftheEgyptians,theearthiscalled Isis, and they mean by this the person Isis. Now Isis, daughter of king Inachis, was a queen of the Egyptians; whenshecamefromGreeceshetaughttheEgyptiansliteracy and established cultivation of the land, on account of which they called the land by her name. 85. Serapis is thegreatestofalltheEgyptiangods.HeisthatApis,king of the Argives, who traveled to Egypt by ship. When he diedtherehewascalledSerapisbecausetheboxinwhich the deceased is placed, which they call a sarcophagus, is called   in Greek. They began to venerate him there where he was buried before his temple had been built. It is as if at first the name were   plus ‘Apis’ – Sorapis – and then, when one of the letters had been changed, it was pronounced Serapis. 86. Among the Egyptians Apis was the bull dedicated to Serapis, and from this he received his cognomen. Egypt worshipped him like a god,becausehewouldgivecertainclearsignsofthingsto come. He would appear in Memphis, and one hundred high priests would follow after him and chant suddenly as if frantic. The Jews made the image of his head for themselves in the wilderness.
15	Gazing at the Gorgon turned one into stone.
16	‘Agitated by the winds’ translates an early reading not adopted by Lindsay, who here prints a nonsense sequence marked as a corruption.
 
87. Fauns (faunus) were so called from ‘speaking’ (fando, gerund of fari) or after the term A (“vocal sound”) because by voice, not by signs, they seemed to show what was to come – for they were consulted by pagans in sacred groves, and gave responses to them not with signs, but with their voices. 88. They name Genius (Genius) thus because he possesses the force, as it were, of generating (gignere, ppl. genitus) all things, or from generating children; whence beds that were prepared for newlyweds were called ‘nuptial’ (geniales) by the pagans.
89. These and others are the fabulous fictions of the pagans, which they interpret and regard in such a way thattheyworshipwhattheydonotevenunderstand,and aredamnedthereby.90.AndtheysaythatFate(Fatum)is whatever the gods say, or whatever Jupiter says. Therefore the name fatum is from ‘saying’ (fari, 3rd person fatur), that is, from speaking. Except for the fact that this word is now usually understood in another context, toward which I do not wish to incline people’s hearts, we can with reason speak of ‘fate’ as from ‘saying.’17 91. For we cannot deny that it is written in Sacred Scripture (Psalm 61:12 Vulgate): “God has spoken once, two things have I heard,” and so on. Now what is said, “has spoken once,” is understood as “has spoken immovably” or “immutably,” since he knows immutably everything thatistohappen,andwhichhehimselfistobringabout. 92. Pagans imagine that there are three Fates – with the distaff, with the spindle, and with fingers spinning a thread from the wool – on account of the three tenses: the past, which is already spun and wound onto the spindle; the present, which is drawn between the fingers of the spinner; and the future, in the wool which is twisted onto the distaff, and which is yet to be drawn through the fingers of the spinner to the spindle, just as the present is yet to be drawn over to the past. 93. They werecalledParcae(Parca)  ’   (“byoppositionofsense”),becausetheyscarcelyspare(parcere)anyone.Peopleclaimedtherewerethree:onewhowouldlay the initial warp of a person’s life; the second, who would weave it; and the third, who would cut it short – for we begin when we are born, we exist while we live, and we are gone when we die.
94. People say that Fortune (Fortuna) has its name from ‘chance things’ (fortuitus), as if it were a certain
17 The other understanding Isidore seems to have in mind is the pagan idea of the Fates treated just below.
VIII.xi.87–xi.100
goddess sporting with human affairs through various accidents and chances. Thus they also call her blind, because she bears down upon people at random, withoutanyconsiderationofmerits,andcomestobothgood people and bad. They distinguish Fate from Fortune: Fortune, as it were, exists in what comes by chance with no obvious cause; but they say Fate is fixed and assigned for each person individually. 95. They also say that the three Furies are women with serpents for hair, on account of the three passions that give rise to many disturbances in people’s spirits, and they sometimes so drive a person to do wrong that they allow him to give no consideration to his reputation or his own danger. These passions are Anger, which desires revenge, Desire, which wishes for wealth, and Lust, which seeks pleasure. They are called the Furies (Furiae) because they strike (ferire) the mind with their goads, and do not allow it to be tranquil.
96. They consider the nymphs (nympha) to be goddesses of the waters, so called from clouds (nubes), for waters are from clouds, whence this name is derived. They call the nymphs goddesses of the waters as though they were ‘spirits of the springs’ (numina lympharum. AndtheycalltheseMusesaswellasnymphs,notwithout reason,becausethemovementofwatermakesmusic. 97. The pagans have various terms for nymphs. Indeed they callnymphsofthemountainsoreads(oreas),thoseofthe forest dryads (dryas), those of the springs hamadryads (hamadryas),thoseofthefieldsnaiads(naias),andthose of the seas nereids (nereis). 98. They say that heroes (heros) take their name from Juno, for Juno is called f 2 in Greek. Thus a son of hers, I don’t know which, was called aA (“the hero”), according to the legend of the Greeks. The legend evidently signifies in a mystical sense that the air (aer), where they claim that heroes live,isassignedtoJuno.Theynamethesoulsofdeceased people of some importance with this term, as if it were A, that is, men of the air (aerius) and worthy of heaven on account of their wisdom and strength.
99. The pagans called all the gods whom they worshiped at home Penates (Penates). And they were called Penates because they were in ‘inner rooms’ (penetralis), that is, in recesses. How these gods were addressed, or what names they had, is not known. 100. They called the gods of the dead Manes, whose power they claim is between the moon and the earth. From this they suppose ‘morning’ (mane) is named. They think these gods
 
VIII.xi.101–xi.104	Isidore of Seville
 
are named Manes after the term for air, which is , that is “sparse,” or because they spread (manare) widely through the heavens – or they are called by this name becausetheyaremild,theoppositeofmonstrous(immanis). Apuleius says (cf. The God of Socrates 153) that it is  ’   (“by opposition of sense”) that they are called Manes, that is, mild and modest, when they are terrible and monstrous, named in the same way as theParcae(seesection93above)andEumenides(i.e.the Furies;lit.“theGraciousOnes”).101.Ghosts(larva),they say, are demons made from people who were deserving of evil. It is said that their nature is to frighten small children and chatter in shadowy corners. 102. Witches (lamia), whom stories report would snatch children and tear them apart, are particularly named from ‘tearing apart’ (laniare). 103. ‘Hairy ones’ (Pilosus, i.e. a satyr) are called Panitae in Greek, and ‘incubuses’ (incubus) in Latin, or Inui, from copulating (inire) indiscriminately with animals. Hence also incubi are so called from ‘lying upon’ (incumbere, ppl. incubitus), that is, violating, for often they are shameless towards women, and manage to lie with them. The Gauls call these demons Dusii, because they carry out this foulness continually (adsidue). 104. Common people call one demon Incubo, and the Romans called him ‘Faunus of the figs.’ About him Horace says (Odes 3.18.1):
Faunus, lover of fleeing nymphs, may you pass lightly through my borders and sunny fields.
 
Book IX Languages, nations, reigns, the military, citizens, family relationships (De linguis, gentibus, regnis, militia, civibus, affinitatibus)
 
 
i. The languages of nations (De linguis gentium) 1. The diversity of languages arose with the building of the Tower after the Flood, for before the pride of that Towerdividedhumansociety,sothattherearoseadiversity of meaningful sounds, there was one language for all nations, which is called Hebrew. The patriarchs and prophetsusedthislanguagenotonlyintheirspeech,but also in the sacred writings. But at the outset1 there were as many languages as there were nations, and then more nations than languages, because many nations sprang from one language stock. 2. The term ‘languages’ (lingua) is used in this context for the words that are made by the tongue (lingua), according to the figure of speech bywhichthethingthatproducesisnamedafterthething that is produced.2 Thus we will say ‘mouth’ for ‘words,’ as we speak of the letters we form as ‘a hand.’
3. There are three sacred languages – Hebrew, Greek, and Latin – which are preeminent throughout the world. On the cross of the Lord the charge laid against him was written at Pilate’s command in these three languages (John 19:20). Hence – and because of the obscurity of the Sacred Scriptures – a knowledge of these three languages is necessary, so that, whenever the wording of one of the languages presents any doubt about a name or an interpretation, recourse may be had to another language. 4. Greek is considered more illustrious than the other nations’ languages, for it is more sonorous than Latin or any other language. We can distinguish five varieties of Greek. The first of these is called  , that is, ‘mixed’ or ‘common,’ which everyoneuses.5.ThesecondisAttic(Atticus),namelythe
1	Presumably “at the outset” here means “immediately after the division of Babel.”
2	Isidore apparently interchanges the terms of the figure by mistake.
3	The last clause loosely translates a corrupted text.
191
Greek of Athens (Atheniensis), which all the authors of Greece used. The third is Doric, which the Egyptians and Syrians employ. The fourth, Ionic; the fifth, Aeolic, which they say the Eolisti spoke.3 In examining the Greek language we find settled differences of this kind, because their speaking communities were dispersed in this way.
6. Some say there are four varieties of Latin, that is, Ancient (Priscus), Latin, Roman, and Mixed. The Ancient is that uncouth language that the oldest people of Italy spoke in the age of Janus and Saturn, and it is preserved in the songs of the Salii. Then Latin, which the Etruscans and others in Latium spoke in the age of Latinus and the kings, and in this variety the Twelve Tables werewritten.7.ThenRoman,whicharoseafterthekings were driven out by the Roman people. In this variety the poetsNaevius,Plautus,andVergil,andtheoratorsGracchus and Cato and Cicero, and others produced their work. Then Mixed, which emerged in the Roman state after the wide expansion of the Empire, along with new customs and peoples, corrupted the integrity of speech with solecisms and barbarisms.
8. All the nations of the East – like the Hebrews and the Syrians – crunch together their speech and words in their throats. All the Mediterranean nations – like the GreeksandthepeopleofAsiaMinor–striketheirspeech on the palate. All the Western nations – like the Italians and Spaniards – gnash their words against their teeth. 9. Syrian and Chaldean are close to Hebrew in speech, mostly agreeing in sound and in the pronunciation of their letters. But some think that Hebrew is Chaldean, because Abraham sprang from the Chaldeans. However, if this is accepted, how is it that the Hebrew children in the Book of Daniel (1:4) are ordered to be taught the Chaldean language, which they do not know? 10. Every human is able to pick up any human language – whether
 
IX.i.11–ii.9	Isidore of Seville
 
Greek, or Latin, or that of any other nation – by hearing it, or to learn it by reading with a tutor. Although knowing all languages is difficult for anyone, yet no one is so indolent that, placed among his own people, he does not know the language of his own nation. Indeed, how else should such a one be considered but as worse than brute beasts? Beasts produce their own cries, and the human who is ignorant of his own language is worse.
11. It is hard to determine what sort of language God spoke at the beginning of the world, when he said (Genesis 1:3), “Be light made,” for there were not yet any languages. Or again, it is hard to know with what language he spoke afterwards to the outer ears of humans, especially as he spoke to the first man, or to the prophets, or when the voice of God resounded in bodily fashion when he said (Mark 1:11), “Thou art my beloved Son.” It is believed by some that the language in these placeswasthatsingleonewhichexistedbeforethediversity of tongues. As for the various language communities, it is rather believed that God speaks to them in the same language that the people use themselves, so that he may be understood by them. 12. Indeed, God speaks to humans not through an invisible substance, but through a bodily creature, through which he even wished to appear to humans when he spoke. Now the Apostle says (I Corinthians 13:1), “If I speak with the tonguesofmen,andofangels.”Herethequestionarises, withwhattonguedoangelsspeak?ButPaulissayingthis by way of exaggeration, not because there are tongues belonging to angels. 13. It is also asked with what language will humans speak in the future; the answer is nowhere to be found, for the Apostle says (1 Corinthians 13:8), “Or tongues shall cease.”
14. We have treated languages first, and then nations, becausenationsarosefromlanguages,andnotlanguages from nations.
ii. The names of nations (De gentium vocabulis) 1. A nation (gens) is a number of people sharing a single origin, or distinguished from another nation (natio) in accordance with its own grouping, as the ‘nations’ of Greece or of Asia Minor.4 From this comes the term ‘shared heritage’ (gentilitas). The word gens is also so called on account of the generations (generatio) of families, that is from ‘begetting’ (gignere, ppl. genitus), as the term ‘nation’ (natio) comes from ‘being born’ (nasci, ppl. natus). 2. Now, of the nations into which the earth is divided, fifteen are from Japheth, thirty-one from Ham, andtwenty-sevenfromShem,whichaddsuptoseventythree – or rather, as a proper accounting shows, seventytwo.5 Andthereareanequalnumberoflanguages,which arose across the lands and, as they increased, filled the provinces and islands.
3. The five sons of Shem each brought forth individual nations. The first of these was Elam, from whom descended the Elamites, princes of the Persians. The second Asshur, from whom sprang the empire of the Assyrians. The third Arpachshad, from whom the nation of the Chaldeans arose. The fourth Lud, from whom came the Lydians. The fifth Aram, from whom descended the Syrians, whose capital city was Damascus. 4. There are four sons of Aram, the grandsons of Shem: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash. Uz was the founder of Trachonitis – a principatebetweenPalestineandCelesyria–fromwhich came Job, as it is written (Job 1:1): “There was a man in the land of Uz.” The second, Hul, from whom came the Armenians. The third, Gether, from whom came the Acarnanians or Curians. The fourth Mash, from whom descended those who are called Maeones. 5. The posterity of Arpachshad the son of Shem follows. The grandson of Arpachshad was Heber (i.e. Eber), from whom descended the Hebrews. The son of Eber was Joktan, from whom the nation of the Indians arose. The son of Joktan was Sheleph, from whom came the Bactrians – although others suspect that these were Scythian exiles. 6. A son of Abraham was Ishmael, from whom arose the Ishmaelites, who are now called, with corruption of the name, Saracens, as if they descended from Sarah, and the Agarenes, from Agar (i.e Hagar). 7. A son of Ishmael was Nebaioth, from whom descended the Nabatheans, who live between the Euphrates and the Red Sea. 8. The sons of Lot were Moab and Ammon (i.e. Ben-ammi), from whom came the Moabites and the Ammonites. 9. The son of Esau was Edom, from whom descended the
Edomites. These are the nations that descend from the
4	The word gens essentially means “people generated together, people of one stock.” It may be translated “nation,” “race,” “tribe,” “people,” “family,” etc., depending on the context.
5	The number of nations was traditionally seventy-two, taking Eber and Phaleg as progenitors of a single nation. In several particulars Isidore departs from the accounts in Genesis 10 and Paralipomenon (Chronicles) 1. Often he follows Jerome’s Liber Quaestionum Hebraicarum in Genesim.
 
stock of Shem, holding the southern lands from the east to the Phoenicians.
10. There were four sons of Ham, from whom sprang the following nations. Cush, from whom the Ethiopians were begotten. Mesraim (i.e. Egypt), from whom the Egyptians are said to have risen. 11. Put, from whom came the Libyans – whence the river of Mauretania is called Put still today, and the whole region around it is called Puthensis. 12. Finally Canaan, from whom descended the Africans and the Phoenicians and the ten tribes of Canaanites. 13. Again, the sons of Cush, grandsons of Ham – the grandchildren of Ham were six. The sons of Cush: Saba (i.e. Seba), Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, Seba, and Cuza.6 14. Saba, from whom the Sabaeans were begotten and named, concerning which Vergil (Geo. 2.117):
The bough of frankincense is the Sabaeans’ alone.
These are also the Arabians. 15. Havilah, from whom descended the Getulians, who cling together in a desert region of farthest Africa. 16. Sabtah, from whom came the Sabathenes, who now are called the Astabarians. 17. But Raamah, Seba, and Cuza gradually lost their ancient names, and the names that they now have, instead of the ancestral ones, are not known. 18. The sons of Raamah were Saba (i.e. Sheba) and Dedan. This Saba is written in Hebrew with the letter shin, whereas the Saba above is written with a samekh, and from him the Sabaeans were named – but now Saba is translated “Arabia.” 19. Dedan, from whom arose the Ethiopians in the western region.
The sons of Mesraim (i.e. Egypt): Lahabim, from whom came the Libyans, who formerly were called Putheans. 20. Casluhim, from whom sprang the Philistines, whom the ancients called J  (lit. “foreigners”), and whom we now call, corruptly, Palestinians. 21. The other six nations are unknown because their past names fell into oblivion when they were overthrown in the Ethiopian War.
22. There were eleven sons of Canaan, from whom descended the ten tribes of Canaanites, whose land the Jews occupied when the Canaanites were expelled. The firstborn of these was Sidon, from whom came the Sidonians – whence also their city in Phoenicia is called
6 Genesis 10:7 lists five sons of Cush. One of these, Sabteca, has erroneously become two, Seba and Cuza.
IX.ii.10–ii.37
Sidon. 23. The second, Heth, from whom came the Hethites. Third, Jebus, from whom descended the Jebusites, who possessed the city Jerusalem. Fourth, Emor, from whom came the Amorites. Fifth, Girgash, from whom the Girgashites. Sixth Hivah, from whom the Hivites. ThosesameweretheGibeonites,fromthecityofGibeon, who came as suppliants to Joshua (Joshua 9:3–15). 24. Seventh, Arkah, who founded the city of Arcas opposite Tripoli, situated at the foot of Mount Lebanon. Eighth, Sinah, from whom the Sinites. Ninth Arvadah, from whom are the Arvadites, who occupied the island Aradum, separated by a narrow strait from the Phoenician coastline. 25. The tenth, Zemarah, from whom came the noble city of Syria called Coeles. The eleventh, Hamath. These are the nations from the stock of Ham, which extend across the whole southern region from Sidon to the Gaditanian Strait (i.e. the Straits of Cadiz).
Now the tribes of the sons of Japheth. 26. Seven sons of Japheth are named: Gomer, from whom sprang the Galatians, that is, the Gauls (Galli). 27. Magog, from whom people think the Scythians and the Goths took their origin. 28. Madai, from whom people reckon the Medes came to be. Javan, from whom the Ionians, who are also the Greeks – hence the ‘Ionian’ Sea. 29. Tubal, from whom came the Iberians, who are also the Spaniards, although some think the Italians also sprang from him. 30. Meshech, from whom came the Cappadocians; hence to this day a city in their territory is called Mazaca. 31. Tiras, from whom the Thracians; their name is not much altered, as if it were Tiracians. 32. Then the sons of Gomer, the grandsons of Japheth. Ashkenaz,fromwhomdescendedtheSarmatians,whom the Greeks call Rheginians. 33. Riphath, from whom camethePaphlagonians.Gotorna(i.e.Togarmah),from whom are the Phrygians. 34. The sons of Javan: Elishah, from whom came the Greek Eliseans, who are called Aeolides.HencealsothefifthlanguageinGreeceiscalled #:  (“Aeolic”). 35. Tarshish, from whom descended the Cilicians, as Josephus thinks. From his name their capital city is called Tarsus. 36. Kittim, from whom the Citians, that is the Cypriots, whose city today is named Citium. Dodanim (i.e. Rodanim), from whom came the Rhodians. 37. These are the nations from the stock of Japheth, which occupy the middle region of Asia Minor from Mount Taurus to the north and all of Europe up to the Britannic Ocean, bequeathing their names to both places and peoples.
 
IX.ii.38–ii.54
Afterwards many of these names were changed, others remain as they were. 38. Indeed, the names for many nations have partially remained, so that their derivation is apparent today, like the Assyrians from AssurandtheHebrewsfromHeber(i.e.Eber).Butpartly, through the passage of time, they have been so altered that the most learned people, poring over the oldest historical works, have not been able to find the origin of all nations from among these forebears, but only of some, and these with difficulty. 39. Thus no original sound of the word remains to show that the Egyptians arose from thesonofHamnamedMesraim(i.e.Egypt),orsimilarly with regard to the Ethiopians, who are said to descend from that son of Ham named Cush.
If all this is taken into account, there appear to be morenamesofnationsthathavebeenalteredthannames remaining, and afterwards a rational process has given diverse names to these. So the Indians were named from the river Indus, which bounds them on the western side. 40. The Serians (i.e. Chinese, or East Asians generally), a nation situated in the far East, were allotted their name from their own city. They weave a kind of wool that comes from trees, hence this verse (Courtney fr. 7):
The Serians, unknown in person but known for their cloth.
41. The Gangarides are a people between the Assyrians and the Indians, living around the Ganges River – hence they were named Gangarides. 42. The Hircanians are named for the Hircanian forest, where there are many tigers. 43. The Bactrians were Scythians who were driven from their territory by a faction of their own people. They settled by the river Bactron in the East, and derived their name from the name of the river. The king of this nation was Zoroaster, inventor of the art of magic. 44. The Parthians likewise take their origin from the Scythians, for they were Scythian exiles, which is still evident from their name, for in the Scythian language exiles are called parthi. Like the Bactrians, after being driven by civil dissension from Scythia they first stealthily occupied the empty territory adjacent to the Hircanians, and then seized more land by force. 45. The Assyrians were named for Assur, the son of Shem – a very powerful nation, which held sway over the whole middle region between the Euphrates and the Indian border.
46. The Medes are thought to have been named after their king. Jason, brother of King Peliacus, was driven by Pelias’s children from Thessaly with his wife Medea. Jason’s stepson was Medus, king of the Athenians, who after the death of Jason conquered the territory of the East. He founded there the city Media, and he named the nation of Medes after his own name. But in the Book of Genesis we find that Madai was the progenitor of the nation of Medes, and also that they were named for him, as was said above (section 28 above). 47. The Persians were named after King Perseus, who crossed into Asia from Greece and there dominated the barbarian nations with heavy and prolonged fighting. Right after his victory he gave his name to the conquered people. Before Cyrus, the Persians were an ignoble people and consideredofnorankamongthenationsofthearea.TheMedes were always very powerful. 48. The Chasdeans, who are now called the Chaldeans, were named after Chesed, the son of Nahor, Abraham’s brother. 49. The Sabaeans were named after the word B, that is, “supplicate” and “worship,” because we worship the divinity withSabaeanincense.TheyarealsocalledArabs,because they live in the mountains of Arabia called Libanus and Antilibanus, where incense is gathered. 50. The Syrians are held to be named from Surim (i.e. Asshurim), who was the grandson of Abraham from his wife Keturah. The people whom the ancients called Assyrians we now call Syrians, making a whole name from the part.
51. The Hebrews were so named from Heber (i.e. Eber), the great-grandson of Shem. 52. The Israelites were named after Israel, the son of Isaac, for Israel was the patriarch of the Hebrews, and from him the twelve tribes of Jews were given the name of Israel. In the divisionofthekingdomhisnamewasgiventotheJewsofthe ten tribes, for before they were all called either Hebrews orIsraelites.53.However,fromthetimewhenthepeople of God were divided into two kingdoms, the two tribes that had kings from the stock of Judah were given the name of Jews (Iudaeus). The residue of ten tribes, who established a king for themselves in Samaria, kept the original name of Israel because of their large population. 54. The nation of the Samaritans took its origin from Assyrians who lived as immigrants in Samaria. In Latin their name means “guardians,” because when the kingdom of Israel was taken captive the Samaritans were stationed in Israel’s territory as a guard.
55.AfterPhoenix,thebrotherofCadmus,movedfrom EgyptianThebestoSyria,hereignedatSidonandnamed
 
those people Phoenicians and the province Phoenicia after his own name. 56. Moreover, the Sidonites are thought to have drawn their name from the city called Sidon. 57. The Saracens are so called either because they claim to be descendants of Sarah or, as the pagans say, because they are of Syrian origin, as if the word were Syriginae. They live in a very large deserted region. They are also Ishmaelites, as the Book of Genesis teaches us, because they sprang from Ishmael. They are also named Kedar, from the son of Ishmael, and Agarines, from the name Agar (i.e. Hagar). As we have said, they are called Saracens from an alteration of their name, because they are proud to be descendants of Sarah.
58.PhilistinesarethesameasPalestinians,becausethe Hebrew language lacks the letter p and uses the Greek phi in its place. Hence they say Philistine for Palestinians, expressly from the name of their city. They are also called Allophyli, that is, “of foreign descent,” because they were always enemies of Israel and were set far apart from their race and society. 59. Canaanites were named afterCanaanthesonofHam,andtheJewsoccupiedtheir land. From this origin came Emor, the father of Sichem, for whom the Amorites were named. 60. The Egyptians were named after a certain King Aegyptus, whereas earlier they were called Aerians. In the Hebrew language ‘Egyptians’ means “afflicters,” because they afflicted the people of God before they were liberated with divine assistance. 61. Armenius of Thessaly was one of Jason’s generals who set out for Colchis with a gathered multitude that wandered here and there upon the loss of their king Jason. He founded Armenia, and gave that nation its name after his own name.
62. The Persian boundary, which divides the Scythians from them, is named Scytha, and the Scythians are regarded by some people as having been named from that boundary – a nation always held to be very ancient. They were ancestors of the Parthians and Bactrians; further,ScythianwomenfoundedthekingdomoftheAmazons.63.TheMassagetesareofScythianorigin,andthey are called Massagetes because they are ‘weighty,’ that is, ‘strong’ Getae – for Livy speaks of silver as weighty, that is, as ‘masses’ (cf. massa, “mass”). They live in north-
7 The writings of Julius Titianus, second century ce, are lost; Isidore cites him at second hand from Servius on Aeneid
11.651.
IX.ii.55–ii.71
ern regions between the Scythians and the Albanians. 64. The Amazons are so called either because they live togetherwithoutmen,asifthewordwere b ;W (“living together”), or because they had their right breasts burnt off so that their shooting of arrows would not be hindered, as if it were O ;W (“without breasts”). Indeed, they would expose the breast that they had burned off. Titianus calls them ‘One-Breasted’ (Unimammae), for that is ‘Amazon,’ as if the term were O; N, that is, “without a breast.”7 Amazons no longer exist, because they were wiped out partly by Hercules and partly by Achilles or Alexander.
65.TheScythianpeoplesinregionsofAsiaMinor,who believe that they are descendants of Jason, are born with white (albus) hair because of the incessant snow, and the color of their hair gave the nation its name – hence they are called Albanians. A blue-gray, that is, colored pupil is present in their eyes, so that they see better by night than by day. Also, the Albanians were neighbors of the Amazons. 66. The Hugnians were formerly called Huns, andafterwards–afterthenameoftheirking–Avars,and theyfirstlivedinfarthestMaeotis,betweentheicyTanais (i.e. the Don) and the savage peoples of the Massagetes. Then, with their nimble horses, they burst forth from the crags of the Caucasus, where Alexander’s Gates had been keeping the fierce nations back. They held the East captive for twenty years, and exacted an annual tribute from the Egyptians and the Ethiopians.
67.TheTrojannationwasformerlynamedtheDardanian, from Dardanus. The brothers Dardanus and Jasius emigrated from Greece, and Jasius came to Thrace, Dardanus to Phrygia, where he was the first ruler. After him succeeded his son Ericthonius, and then his grandson Tros,fromwhomtheTrojanswerenamed.68.TheGalatians are also known as the Gauls, and when they were called to the aid of the king of Bithynia they divided the kingdom with him when victory was attained. Then, mixed with the Greeks in this way, they were first called Gallogreeks, but now they are named Galatians after their ancient name of Galli (i.e. Gauls).
69. The Greeks were formerly named Thessalians, fromThessalus,andafterwardscalledGreeks,fromKing Graecus – for Greeks are properly Thessalians. 70. Further,peoplesaythattheLapithswereanationofThessaly who once lived by the river Penios and were named after Lapitha, the daughter of Apollo. 71. The Greek nation of Sicyonians was named after King Sicyon. These were
 
IX.ii.72–ii.88
firstcalledAgialeans,afterKingAgealeus,whofirstruled over the Sicyonians. The city of Agealea is named after him, and this is now called the Peloponnesus, after its kingPelops.ThesearealsocalledArcadians,namedafter KingArcas,thesonofJupiterandCallista.72.TheDanai were named after King Danaus. They are the same as the Argives,namedaftertheirfounderArgos.AfterApis,the king of the Greeks, died, his son Argos succeeded to the kingship, and the Argives were named after him. After his death he began to be regarded as a god by them, honored with a temple and sacrifices. 73. The Achaians, also known as Achivians, were named after Achaeus, son of Jupiter. 74. The Pelasgians were so named because they seemed to have arrived in Italy in springtime with sails spread, like birds (cf. !, “stork”). Varro records their first landing in Italy. But the Greeks maintain that the Pelasgians were so called after the son of Jupiter and Larissa.
75. The Myrmidons were allies of Achilles, and the Dolopians of Pyrrhus. The Myrmidons were so called for their cleverness, as if the word were , that is, “ants.” But Eratosthenes says they are called Myrmidons after their leader Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. 76. Cranaus succeeded to Cecrops, king of the Athenians; his daughter Atthis gave her name to the region and the nation. Also from her the Attic people were named, and they are the Athenians. 77. Ion was a powerful man, and he called those same Athenians ‘Ionians,’ from his own name. 78. The Macedonians were earlier named the Emathians, after the name of King Emathio, and afterwards called Macedonians. 79. TheEpiroteanswereearliernamedthePyrrhideansafter Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, but afterwards after King Epirus . . .8 they ventured to cross over to Italy. 80. Dorus was the son of Neptune and Ellepis, whence the Dorians take their origin and their name. Moreover, they are a part of the Greek nation, and after them is named the third language of the Greeks, called Doric.
81.	The Lacedaemonians are named from Lacedae-mon, the son of Semela. These people engaged for a long time in battle against the Messenians and, fearing that they would lose any hope of offspring because of the prolongation of the conflict, they commanded that their virgins should lie with the young men remaining at home. Thus, because of the promiscuous intercourse of these virgins, the youths, born of uncertain parentage, were named Spartans after the stigma of their mothers’ shame.9 The Spartans are the same as the Lacedaemonians.
82.	The Thracians are thought to have descended andtaken their name from the son of Japheth named Tiras, aswassaidabove(section31above),althoughthepagans judge that they were named for their behavior, because they are ferocious (trux, gen. trucis). Indeed, they were the most savage of all nations, and many legends are recorded about them: that they would sacrifice captives totheirgods,andwoulddrinkhumanbloodfromskulls. About them, Vergil (Aen. 3.44):
Alas, flee those cruel lands, flee that greedy coast –
as if it were the land of cruel and greedy people. 83. The Istrian nation originated from the Colchians, who were senttohuntdowntheArgonauts.Theywentuptheriver Ister from the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), and thus they were called after the name of the river by which they left the sea.
84. The Romans were named after Romulus, who founded the city of Rome and gave his name to both nationandcity.ThesepeoplewereearliercalledSaturnians, from Saturn, and Latins, from Latinus – for Latinus was king of Italy, who named the Latins from his own name – and they afterwards were called Romans. They are also called Quirites, because Romulus is also named Quirinus, since he would always use a spear that in the language of the Sabines is called curis. 85. Also, Italus, Sabinus, and Sicanus were brothers, after whom names were given to both peoples and regions. From Italus, the Italians; from Sabinus, the Sabines; from Sicanus, the Sicani were named – these last were also named Siculi, that is, Sicilians. 86. The Tuscans (i.e. Etruscans) are a nation of Italy named for their frequent use of rituals and incense (tus), that is, from the word ;
(“offer sacrifice”).
87. The Umbrians are a nation of Italy, but they are the offspring of the ancient Gauls, and they inhabit the Apennine mountains. The histories maintain that because in a period of destructive flooding they survived the rains they were called g -  (“rain people”)inGreek.88.TheMarsiannationofItalyissocalled fromMarsyas,thecompanionofLiber,whorevealedthe
8	A lacuna occurs here in the early manuscripts.
9	Isidoremayderive‘Spartan’fromtheGreek!B ,“virgin,” or possibly from Latin spargere, “scatter” (as seed).
 
practice of viticulture to them. Because of this they built astatuetohim,whichafterwardstheRomanscarriedoff when the Marsians had been conquered. Moreover, the Greeks call the Marsians ‘Oscians,’ as if it were C , because they had many serpents, and d means “serpent.”Theyarealsosaidtobeinvulnerabletothesorcery of spells. Like the Umbrians they inhabit the region of theApenninemountains.[ThehistorianAlexandersays, “Some say that the Volscians were named after Vulscus, sonofAntiphatestheLaestrygonian.Fabiusalsosaysthat the Volscians migrated from the Sicolicians and were so called by a corruption of that name.”]10
89.	The Goths are thought to have been named afterMagog, the son of Japheth, because of the similarity of the last syllable. The ancients called them Getae rather than Goths. They are a brave and most powerful people, tall and massive in body, terrifying for the kind of arms they use. Concerning them, Lucan (Civil War 2.54):
Let here a Dacian press forward, there a Getan (Getes) rush at the Iberians.
90.	The Dacians were offshoots of the Goths, and peoplethink they were called Dacians (Dacus) as if the word were Dagus, because they were begotten ‘from the stock of the Goths’ (de Gothorum stirpe). Concerning them, this verse (Paulinus of Nola, Poems 17.17):
You will go far, up to the northern Dacians.
91.	The Bessians were a barbarian people who arethought to have been named after their great herds of cattle (bos). Concerning them, a certain poet (Paulinus of Nola, Poems 17.250):
He who lives in the middle of the land, or he who dwells by the river, rich with many cattle and wearing a felt cap.
92.	The Gipedes used to go to war on foot (pedester) rather than on horseback, and they are so named for this reason.
93.	The Sarmatians rode armed (armatus) over the open fields before Lentulus restrained them at the Danube, and from their enthusiasm for weaponry (arma) they are thought to have received the name Sarmatians. 94. They say that the Lanus is a river beyond theDanube,afterwhichtheAlaniwerenamed,justasthe
10 Lindsay placed this bracketed passage here, expressing doubt about its proper location, moving it from its obviously wrong position in the family of early manuscripts where it occurs, at IV.vii.34.
IX.ii.89–ii.100
peoplelivingbytheriverLemannus(i.e.LakeLeman)are called Alemanni. About these, Lucan (Civil War 1.396):
They abandoned their tents pitched by the deep-channeled Lemannus.
95. The Langobards are commonly said to have been named for their beards (barba), long and never cut. 96. The river Vindilicus springs out from the far frontier of Gaul, and people maintain that the Vandals lived by it and got their name from it.
97.	The Germanic (Germanicus) nations are so called because they are immense (immanis) in body, and they aresavage(immanis)tribeshardenedbyveryseverecold. They took their behavior from that same severity of climate – fiercely courageous and ever indomitable, living by raiding and hunting. There are many tribes of Germani, varied in their weaponry, differing in the color of their clothes, of mutually incomprehensible languages, and with uncertain etymologies of their names – such as the Tolosates, the Amsivari, the Quadi, the Tuungri, the Marcomanni, the Bruteri, the Chamavi, the Blangiani, the Tubantes. The monstrosity of their barbarism gives a fearsome quality even to their names.
98.	The Suevi were a segment of the Germanic nationatthenorthernfrontier.Ofthem,Lucan(CivilWar2.51):
(The Elbe and Rhine) pour the blond Suevi from the extreme north.
Many have reported that there were a hundred villages and communities of Suevians. The Suevi are thought to have been named from Mount Suevus, which forms the eastern boundary of Germania and whose territory they occupied. 99. Formerly, when the interior of Germania wassubjectedbytheRomans,theBurgundianscoalesced into a large nation after being placed at the frontier-line of the Roman camps by Tiberius Caesar. Thus they drew their name from their location, because in their vernacular they call the dense settlements along the frontier ‘forts’ (burgus). Afterwards they rebelled against the Romans and, comprising more than eighty thousand armed men, they settled on the banks of the Rhine, and took the name of a nation. 100. The Saxon people, situated on the shores of the Ocean in impassable marshes, are accomplished in strength and agility. Whence they were named (i.e. from saxosus, “stony”), because they are a hard and very powerful kind of people, standing out above the other piratical tribes.
 
IX.ii.101–ii.120
101. The Franks (Franci) are thought to have been named after a certain chieftain of theirs. Others reckon that they were named for the brutality (feritas) of their behavior, for their behavior is wild, with a natural ferocity of spirit. 102. Some suspect that the Britons were so named in Latin because they are brutes (brutus). Their nation is situated within the Ocean, with the sea flowing between us and them, as if they were outside our orbit. Concerning them, Vergil (Ecl. 1.66):
The Britons, separated from the whole world.
103. The Scotti (Scottus, i.e. the Irish) in their own language receive their name from their painted (pictus; cf. the Picts) bodies, because they are marked by tattoos of various figures made with iron pricks and black pigment. 104. The Gauls (Galli) are named for the whiteness of their bodies, for in Greek milk is called . Whence the Sibyl speaks of them thus, when she says of them (Vergil, Aen. 8.660):
Then their milk-white necks are circled with gold.
105. People’s faces and coloring, the size of their bodies, and their various temperaments correspond to variousclimates.HencewefindthattheRomansareserious, the Greeks easy-going, the Africans changeable, and the Gauls fierce in nature and rather sharp in wit, because the character of the climate makes them so. 106. The Gauls were also called the Senones, and in ancient times the Xenones, because they offered hospitality to Liber (cf. ?B , “guest”); afterwards the letter x was changed to s. 107. Vacca was a town near the Pyrenees, and the Vacceans were named after it. The poet is believed to have spoken about them (cf. Vergil, Aen. 4.42):
And the Vacceans ranging far.
They occupied the vast emptiness of the heights of the Pyrenees. They are the same people as the Vascones (i.e. the Basques), as if the word were Vaccones, with the letter c changed to s. 108. After he subdued Spain, Gnaeus Pompey, in his rush to come to his triumphal celebration, drove them down from the heights of the Pyrenees and gathered them into one city. Hence the city took the name of ‘Assembled Refugees’ (Convenae, i.e. SaintBertrand de Comminges).
109. The Spanish were first named Iberians, after the river Iberus (i.e. the Ebro), but afterwards they were named Spaniards (Hispanus) after Hispalus (i.e. the legendary founder of Hispalis, Seville). 110. The Galicians (Gallecus) were named for their whiteness (cf. , “milk”) – and hence also the Gauls (Gallus) were named – for they are of whiter complexion than the other people of Spain. They claim a Greek origin for themselves, and hence are wise with a native wit. 111. They say that, after the Trojan War, Teucer was despised by his father Telamon because of the death of his brother Ajax.Whenhewasnotreceivedintohiskingdom,Teucer retired to Cyprus and there founded the city of Salamis after the name of his ancient homeland. From there he emigrated to Galicia, and when he had settled there he gave the name of the place to the nation. 112. The Astures areanationofSpain,socalledbecausetheylivealongthe river Astura, hedged in by mountains and thick forests. 113. The Cantabrians (Cantaber) are a nation of Spain named after the name of a city and the river Iberus (i.e. theEbro)wheretheyreside.Theyhaveagrittyspiritand are always as ready for brigandage and warfare as for enduring blows. 114. The Celtiberians descended from the Celtic Gauls, and from these names their district, Celtiberia, was named – for they were named Celtiberians after the river Iberus of Spain, where they are settled, and after the Gauls, who were called Celtic, with the two terms combined.
115. The Africans were named for one of the descendantsofAbraham,whowascalledAfer.Heissaidtohave led an army against Libya and to have settled there after he had conquered the enemy, and his descendants were named Africans, and the place named Africa, after their ancestor. 116. The Punic people are the Carthaginians, named after the Phoenicians who emigrated with Dido. 117. The Tyrians were named after Tyre, the city of the Phoenicians, whence they emigrated and came to the African coast. 118. The Getulians are said to have been Getae who, setting out from their homeland with a huge force on ships, occupied the region of the Syrtes in Libya and were named by derivation Getulians, because they came from the Getae. Hence also the idea among the Goths is to speak of the Moors as close blood-relatives ofthemselvesfromtheirancientaffinity.119.ThusAfrica was held initially by the Libyans, then the Africans, and after this the Getulians, and finally the Moors and Numidians.
120. The Moors and Numidians – so the Africans believe – got their origin and name in the following way. After Hercules perished in Spain, his leaderless army,
 
composed of various nations, sought homes for themselves in various places, and from this mass Medes and Persians and Armenians, having sailed across to Africa by ship, occupied the regions nearest the sea. 121. But the Persians, not finding wood in the fields for building houses, and with communication inhibited by the unknown language, wandered through open fields and diverse deserts. In accordance with their itinerant foraging they called themselves, in their own language, Numidians, that is, wandering and errant and without a city. 122. On the other hand, the Medes mingled with those Libyans who lived closest to Spain. Little by little the Libyans altered the name of these people, in their barbarous tongue calling the Medes ‘Moors’ (Maurus), although the Moors are named by the Greeks for their color, for the Greeks call black  (i.e. , “dark”),andindeed,blastedbyblisteringheat,theyhave a countenance of a dark color.
123. Massylia is a city of Africa, not far from Mount Atlas and the gardens of the Hesperides. The Massylians were named after this city, and we now call them, with alteration,Massulians.Concerningthem,Vergil(cf.Aen.
4.483):
Here a priestess of the Massylian people has been shown to me.
124. The nation of the Gaulalians consists of people wandering from the south up to the western Ocean. The island Gauloe gave them their name; it is next to Ethiopia,andnoserpentisbornorlivesthere.125.Garamantes are a people of Africa living near the Cyrenians and named after the king Garamans, son of Apollo. He founded there the city named Garama after his own name. They are neighbors of the Ethiopian tribes. Concerning them, Vergil (Ecl. 8.44):
The farthest Garamantes.
And ‘farthest,’ because they are savage and remote from human fellowship. 126. The Hesperians are those who live alongside Spain, for Hispania is Hesperia (see XIV.iv.19).
127. Ethiopians are so called after a son of Ham named Cush, from whom they have their origin. In Hebrew, Cush means “Ethiopian.” 128. This nation, which formerly emigrated from the region of the river Indus, settled next to Egypt between the Nile and the Ocean, in the south very close to the sun. There are three tribes
IX.ii.121–iii.2
of Ethiopians: Hesperians, Garamantes, and Indians. Hesperians are of the West, Garamantes of Tripolis, and the Indians of the East. 129. The Trochodites (i.e. Troglodytes) are a tribe of Ethiopians so called because they run with such speed that they chase down wild animals on foot (cf.   9;, “run quickly”;  B9, “run”).130.ThePamphagiansarealsoinEthiopia.Their foodiswhatevercanbechewed,andanythinglivingthat theycomeupon–whencetheyarenamed(cf. !-,“all”; @, “eat”). 131. Icthyophagians (cf. :9N, “fish”), whoexcelinfishingatseaandsurviveonfishalone.They occupy the mountainous regions beyond the Indians, and Alexander the Great conquered them and forbade them to eat fish. 132. Anthropophagians are a very rough tribe situated below the land of the Sirices. They feed on human flesh and are therefore named ‘maneaters’ (anthropophagus; cf. OA! , “man”). As is the case for these nations, so for others the names have changed overthecenturiesinaccordancewiththeirkings,ortheir locations, or their customs, or for whatever other reasons, so that the primal origin of their names from the passage of time is no longer evident.
133. Now indeed the people called Antipodes (i.e. “opposite-footed”)–becausetheyarethoughttobecontrary to our footprints, as if from under the earth they make footprints upside-down from ours – are on no account to be believed in, because neither the solidity nor the central space of the earth allows this. Indeed this is not confirmed by any knowledge of history, but poets conjecture it as it were by sheer inference. 134. Moreover, they say that the Titans of Greece were a robust people of preeminent strength who, the fables say, were created by the angry Earth for her revenge against the gods. 135. Hence Titans are so called from the word  , that is, ‘revenge,’ for they lived in arms as if for the sake of avengingMotherEarthagainstthegods.Thefablesfeign that in war the Titans were overwhelmed by Jupiter and made extinct, because they perished from thunderbolts hurled from the sky.
iii. Reigns and terms for military matters (De regnis militiaequevocabulis) 1. A reign (regnum) is so named from a king (rex, gen. regis), for as kings are so called from governing (regere), so reigns are called after the word for kings. 2. Every nation has had its own reign in its own times – like the Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians, the Egyptians, the Greeks – and fate has so
 
IX.iii.3–iii.17
rolled over their allotments of time that each successive one would dissolve the former. Among all the reigns on earth, however, two reigns are held to be glorious above the rest – first the Assyrians, then the Romans – as they are constituted differently from one another in location as much as time. 3. For as one began first and the other later,soonewasintheEast,theotherintheWest.Indeed, the beginning of the latter came close upon the end of the former. Other reigns and other kings are considered mere appendices of these two.
4. Kings are so called from governing, and as priests (sacerdos) are named from ‘sacrificing’ (sacrificare), so kings(rex,gen.regis)fromgoverning(regere,alsomeaning “keep straight, lead correctly”). But he does not govern who does not correct (corrigere); therefore the name ofkingisheldbyonebehavingrightly(recte),andlostby one doing wrong. Hence among the ancients such was the proverb: “You will be king (rex) if you behave rightly (recte); if you do not, you will not.” 5. The royal virtues are these two especially: justice and mercy – but mercy is more praised in kings, because justice in itself is harsh.
6. Consuls (consul) are so called after ‘taking counsel’ (consulere), as kings from governing, laws (lex, gen. legis) from reading (legere). Because the Romans would not put up with the haughty domination of kings, they made a pair of consuls serve as the governing power year by year – for the arrogance of kings was not like the benevolence of a consul, but the haughtiness of a master. They were therefore called consuls either from their ‘consulting the interests of’ (consulere) the citizens, or from their governing everything by consultation (consilium). 7. Still, they elected new consuls each year so that a haughty one would not remain for long, but a more moderate one would quickly succeed to the office. Further, there were two with equal authority, for the one administered civil, the other military affairs. Consuls governed over a period of 467 years. 8. Proconsuls were substitutes for consuls, and were called proconsuls because they would function in place of consuls, as a procurator does in place of a curator, that is, an agent. 9. Exconsuls were likewise so named because they had already passed on (exire) from the consulate, or because they had departed when the year of their term expired.
10.	The Romans established dictators for themselvesin the fifth year after the kings were expelled, when the son-in-law of Tarquinius gathered a huge army against Rome to avenge the injustice done to his father-in-law.
11.	Dictators held power for five-year terms. They hadmore honor, then, than consuls, who held office for only ayear.Andtheywerecalled‘dictators’asiftheywereboth leadersandteachers(i.e.giversofdictation)–hencethey were named ‘(school)-masters (magister) of the people.’ Also from them ‘edicts’ (edictum) are named. 12. The name of the Caesars began with Julius, who was the first of the Romans to achieve sole personal dominion after civil war had been stirred up. And Caesar was so called because he was brought forth and drawn out of his dead mother’s womb, which had been ‘cut open’ (caedere, ppl. caesus), or because he was born ‘with a head of hair’ (caesarie). After him the successive emperors were called Caesars, because they had abundant hair. Those who weredrawnoutfromawombthathasbeencutopenwere called Caesones and Caesares. 13. He was furthermore called Julius because he took his origin from Julus, the son of Aeneas, as Vergil confirms (Aen. 1.288):
Julius, the name drawn from great Julus.
14.FortheRomans,thetitleimperatorwasatfirstgiven only to those on whom supremacy in military affairs was settled, and therefore the imperatores were so called from ‘commanding’ (imperare) the army. But although generals held command for a long time with the title of imperator, the senate decreed that this was the name of Augustus Caesar only, and he would be distinguished by this title from other ‘kings’ of nations. To this day the successive Caesars have employed this title. 15. Indeed it is customary for later kings to use the name of the first one, as among the Albans all the kings of the Albans are called Silvii after the name of Sylvius; similarly for the Persians the Arsacidae, for the Egyptians the Ptolemies, for the Athenians the Cecropidae.
16. For the Romans, ‘Augustus’ is the name of the imperial office, because formerly the emperors ‘enlarged’ (augere) the republic by extending its borders. Originally the senate bestowed this name on Octavius Caesar, so that he might be honored in his very name and title for enlarging their territory. 17. Moreover, this same Octavius was now called Caesar and emperor, or Augustus. Afterwards, when it was announced to him while he was watching the games that he would also be called ‘Lord’ (Dominus) by the people, he immediately, by gesture and with face averted, repressed this indecorous adulation and, as a human being, declined the title of Lord. On the next day he rebuked the whole populace
 
with a very severe edict, and after this allowed no one to call him Lord, not even his own children. He was the son of Actia, who was the daughter of Julius Caesar’s sister.
18. A king is called  in Greek because like a pedestal’s base (basis) he supports the people (cf. , “people”). Hence pedestals also have crowns (i.e. their cornices), for the higher a person is placed in command, justsomuchheavieristheburdenofhisresponsibilities. 19. Tyrants (tyrannus) in Greek are the same as ‘kings’ in Latin, because for the ancients there was no distinction between a king and a tyrant, as (Vergil, Aen. 7.266):
A condition of the peace for me will be to have touched the right hand of your ruler (tyrannus).
Strong kings were called tyrants, for a tiro is a strong young man. Of such people the Lord speaks, saying (cf. Proverbs 8:15): “By me kings reign, and tyrants (tyrannus) possess the earth by me.” 20. Now in later times the practice has arisen of using the term for thoroughly bad and wicked kings, kings who enact upon their people their lust for luxurious domination and the cruelest lordship.
21. The term ‘prince’ (princeps) is a mark of rank and also of precedence in time, as in this Vergilian line (Aen.
9.	535):
Turnus was first (princeps) to hurl a burning torch,
where princeps means ‘the first one.’ Moreover, the term ‘prince’ derives from the sense of ‘taking,’ because he ‘first takes’ (primus capit), just as one speaks of a ‘citizen of a municipality’ (municeps) because he ‘takes office’ (munia capit). 22. A general (dux, gen. ducis) is so called because he is the ‘commander’ (ductor) of an army. But not everyone who is a prince or general can immediately be called a king. Moreover, in wartime it is better to be titled a general than a king, for the former title signifies the one in command in battle. Hence also Vergil (Aen.
10.	370):
Of General (dux) Evander.
And Sallust (Histories 4.7 M): “For everyone is more eager to seem brave in front of the general.” He did not say, “in front of the consul.”
23. Monarchs (monarcha) are those who wield supreme power alone, like Alexander among the Greeks and Julius among the Romans. From this term also derives the word ‘monarchy’ (monarchia). In Greek
IX.iii.18–iii.36
  is “singleness” and 9 is “governing power.” 24. Tetrarchs (tetrarches) are those who hold the fourth part of a kingdom, for  B   means “four.” Such was Philippus in Judea. 25. The patricians (patricius) are so called because, as fathers (pater) watch over their children, so they watch over the state. 26. Prefects (praefectus) are so called because they ‘preside’ (praeesse) with praetorian (praetorius) power. 27. Praetors (praetor) are the same as prefects, as if the word were ‘one placed in front’ (praepositor). 28. Again, ‘chief wardens’ (praeses, i.e. provincial governors) are those who maintain the security of some location ‘with chief custody’ (praesidialiter). 29. Tribunes (tribunus) are so called because they dispense (tribuere) justice for soldiers or common people. 30. Chiliarchs (chiliarches) are those who preside over a thousand men; we call them millenarii, and the former term is Greek (i.e. 99 ). 31. Centurions aresocalledbecausetheycommandahundred(centum) soldiers;similarlyquinquagenarii,becausetheyareatthe headoffifty(quinquaginta)soldiers,anddecani,because they are set over ten (decem) soldiers.
32.Asoldier(miles)issocalledbecauseformerlythere were a thousand (mille) in one troop, or because one in a thousand was chosen. Romulus was the first to recruit soldiers from the populace and give them this name. Liber first taught military organization. 33. A soldier is called either a regular or an irregular. A regular (ordinarius) soldier is one who fights within the ‘rank and file’ (ordo), and has not yet reached any rank of honor, for he is in the ranks, that is, of the humble militia. But an irregular (extraordinarius) soldier is one who is promoted beyond the rank and file on account of his valor. 34. Veteran and discharged soldiers who no longer serve in battle are called emeriti, because mereri means “to serve in the military,” with reference to the wages that they earn (mereri). They are also called veterans (veteranus; cf. vetus, gen. veteris, “old”) because they no longer serve in battle, but after their many trials as soldierstheyhaveattainedtherighttoliveinpeace.35.Cavalrymen (equestri milites) are so called because they ride horses (equus), and they fight in the equestrian order.
36. An able-bodied young soldier is called a tiro (i.e. a new recruit), and such are enrolled for military service and serve as skilled in arms. They are appraised not by their professed age alone, but by their looks and physical strength. Hence they are called tyros, and they are not soldiers until they have been approved by their oath
 
IX.iii.37–iii.53
of allegiance. 37. The custom of the Roman army was that youths should first bear arms on reaching puberty, for tyros would begin to serve in their sixteenth year, though still at this age under instructors. Concerning them, Vergil (cf. Aen. 7.162):
And youths in their first flower.
38. Of course, slaves never served in the military unless they were freed – except at the time of Hannibal, when theRomanswereinsuchstraitsafterthebattleofCannae that there was no possibility of freeing slaves. 39. Deserters (desertor) are so called because they wander, leaving their military duties deserted (desertus). They are prohibited from enlisting in other troops of soldiers, but if their crime was of short duration, after they have been flogged they are restored to their own troop. But there are those who desert (deserere) the army and pass over to the enemy, and they are also called deserters.
40. Conscript soldiers are so called because they are enrolled in the muster list by the officer who will command them, just as soldiers are called transcripts when they transfer from one legion to another – and hence transcript (transcriptus), because they give their names so that they may be transcribed (transcribere). 41. Adjutants (optio) are so called, because they are selected, for optaremeans“select,”asinthisverse(Vergil,Aen.3.109):
And he chose (optare) a site for the kingdom,
that is, he selected it. 42. Sentinels (excubitor) are so called because they always keep watch (excubia). They are members of a troop of soldiers who ‘keep outdoor watch’ (excubare) in sentry boxes as a royal guard. Excubiae are daytime watches, and vigiliae are nighttime. Hence also the term ‘sentinel’ (vigil). 43. Skirmishers (veles) are a type of fighter among the Romans, so called from their ‘darting about’ (volitare). Thus armed young men selected for their agility would ride seated behind mounted soldiers, and as soon as they encountered the enemy they would leap from the horses and now as foot soldiers would persistently harass the enemy while the mounted men who brought them would attack on the other side. Hannibal’s elephants were once driven back by these skirmishers, and when their riders could not control them, the elephants were killed with a workman’s knife driven between their ears.
44. A camp is where a soldier would be stationed. It is called a camp (castra) as if it were ‘chaste’ (castus), or because there sexual desire would be castrated (castrare) – for a woman never entered a camp. 45. ‘Military service’ (militia) is so called from ‘soldiers’ (miles, gen. militis), or from the word ‘many’ (multus), as if the term were multitia, being the occupation of many men, or from a mass (moles) of things, as if the word were moletia. 46. A legion (legio) is a troop of six thousand armedmen,socalledfrom‘selected’(eligere),asifitwere ‘picked out’ (legere), that is, chosen for arms. Properly wespeakofaphalanxofMacedonians,a‘band’(caterva) ofGauls,anda‘legion’(legio)ofour(i.e.Roman)forces. 47. A legion has sixty centuries, thirty maniples, twelve cohorts, and two hundred squadrons.
48. A century (centuria) is a division of an army composed of a hundred (cf. centum, “hundred”) soldiers. Hence those who command them are called centurions. 49. Reinforcements (subcenturiatus) are men not of the first,butofthesecondcentury,asifthewordwere‘below the first century’ (sub prima centuria); nevertheless in battletheywereformedupandplacedinlookoutssothat ifthefirstcenturyfailedthey,whomwehavespokenofas the substitutes, would reinforce the first century in their efforts. Hence also a subcenturiatus would be stationed in ambush, as if he were trained in deceptive warfare (i.e. as sub can mean “secret”). 50. A maniple consists of two hundred soldiers. These troops are called maniples (manipulus) either because they would begin a battle in the first combat (manus), or because, before battlestandards existed, they would make ‘handfuls’ (manipulus) for themselves as standards, that is, bundles of straw or of some plant, and from this standard the soldiers were nicknamed ‘manipulars.’ Of them, Lucan (Civil War 1.296):
Straightway he rallies the armed maniples (maniplus) to the standards.
51.	A squadron (turma) consists of thirty horsemen. There were three hundred Roman horsemen in one ‘tribe’ (tribus; see iv.7 below) and each group of one hundred would give ten to make up the squadron. A cohort has five hundred soldiers.
52.	There are three kinds of military service: by oath,by call to arms, and by communal oath. 53. In service by oath (sacramentum) each soldier after his election swears not to quit his service until after his hitch has been completed, that is, his period of service – and those are the ones who have a full service record, for they
 
are bound for twenty-five years. 54. By ‘call to arms’ (evocatio), when not only soldiers but also other people are called out (evocare) to a sudden battle. At such a time a consul would say, “He who wants the republic to be preserved, follow me.” 55. By ‘communal oath’ (coniuratio): this is done when there is an uprising, and the city’s imminent peril leaves no time for individuals to take an oath, but a multitude is suddenly assembled and is kindled into tumultuous wrath. This is also called an uproar (tumultuatio).
56. In a battle array these are the usual formations: an army, a levy, a knot, a wedge, the wings, the horns, a column. These borrow their shapes and their names from the objects from which the terms have been derived. 57. The ‘battle array’ (acies; also meaning “cutting edge”) is so called because it is armed with iron and the sharpness (acumen) of swords. 58. An army (exercitus) is a multitude of one kind, so called from its training (exercitatio) for war. 59. A wedge (cuneus) is a company of soldiers gathered into one place. Hence, because it assembles in oneplace,this‘gatheringinoneplace’(coitioinunum)is named a cuneus, as if the word were couneus, because all areassembledinoneplace.60.Levies(classis,alsomeaning “fleet”) are so called because they are segments of an army; later these were called maniples. Hence Vergil (cf. Aen. 2.30):
Here the site for the divisions (classis), here the battle arrays (acies) would fight.
Nowadays classis also means a fleet (classicum) of ships.
61. A knot (nodus) properly is a dense crowd of foot soldiers, as a squadron (turma) is of cavalry. It is called a ‘knot’ for its intricacy, because it can scarcely be loosened. 62. The wings of an army are said to be thirty cavalrymen. The cavalry are called the wings (ala) because they cover the foot soldiers in the manner of wings. 63. The troops of an army who are farthest out are called horns(cornu),becausetheirlineiscurved.64.Itiscalled a column (agmen) when an army marches, named from ‘driving’ (agere), that is, going. Plautus (The Haunted
11	An early manuscript adds, “for "E  in Greek means
‘houses.’”
12	See v.12 below. Femur literally means “thigh.” It is used here as a euphemism for “genitals,” as often in the Vulgate.
13	TheGreektermsherearehopelesslygarbledinthemanuscripts. InhiseditionofBookIX(1984),MarcReydelletingeniouslyproposes 9 (“dense”) and !R !  N (“numerous”), the latter phrase sounding like populus.
IX.iii.54–iv.8
House 562): “Where are you going (agere)?” Thus it is an army on the march. It is called a column because it is arranged in a file, as it would be when an army passes through gates. In any other sense the term is used incorrectly.
iv. Citizens (De civibus) 1. We have spoken somewhat about reigns and military terms, and now we add a summary of terms for citizens. 2. Citizens (civis) are so called because they live ‘assembled’ (coire) in one body, so that their common life might be made richer and safer. 3. A house is the dwelling place of a family, as a city is the dwelling place of a single populace, and as the world is the domicile of the whole of humankind. But ‘house’ also refers to a lineage, a family, or the union of husband and wife. A house (domus) originates with these two (duo),andthetermisGreek(i.e. " ,or "W,“house, household, family”).11 A familia consists of the children of free parents legally begotten from the loins (femur).12 4. A ‘race’ (genus) is so called from begetting (gignere, ppl. genitus) and procreating (progenerare), or from the delimiting of particular descendants (prognatus), as are nations (natio) that, delimited by their own kinships, are called ‘stocks of people’ (gens). 5. A populace (populus) is composed of a human multitude, allied through their agreed practice of law and by willing association. A populaceisdistinctfromtheplebeians(plebs),becausea populace consists of all the citizens, including the elders of the city. [But the plebeians are the remaining people apart from the elders of the city.] 6. Therefore the populaceisthewholecity,butthecommonpeoplearetheplebeians. The plebeians are named for their plurality (pluralitas), for there are more people of lesser status than there are elders. The populace is called the  9 , that is,   , and hence the term populus.13 In Greek the populace is called , from the term ‘stone’ (lapis; cf. Greek Y, “stone”). The ‘common people’ (vulgus) is the multitude living here and there – as if it were “each one where he wishes (vult, from velle, “wish”).”
7. The separate courts and assemblies of the people are called tribes (tribus), and they are so called because in the beginning the Romans had been separated by
Romulus‘intothreegroups’(trifarie):senators,soldiers, and plebeians. Although the tribes are now multiplied, they retain their original name. 8. Its members’ age gave the senate (senatus) its name, because they were seniors (senior). Others have it that senators are so called from
 
IX.iv.9–iv.28
permitting (sinere), because they grant the means for doing something. 9. A ‘senate resolution’ (senatusconsultum) is so called from consulting (consulere) and deliberating, because it is rendered in such a way that it consults interests, and cannot cause harm. 10. Indeed, senators are called fathers (pater), as Sallust says (War with Catiline 6), from their similar responsibilities, for just as fathers tend to their children, so the senators would tend to the republic. 11. ‘Enrolled fathers’ (patres conscripti) were so called because when Romulus chose the ten curial districts of the senators he set down their names on golden tablets in the presence of the populace, and hence they were called enrolled fathers. 12. The first ranks of senators are called the illustres (lit. “illustrious”), the second, the spectabiles (“notable”), and the third, the clarissimi (“distinguished”). There is no fourth type lower than these. Although a person might be of senatorial birth, he was called a Roman equestrian (eques) until the lawful age, and then he would receive the honor of the senatorial office.
13. There were ‘censors’ among the ancient Romans. The term censor applies to a judicial office, because censere means “judge.” Likewise, censors are the arbiters of inherited estates, so called from the ‘counting of money’ (census aeris). 14. Judges (iudex, gen. iudicis) are so called as if it were ‘those speaking the law’ (ius dicens) to the people, or because they ‘lawfully decide’ (iure disceptare).Toexaminelawfullyistojudge(iudicare)justly, and a person is not a judge if justice is not in him. 15. Presidents (praeses) are governors of provinces, so called because they preside (praeesse). 16. The office of praetor (praetor) is named as if it were ‘teacher’ (praeceptor) and ‘chief person’ (princeps) of the city. Likewise quaestors (quaestor),asifthewordwerequaesitor(“investigator”), because they preside over examinations (quaestio) at trials, for the deliberations and judicial process are in their hands.
17. The proceres are the leading men of a city, as if the word were procedes (i.e. “those going before”), because they ‘take precedence’ (praecedere) before all others in esteem. Hence also the tips of the beams that protrude beyond the walls are called proceres, because they ‘come out’ (procedere) first. Therefore, a transfer of sense was made in applying the term to the leading men, because they jut out beyond the multitude of others. 18. Tribunes (tribunus) are so called because they grant (tribuere) either legal process or aid to the common people. That office was established in the sixth year after the kings (i.e. of Rome) were driven out, for when the common people were oppressed by the senate and consuls they createdforthemselvestribunestoactastheirownjudges and defenders, to safeguard their liberty and defend them against the injustice of the nobility. Hence they (i.e. municipal magistrates) are also called defensores, because they defend (defendere) the common people entrusted to them against the arrogance of the wicked. But now, on the contrary, we have not defenders but destroyers.
19. Those who convey the public funds (nummus) to the treasuries (aerarium) are therefore called numerarii. 20. Functionaries (functus) are so called because they perform (fungi, ppl. functus) an office and some official charge. Hence we call those dead people who have completedtheirlife’sfunction‘thedefunct’(defunctus)– for now they do nothing. 21. Fellow-citizens (municeps, particularly a “municipal officer”) are those born in the same municipality, so called from their service in their offices,becausetheytakeon(accipere)publicoffices–for munia are public offices. Hence people who assume no official duty are called ‘immune’ (immunis). 22. Municipalofficers(municipalis)arecitizensnativetoaplaceand holding office there. 23. Decuriones are so called because they are of the curial order, and hold office in the curia.14 Henceapersonwhohasnotpaidthesumorparticipated in the curia is not a decurio. 24. Curiales are the same as decurions,andtheyarecalledcurialesbecausethey‘have chargeof’(procurare)andcarryoutcivicduties.25.Principales, magistrates, and duumvirs are orders of curial offices. Principales are so called because they are first (primus), above the magistrates. 26. Magistrates (magistratus), because they are greater (maior, comparative of magnus) than the other offices. Duumvirs. . .
27. A notary (tabellio) is so called because he is the carrier of writing tablets (tabella). The same person is called a copyist (exceptor), and a ‘public scribe’ (scriba publicus), because he writes down (scribere) only those things that are published (publicare) in the records of transactions. 28. Burghers (burgarius) are so called from ‘fortified villages’ (burgus), because in common speech people call the many dwelling-places established along
14 Curia here refers to the senate of a municipality, and ‘paying the sum’ refers to a payment decuriones would deposit on assuming office.
 
thefrontiersburgi.HencealsothenationofBurgundians got their name: formerly, when Germania was subdued, the Romans scattered them among their camps, and so they took their name from these places. 29. Collegiati are so called because they are removed from their board of officials (collegium) and their responsibilities, because they have committed a crime. The vilest class of people are those born of an unidentified father.
30. Private citizens (privatus) are those not holding public offices. The title is the opposite of that for one holding a magistracy, and they are called privati because they are free from the offices of the curia (cf. privare, “setfree”).31.Mercenaries(mercennarius)arethosewho serve for pay (merces). They are also called by the Greek term barones, because they are strong in difficult circumstances, for  means “heavy,” that is, strong. Its contrary is ‘light,’ that is, weak. 32. ‘Publican’ (publicanus) is the title for the farmers of the taxes of the public treasury, or of public (publicus) affairs, or for those who exact the public taxes, or for those who chase profits through the business of the world – hence their name. 33. A vilicus is properly the manager of a ‘country estate’ (villa), whence the vilicus takes his name from villa. Yet sometimes vilicus does not signify the management of a country estate, but, according to Cicero, the oversight of all the household business, that is, he is overseer of all the property and estates. 34. Agents (actor, “prosecutor”) and administrators (curator) are so called from ‘acting for’ (agere, ppl. actus) and ‘caring for’ (curare).15 35. Procurators are those who serve in place of curatores, as if the term were ‘in place of caretakers’ (propter curatores), like proconsul, ‘for the consul’ (pro consule).
36. Colonists (colonus) are settlers (cultor) from a foreign country, so called from the cultivation (cultura) of fields. There are people coming from elsewhere and tilling (colere, ppl. cultus) a foreign field that they have leased, and they owe their condition to the fruitful soil, because of their tillage of the land under the control of
15	In Isidore’s time curatores were the highest local officials, according to Thompson (1969).
16	Isidore speaks of the two types of coloni: ‘colonists’ (foreigners who settle a land) and serfs. According to Thompson (1969), in Visigothic Spain coloni were serfs, hereditarily tied to the soil, who paid rents of a tenth of their produce.
17	Reydellet (1984) shows that in Isidore’s Spain the word ancon, rather than cubitum, was the common word for ‘elbow.’ In classical
Latin ancon means “angled supporting bracket.”
IX.iv.29–iv.48
the owner, inasmuch as an estate was leased to them.16 We speak of four types of colonists: Roman, Latin, auxiliary, or colonists of the private countryside. 37. Tenants (inquilinus) are so called as if it were ‘residents of others’ property’ (incolentes aliena), for they have no place of their own, but live on alien land. 38. There is this difference between a tenant and a ‘resident alien’ (advena): tenants are people who emigrate, and do not remain permanently, whereas we speak of resident aliens or immigrants (incola) as coming from abroad but settling permanently – hence the term incola, for those who are now inhabitants, from the word ‘reside’ (incolere). 39. Indigenous people (indigena) are those ‘therefrom begotten’ (inde genitus), born in the same place in which they live. 40. The term incola signifies not an indigenous person, but a resident alien.
41. Foreigners (peregrinus) are so called because the parents from whom they come are not known (cf. parentes ignorari). 42. People who lived in Rome were calledurbani,butthosewholiveinothertownsareoppidani, because the only ‘city’ (urbs) is Rome, and the others are towns (oppidum). 43. Famuli are those who were born of one’s own household of slaves. Slaves (servus) got their name from this, that those who could have been killed by the victors according to the law of war, when they were ‘preserved alive’ (servare), were made servi, and thus ‘slaves’ were named from ‘preserving.’ 44. Handmaids (ancilla) were so called from ‘support,’ for in Greek E means “elbow.” Hence we also use the word ancon.17 45. ‘Estate property’ (mancipium) is whatever can be ‘taken by hand’ (manu capere) and subjected, like a human, a horse, or a sheep, for these living beings, as soon as they are born, are reckoned as estate property.Likewisethosecreaturesfromtheworldofwild beasts are considered as estate property as soon as they are captured or tamed.
46. A freeman (ingenuus) is so called because he has freedom by birth (genus), not from a legal action like freedmen. Hence the Greeks call such a one L (lit. “well-born”) because he is of good birth. 47. A freedman (libertus) was so called as if the word were liberatus (“liberated”), for at an earlier time he was consigned to the yoke of slavery. In antiquity the son of a freedman was called libertinus, as if the term were de liberto natus (“born from a freedman”). But now, libertinus refers to one who was freed by a freedman, or his possession. 48. A ‘manumitted man’ (manumissus) is so called as if the
 
IX.iv.49–v.10
term were manu emissus (“delivered by a hand”), for in ancient times whenever they would liberate (manumittere) someone they would turn him around after he was struck with a slap and confirm him to be free. From this, they were said to be ‘manumitted’ because they were delivered by a hand. 49. A dediticius (i.e. a surrendered captive) was first named after the word deditio (“surrender”), the word used when conquered or about to be conquered enemies hand themselves over to the victors. This was the origin of the word dediticius: once, when slaves took up arms and fought against the Roman people, they were defeated and ‘gave themselves up’ (se dare, perfecttensededi),andtheywerearrestedandwerepunished with various marks of shame. 50. For this reason, when at a later time some of them were manumitted by their masters, they did not attain the standing of Roman citizens, on account of the marks of punishment that they had manifestly experienced.
51.AmongtheLatins,beforeRomewasfounded,peopleweremadefreewhentheytookuptheirfreedombya letter,neverbyawill.Thus,becausetheydidnotbecome freethroughawill,theywerenotabletoacquireanything by a will or to designate heirs. They were later, under the consuls, made Roman citizens by wills in the city of Rome. 52. They were called Roman citizens because they were brought into the number of Roman citizens by being made free by means of a will. Permission to dwell in the city of Rome was granted to them from the first, but when others were made freedmen there was a prohibition against their remaining either in Rome or within seven miles of the city.
v. Family relationships and their degrees (De adfinitatibus et gradibus) 1. Property consisting of money (aes, gen. aeris) provided the word for ‘heir’ (heres), for the heir is the executor for the testator’s payments. Indeed, by this word heres is meant the first succession of inheritance and family, such as children and grandchildren. 2. A pro-heir (proheres) is someone who acts in placeofanheir,asthoughthetermwere‘foranheir’(pro +heres).Theproheresiseitherappointedasheirormade asecondaryheir.3.Afather(pater)istheonefromwhom the beginning of the line springs, and thus, he is called the paterfamilias. Moreover, a father is so called because he engenders a son when patratio has been performed, for patratio is the consummation of sexual intercourse.
Lucretius says (cf. On the Nature of Things 4.1129):
The well-done begettings (patra) of fathers.18
4. The term progenitor (genitor) comes from the verb ‘engender’ (gignere, ppl. genitum), and parents (parens) are so called as though they were ‘begetters’ (parere, present participle pariens). 5. They are also ‘creators’ (creator). Crementum (lit. “growth”) is the word for the maleseed,fromwhichthebodiesofanimalsandhumans are conceived; hence parents are creators. 6. A mother is so named because something is made from her, for the term ‘mother’ (mater) is as if the word were ‘matter’ (materia), but the father is the cause.
7.The‘paterfamilias’issocalled,becausehetakescare of the slaves placed in his household (familia), just as a father directs his children, with paternal affection. And he does not distinguish in his affection the condition of the slaves from that of his children, but embraces them all as though they were a single unit. This is the origin of the word ‘paterfamilias.’ Those who lord it over their slaves in an unfair manner could never reckon themselves to be called by this term. 8. The ‘materfamilias’ is so called because she has crossed over into the ‘householdofherhusband’(maritus+familia)through a certain procedure of law, and the matrimonial registers are the records of her purchase. In another manner, just as matron (matrona) is a name for the mother of a first child, that is, as though the term were the mater nati (“mother of one born”), so the ‘materfamilias’ is the woman who has borne several children – for a family (familia) comes into existence from two people.
9. A grandfather (avus) is a father’s father, so called from ‘age’ (aevus), that is, from ‘antiquity.’ A greatgrandfather (proavus) is the grandfather’s father, as though he were ‘close to the grandfather’ (prope + avus). A great-great-grandfather (abavus) is the greatgrandfather’sfather,whoisnowfarway‘fromthegrandfather’ (ab + avus). 10. A great-great-great-grandfather (atavus) is the great-great-grandfather’s father. 10. A great-great-great-great-grandfather (tritavus) is the father of a great-great-great-grandfather, as if the word weretetravis,thatis,the‘fourthbeyondthegrandfather” (cf.   −, “four”). But tritavus is the last name given to this line of kinship; a family arises with the father, and ends with the great-great-great-great-grandfather.
18 The received text of Lucretius has “acquisitions” (parta) for patra; patra is a nonce-word.
 
11. Son (filius) and daughter (filia) are named after the family (familia); for they are first in the order of descent. Hence with regard to the Cornelian family, the whole stock arose from Cornelius. 12. ‘Family’ comes from the word ‘loins’ (femur; see iv.3 above, with note), for a race ofpeopleanditslineageappearfromtheirancestralloins (femur). The word familia is used metaphorically for slaves, and not with its proper application. 13. A family’s lineage (stirps, “stock,” lit. “stalk”) is so called from its longstanding designation based on birth. A son (gnatus) is so called because he has been generated (generatus); whence the word is spelled with a g. Offspring (suboles) are so named for their ‘taking the place’ (substitutio) of the previous generation.
14. The birth-order of children is designated in four ways: only-born (unigenus), first-born (primogenitus), middle (medius), and last (novissimus). The first-born is so named because no child was born before him. The only-born is so called when no child is born after him. The middle child is between all the others, and the last comes after all the others; this same child is the ‘littlest’ (minimus), from the word ‘monad’ (monas). The lastborn is so called because he is recent (novus), since the remaining siblings are older because they came first. 15. Children (filius) are designated in four ways: by nature, by imitation, by adoption, and by instruction. Children by nature (natura), as when the Jews are called the children of Abraham. Children by imitation (imitatio), as those gentiles who imitated (imitare) the faithfulness of Abraham, as when the Gospel says (Luke 3:8) “God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham,” or as when the Lord says that these same Jews are the children of the devil, from whom they are not born, but whom they have imitated (John 8:44). 16. Children also by adoption (adoptio), the kind everyone is familiar with in human society, or as we address God “Our Father, who art in heaven,” as our father by adoption, not nature. Children by instruction (doctrina), as when the apostle Paul called those to whom he preached the Gospel “his own children.”
17. When children are called liberi (“children”; lit. “free”) in a legal sense, it is so that by this term they are distinguished from slaves, because just as a slave is in the power of his master, so a child (filius) is in the power of his father. Thus, ‘emancipation’ occurs for the son, so that he is free from his father, just as ‘manumission’ occurs for a slave, so that he is liberated from
IX.v.11–v.26
his master. 18. Again, children are called liberi when they havesprungfromafree(liber)marriage,forthechildren of a free man and a slave serving-girl have slave status, as children who are so born always assume the status of thelowerparent.19.‘Naturalchildren’(naturalis)means those belonging to freeborn concubines, whom nature alonebegot,notthechastityofmarriage.Theword‘boy’ (puer) comes from ‘the signs of puberty’ (pubes). 20. An ‘adoptive son’ (adoptivus) is one who has been handed into the power of another through ‘transfer of property’ (mancipatio) – either by his rightful father, or grandfather, or great-grandfather, in whose power he was – and who then bears the name of both, like Fabius Aemilius, or Scipio Paulinus.
21. Twins (gemini) are not only two who are born at the same time, but also more than two. If one of the twins is miscarried, the other, who has been properly born, is given the name ‘Vopiscus.’ 22. A child is called ‘posthumous’ (posthumus) because is he born after the burial (post + humatio) of his father, that is, after his death. This son takes the name of his dead parent, for so thelawwillsit,thathewhoisbornfromadeceasedfather is called by the name of the deceased. 23. One is called nothus(lit.“onebornoutofwedlock”)whoisbornfrom anoblefatherandfromanignoblemother,forinstancea concubine. Moreover, this term is Greek (i.e.  ) and is lacking in Latin. 24. Opposite to this is a spurius son, one who is born from a noble mother and an ignoble father. Again, the spurius son is born from an unknown father and from a widowed mother, as if he were the son of a spurium only – for the ancients termed the female generative organs spurium, as though the term derived from the term ! , that is, “seed” – and he has no name from his father. 25. Such children were also called Favonii,becausecertainanimalsarethoughttoconceive by receiving a draft from the Favonian (i.e. west) wind. Hence those children who are not born of legitimate wedlock follow the condition of the mother rather than the father. In Latin the word spurius is as if the term were extra puritatem (“apart from purity”; cf. the prefix se-, “apart from”), that is, as if unclean.
26. A grandchild (nepos) is one who is born from a son. A grandchild is so called as though the term were natus post (“born afterward”), for first the son is born, and then the grandchild. It is the degree of relationship of the secondary heir. From this we also get the word ‘posterity’ (posteritas), as though the term
 
IX.v.27–vi.10
were postera aetas (“later age”). The word nepos refers to either sex, for the reason that we speak of a neptis (“granddaughter”) in legal use is because of the acknowledged distinction in matters of succession. 27. A great-grandson is the child who is conceived and born from the grandson, and he is called pronepos as if the term were natus porro post (“born further after”). From this degree on the offspring begin to be called the progeny (progenies), as if porro post geniti (“begotten further after”). The children and grandchildren do not count as ‘progeny’ because they have no long period of descent.
28. Just as those born rather far down the line of descent are called progeny, so those further up, thegreat-grandfathersandgreat-great-grandfathers,are also called ‘progenitors’ (progenitor), as if the term were porro generans (“remote begetter”). A great-grandson (pronepos)issocalledbecauseheispropenepotem(“near thegrandson”).29.Thegreat-great-grandson(abnepos), because he is separated ‘from the grandson’ (a nepote), for the pronepos is between him and the nepos. The adnepos is the son of an abnepos. 30. The trinepos is the son of the adnepos, because he is fourth in line after the nepos – as if the word were tetranepos (“fourth” + “grandson”). 31. We do not speak of ‘descendants’ (minor) except where a name for a degree of kinship is lacking – such names as son, grandson, great-grandson, great-great-grandson, great-great-great-grandson, and great-great-great-great-grandson. Where there are no more such terms for degrees we rightly speak of ‘descendants,’ just as we speak of ‘ancestors’ (maior) beyond the terms for father, grandfather, great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather, great-great-great-grandfather, and great-great-great-great-grandfather.
vi. Paternalandmaternalrelatives(Deagnatisetcognatis) 1. ‘Paternal kin’ (agnatus) are so called because they ‘succeed in place of children’ (accedere pro natis) when there are no sons. Hence they are acknowledged as taking precedence in the lineage, because they issue from people of the male sex, such as a brother begotten by the same father, or a brother’s son or grandson, or a paternal uncle. 2. ‘Maternal kin’ (cognatus) are so called because they are also linked by nearness of kinship (cognatio). Maternal kin are considered as after the paternal kin because they issue from people of the female sex, and are not paternal kin, but are related otherwise by natural law. 3. The ‘next of kin’ (proximus) is so called because of closeness (proximitas) of blood. 4. ‘Bloodrelatives’ (consanguineus) are so called because they are conceived from one blood (sanguis), that is, from one seed of a father. A man’s seed is a froth of blood that looks like water dashed against cliffs and making a white froth, or like dark wine that makes a whitish foam when shaken in a cup. 5. Brothers (frater) are so called because they are of the same fruit (fructus), that is, born of the same seed. 6. However, ‘maternal brothers’ (germanus) are those issuing from the same mother (genetrix) and not, as many say, from the same seed (germen); only the latter are called fratres. Therefore fratres issue from the samefruit,andgermanifromthesamemother.19 7.Uterine (uterinus) brothers are so called because they have issued from different fathers but from a single womb (uterus), for only a woman has a womb.
8. In the Divine Scriptures brothers are referred to in four ways: in nature, in nation, in lineage, and in affection. In nature, as Esau and Jacob, Andrew and Peter, James and John. In nation, as all Jews are called brothers of each other in Deuteronomy (cf. 15:12): “If you obtain your brother (frater), who is a Hebrew man.” And the Apostle says (Romans 9:3-4): “I wished myself to be an anathema from Christ, for my brethren (frater), who are my kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites.” 9. Further, people may be called brothers by lineage when they are of one family, that is, one native land.Latinspeakersusetheword‘paternity’(paternitas) when many groups of a race spread from a single root. In Genesis, Abraham said to Lot (cf. 13:8): “Let there be noquarrelbetweenmeandthee,andbetweenmyherdsmen, and thy herdsmen: for we are all brethren (frater).” Surely Lot was not Abraham’s brother, but the son of his brother Aram. 10. In the fourth way, brothers are so called in affection, and this has two types: spiritual and general. In spiritual brotherhood, by which all of us Christians are called brothers, as (Psalm 132:1 Vulgate): “Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren (frater) to dwell together in unity.” In general brotherhood, because all humans, born from one father, are joined in equal kinship among ourselves, as Scripture says (cf. Isaiah 66:5): “Say to those that hate you: you are our brothers (frater).”
19 In classical Latin a frater was the son of one’s father or mother, and a frater germanus or simply germanus was a full brother.
 
11.Theterm‘maternalsister’(germana)isunderstood justas‘maternalbrother’(germanus),asissuingfromthe same mother. 12. And ‘sister’ (soror) is understood in the same sense as ‘brother.’ Thus, ‘sister’ is the name for a person of the same seed, because only she is considered as belonging to the portion (sors) of the paternal heritage with the brothers. 13. ‘Paternal first-cousins’ (frater patruelis) are so called because their fathers (pater) were brothers (germanus). 14. But ‘first cousin’ (consobrinus) is the name for those born from a sister (soror) and a brother, or from two sisters, as if the word were consororinus. 15. Fratruelis is the child of one’s mother’s sister. ‘Second-cousins’ (sobrinus) are the children of firstcousins. Tius is a Greek word (i.e. @ , “uncle”). 16. ‘Paternal uncle’ (patruus) is the brother of one’s father, as if the term were pater alius (“another father”). Hence whenthefatherofaminordies,thepaternaluncleadopts him and cares for him as his own son as he is obliged by law.
17. A ‘maternal uncle’ (avunculus) is the brother of one’s mother, and the term appears to have the form of a diminutive, because it shows signs of coming from the word avus (“grandfather”). 18. A ‘paternal aunt’ (amita) is the sister of one’s father, as though the term were alia mater (“another mother”). A ‘maternal aunt’ (matertera) is the sister of a mother, as if mater altera (“a second mother”). A father-in-law (socer) is one who has given his daughter in marriage. 19. A son-in-law (gener) is one who marries the daughter, and he is so called because he is taken into the family (genus, gen. generis) for its increase. A father-in-law – or a mother-in-law (socrus) – is so called because they ally (adsociare) to themselves a son-in-law or daughter-in-law (nurus). 20. A stepfather (vitricus) is one who takes a wife who has a son or daughter from another man. He is so called as though the word were novitricus, because the mother marries a new (novus) husband.
21. A stepson (privignus) is one who was born from anotherfather,andheisthoughttobecalledprivignusas though the word were privigenus, because he was ‘born at an earlier time’ (prius genitus). Whence, a stepson is
20 In sections 24–27 we translate the text, with emendations of theearlymanuscripts,asgivenbyLindsay,inspiteofapparentconfusions–e.g.,thefatherofone’spaternaluncleisone’sgrandfather,not one’sgreatuncle.ForfulldiscussionseeReydellet1984:212–15.Surely rightly, Reydellet emends pater magnus below to patruus magnus.
IX.vi.11–vi.26
commonly called antenatus (“born before”). 22. These are words that appear to be derived from the word for family(gens):genitor,genetrix,agnatus,agnata,cognatus, cognata, progenitor, progenitrix, germanus, germana.
23.	More on the aforementioned relationships (Item de praedictis affinitatibus) The originator of my birth is my father, and I am his son or daughter. The father of my father is my grandfather (avus), and I am his grandson (nepos) or granddaughter (neptis). The grandfather of my father is my great-grandfather (proavus), and I am his great-grandson (pronepos) or -daughter (proneptis). The great-grandfather of my father is my great-great-grandfather (abavus) and I am his great-great-grandson (abnepos) or -daughter (abneptis). The great-great-grandfather of my father is my great-great-great-grandfather (atavus), and I am his great-great-great-grandson (adnepos) or -daughter (adneptis). The great-great-great-grandfather of my father is my great-great-great-great-grandfather (tritavus),andIamhisgreat-great-great-great-grandson (trinepos) or -daughter (trineptis).
24.	Paternaluncles (Depatruis)20 The brother of my father is my paternal uncle (patruus), and I am the son or daughter of his brother. The father of my paternal uncle is my ‘great uncle’ (pater magnus), and I am the son or daughter of his brother’s son or daughter. The grandfatherofmypaternaluncleismygreat-great-uncle (propatruus), and I am the grandson or granddaughter of his son or daughter. The great-grandfather of my paternal uncle is my great-great-great-uncle (adpatruus), and I am the son or daughter of his grandson or granddaughter.
25.	Paternalaunts (Deamitis) The sister of my father is my paternal aunt (amita), and I am the son or daughter of her brother. The mother of my paternal aunt is my ‘great paternal aunt’ (amita magna), and I am the son or daughter of her brother’s son or daughter. The grandmother (avia) of my paternal aunt is my great-greatpaternalaunt(proamita)andIamthesonordaughterof hergrandsonorgranddaughter.Thegreat-grandmother (proavia) of my paternal aunt is my great-great-great paternal aunt (abamita) and I am the son or daughter of her grandson or granddaughter.
26.Maternaluncles(Deavunculis)Thebrotherofmy mother is my maternal uncle (avunculus), and I am the son or daughter of his sister. The father of my maternal uncle is my maternal great uncle (avunculus magnus)
 
IX.vi.27–vii.10
and I am the son or daughter of his son or daughter. Thegrandfatherofmymaternaluncleismygreat-greatuncle (proavunculus) and I am the grandson or granddaughter of his son. The great-grandfather of my maternal uncle is my great-great-great uncle (abavunculus) and I am the son or daughter of his granddaughter.
27.	Maternal aunts (De materteris) The sister of my mother is my maternal aunt (matertera), and I am the son or daughter of her sister. The sister of my maternal aunt is my great maternal aunt (matertera magna), and I am the grandson or granddaughter of her sister.21 The sister of my grandmother is my abmatertera and I am a great-grandson or great-granddaughter of her sister. The sister of my great-grandmother is my promatertera, and I am the son or daughter of her granddaughter.
28.	The family tree that legal advisors draw up con-cerning lineage is called a stemma, where the degrees of relationship are spelled out – as, for example, “this one is the son, this one is the father, this one the grandfather, this one the relative on the father’s side,” and all the rest. Here are the figures for these relationships.22 29. While thisconsanguinitydiminishestowardsthelastdegree,as it subdivides through the levels of descent, and kinship (propinquitas) ceases to exist, the law recovers it again through the bond of matrimony, and in a certain way callsitbackasitslipsaway.Thus,consanguinityisestablished up to the sixth degree of kinship, so that just as thegenerationoftheworldandthestatusofhumankind comes to an end through six ages, so kinship in a family is terminated by the same number of degrees.23
vii. Marriages (De coniugiis) 1. ‘Man’ (vir) signifies gender, not marital status, unless you say in addition, ‘her man.’ 2. But ‘husband’ (maritus) without an additional term means a man who is married. ‘Husband’ comes from ‘masculine’ (mas, adjective) as if the word were mas (i.e. “male,” noun), for the noun is the primary form, and it has masculus as a diminutive form; maritus is derived from this. 3. A ‘betrothed man’ (sponsus) is so called from pledging (spondere, ppl. sponsus), for before the use of matrimonial registers the betrothed sent each other written warranties in which they would pledge to each other that they consented to the laws of marriage, and they would provide guarantors. 4. From this, it was accepted that we call a betrothed man sponsus, from ‘pledging,’ and a betrothed woman sponsa in similar fashion. Again, properly speaking, ‘to pledge’ means “to intend.” Therefore, he is a sponsus not just because he promises, but because he pledges and gives sponsors (sponsor).
5. ‘Earnest-money’ (arrabo) is so called as though the word were arra bona (“good pledge”), for what is given for the purposes of matrimony is well given, since marriageisgood.Butthatwhichisgivenforthesakeoffornication and adultery is bad, and therefore not an arrabo. 6. A pledge (arra) is so called ‘from the thing’ (a re) for which it is given. Moreover, an arra is not only a pledge of marriage, but also a pledge for anything that has been promised – that something will be given back, or that a promise will be fulfilled. 7. Suitors (procus) are petitioners of marriage, so called from ‘pressing one’s suit’ (procare) or ‘petitioning’ (petere). 8. A bride’s-woman (pronuba) is so called because she presides over a bride (praeesse + nubens) and she is the one who joins the bride to her husband. She is also called a paranympha, for the nympha is the bride in the wedding ceremony, and nympha (also meaning “water”) refers to the duty of washing (i.e. bathing the bride), since the word also alludes to the word for ‘marrying’ (nubere).
9. ‘Conjugal partners’ (coniunx) are so called on accountoftheyoke(iugum)thatisplacedonthoseyoked together (coniungere) in matrimony. Customarily, those who are married are placed under a yoke, indicative of future harmony, lest they be separated. However, conjugal partners are more truly so called from the initial pledge of their betrothal, even though conjugal relations arestillunknowntothem,asMaryiscalledthe‘conjugal partner’ of Joseph, but between them there neither was nor would be any commingling of the flesh. 10. Brides (nupta) are so called because they veil their faces, for the word for brides is taken from ‘clouds’ (nubes), which
21	This section contains a number of confusions.
22	The manuscripts present here two figures laying out in tree formthenamesoftherelationshipsdiscussedabovearrangedaccording to their degrees of kinship. One’s parents and children are of the first degree; siblings, grandparents, and grandchildren are of the second degree; and so on to the sixth degree. A note on the first figure indicates that from the sixth to the fourth degree, including first cousins but not nieces and nephews, people are immunis, that is, non-incestuous and marriageable.
23	Here follows a third figure, found in a few early manuscripts, laying out the same information about degrees of kinship in a table made of eight concentric circles divided into wedges by ten radii.
 
cover the heavens. Whence the wedding festivities are called‘nuptials’(nuptiae),becausetheretheheadsofthe newlywedsarecoveredforthefirsttime.Thewordobnubere means “cover.” 11. The opposite of this is ‘unmarried’ (innuba), that is, innupta, a woman who has not yet veiled her own face.
12. Wives (uxor) are so called as though the word were unxior, for there was an ancient custom that, as soon as newlyweds would come to their husbands’ threshold, before they entered they would decorate the door posts with woolen fillets and anoint (unguere, perfect unxi) themwithoil.Hencethenewlywedswerecalled‘wives’as if the word were unxior. And they would avoid stepping on the thresholds, because at that place the doors both come together and separate. 13. A matron (matrona) is a woman who has already married, and she is called a matrona as though she were the ‘mother of a born child’ (mater nati), or because now she can become a mother (mater) – whence also matrimonium (“matrimony”) is so called. There is a difference between a matron and a mother, and between a mother and a materfamilias; for a woman is called a ‘matron’ because she has entered in matrimony; a ‘mother’ because she has borne children; and ‘materfamilias’ because through certain procedures of law she has passed over into the household (familia) of her husband.
14. A man is called ‘monogamous’ (monogamus) because he has been married to only one woman, for   is the Greek word for ‘one,’ and   is translated as “marriage.” 15. A man is called digamus and trigamus for the numbers of wives he has had, as though he were a husband to two or three women. 16. A widow (vidua) is so called because she has not been part of a pair along with a man (vir, “man” + duo, “two”),24 and after the death of her first husband she has not attached herselfinaunionwithanotherman.Womenwhomarry other men after the death of their first husbands are not called ‘widows.’ Again, she is called ‘deprived’ (viduus, adj.) because she is alone, because she has lost the rights of marriage related to sharing her life with a husband. 17. The wife of a brother is called fratrissa. The brother of a husband is called levir. The wives of two brothers
24	Considering the perfect tense (“has been”), the emendation deleting non (“not”) makes better sense.
25	For “of marriageable women” (nubilium) all the early manuscripts read “of noble women” (nobilium).
IX.vii.11–vii.27
call each other ianetrix (cf. : , “wives of brothers”) as if the term were ‘frequenting the doors’ (ianua + terere), or through the same ‘door’ having ‘entry’ (ianua + iter). The sister of a husband is called galos (cf. A, “sister-in-law”). 18. The husband of a sister does not have a special name, nor does the brother of a wife.
19. Matrimony (matrimonium) is the lawful ‘passing into a husband’s control’ and marriage contract of marriageablewomen.25 20.A‘conjugalunion’(coniugium)is a marital relationship of persons who have met the legal requirements, marked by joining together and sexual intercoursewithoneanother.Thisconiugiumissocalled because the two people are conjoined (coniungere), or from the yoke (iugum) by which they are coupled in marriage, so that they cannot be unbound or separated. 21.Thewordconubium(“marriage”),however,isformed not from nupta (“married woman”), but from the word nubo (“veil, wed”). And it is called conubium when equals enter into a married state, as for example Roman citizens, clearly equal in status. But it is not conubium whenaRomancitizenisjoinedwithawomanofLatium. Whenever a marriage is not defined as conubium, the children do not become members of the father’s line.
22. The ‘wedding’ (hymenaeus, also meaning “wedding song”) is so called from a certain Hymenaeus, who was the first to enjoy a fortunate wedding, or it is from the term I, the membrane that is the closed gateway of virginity. 23. ‘Living together’ (contubernium) is an agreement to sleep together for a time; whence the term ‘tent’ (tabernaculum), which is pitched now here, now there. 24. A repudiation (repudium) is that which, substantiated by witnesses, is delivered to someone who is eitherpresentorabsent.25.Adivorce(divortium)occurs whenever a marriage has dissolved, and one of the partners pursues a new marriage. Moreover, ‘divorce’ is so called from a parting of ways, that is, paths stretching in ‘different directions’ (diversus). 26. Frivolum occurs when two people separate in such a state of mind that they once again return to each other, for ‘frivolous’ (frivolus)isbeingmarkedbyawaveringandficklemind, not a stable one. Appropriately, useless crockery is called frivola.
27. There are three reasons to marry a wife: the first reason is for the sake of offspring, about which we read
 
IX.vii.28–vii.29	Isidore of Seville
 
in Genesis (1:28): “And he blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply.” The second reason is for a help, about which, Genesis says (2:18): “It is not good for the man to be alone: let us make him a help like unto himself.” The third reason is lack of self-restraint, whence the apostle Paul says, for example (I Corinthians 7:9): “Let the man who cannot contain himself marry.” 28. In choosing a husband, four things are usually considered: valor, family, good looks, and wisdom. Of these, wisdom is the more powerful for arousing the feeling of love. Vergil refers to these four qualities with regard to Aeneas, because Dido was driven by them into love for him (Aen. 4.11–14):
By good looks:
What a bearing he has, what looks!
By valor:
And what a brave heart, what feats of arms!
By speech:
Ah, by what fates this man has been tossed about, what drawn-out wars he was singing of!
By family:
Indeed, I believe – and it is no empty trust – that he belongs to the family of the gods.
29. Then, in choosing a wife, four things impel a man tolove:beauty,family,wealth,andcharacter.Yetitisbetter if character is looked for in her rather than beauty. Butnowadays,wivesaresoughtwhomwealthandbeauty recommend, not uprightness of character. 30. Women stand under the power of their husbands because they are quite often deceived by the fickleness of their minds. Whence, it was right that they were repressed by the authority of men. Consequently, the ancients wanted their unwed women, even those of mature age, to live in guardianship, on account of their fickle minds.
 
Book X Vocabulary (De vocabulis)
 
 
1. People are for the most part unaware of the origin of certain terms. Consequently we have included a number in this work for their informational value.
Certain terms for human beings (De quibusdam vocabulis hominum)1 Although the origin of terms, whence they come, has received some accounting by philosophers – such that by derivation ‘human being’ (homo) is so called from ‘humanity’ (humanitas), or ‘wise person’ (sapiens) from ‘wisdom’ (sapientia), because wisdom comes first, then the wise person – nevertheless a different, special cause is manifest in the origin of certain terms, such as homo from ‘soil’ (humus), from which the word homo properly is so called. From such derivations, as examples, we have set forth a number in this work.
A. 2. Aeros (i.e. heros, “demi-god, hero”), a strong and wise man. Author (auctor), so called from ‘augmenting’ (augere); moreover, auctor cannot be used in the feminine gender – for there are some terms that cannot be inflected in the feminine, such as ‘runner’ (cursor). Agent (actor), from acting (agere). 3. Foster-son (alumnus), so called from fostering (alere), although both he who fosters and he who is fostered can be called alumnus – that is, he who nourishes and he who is
1 Indeed the vocabulary treated in this book specifically comprises nouns and substantive adjectives used for human beings. To arrange a large body of information in alphabetical order was still rare in Isidore’s time, although Pliny and others had used alphabeticalorderforshortlistsofthings,andatleastacoupleofLatinauthors used the alphabet to organize larger lexicographical works (the lost lexicon of Verrius Flaccus of the first century ce, the lexicographical part of Nonius Marcellus’s encyclopedia of the fourth century). See Daly (1967), pages 50–59. Some early manuscripts reflect the novelty of the scheme with titles referring to the alphabetical organization.
Latinfreelyusesadjectivesassubstantives,sothatargutuscanmean “smart” or “a smart person.” While for the most part the substantive use can be presumed in Book X, we here generally and somewhat elliptically translate such terms as adjectives, trusting that the substantive use will be understood. Many of the words are present and perfect participles; we supply their infinitive forms only when they are not obvious.
213
nourished – but still, the better use is for one who is nourished. 4. Friend (amicus), by derivation as if from the phrase ‘guardian of the spirit’ (animi custos). 5. And amicus is appropriately derived; the term for someone tormentedbycarnaldesireisamatorturpitudinis(“lover ofwickedness”),butamicusisfrom‘hook’(hamus),that is,fromthechainofcharity,whencealsohooksarethings that hold. Lovable (amabilis), too, because one is worthy of love (amor). A lover (amasius), because he is prone to love(amor).6.Clever(astutus)issocalledfromtheword ‘cleverness’ (astus), which is the term for a shrewd and wary person who can do something forcefully without danger. Smart (argutus), because one quickly comes up with an argument (argumentum) while speaking. Acute (acer),ineverymannerlivelyandforceful.Swift(alacer), with regard to speed and running, as if one would say ‘winged’ (aliger). ‘Bearing arms’ (armiger), because he ‘bears arms’ (arma gerere). Happy (alacris), “joyful”; cheerful (alacer), lively and disturbed by no surprising events. Agile (agilis), from doing (agere) something quickly, like docilis (“easily taught’).
7. Rivalling (aemulus), striving for the same thing as an imitator (imitator) and lover (amabilis) of it; at other times it comes to mean “inimical.” Fair (aequus), meaning“naturallyjust,”from‘equity’(aequitas),thatis,after the idea of what is equal (aequus) – whence likewise ‘equity’ is so called after a certain equalness (aequalitate).Aequaevusreferstowhatisofanequalage(aequale aevum) with another thing, that is, coeval (coaetaneus). Arrogant (arrogans), because much is demanded (rogare), and such a person is disdainful. Presumptuous (audax) may properly be substituted for arrogans. Spirited (animosus), because one is full of spirit (animus) and drive. Stouthearted (animatus), as if ‘endowed with vigor’ (animo auctus), firm in spirit. 8. Puffed up (aelatus,i.e.elatus,ppl.ofefferre),becauseoneexalts(elevare) himself beyond his proper measure when he seems to himself a great person for what he accomplishes. Selfaggrandizing (attollens), because one exalts and elevates himself. Ambitious (ambitiosus), because one solicits
 
X.A.9–B.24
(ambire) honors. 9. Greedy (avidus) is so called from ‘crave’ (avere), for to crave is to desire; from this verb also comes ‘covetous’ (avarus). Now, what is it to be greedy? To pass beyond what is sufficient. The covetous person is so called because he is greedy for gold, and never has enough money, and the more he has, the more he covets. On this, with the same idea, is Horace, who says (Epistles 1.2.56):
The covetous person (avarus) is always in need.
And Sallust (War Against Catiline 11.3): “Because avarice (avaritia) is diminished neither by wealth nor by poverty.”
10. Bitter (amarus) draws its name from the taste, for such a one is not sweet-tempered, and does not know how with any sweetness to invite anyone to share his company. Adulterous (adulter), a violator of marital chastity, because he defiles the bed of another person. 11. Indecisive (anceps), wavering this way and that and doubting whether to choose this or that, and distressed (anxius) about which way to lean. Abominable (atrox), becauseonehasloathsome(taeter)conduct.Abstemious (abstemius), from temetum, that is, ‘wine,’ as if abstaining (abstinere) from wine. [Neighboring (affinis) . . .] Weaned (ablactatus), because one is ‘withdrawn from milk’ (a lacte ablatus). 12. Sick (aeger), because one is pressed (agere) by illness or grief for a time, and sickly (aegrotus), because one is sick rather often – there is the samedistinctionasbetween‘angry’(iratus)and‘givento anger’ (iracundus). Miserable (aerumnosus) is so called from gullet (rumen), because one who has become a wretch from poverty hungers and thirsts. 13. A diviner (auspex), because he examines the auspices (auspicium; cf. specere, “look at”) of birds, in the same way that a fowler (auceps) is so called because he ‘catches birds’ (aves capere). Star-crossed (astrosus), so called from star (astrum), as one born under an evil star. 14. Enormous (aenormis, i.e. enormis), because one exceeds the norm (norma) and moderation. A rustler (abactor) is a thief of beasts of burden and livestock; commonly people call him an abigeius, from ‘drive off’ (abigere). 15. ‘Dressed for mourning’ (atratus) and ‘clothed in white’ (albatus): theformerfromblackclothing(cf.ater,“black”),thelatter from white (albus) clothing. Stranger (advena), one who ‘comes here’ (advenire) from elsewhere. Foreigner (alienigena),becauseoneisofa‘foreignnation’(alienum genus), and not of the nation where one now is. [Again,] alienigena, one who is begotten (genitus) from another people (alia gens), and not from the people where one now is.
16. Immigrant (accola), because immigrating (advenire) one tills (colere) the land. Farmer (agricola), from ‘tilling a field’ (colere + ager); likewise silvicola (“inhabitant of the woods”; cf. silva, “woods”). Hanger-on (assecula), because one follows (sequi, ppl. secutus) someone for money. 17. Tax-payer (assiduus) was the term among the ancients for one who had to contribute a payment to the public treasury in money (as, gen. assis), and also was busy with public affairs – hence also it should be written with an s, not with a d (i.e. not adsiduus). 18. An attendant (apparator) is so called because one appears (apparere) and is seen and is in attendance at someone’s pleasure. Attentive (attentus), as one holds onto (tenere) what one hears. 19. Thunderstruck (attonitus), as if fired with a certain madness and stupefied, called ‘thunderstruck’ from the crash of thunderclaps (tonitrus), as if stupefied by a thunderclap and close to a nearby lightning strike. 20. An allectus (i.e. a public official), because such a one is publicly elected (electus). ‘Driven from office’ (abactus), because one is removed from ‘from public employment’ (ab actus). Aborted (abortivus), because one is not born, but miscarried (aboriri, ppl. abortus) and perishes. Adoptive (adoptivus), because one is publicly chosen (optare) as a son. 21. Both (ambo), derived from OA (“both”), a Greek word made into Latin with the third letter (i.e. phi) changed. ‘Another’ (alius) [is said of one from many, but] ‘the other’ (alter) [of one from two]. Ambidextrous (aequimanus) is the term for one who holds a sword in either hand (manus).
B.	22. Blessed (beatus) is so called as if the term were ‘well endowed’ (bene auctus), specifically from having whatonewantsandnotsufferingwhatonedoesn’twant. Further, a person is indeed blessed who both has all the good things that he wants, and wishes for nothing wickedly. From these two, a person is made blessed. 23. Good (bonus) is thought to be so called from beauty (venustas) of the body, and later the word was transferred to the spirit. We call a person good if evil does not have the upper hand in him, and we call that person best (optimus, superlative of bonus) who sins least. 24. A gracious (benignus) person is willingly prepared ‘to do good’ (benefacere) and is kind in speech. Not
 
much distinguishes benignus from bonus, because the benignus person also seems disposed to do well. However, they differ in this, that the bonus person can be rather somber, and although he does well and is attentive to what is demanded of him, still he does not know howtobepleasantasacompanion,whereasthebenignus person knows how to be inviting to all with his sweet nature. 25. Beneficent (beneficus), so called from ‘doing well’ (benefacere) to another; from this also is the term ‘beneficence’ (beneficentia), which benefits one’s neighbor.26.Benevolent(benivolus),becauseone‘wisheswell’ (bene velle, 1st person volo). Still, we do not say benevolus, any more than malevolus, for often a word compounded of two bases alters either the first letter (i.e. of the second base) or the last letter (i.e. of the first base) – for benevolentia (i.e. rather than benivolentia, “benevolence”) has a disagreeable sound. 27. Charming (blandus), sweet and open to friendship. 28. Stupid (brutus), as if overwhelmed (obrutus), because one lacks sense, for such a one is without reason or prudence. From this term also came the name Junius Brutus, the son of the sister of Tarquinius Superbus. When he feared the same disaster that befell his brother, who was killed by his maternal uncle because of his wealth and prudence, he feigned a useful stupidity for a time. Whence he received the cognomen Brutus, although he was named Junius. 29. [Red (burrus) . . .] Stammering (balbus), so called from bleating (balare) rather than speaking, for such a person cannot get words out. 30. Hence also ‘hesitating in speech’ (blaesus), because one breaks off words. A chatterer (bucco), a garrulous person, because he outdoes others in the loquacity of his speech, not its sense. Bilious (biliosus), because one is always in a melancholy state, from the black humor that is called bile (bilis). 31. Baburrus, “stupid, inept.” Biothanatus (i.e. a martyr who dies a violent death), because he is ‘twice dead,’ for death is    in Greek.2
C.	32. Bright (clarus), from sky (caelum), because it shines, and hence also the term ‘bright day’ for the shining of the sky. Lofty (celsus) is named after sky, because one is elevated and high, as if the term were ‘celestial’ (caelestis). 33. Chaste (castus) was first so called after the term ‘castration’ (castratio); afterwards the ancients
2 Greek  means “violence,” but bio- is here taken as the Latin combining form bi-, “twice.”
X.B.25–C.42
chose so to call those who would promise perpetual abstinence from sexual intercourse. 34. A ‘celestial one’ (caeles) is so called because such a one directs his course tothesky(caelum).Celibate(caelebs),onehavingnopart in marriage, of which kind are the numinous beings in heaven(caelum),whohavenospouses–and caelebsisso called as if the term were ‘blessed in heaven’ (caelo beatus). Heavenly-dweller (caelicola), because they ‘dwell in heaven’ (caelum colere) – for that is an angel. 35. ‘Continent’ is said not only of chastity, but also of food and drink, and also of anger, agitation of mind, and passion for disparaging. A person is continent (continens) because he ‘holds himself back’ (abstinere) from many evils. 36. Merciful (clemens), having pity, because such a one ‘is called upon’ (cluere), that is, he protects and guards, as a patron does for his client (cliens). 37. Concordant (concors) is so called from ‘joining of the heart’ (coniunctio cordis), for as one who shares one’s lot (sors) is called a ‘partner’ (consors), so one who is joined in heart (cor) is called concors. 38. Haranguer (contionator)....Consoler(consolator),‘comfortinginterlocutor’; and a consoler is so called because he focuses attention on the single (solus) person to whom he is speaking, and alleviates his solitude by talking with him. Hence also the word ‘solace’ (solacium).
39. Well-advised (consultus) is one who has ‘taken counsel’ (consulere); the opposite is ill-advised, one who does not accept counsel. 40. Constant (constans) is so called because one ‘stands firm’ (stare, present participle stans) in every situation, and cannot deviate in any direction. Trusting (confidens), one full of faith (fiducia) in all matters. Whence Caecilius (fr. 246):
If you summon Confidence, confide (confidere) everything to her.
41. Cautious (cautus), so called from ‘being wary’ (cavere). Sly (callidus), “deceptive,” because he knows how to conceal (celare) things, and is skillful in a bad way. However, the ancients would use callidus not only for “cunning,” but also for “expertly taught.” Such a one is also wily (versutum), because he quickly shifts (vertere) his thinking around. 42. Desirous (cupidus), so called from taking (capere), that is, receiving, much. Clamorous (clamosus), as if the word were calamosus, from ‘reed-pipe’ (calamus) – thus, because one makes noise. A calumniator (calumniator), a false accuser of a crime, so called from ‘intriguing against’ (calvere), that
 
X.C.43–C.62
is,misleadinganddeceiving.43.Accountant(calculator), from‘pebbles’(calculi),thatis,littlestones;theancients, holding these in their hands, would calculate numbers. 44. A plagiarist (compilator), one who mixes the words ofanotherwithhisown,aspigment-makerscustomarily crushtogetherdiversethingsmixedupinamortar(pila). The poet of Mantua (i.e. Vergil) was once accused of this crime because of his taking some verses of Homer and mixing them with his own, and was called by his rivals a plagiarist of the ancients. He answered them, “It takes great strength to wrest Hercules’s club from his hand.”
45. Insolent (contumax), because one scorns (contemnere). Chromaticus, because one is not confused nor does he change color, for ‘color’ in Greek is 9W.3 46. Abusive (contumeliosus), because one is quick and swells (tumere) with insulting words. Headstrong (contentiosus), so called from purposefulness (intentio), one who claims something not according to reason,butfromobstinacyalone.47.Contemptible(contemptibilis), either because ‘worthy of contempt’ (contemptui habilis), or because disdained (contemptus) and base (vilis), that is, without honor. 48. Cruel (crudelis), thatis,raw(crudus),whichtheGreekscall > (“raw”), with a transferred sense as if uncooked and not suitable for eating, for such a one is harsh and hard-hearted. 49. Executioner (carnifex), because he ‘makes dead meat’ (carnem afficere). Gallows-bird (cruciarius), because he deservesthecross(crux,gen.crucis).Colleague(collega), so called from the bond (colligatio) of fellowship and from the embrace of friendship. Contemporary (coaetaneus), as if the term were ‘of equal age’ (compar aetatis). 50. Accomplice (complex, gen. complicis), because one has been connected (applicatus) with another person in a single sin or crime for an evil purpose – but if done for a good purpose we never use the word complex. 51. Partner (consors), because a share of property belongs to him, for the ancients would use the word ‘allotment’ (sors) for ‘share.’ Therefore consors, because one is ‘sharing in the allotment’ (communis sorte), just as dissors means ‘unequal in the allotment’ (dissimilis sorte).
52. Swift (celer) is so called from swiftness (celeritas), because such a one quickly does what needs to be done. ‘Closely connected’ (confinalis), because one is nearby (affinis) in family or in location. Farmer (colonus), so called from farm (colonia) or from tilling (colere) a field. 53.Attorney(cognitor)fromknowing(cognoscere)acase. Curator (i.e. a high municipal official), because he takes care(cura)ofminorchildrenwhoarestillnotoldenough to be able to administer their affairs. Clients (cliens, “dependent on a patron”) were earlier called colientes, from ‘cultivating’ (colere) their patrons. 54. [Captured (captus) . . .] Captive (captivus) is so called as if ‘deprived of civic rights’ (capite deminutus), for the condition of a free person has passed from him, whence he is spoken of as deprived of civic rights by legal experts. 55. Unimpaired (colomis, i.e. columis), so called from pillar (column), because such a one is erect and very firm. 56. Adorned (comtus), so called from hair (coma), because one’s hair is good-looking, or because one grooms one’s hair. 57. Curly-haired (calamistratus), from the ‘curling iron’ (calamister), that is, the iron pin made in the shape of a reed (calamus), on which hair is twisted to make it curly. Those who curl hair will warm these irons in embers in order to be curly-haired.
58.Stout(corpulentus),becauseoneisweightyofbody (corpus)andsluggishwithflesh.Fat(crassus),fromstuffing of the body, from ‘making’ (creare) flesh. Glutton (comesor), from eating (comedere, ppl. comesum) a lot, forsuchaoneisimmoderatelydedicatedtothemawand belly. Taverner (caupo) – the worst sort make water from wine. 59. Candidus [“honest, splendid”]. Gray-haired (canus), so called from white (candidus), and ‘white’ as if the term were ‘added whiteness’ (candor datus) – for the whiteness called candor results from effort, and a naturally white thing is called albus. 60. Curly-haired (crispus) . . . Lame (clodus) . . . Bent (curvus) . . . Blind (caecus) is so called because one ‘lacks vision’ (carere visum), for he has lost his eyes. One is caecus who does not see with either eye. 61. Epileptic (caducus, “falling sickness”), so called from falling down (cadere). Similarly a lunatic (lunaticus) because [he suffers at a particular phase of the moon (luna)]. Confounded (confusus), so called from one’s confession (confessio) of a wicked deed; hence also ‘confounding’ (confusio).
62. Ruined (convulsus) is said of one whose possessions are carried off by some force. Whence also a wrecked(convulsus)ship,whoseprojectingpartsarecarried off by the force of a storm, as in Vergil (Aen. 1.383):
Scarcely seven (ships), wrecked (convulsus) by the waves –
3 Perhaps a chromaticus is a person skilled in the argumentative use of rhetorical colors, from the sense of Greek 9A . Or a chromaticus may be a person “dyed-in-the-wool.”
 
as if mutilated. 63. Consumed (consumptus), wholly ‘used up’ (sumere) and devoured. Procuress (conciliatrix), so called from her making a companionship in a shameful agreement (consensio), because she acts as go-between and traffics in someone else’s body. Such a woman is also called a pimp (leno). 64. Circumforanus, one who strolls ‘around marketplaces’ (circum fora) and courts for the sake of lawyering. Guildsman (collegiatus) . . . Coachman (carpentarius) . . .
D.	65. Master (dominus) is so called by derivation, because he presides over a household (domus). Wellspoken (disertus), “learned,” so called from discuss (dissere, ppl. dissertus), for he discusses things methodically. Learned (doctus), from speak (dicere), whence also dictor (“speaker”). 66. Docile (docilis), not that one is doctus, but that he is able to be taught (docere), for he is clever and apt for learning. Student (discipulus) is so called from instruction (disciplina), and disciplina is so called from learn (discere). 67. Steward (dispensator) is thenameforapersonentrustedwiththeadministration of money, and such a one is a dispensator because in former times the person who dispensed money would not count it but ‘weigh it out’ (appendere). 68. Rich (dives), so called from money (cf. divitiae, “wealth”). Seemly (decorus),“perfect,”fromthenumberten(decem,i.e.the perfectnumber).[Sweet(dulcis)...]Becoming(decens), “well-arranged,”socalledfromthenumberten(decem). From ‘ten’ also come ‘seemly’ and ‘fitting’ (decibilis). 69. Straightforward (directus), because one goes straight (in rectum).Beloved(dilectus),from‘caringfor’(diligentia); botharemarksofloving(diligere).70.‘Thicklysmeared’ (delibutus), anointed with oil as is the custom for athletes or youths in the wrestling arena. Hence (Terence, Phormio 856), “Anointed (delibutus) with joy,” that is, suffused with or full of joy. Over-indulged (delicatus), because one is fed with luxury (deliciae), living in feasts and daintiness of body.
71.Exhausted(defessus),“alwaysfeeble,”asiftheterm were ‘tired for a long time’ (diu fessus). Infirm (debilis), because one is made weak by bile (bilis), for bile is a humorthataffectsthebody.Pale(decolor),becausecolor (color) is lacking in someone. 72. Desperate (desperatus) is the common term for “bad” and “lost” and “without any hope (spes) of success”; it is likewise said of sick people who are weakened and given up as hopeless (sine spe). It was the custom among the ancients to set those
X.C.63–D.80
desperately ill in front of their doors, either to give up their last breath to the earth or to be able to be cured, perhaps, by passers-by who at some time had suffered with a similar disease. 73. Base (degener), or “ignoble,” either because one is of an inferior lineage or because, although born of the best lineage, one lives dishonorably.74.Decrepit(decrepitus),becauseoneisratherclose to death, as if he were turning toward the darkness of death,astowardthetwilight(crepusculum)timeofnight. Others say a decrepit person is not one who is borne away by old age, but one who has already left off chattering (crepare), that is, has ceased speaking. 75. Worthless (depretiatus), because one is base and not of any value (pretium). Dire (dirus), “very mean” and “horrible,” as if driven that way ‘by divine wrath’ (divina ira), for a dire condition means that which is brought on by divine wrath. In another sense dirus means “great.” 76. Gaping (dehiscens), “yawning (hiscere) very much,” for here the prefix de- is augmentative, as (Terence, Self-Tormentor 825), “I ‘very much love’ (deamare) you, Syrus.” Despising (despiciens), because one ‘looks down’ (deorsum aspicere)onsomeone,orholdsoneincontempt.Guileful (dolosus), “deceptive” or “malicious,” because he ‘practices guile’ (deludere), for to deceive someone he colors his hidden malice with charming words. 77. Doubtful (dubius), “uncertain,” as if in ‘two directions’ (duae viae). Accuser (delator), so called because one discloses (detegere) what was hidden (latere). A ‘dilatory person’ (dilator), because one delays (differre, ppl. dilatus) action. Indolent (desidiosus), “sluggish, lazy,” so called from ‘settling down’ (desidere), that is, from sitting too much. Similarly, the term ‘inactive ones’ (resides; singular reses) is from ‘remain seated’ (resideo) – for the prefix de-hereisaugmentative.78.Doting(delerus,i.e.delirus), dementedfromoldage,aftertheterm @ (“prattle”), orbecauseonewandersfromstraightthinkingasiffrom the lira – for a lira (i.e. the balk between furrows) is a kindofplowedlandwhenfarmers,atthetimeofsowing, make straight furrows in which the whole crop is set. 79. Demented (demens), the same as one who is amens, that is, without mind (mens), or suffering a loss of mental power. Doting (desipiens), because one begins to understand (sapere) less than one used to. 80. Condemned (damnatus) and condemnable (damnabilis): of these the former has already been sentenced, the latter can be sentenced. Glutton (degulator), because he is dedicated to the maw (gula).
 
X.E.81–F.98
E.	81. Eloquent (eloquens), “profuse in speech (eloquium).” Exertus, “ready in speaking,” because exerere (ppl. exertus) means “bring out” or “set forth clearly.” Erudite (eruditus), because not uncultivated (rudis), but already educated. 82. Expert (expertus), much skilled (peritus), for here the prefix ex- means “very much.” However, ‘lacking experience’ (expers), one who is without ‘practical knowledge’ (peritia) and understanding. ‘Decked out’ (exornatus), “very ornate (ornatus),” for the prefix ex- means “very,” as in ‘noble’ (excelsus), as if ‘very lofty (celsus),’ and ‘excellent’ (eximius), as if ‘very prominent (eminens).’ 83. Efficacious (efficax), so called because one has no difficulty in doing (facere) any kind of thing. Hence also effective (efficiens), so called from ‘accomplishing’ (facere). Hopeless (exspes), because one iswithouthope(spes).Destitute(expers),because‘without a share (pars),’ for such a one lacks a share. Deprived (exsors), because one is ‘without an allotment (sors).’ 84. Exile (exul), because one is ‘outside his native soil’ (extra solumsuum),asifsentbeyondhissoil,orwanderingoutside his soil, for those who go outside their soil are said to ‘be in exile’ (exulare).
85.Banished(extorris),becauseoneis‘outsidehisown land’ (extra terram suam), as if the term were exterris – but properly speaking one is banished when driven out by force and ejected from his native soil with terror (terror). Also extorris, driven ‘from one’s own land’ (ex terra sua). 86. Banished (extorris), ‘outside the land’ (extra terram), or ‘beyond one’s frontier’ (extra terminos suos), because one is frightened (exterrere). 87. Expeller (exterminator), not the one who is commonly said 7 H (“to be destroyed”),4 but the one who casts out and expels someone from the boundaries (terminus) of a city. Expelled (exterminatus), because such a one is driven out ‘beyond his boundaries’ (extra terminos). [Thus also] foreign (externus), because one is from an alien land (terra). 88. Needy (egens) and destitute (egenus), “indigent (indigens),” without a nation (gens) and without a family (genus). [Egenus . . .] ‘Poor’
(exiguus), very needy (egens), for the prefix ex- means “very.” Lank (exilis), “thin,” because one can ‘go out’ (exire) of a place even if it is narrow. 89. Emaciated (exesus), because one is ‘entirely eaten away’ (percomedere, ppl. percomesus), for such a one is withered, thin, lank. Drained(exhaustus),becauseoneisconsumedandmade empty (cf. haurio, ppl. haustus, “drain”). Feeble (exsanguis), because such a one is without blood (sanguis).
90. Lifeless (exanimis) means “dead” (cf. anima, “soul, life”). Further, we say exanimis or exanimus, as we say unanimus or unanimis (“of one mind”), and inermus or inermis (“unarmed”), and this is a matter of our whim. 91. ‘Burnt up’ (exustus) is said of one of whom nothing remains, as if it were ‘very burned’ (ustus), for the prefix ex- means “very.” Hateful (exosus) is so called from hatred (odium), for the ancients would say both odi (“I hate”) and osus sum (“I hate”; an alternative older form of the verb), and from this is exosus, which we use even though we no longer say osus. Destructive (exitiosus), because one is a cause of destruction (exitio) to many.
Executor (i.e. an official who summoned to court and enforced the court’s mandate), from ‘carry out’ (exequi, ppl. executus); the same person is an exactor (“superintendent, tax-gatherer”). 92. Burglar (effractor), because such a one is a breaker (cf.frangere, ppl. fractus, “break”) of locks. Fierce (efferatus), ‘affected with a savage (ferinus) spirit’ and passing beyond the nature of humans. Unrestrained (effrenatus), because such a one is impulsive and headlong and without the rein (frenum) of reason. 93. Eunuchus is a Greek term (i.e. L N9 ) meaning “eunuch” (spado). Although some of these have sexual intercourse there is no strength in their seed, for they possess and emit a fluid but it is useless and impotent for begetting. 94. A ‘worn out’ (effeta) woman, because she is exhausted from frequent childbearing (fetus), for incessant parturition makes her weak.
F. 95. Fluent (facundus), because one can speak easily (facilis). Merry (facetus), one who devotes himself to jokes and games in gestures and actions (factum), so called from ‘act’ (facere). Frugal (frugalis) is so called fromcrops(frux,gen.frugis),thatis,fromprofit(fructus) and parsimony, or, as others would have it, from moderation and temperance. 96. Money-lender (fenerator, i.e. faenerator), one who entrusts money to a debtor, as if ‘the handler of interest (faenus),’ for faenus is money. A feneratorinLatinisalsoonewhogivesandreceivesloans. Flamines (singular flamen) are the high priests of idols. 97. Happy (felix) is one who gives happiness (felicitas), happy,onewhoreceivesit,andhappythethingbywhich happiness is given, as a ‘happy time,’ a ‘happy place.’ 98. Trustworthy (fidelis), because the good such a person
4 The Greek form is passive; an active form meaning “to destroy” would fit the sense better.
 
says or promises ‘is done’ (fieri, 3rd person fit) by him. Willing(facilis,lit.“easy”),from‘doing’(facere),andnot sluggish. Sturdy (firmus), from whence also the word formosus (“good-looking”). Brave (fortis), because one bears (ferre, 3rd person fert) adversity or whatever happens – or, from ‘iron’ (ferrum), because one is tough and not softened. 99. Good-looking (formosus) is so called from appearance (forma); the ancients used formus for ‘warm’ and ‘heated,’ for heating arouses blood, [and] blood arouses beauty.
100. Foul (foedus) takes its name from goats and kids (haedus, also spelled aedus), with the letter f added. The ancients would use this with a serious connotation, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.502):
Defiling (foedare) with his blood the fires that he himself had consecrated.
Fragile (fragilis) is so called because it can easily be broken(frangere).101.Weary(fessus),asif‘split’(fissus),and no longer whole in health – and that is the general sense, for we say ‘weary in spirit’ – as (Vergil, Aen. 8.232):
Weary (fessus) he sinks back three times into the valley – and ‘weary in body,’ which is the more proper sense, and ‘weary of circumstances,’ with respect to the outcomeofcomingevents.Harassed(fatigatus),asif‘tossed by the fates’ (fatis agitatus). 102. Fearful (formidolosus), so called from formum (“warm thing”), that is, blood, because, when fleeing from the skin and the heart, the blood contracts – for fear congeals the blood, which when concentrated produces terror (formido), whence is the verse (Vergil, Aen. 3.30):
And my chilled blood coagulates with terror (formido).
Although a formidolosus person is fearful, it also means “fearsome.”103.Afool(fatuus)isthoughttobesocalled because he understands neither what he says (fari, 3rd person fatur) himself nor what others say. Some think that the term ‘fool’ derives originally from admirers of Fatua, the prophesying wife of Faunus, and that they were first called fatuus because they were immoderately stupefied by her prophecies, to the point of madness.
104. Patron (fautor), because one ‘gives favor’ (favere) and consent. Fashioner (fictor), so called from fashioning (fingere, ppl. fictus) and arranging something, as one who smoothes, treats, anoints, and brightens women’s hair. Liar (fallax), one who deceives by speaking (fari),
X.F.99–G.112
that is, by his talk. 105. Hot-headed (fervidus), “prone to anger,” for wrath inflames such a one. ‘Gnashing one’s teeth’ (frendens), because in a threatening way one crushes (frangere) and clenches his teeth. Growling (fremens)...Ferocious(ferox),becauseoneengagesinwildness (feritas), as a beast. 106. Thief (fur) is so called from ‘dark’ (furvus), that is, ‘dusky,’ for such a one practices at night. Factious (factiosus), in its bad sense, when we mean for it to be taken as “seditious,” but otherwise when we mean “popular,” and “powerful” and as if “of grand conduct (factio).” 107. Criminal (facinorosus), so called from the commission of a particular deed, for he does (facere) what harms (nocere) another. [Womanizer (femellarius),onedevotedtowomen,whomtheancients called mulierarius.] Debauched (flagitiosus), because one frequently solicits (flagitare) and desires sensual pleasure. 108. Rascal (furcifer) was once the term for one who, because of a petty offense, was forced to ‘carry a fork-shaped yoke’ (furcam ferre) along the road, more to shame the man than as a cause of torment, and to announcehissin,andwarnothersnottosininlikemanner. 109. Worthless (futilis; lit. “leaky”), “vain, useless, a chatterbox”; the term has a transferred sense from ‘pottery (fictilis) vessels’ that are empty and leaky and don’t hold what you put into them. 110. Fornicator (fornicarius) . . . Prostitute (fornicatrix), a woman whose body is public and common. Such bodies would lie prostrate underarches,placesthattheycallfornices–hencealsothe term ‘female fornicator’ (fornicaria). Vergil (Aen. 6.631: And with the archway (fornix) opposite.
111.A‘fertilewoman’(fecunda)issocalledfromoffspring (fetus), as if the word were fetunda, for she frequently bears children. Pregnant (feta) . . . Weeping (flens), as if shedding(fluere,presentparticiplefluens)tears.Fugitive (fugitivus): nobody is correctly so called except one who flees (fugere, 3rd person fugit) from a master, for if a little boy runs away from his nurse or from school he is not a fugitivus.
G.	112.Glorious(gloriosus),socalledfromanabundance of distinction (claritas), with the letter g exchanged for c. Gloriosus is so called from the laurel wreath (laurea) that is given to victors. Knowledgeable (gnarus), “knowing”; its opposite is ignorant (ignarus), “not knowing.” Grave (gravis, lit. “heavy”), “venerable.” Whence we also call contemptible people lightweight (levis). A person is
 
X.G.113–I.126
called grave for his good counsel and steadfastness, because he does not hop about with a light motion, but stands firm with a fixed gravity (gravitas) of constancy. 113. [Great (grandis) . . . Slender (gracilis) . . .] Aged (grandaevus), because one is ‘great in age’ (grandis aevo). Kindly (gratus), because one maintains kindness (gratia) – but ‘kindly’ is said only with regard to the mind, whereas ‘most pleasing’ (gratissimus) is said with regard to both the mind and the body. Obliging (gratificus),becauseone‘freelydoes’(gratisfacere)agooddeed. Generous (gratiosus), because he gives someone more thanonedeserves.114.Garrulous(garrulus)istheproper word for a person who is commonly called verbose (verbosus). When happiness befalls such people they neither can nor will be quiet. The term is taken from the bird calledjackdaw(graculus),whichconstantlychatterswith importunate loquacity and is never quiet. A debauchee (ganeo), “voluptuary,” though in hidden and subterranean places that the Greeks call  (cf. ganea, “disreputable chophouse”). Glutton (glutto), from maw (gula), that is, a gluttonous person (gulosus).
H.	115. Humble (humilis), as if inclined to the ground (humus). Honorable (honorabilis), as if the term were ‘suitable for honors’ (honore habilis), that is, ‘fit.’ 116. Decent (honestus), because such a one has no part of wickedness – for what is decency (honestas) but perpetual honor, that is, as if the term were ‘the condition of honor’ (honoris status)? Humane (humanus), because such a one has love and feelings of sympathy for humans (homines). Hence also derives the term ‘human kindness’ (humanitas), because of which we watch over one another. 117. Capable (habilis), because such a one is suitable and fit for handling (habere) something. Burdened (honerosus, i.e. onerosus, in classical Latin “burdensome”) is more than honeratus (“burdened”), just as scelerosus (“vicious”) is more than sceleratus (“tainted with wickedness”). Hirsute (hirsutus), because such a one is hairy (hirtus) and shaggy with hair.
118. Hypocrite (hypocrita) from the Greek (i.e. I! , “play-actor, dissembler”) is translated into Latin as “dissembler” (simulator). Such a one outwardly appears as good, while he is evil within, for I! - means “false” and  means “judgment.” 119. Moreover, the name of hypocrita derives from the appearance of those who go in theatrical spectacles with countenance concealed, marking their face with blue and red and other pigments, holding masks of linen and plaster of Paris decorated with various colors, sometimes also smearing their necks and hands with white clay, in order to arrive at the coloring of the character they portray and to deceive the public while they act in plays. Now they looklikeaman,nowawoman,nowamanwithbarbered hair, now with long, now a woman with an old crone’s, a maiden’s, or some other appearance, with age and sex varied, to deceive the people while they act in plays. 120. The sense of this theatrical hypocritical appearance has been transferred to those who proceed with a false face and pretend to be what they are not. They cannot be called hypocrites from the moment they reveal themselves outwardly. 121. Interred (humatus), because one is covered with soil (humus), that is, buried.
I. 122. Talented (ingeniosus), one who has the power within (intus) of producing (gignere, ppl. genitus) any sort of art. Discoverer (inventor), because he ‘comes upon’ (invenire) what he is searching for. Hence also the thing called an invention (inventio). If we reconsider the origin of the word, what else does it sound like if not that ‘to invent’ (invenire) is to ‘come upon’ (in + venire) that which is sought for? 123. Translator (interpres),becauseheisthemedium‘betweenthesides’(inter partes) of two languages when he translates. But the person who interprets (interpretari) God is also called an interpreter for the humans to whom he reveals divine mysteries [because he mediates ‘between’ (inter) that which he translates]. 124. Judge (iuridicus) [because he ‘tells the ordinances’ (iura dicere) of the laws]. Potential (indoles) in the proper sense is a certain image of future strength. A righteous (iustus) person is so called because he keeps the laws (ius) and lives according to the law. 125. Innocent (innox), because such a one does not harm (nocere); innocuus, one who has not been harmed – but among the ancients there is no difference between the senses of the words. Cheerful (ilaris, i.e. hilaris) is a Greek word (i.e. , “cheerful”). ‘Given to merriment’ (iocundus), because such a one is always ready for jokes(iocus)andmerry-making–fromthefrequentative element (i.e. -cund-), as is iracundus (“given to wrath”; cf. ira, “wrath”). Jesting (iocosus), making jokes (iocus).
126. Renowned (inclitus) is a Greek term, for the Greeks call ‘glorious’  . Illustrious (inlustris) is a term for fame, because a person shines in many ways because of the splendor of his family or wisdom or
 
strength; the opposite of an illustrious person is one of obscure birth. [Suitable (idoneus) . . .] 127. Hale (incolumis) has its name from column (columna), as if upright, strong, and stable. Unfading (immarcescibilis), uncorrupted and eternal, because it is without decay (marcor) and faintness. Undefiled (intemeratus), uncorrupted and violated by no audacity (temeritas). 128. Feeble (infirmus), because without ‘good looks’ (forma). Weak(imbecillus),asifthetermwere‘withoutawalkingstick (baculum),’ fragile and unsteady. Empty (inanis), trifling. Fickle (inconstans), because such a one is not stable (stabilis), but what pleases him in turn displeases him. 129. One is boasting (iactans) or arrogant because he is not satisfied with the institutions of his elders but seeks his own individual way of righteousness and sanctity. Wrathful (iracundus) is so called because such a one is driven into a fury by inflamed blood, for ur5 means “flame,” and wrath (ira) inflames. 130. Instigator (incentor),becausesuchaonekindles(incendere)andinflames. An instigator because such a one fires (succendere) the hearts of other people to vice by his wicked suggestions, and inflames them by persuasion. 131. Unforgivable (inexpiabilis),becausesuchaoneisneverforgiven(expiare), and would never be exculpated. ‘Not praiseworthy’ (inlaudabilis), not because one has not been praised (laudare), but because one has not deserved to be praised. Irate (iratus), driven by anger (ira).
132.Impious(impius),becauseoneiswithoutthepiety (pietas) of religion. Unjust (iniquus) in the strict sense is so called because one is not even-handed (aequus), but is unfair (inequalis). However, between impious and unjustthereissometimesadifference,inthatallimpious persons are unjust, but not all the unjust are impious. Thus impious means “not of the faith,” and such a one is called impious because he is a stranger to the piety of religion.Ontheotherhand,anunjustpersonissocalled because he is not fair but is stained with wicked works – and this is the case [if] he were to be appraised in the nameofChristianity.133.Enemy(inimicus),becausenot afriend(amicus),butanadversary.Nowtwothingsmake an enemy: deceit and terror. Terror, because they are afraid; deceit, because they have suffered evil. 134. Envious (invidus), so called from gazing (cf. videre, “see”)
5 Lindsay indicates that this term is a corruption. The original may well have been pur, transliterating Greek !N, “fire.” Cf. also urere, “burn.”
X.I.127–I.142
at the happiness of another person. Enviable (invidiosus) is a person who suffers the envy of another. Hated (invisus), “odious,” so called from envy (invidia) and jealousy. 135. ‘Unable to testify’ (intestabilis), one whose testimony (testimonium) is worthless, and what he says would be null and void. Infamous (infamis), not of good repute (fama). Relentless (improbus), so called because he presses hard upon one who is refusing (prohibere). 136. Importunate (importunus), “restless,” because such aonehasnoharbor(portus),thatis,placeofrest–hence importunate people are quickly driven into shipwreck, as it were. Unbridled (infrenis), that is, one who is not controlled by a bridle (frenum), as (Vergil, Aen. 4.41):
The unbridled (infrenus) Numidians.
137.Gnashing(infrendens)properlyspeakingisgrinding the teeth against each other. Also grind (frendere) means to crush (frangere) with the teeth – hence infants not yet having teeth are called nefrendes. Gluttonous (ingluviosus), so called from the maw (gula) and voracity (voracitas). 138. Inglorious (ingloriosus), becauseoneiswithoutglory(gloria),thatis,withouttriumphs. Again, inglorius, “not remembered with glory.” Unshapely(informis),“huge,”notthatsuchaonehasno propershape(forma),butthathehasagreatsizebeyond the shapely. 139. ‘Hardened crook’ (inveterator), because he has much experience ‘of long standing’ (vetus, gen. veteris) in evildoing. Horrible (immanis), because not good, but cruel [and] terrible, for manus means “good.” Hence also by antiphrasis the gods called Manes, in no way good. 140. Immunis, “not at all generous (munificus),” as in the old proverb, “One’s fellow-citizens hate ‘anyone who gives nothing’ (immunis).” Again, immunis, one who does not fulfill his duties (munia), that is, perform his official function, for he is devoid of any specialclaim.141.Indemnified(indemnis),becauseonelives without a penalty (damnum), and without any blame or danger. Unskilled (iners), “without a craft (ars),” and for this reason useless for any work. Unarmed (inermis), either“withoutweapons(arma)”or“withoutstrength,” fortheterm‘weapons’[istaken]inageneralwaytorefer to strength. 142. Listless (ignavus), “ignorant of the way” (ignarusviae),thatis,thewayofreasonandlife.Ignorant (ignarus), “not knowing (gnarus),” that is, unknowing, that is, without a nose (nares), for the ancients called knowing “sniffing out.” Moreover, ignarus means two
 
X.I.143–L.158
things: either one who ‘knows not’ (ignorare), or one who is not known. Ignarus, one who knows not.
143. Unmindful (immemor), one who has forgotten, forsuchaonehaslosthismemory(memoria).Unknowing (inscius), because one is without knowledge (scientia).Naive(idiota),“aninexperiencedperson”;theword isGreek(cf. :"E ,“privateperson,ordinaryperson”). Inexperienced (imperitus), “without experience (peritia).” 144. Ill-advised (inconsultus), because such a one does not take counsel (consilium). Ill-advised, because without counsel and unaware of things and ignorant. Unsuitable(ineptus),theoppositeofsuitable(aptus)and as if the word were inaptus. 145. Poor (inops), one who is withoutland,forweunderstandthatlandiswealth(ops), because it brings wealth by being fruitful. Others understand inops to mean “not entombed, unburied,” one for whom no empty burial mound has been raised for whenhedies.146.Ignoble(ignobilis),becausesuchaone is low-born (ignotus) and base (vilis) and of an obscure family, whose very name is not known. Goatish (ircosus, i.e. hircosus), because one stinks with the fetid sweat of his body. Low-born (ignotus), ignoble (ignobilis), or arriving unexpectedly. 147. Unexpected (improvisus), so called because one is suddenly present, and not ‘seen far before’ (porro ante visus). Informer (index), a betrayer, from‘pointingout’(indicare).Indigenous(indigena),so calledbecauseoneis‘fromtherebegotten’(indegenitus), that is, born in the same place. 148. Shameless (impudens), because shame (pudor) and modesty (pudicitia) arefarfromsuchaone.Shameless(impudicus),socalled from ‘anus’ (podex), for putor means a stench. Incestuous (incestus), so called from illicit intercourse – as if the word were incastus (“not chaste”) – as one who defiles a holy virgin or someone closely related to himself.
149. Internicida is one who bears false witness and by it kills (occidere) a person. Infitiator, “one who denies,” becausehedoesnotconfess(fateri)butstrivesagainstthe truthwithalie.[Impostor(impostor)...]150.Interceptor (in classical Latin, “usurper”), properly speaking is the name for one of two (inter duos) rivals who is removed from public life. 151. Insidious (insidiosus), because such a one ‘lies in ambush’ (insidiare), for properly speaking insidere (lit. “to occupy”) is to await someone guilefully. Hence also ambush (insidiae) has its name. Enceinte (incincta), that is, without a girdle (cinctus), because the enlargedwombdoesnotpermitapregnantwomantobe tightlygirded.152.Unmarried(investis),thatis,‘without a garment (vestis),’ for such a one does not yet have a stola, the garment that is the sign of the marriage of a maiden. Parasite (iscurra, i.e. scurra), so called because suchaoneattendsonsomeoneforthesakeoffood(esca).
K.	153. Katholicus, “universal,” a Greek term (i.e.  ). Dear (karus) is a Greek term (cf. 9, “kindness”), as is caritas (“charity”) also, whence also caristia (“annual family dinner”).
L.	154. Distinguished (luculentus), because bright (cf. lux, gen. lucis, “light”) in speech and splendid in one’s words. Reader (lector) is so called from reading (legere, ppl. lectus), that is, ‘running over’ (i.e. a text), whence a ship is said to ‘run by’ (legere) whatever it passes. Thus legere, “pass by, go by,” as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 3.127):
We pass by (legere) straits made rough by many lands.
Again, lector, from ‘gathering’ (colligere, ppl. collectus) with one’s mind what one reads, as if the term were collector – as in this verse (Vergil, Ecl. 3.92):
You who gather (legere) flowers.
155. Prating (loquax), not an eloquent (eloquens) person. Copious (laetus, lit. “happy”), from amplitude (latitudo). ‘Rich in lands’ (locuples), as if the term were ‘full of estate property’ (locis plenus) and the owner of many properties, as Cicero teaches in the Second Book of his Republic (16): “And with a great production of sheep and cattle, because then their business was in livestock and the possession of places (locus), for which reason they were called wealthy (pecuniosus) and ‘rich in lands’ (locuples).” 156. Generous (liberalis), so called because one gives freely (libenter) and doesn’t grumble. Bountiful (largus) . . . Tall (longus), so called from line (linea), because such a person is stretched out. Long-lived (longaevus), as if ‘of a long age’ (longum aevum) and for a long time.
157. Long-suffering (longanimis), or great-spirited (magnanimis; cf. animus, “spirit”), because such a one is disturbed by no passion but suffers all things to be endured. The opposite of this is pusillanimous (pusillanimis), petty and not steadfast in any trial. Of this sort it is written (cf. Proverbs 14:17): “The pusillanimous man, extremely foolish.” 158. Light-minded (levis), so called from the inconstancy of one’s wavering, because with a light (levis) movement of the mind one desires now this,
 
now that. Slippery (lubricus), because one slips (labi). Gliding (labens) sometimes means “swift,” as (Vergil, Aen. 11.588):
Glide down (labi), nymph, from the sky, and (Vergil, Aen. 4.223):
Glide down (labi) on your wings.
For a gliding down is faster than running. 159. Bandit (latro),awaylayer,socalledfrom‘hiding’(latere).Aelius (i.e.AeliusStilo,fragment)says,“Alatroisalatero–from the word ‘to hide’ (latere) – a waylayer.”6 Lanista, “gladiator,” that is, an executioner, so called from the Etruscan language, from ‘tear in pieces’ (laniare), with regard to bodies. 160. Provoker (lacessitor), so called with transferred sense from dogs or wild beasts that provoke by ‘lacerating’ (lacerare). Pimp (leno), an arranger of lewd practice, because he charms the minds of wretched people and seduces them by cajoling (delinire, i.e. delenire). Libidinous(libidinosus),becauseonedoeswhat‘ispleasing’ (libet). Libidinous from (the god) Liber, who is [depicted with the body] of a girl. Voluptuous (luxuriosus), as if dissolute (solutus) with pleasure (voluptas); whence also limbs moved from their places are called luxus (“dislocated”). Lascivious (lascivus), because such a one is loose (laxus), that is, dissolute and vain.
161. Panic-stricken (lymphaticus), because one fears water (cf. lympha, “water”), one whom the Greeks call I"   (“hydrophobic”). In the strict sense lymphaticusisthewordforonewhocontractsadiseasefrom water,makinghimrunabouthitherandthither,orfrom the disease gotten from a flow of water. But poets now have taken over this term for ‘madmen.’ 162. [Sluggish (languidus)...]Wan(luridus),becausesuchaoneispallid, so called from ‘leather strip’ (lorum), because one’s skinlookslikethis.Leprous(leprosus),socalledfromthe excessive itching (pruritus) of mange, whence it should be written with a p. 163. One-eyed (luscus), one who sees the light (lux, gen. lucis) only partly, and similarly dimsighted (luscitiosus), one who cannot see in the evening.
6	Stilo’s expression means “from the word ‘to hide’ (ob latere)” ratherthan“fromtheword‘side’(oblatere,ablativeoflatus),”though Isidoremayhaveunderstoodthelatterconstruction.Thepreposition ob may govern the ablative in Late Latin, but rarely if ever in Stilo’s time (second to first century bce).
7	The word steron is scribally corrupt; perhaps compare Greek
 ?, “fixed position.”
X.L.159–M.171
The ancients called a one-eyed person cocles, whence we read of the Cyclopes called Coclites, because they are thought to have had a single eye. Washed (lotus, the ppl. of lavare, “wash”), the same as lautus, thatis,clean. Lupa (lit. “she-wolf”), a prostitute, so called from her rapaciousness, because she seizes wretched people for herself and takes possession of them.
M. 164. The term ‘pitying’ (misericors) is assigned from one’shavingcompassionforanother’sdistress(miseria), and from this pity (misericordia) is so called, because it makes miserable (miserum) the heart (cor) of one who grieves over the distress of another. However, this etymology does not apply in every case, because in God there is misericordia without any ‘misery of heart’ (cordismiseria).165.Glorified(mactus),‘moreadvanced’ (magis auctus) in glory. The word is taken from sacrificial rites, for whenever incense or wine would be poured on a victim they would say, “This bull is mactus by wine or incense,” that is, the offering is perfected and more advanced. 166. One is called munificent (munificus) either because he gives a lot of gifts (munus) to someone, or because he fulfills his duty (munus), that is, the service that he owes. Thus also ‘performing service’ (munifex), because one undertakes duties. 167. Magnanimous (magnanimis), because one has a ‘great spirit’ (magnus animus) and great virtue. Its opposite is pusillanimous (pusillanimis). Magnificent (magnificus), a term derived from ‘doing great things’ (magna facere). 168. Docile (mansuetus), “mild” or “tamed,” as if ‘accustomed to the hand’ (manu assuetus). Moderate (modestus), so called from measure (modus) and temperance (temperies), doing something neither too much nor too little. Mild (mitis), “gentle and docile,” yielding to wickedness and silently enduring injustice, as if the term were mutus (“mute”). 169. Mute (mutus), because the sound one makes is not words but a lowing (mugitus), for such a one sends the breath of his voice through his nostrils, in a kind of lowing. Memor, one who keeps something in memory, or one who is kept in memory.
170. Master (magister, also meaning “teacher”), “greater in station” (maior in statione), for steron in Greek means “station.”7 Attendant (minister), “lesser in station” (minor in statione), or because such a one performs the service that he owes with his hands (manus). 171. ‘Very great’ (maximus), ‘more distinguished’ (magis eximius) in merit, age, honor, eloquence, valor, or in
 
X.M.172–N.188
everything. Greater (maior) . . . Lesser (minor) . . . Least (minimus), from the number ‘one’ (monas), because there is no other number below it. 172. Modicus, “little,” but incorrectly; otherwise, “reasonable,” “moderate” (moderatus), from measure (modus) and temperance. Mediocre (mediocris), because a small amount (modicum) is sufficient for such a one. 173. A wretch (miser)isproperlysocalledbecausehehaslost(amittere, perfect amisi) all happiness. According to Cicero, however, it properly means “dead”: in the Tusculan Disputations (1.5) he called dead people ‘wretches’ because they have already lost their life. Pitiable (miserabilis), because one is ‘liable to misery’ (miseriae habilis). 174. Gloomy (mestus, i.e. maestus), sad by nature, not from circumstances, because it is innate in the spirit and the mind (mens, gen. mentis), whence the term mestus. 175. Indigent (mendicus), so called because one has less (minus) from which he can carry on life – or, because it was the custom among the ancients for a destitute beggar to closehismouthandextendhishand,asif‘speakwiththe hand’ (manu dicere). Liar (mendax), one who deceives the mind (mens) of another.
176. Malicious (malignus), because one carries out a vow or work of malice (malitia). Evil (malus) is named after black bile; the Greeks call black B. Hence those people are called melancholy (melancholicus) who flee human intercourse and are suspicious of dear friends. Malitiosus,“worsethanevil(malus),”becausefrequently evil. Moreover, from malus the comparative is peior (“worse, more evil”); from bonus (“good, a good person”) the comparative is deterior (“worse, not as good”). 177. Better (melior), so called as if ‘softer’ (mollior); not hard or steely, for a better thing is as if it were softer. Threatening (minax, lit. “projecting”), from the look of one’s eyes when they gleam madly, so that one seeing them becomes more fearful. Threatener (minator) and warner (monitor) – but a warner is so called because he announces good things, a threatener, because he announcesunfavorablethings.178.Appeaser(mulcator), because one flatters (mulcere) with charming words in order to change a person’s mind. The term is transferred from mulsum (“honey-wine”), that is, what is usually taken to soothe a sore throat or a belly filled with something bad. 179. A metator is the name for a person who lays out campsites, after the word metiri (“to measure”). Lucan (cf. Civil War 1.382):
Let the bold metator come into the Hesperian fields.
Effeminate (mollis, lit. “soft”), because such a one disgraces the vigor of his sex with his enervated body, and is softened (emollire) like a woman (mulier).
180. Thin (macer), from thinness (macies), and ‘thinness’fromadultery(moechia),becauseimmoderatesexual desire makes people thin. Maimed (mancus), “lame of hand (manu ancus).” 181. Moribund (moribundus), “like one dying (moriri),” just as vitabundus (in classical Latin, “avoiding”) means “like one living” (cf. vita, “life”). When we say ‘about to die’ (moriturus), the person is indeed about to die, but when we say moribundus, he is not actually about to die, but is like a person who is dying.182.Aprostitute(meretrix)issocalledbecauseshe earns (merere) a price for an act of lust. Hence also the term ‘houses of prostitution’ (meritoria taberna). Also soldiers are said to earn (merere) when they receive their wages. 183. Moron (morio), so called from death (mors), because such a one is not lively in intellect. Mule-driver (mulio),socalledfrommule(mulus),becauseonedrives vehicles with them.
N. 184. Noble (nobilis), not base, one whose name and family are recognized. Nubile (nubilis), “marriageable” (ad nubendum habilis). Nobody (nemo), derived from ‘human being’ (homo), that is, ne homo (“not a person”), that is, ‘no one.’ Moreover, ‘no one’ (nullus), as if neullus(“notanyone”).Noone,notanyone.185.Worthless (nihili) is compounded of nil (“not”) and hilum (“a whit”). Varro says hilum means the pith of the giant fennel, which the Greeks call "  (“asphodel”), and thus we say ‘nothing’ (nihilum) in the same way the Greeks say  L"P N (“not a bit”). 186. Most people distinguish mischievous (nequam) from evil (malus), reckoning the latter as destructive, the former as trifling, as Munatius says (unidentified fragment): “This youth is mischievous,butheisnotevil”–thatis,badinatrifling, not a destructive way. Other people confuse these terms as if both mean the same thing. 187. The ancients would haveitthatnequamissocalledbecausesuchaoneis‘not anything’ (nec quicquam), that is, because he is nothing. Neuter (neuter), “neither this nor that,” as if one would sayneuterque(“noteither”).188.Abominable(nefarius), “not worthy of spelt (far)”; by this type of food human life was first sustained. [Otherwise, abominable, “not to bespokenof”(cf.fari).][Rearer(nutritor),asifonewere an instructor by means of nodding gestures (nutus).] Unspeakable(nefandus),thatis,onewhooughtnoteven to be named (cf. fari, gerundive fandus, “speak”).
 
189. A nuntius is [both] “one who ‘brings a message’ (nuntiare)” and “what is announced,” that is, O  and  (“messenger” and “message”). But nuntius as “messenger” is a word of masculine gender, but “that which he announces” is of neuter gender, as nuntiumandpluralnuntiawithneuterforms.190.‘Nazarite’ (Nazaraeus), that is, consecrated to God. Formerly a Nazarite meant one who would not cut his hair, retaining it as holy, and would countenance nothing tainted, abstaining from wine and every intoxicating drink that subvertsthemindfromitshealthysoundness(seeNumbers 6:2–5). 191. ‘Triflers’ (nugas, i.e. nugae) is a Hebrew term, for so it is used in the prophets, where Zephaniah says (3:18): “The triflers (nugae; accusative nugas) that were departed from the law (I will gather together)” – so that we have reason to know that the Hebrew language is the mother of all languages. 192. Gossip (nugigerulus; cf. gerere, “carry”), because such a one is the messenger of scandal. Negligent (neglegens), [as if the term were] ‘not reading’ (nec legens). 193. ‘Prodigal’ (nepos), so called from a certain kind of scorpion (i.e. nepa) that consumes its offspring except for the one that has settled on its back; for in turn the very one that has been saved consumes the parent; hence people who consume the property of their parents with riotous living are called prodigals. Hence also nepotatio means riotous living, by which any belongings are surely consumed. 194. Black (niger), as if the word were ‘clouded’ (nubiger), because it is not clear but cloaked in darkness. Hence we also call a cloudy day ‘foul’ (teter, i.e. taeter).
O. 195. Orthodoxus, “of correct renown (recta gloria).”8 Orator (orator), so called from mouth (os, gen. oris), and named from ‘complete a speech’ (perorare), that is, “speak,” for to orate (orare) is to speak. 196. Obedient (obaudiens), from auris (ear), because such a one hears (audire) the one commanding. Guest (ospes, i.e. hospes, also meaning “host”), because he brings his ‘foot to the door’ (ostio pes). Ospes, “easy to deal with, adaptable, with open door”; from this term also a person is called hospitable (ospitalis, i.e. hospitalis). 197. Hater (osor), “inimical,” so called from hatred (odium), just as the word ‘lover’ (amator) is from ‘love’ (amor).
8 Isidore translates the Greek bases of orthodoxus literally: C, “straight, correct”; "?, “opinion, reputation.” Greek C " ? in fact means “right opinion” and orthodoxus means “orthodox, of correct belief.”
X.N.189–P.203
Osor is of common gender. Hateful (odibilis), “liable to hatred” (odium). Obsitus, “besieged” (obsessus), that is, surrounded with ambushes (insidiae) on all sides. 198. Obscene (obscenus), of impure desire, so called from the vice of the Oscans (Obsci). Dull (obtunsus), “rather sluggish and dense,” as if ‘battered’ (tunsus) from every side. Resolute (obnixus), “resistant (contranisus; cf. niti, ppl. nisus, ‘strive’) and liable to struggle.” Bound (obnexus), because one is tangled in the bonds (nexus) of guilt. 199. Charmer (oblectator), as if ‘with milk (lac, gen. lactis),’ means “with guile,” as Terence (Andria 648):
Unless you had cajoled (lactare, homophone of lactare, “give milk to”) me, a lover.
Whence also the verb ‘delight’ (oblectare). Detractor (obtrectator), one who is malicious and who by hindering and obstructing doesn’t permit someone to advance and become greater. 200. Childless (orbus), because one has no children, as if the word were ‘with eyes missing’ (cf. orbis, “circle, eye”). Workman (opifex), because he ‘makes a work’ (opus facere). Shepherd (opilio), [“keeper of sheep (ovis)”] [“feeder of sheep,” as if ovilio].
P. 201. Prudent (prudens), as if ‘seeing from afar’ (porro videns). For he is foreseeing, and sees the outcome of uncertain things beforehand. Patient (patiens) is so calledfrom‘striking’–forpavere(i.e.pavire)is“strike”– for such a one is beaten and endures it. 202. Perfected (perfectus), one to whom nothing can be added. Among grammarians no comparative degree is added to this word, because if one says “that one is more perfect” the firstonewillnotbeperfect.203.Good-looking(pulcher), so called from the appearance of the skin, because that is pellis (“skin”); afterwards this word was generalized, for the ‘good looks’ (pulchritudo) of a person are in one’s face, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.589):
In face and shoulders like a god, or in the hair, as (cf. Aen. 1.589):
For indeed (she endowed him with) beautiful hair, or in the eyes, as (Aen. 1.591):
She endowed his eyes with happy grace, or in fair skin, as (Aen. 1.592):
The kind of beauty that craftsmen give to ivory,
 
X.P.204–P.218
or in features, as (cf. Cicero, Second Action Against Verres [2.89]): “The figure and features of the guest delighted you much more,” or in tall stature, as Turnus (Aen. 11.683):
He turns in their midst, and is a whole head taller.
204. Seductive (pellax), from ‘enticing’ (pellicere). Perspicax (in classical Latin, “sharp-sighted”), “splendid,” because one shines (perlucere). [Continuous (perpetuus) . . .] Perennial (perennis), because ‘continuing through the years’ (perpetuus annis). 205. Protector (praesul), because such a one is ‘first in caring’ (praeesse sollicitudine). Overseer (praepositus; lit. one ‘placed before’: positus, ppl. of ponere + prae), so called because he is the administrator and director of underlings and servants. Patrons (patronus) are so called from father (pater), because they have a fatherly affection for their clients, so that they govern them like fathers. 206. Paedagogus (i.e. a slave who took children to school and supervised their behavior) is the person to whom children are assigned. It is a Greek term (i.e. !"A, from !@, “child”; O, “lead”), and it is a compound word because he ‘conducts children’ (pueros agere), that is, he leads them and restrains them in their childish play. 207. Present (praesens), so called because one is ‘before the senses’ (prae sentibus), that is, before the eyes, which are the senses of the body. Superior (prior), because one is first (primus) in order, and ‘first,’ as if the word were praeminens (“pre-eminent”). [First (primus)...Last(postremus)...]208.Powerful(potens), extending (patere) widely in one’s property; hence also ‘power’ (potestas), because it extends for him in whatever direction he chooses, and no one closes him in, none can stand in his way. ‘Very rich’ (praeopimus), well-supplied with “goods (opes) beyond (prae) other people.” 209. Moneyed (pecuniosus): Cicero (Republic 2.16; see 155 above) relates that at first those people were so called who had a lot of livestock (pecunia), that is, cattle (pecus), for so the ancients would call such people. However, gradually, through loose use of the term, the other meaning evolved.
210. Steadfast (pervicax) properly means one who ‘perseveres to victory’ (ad victoriam perseverare) in what he sets out to do, for the ancients used the word vica for our victoria. I think that from this term comes the word for the plant ‘vetch’ (vicia), that is, victorialis (i.e. another plant name). 211. Nimble (pernix) derives from ‘striving through’ (perniti), that is, “persevering in one’s efforts.” Others understand it to mean “swift of foot,” forpernicitas(“swiftness”)hastodowithfeet,as(Vergil, Aen. 11.718):
Flashing with swift (pernix) feet, just as celeritas (“speed”) has to do with wings, as (Aen.
3.243):
(Harpies) soaring with speedy (celer) flight to the sky.
212. Sluggish (piger), as if ‘afflicted in the feet’ (pedibus aeger), for such a one is slow to move forward. The term through usage passed over to apply to the mind. All-night (pernox), ‘keeping watch at night’ (pervigilans nocte). [Persevering (perseverans) . . .] Stubborn (pertinax), “shamelessly hanging on,” as if ‘holding fast’ (pertinens). 213. Petulans nowadays means “bold-faced” and “saucy,” but formerly “cruelly demanding people” and, strictlyspeaking,theagentsofmoneylenderswhowould exactwhatwasowedfrequentlyandharshly,calledpetulantes from pursuing (petere).
214. Forward (procax), properly the same as ‘greedy’ (petax),fortodemand(procare)istoseek(petere).Hence asuitorformarriageiscalledprocus.215.Prodigal(prodigus), “a voluptuary and spendthrift,” who ‘drives far away’ (porro agere) everything, and as it were ‘throws it away’ (proicere). Fugitive (profugus) properly means one who wanders far from his own land, as if the term wereporrofugatus(“drivenfar”).Foreigner(peregrinus), one set far from his native country, just as alienigena (“born in another country”). 216. Far-flung (proiectus), as if ‘flung far’ (procul iactatus) and wide, just as ‘he brought forth’ (producere) is as if ‘he brought someone far’ (porro . . . ducere), and ‘he called forth’ (provocare), as if ‘he called someone far’ (porro . . . vocare). Projecting (proiectus), ‘thrown out far’ (porro eiectus) and ‘thrust forth’ (proiactatus), whence also (Vergil, Aen. 3.699):
And the projecting (proiectus) rocks, that is, thrust far out (porro iactatus). Proscribed (proscriptus),onewhosegoodsareopenlyandpubliclylisted (scribere, ppl. scriptus, i.e. for confiscation). Prescript (praescriptus) means an order, like the prescripts of jurists. 218. ‘Girded up’ (procinctus), “armed and ready”; whence the term in procinctu (“in arms”), that is, when men take up arms for war. Praecinctus, because one puts something in front of oneself by which he is girded (praecingere). Whence it was said concerning the Lord
 
(cf.John13:5):“Hewasgirded(praecinctus)withatowel, and he washed the feet of his disciples.”
219. A raider (praedo) is one who invades a foreign province with plundering, called ‘raider’ from stealing booty (praeda), and a raider is someone who possesses booty. Plunderer (praedator), that is, the one to whom some of the booty (praeda) is owed. 220. Kidnapper (plagiator), after the term !  (“crooked”), that is, “oblique,” because he does not attack by a straight path, but by inveigling with guile. Pirates (pirata) are plunderers of the sea, so called from their burning of the passing ships that they capture, for ! means “fire.” 221. Messenger (pugillator), because he carries pieces of money from one hand (cf. pugillus, “handful”) to another. Embezzler (peculator), because he steals public money (pecunia). Traitor (proditor), because such a one discloses (detegere). Again, a traitor is a destroyer (perditor), as (Vergil, Aen. 1.252):
We are betrayed (prodere, here also “ruined”) because of the wrath of one.
222. Treacherous (perfidus), because fraudulent and without good faith (fides), as if ‘losing faith’ (perdens fidem).Perjured(periurus),onewho‘falselyswears’(perpere iurare), that is, swears wrongly. However, the verb form does not have the r, as we say peiuro (“I perjure”) and deiero (“I swear”). 223. ‘False accuser’ (praevaricator), an advocate in bad faith, one who either neglects things that will be harmful when he prosecutes, or neglects things that will be profitable when he defends, or presents the case ineptly or doubtfully, having been corrupted by bribes. Cicero (unidentified fr.): “Why so very perverse (praevarus)?” – that is, extremely crooked (varus).
224. Seductive (pellax), “guileful and false,” from ‘skin’ (pellis), that is, ‘face,’ for such a one smiles on the outside in order to deceive, but bears malice within. Impious (profanus), as if the term were porro a fano (“far fromthesanctuary”),forsuchaoneisnotallowedtotake part in holy rites. 225. Parricide (parricida) is the proper word for someone who kills his own parent (parens), although some of the ancients called this a parenticida becausetheactofparricidecanalsobeunderstoodasthe
9 Isidore is treating two verbs as one: pavere, “to be in a state of fear,” and pavire, “to strike.” At section 201 above he uses the form pavere for pavire.
X.P.219–R.234
homicide (homicidium) of anybody, since one ‘human being’ (homo) is the equal (par) of another. 226. Persecutor (persecutor) is not always understood in a bad sense. From this term also comes ‘finished up’ (persecutus), that is, ‘thoroughly followed up’ (perfecte secutus). 227. A publican (publicanus) is one who gathers the public taxes, or one who runs after the lucre of the world through public (publicus) business, whence such a one is named. 228. Sinner (peccator), so called from concubine (pelex, i.e. paelex), that is, prostitute, as if the term were ‘seducer’ (pelicator). Among the ancients this term signified only such shameful persons, but afterwards the term passed into use for any wicked person. 229. Prostitutes (prostituta), “whores,” from their ‘sitting in public’ (prosedere; cf. proseda, “prostitute”) at flophouses or brothels; such a one is properly called pelex in Greek (cf. !, “concubine”); in Latin, concuba, and so called from fallacia, that is, “cunning deceit, guile, and
trickery.”
230.Crooked(procurvus),asifcurved(curvus)lengthwise. Alarmed (pavidus) is one whom agitation of mind disturbs; such a one has a strong beating of the heart, a moving of the heart – for to quake (pavere) is to beat, whence also the term pavimentum (beaten floor; cf. pavire, “ram down”).9 231. A rustic (petro) and a boor (rupex) are so named from the hardness of stones (cf. petra and rupes, both meaning “rock”). Pusillanimous(pusillanimis),onewith‘verylittlecourage’(pusillus animus). Wanton (petulcus), so called from ‘eagerly desiring’ (appetere), whence we call prostitutes petulcae. [Long-lived (productus) . . .] [Small (pisinnus) . . .]
Q.	232. Quaestor (quaestor, i.e. a prosecutor), so called from investigating (quaerere, ppl. quaesitus), as if the term were quaesitor. ‘Financially successful’ (quaestuosus)...233.Complaining(querimoniosus)...Querulous (querulus), one who brings a complaint (querella). Calm (quietus), because such a one is untroubled in his own spirit, troubling no one.
R.	234. Religious (religiosus), says Cicero (On the Nature of the Gods 2.72), is so called from ‘re-reading’ (relegere): onewhoreconsidersand,sotospeak,re-readsthethings that pertain to divine worship. They were called religious people from ‘re-reading’ in the same way that fastidious (elegens, i.e. elegans) is from ‘choose’ (elegere, i.e. eligere), caring (diligens) from ‘care for’ (diligere),
 
X.R.235–S.247
intelligent (intellegens) from ‘understand’ (intellegere). 235.Areasoner(rationator)iscalledagreatman,because such a one is able to give a reason (ratio) for all the things that are considered marvelous. Reviser (retractator), one who undertakes something anew, for to revise (retractare) means to undertake anew what you have left undone. 236. Reconverting (resipiscens, lit. “returning to one’s senses”), because such a one recovers (recipere) his mind, as if after a period of insanity, or because one who stopped knowing ‘knows again’ (resapere), for he chastises himself for his folly and strengthens his spirit for right living, remaining watchful so as not to relapse. 237. Unexpected (repentinus), from sudden (repens). Repens can be both an adverb (i.e. “suddenly”) andasubstantive.Robust(robustus),“strong,vigorous,” socalledfromthestrengthoftheoak(roboreus)tree.Fast (rapidus), “swift of foot (pes, gen. pedis).” Ravisher (raptor), because he is a corrupter (corruptor), whence also ‘raped woman’ (rapta), because corrupted (corrupta).
238. Accused (reus), so called from the lawsuit (res) in which he is liable, and offence (reatum) from reus. ‘Impeached for state treason’ (reus maiestatis) was at first the term for one who had carried out something against the republic, or anyone who had conspired with the enemy. It was called ‘impeached for state treason’ becauseitis‘graver’(maius)toharmone’snativecountry thanasinglecitizen.Afterwardsthosepeoplewerecalled ‘impeachedforstatetreason’whowereseentohaveacted against the majesty (maiestas) of the head of state, or who had conferred unbeneficial laws on the state, or had abrogated beneficial ones. 239. Quarrelsome (rixosus), so called from canine snarling (rictus), for such a one is always ready to contradict, and delights in strife, and provokes an opponent. Rustic (rusticus), because such a one works the countryside (rus), that is, the earth.
S. 240. Wise (sapiens), so called from taste (sapor), because as the sense of taste is able to discern the taste of food, so the wise person is able to distinguish things and their causes, because he understands each thing, and makes distinctions with his sense of the truth. The opposite of this is a fool (insipiens), because he is without taste, and has no discretion or sense. 241. Assiduous (studiosus) . . . Holy (sanctus), so called from an ancient custom, because those who wished to be purified would be touched by the blood (sanguis) of a sacrificial victim, and from this they received the name of holy ones (sanctus). 242. Honest (sincerus), as if the term were ‘without corruption’ (sine corruptione), of which the opposite is dishonest (insincerus), “tainted, corrupt.” Supreme (supremus), “the highest,” because it ‘rises above’ (supereminere). Hence we also say, “O Supreme Father.” [Agreeable (suavis) . . .] Exalted (sublimis) is so called after the height of one’s esteem, for strictly the term ‘exalted’ is used for what is on high, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.259):
And you will raise him on high (sublimis) to the stars of the sky.
243.	Good-looking (speciosus), from appearance (species) or looks, as beautiful (formosus) is from shape (forma). Skillful (sollers), because one is engaged (sollicitus) ‘in a craft’ (ars) and adroit, for among the ancients one who was trained in every good craft would be called skillful. Terence (Eunuch 478):
I will grant that the youth is skillful (sollers).
244.	Those called the superstitious (superstitiosus), says Cicero (On the Nature of the Gods 2.72), are those “who would pray and make burnt offerings every day in orderthattheirchildrenmightbetheirsurvivors(superstes).” Busy (sollicitus), because such a one is skillful (sollers) and quick (citus) and restless. Diligent (sedulus), a familiar word in Terence, that is, ‘without guile’ (sine dolo); otherwise, assiduous (assiduus). 245. ‘Comrades’ (sodalis) is the name for those who regularly convene under one sign (e.g., as of a guild), as if the term were ‘persuaders’ (suadentes). They are also called allies (socius) because of their alliance (societas) in danger and in work, as if they wore a single kind of shoe (cf. soccus, “shoe”) and kept to the same track. 246. Stolid (stultus), rather dull in spirit, as a certain writer says (Afranius, fragment 416): “I consider myself to be stolid (stultus); I don’t think myself a fool,” that is, with dulled wits, but not with none at all. A stolid person is one who in his stupor (stupor) is not moved by injustice, for he endures anddoesnotavengecruelty,andisnotmovedtogriefby anydishonor.247.Sluggish(segnis),thatis,‘withoutfire’ (sine igni), lacking native wit – for se- means “without” (sine), as sedulus, sine dolo (see 244 above). Calm (securus), as if the term were ‘without anxiety’ (sine cura) – that is, unresponsive, for which reason we take such people as unbeneficial.
 
248. Stupefied (stupidus), “rather often astounded (stupere).” Proud (superbus), so called because such a one wishes to seem above (super) where he is, for one who wishes to pass beyond (supergredi) what he is, is proud. 249. A tale-bearer (susurro) is so called after the sound of the word (cf. susurrus, onomatopoeic, “whispering”), because such a one speaks to someone not face to face but in the ear when gossiping maliciously about another person. 250. Factious (seditiosus), one who causes dissension of minds and brings about discord,whichtheGreekscall "  (“disagreement”). Severe (severus), as if ‘a true savage’ (saevus verus); for he maintains justice without mercy. 251. A pretender (simulator) is so called from likeness (simulacrum), for such a one adopts a semblance (similitudo) that is not himself. Persuader (suasor) [from persuading (suadere) the person whom one wishes to deceive]. 252. [Assiduous (studiosus) . . .] ‘Minutely thorough’ (scrupulosus), “of a finely discriminating and rigorous mind,” for a scrupo (i.e. scrupus, “jagged stone”) is a rather hard grain of sand. Sacrilegious (sacrilegus) is one who ‘plucks sacred objects’ (sacra legere), that is, steals them. A murderer (sicarius) is so called because he is armed with weapons in order to perpetrate a crime, for a sica is a dagger, so called from ‘cut’ (secare). 253. Sinister (scaevus), “on the left and perverse,” after the term  (“on the left, illomened”), for such a one has a most wicked and cruel temper. Stage-player (scenicus), one who performs in a theater, for a theater is a stage (scena). Prostitute (scortum, also meaning “skin”), because such a one is also called    (“skin”) in Greek; the skin of those for whom this vice is performed is rubbed by this person.
254. Unclean (spurcus), because such a one is impure (impurus). Scelerosus, “full of wickedness (scelus, gen. sceleris)” – like a place that is ‘full of stones’ (lapidosus) or ‘full of sand’ (arenosus) – for a scelerosus person is worse than a sceleratus (“wicked”) one. 255. Sator, a sower (seminator) or father, from seed (semen). Parasite (scurra), one who usually attends on someone for the sake of food; such a one is called scurra from his ‘following after’ (sequi, ppl. secutus). Likewise, hanger-on (assecla),fromsequi.Attendant(satelles),onewhoclings to another (alter), or guards his side (latus). 256. Substitute (suffectus), one put in place of another, as if the term were suffactus (i.e. sub + factus, “made under”). Hence we also speak of a consul as suffectus when he is substituted for another. 257. Subordinate (secundus),
X.S.248–T.267
becauseoneis‘besidethefeet’(secuspedes),andtheterm is derived from servants who follow (sequi, ppl. secutus) as footmen. Whence fortune is called favorable (secundus) because it is ‘following after’ (secundus) us, that is, is near us. Hence also a successful affair (res secundae), that is, a prosperous one. The ‘after-birth’ (secundae) is so called from ‘following on’ (sequi).
258.Stipulator(stipulator),“apromiser,”forstipuloris ‘promise,’ from the terminology of jurists. 259. Healthy (sanus), from blood (sanguis), because such a one is not pale. [Safe (sospes) . . .] Slender (subtilis, also meaning “precise”), so called from thinness. 260. A trustee (sequester) is so called because he intervenes between disputants; he is called the B  (“middle,” cf.  , “mediator”)inGreek,andthedisputantsdepositpledges with him. The word derives from ‘following’ (sequi), because both parties would follow the trustworthiness of the chosen trustee. 261. Dwarf (sessilis), because such a one seems not to stand, but to sit (sedere, ppl. sessum). Deaf (surdus), from the filth (sordes) formed out of the humor in one’s ear, and although deafness occurs on account of a number of reasons it still keeps the name of the foresaid defect. 262. Dry (siccus), because such a one is ‘without juice’ (exsucatus), or by antiphrasis, because he is without ‘moisture’ (sucus). Buried (sepultus) is so calledbecauseoneis‘withoutatremor’(sinepalpatione) or ‘without a pulse’ (sine pulsu), that is, without motion. 263. Saio (i.e. an executor; see section 91 above; Thompson 1969:142), so called from ‘bringing to completion’ (exigere).Cobbler(sutor),namedforhisstitching(suere) hides.Swine-herd(subulcus),aherdsmanofpigs(cf.sus, “swine”), just like a cow-herd (bubulcus), from keeping cattle (bos).
T. Guardian (tutor), one who ‘looks after’ (tueri, ppl. tuitus) a pupil, that is, attends (intueri) to him, concerning whom there is a common saying, “Why are you scolding me? I buried both my guardian and my school-servant some time ago.” 265. Witnesses (testis) are so called because they would be used for a testament (testamentum); similarly signatories (signator), because they sign (signare) a testament. 266. Tetricus is a very harsh mountain in the Sabine region – hence we call gloomy people tetricus. Taciturn (taciturnus), ‘being silent for long periods’ (tacere diuturnus). 267. Arbiter(trutinator),anexaminer,weighingouttrueverdicts according to the scales of judgment, derived from
 
X.T.268–V.283
trutina, which is a pair of scales. 268. Sorrowful (tristis) . . . Grasping (tenax), too eager for money, because he holds (tenere) it fast – sometimes also pertinax. 269. [Savage (truculentus) . . .] Fierce (torvus), “terrible,” because such a one has a twisted (tortus) face and a disturbing (turbulentus) look, as in “fierce lioness,” and (Vergil, Aen. 3.677):
We see (the Cyclopes) standing there uselessly with terrible (torvus) eye.
270. Violent (turbidus), “terrible.” Hideous (teter, i.e. taeter), because of a dark and shadowy life. ‘Most savage’(teterrimus),foratoobeastlyperson,fortheancients said teter for ‘beastly,’ as Ennius (Annals 607): “Hideous (teter) elephants.” Terrible (terribilis), because such a one possesses terror (terror) and is feared. 271. Evader (tergiversator), because one changes his mind as if ‘turning his back’ (tergum vertere) this way and that, so that it is not easy to understand what condition he is in. Drunk (temulentus), so called from ‘intoxicating drink’ (temetum), that is, wine. 272. Fearful (timidus), because one ‘is afraid for a long time’ (timere diu), that is, from one’s bloody humor, for fear congeals the blood, which when coagulated causes fear. 273. Ugly (turpis), because one is ill-shaped and sluggish
(torpere).
V. 274. Man (vir), from strength (virtus). Beneficial (utilis),fromusing(uti)one’spropertywell,orbecausea thing can be well used, just as trainable (docilis), because suchaonecanbetaught(docere).275.True(verus),from truth (veritas); hence also verax (“truthful”). ‘Truth’ is prior to ‘true,’ because truth does not derive from a true person, but a true person from truth. 276. Truthful (veridicus), because he ‘says a true thing’ (verum dicere) and is a champion of the truth. ‘Having a sense of honor’ (verecundus), because he respects a true (verum) deed. 277. Handsome (venustus), “good-looking,” from one’s veins (vena), that is, from blood. [Lively (viridis, lit. “green”), full of energy and sap, as if ‘youthful with vigor’(virudis).][Living(vivens),“alive”(vivus).]Fickle (varius), as if not having one path (via), but of unfixed and confused thought. Wily (versutus), because in any sort of action one’s mind is easily turned (vertere, ppl. versus) toward some deceit. Hence also craftiness (versutia) means “twisted thought.” 278. Plautus (Epidicus
371):
[He is] wilier (versutior) than a potter’s wheel.
279. [Base (vilis), from ‘farm’ (villa), because such a one has no urbanity.] Dissembling (versipellis, lit. “changing one’s skin”), because one changes (vertere, ppl. versus) into various appearances and mental states. Hence also wily (versutus; see 277 above) and cunning. Violent (violentus), because one brings force (vis) to bear. Mad (vecors), having a bad spirit (cor) and a bad conscience. Wandering (vagus), because without a path (via). 280. Vain (vanus) derives its etymology from Venus. Again, vain, “empty, false,” because one’s mindfulness vanishes (evanescere). 281. Insane (vesanus), not properly sane (sanus). Vinolentus, one who both drinks a lot and only becomesdrunkwithdifficulty(cf.vinum,“wine”;lentus, “slow”).Agitated(vexatus),thatis,‘carried’;vexoisfrom the same root as veho and vecto, so that vexasse means “to have carried.” 282. Poisoner (veneficus), because one has prepared or furnished or sold poison (venenum) as a cause of death. Bearer (vector), as if the term were ‘conveyor’ (vehitor); moreover, a vector is both one who conveys (vehere) and one who is conveyed. 283. Hunter (venator),asifthetermwerevenabulator(i.e.theuserofa venabulum, “hunting spear”) – from the word ‘hunting’ (venatio) – that is, the hunting of wild animals. There are four roles for hunters: trackers, pursuers, wingmen, and drivers.
 
Book XI The human being and portents (De homine et portentis)
 
 
i. Human beings and their parts (De homine et partibuseius) 1.Nature(natura)issocalledbecauseitcauses something to be born (nasci, ppl. natus), for it has the powerofengenderingandcreating.Somepeoplesaythat this is God, by whom all things have been created and exist.2.Birth(genus)isnamedfromgenerating(gignere, ppl. genitus), and the term is derived from ‘earth,’ from whichallthingsareborn,forinGreek‘earth’iscalled H. 3. Life (vita) is named on account of its vigor (vigor) or because it holds the power (vis) of being born and growing. Whence even trees are said to possess life, because they are generated and grow. 4. Human beings (homo) are so named because they were made from the soil (humus), just as is [also] said in Genesis (cf. 2:7): “And God created man of the soil of the earth.” Incorrectly, the whole human is named from this term, that is, the whole human consisting of both substances, the association of soul and body. But strictly speaking, ‘human being’ is from ‘soil.’
5. The Greeks called the human being OA!  because he has been raised upright from the soil and looks upward in contemplation of his Creator (perhaps cf. h4, “eye, face, countenance”). The poet Ovid describes this when he says (Met. 1.84):
While the rest of the stooping animals look at the ground, he gave the human an uplifted countenance, and ordered him to see the sky, and to raise his upturned face to the stars.
And the human stands erect and looks toward heaven so as to seek God, rather than look at the earth, as do the beasts that nature has made bent over and attentive to their bellies. 6. Human beings have two aspects: the interior and the exterior. The interior human is the soul [and] the exterior is the body.
7. Soul (anima) takes its name from the pagans, on the assumption that it is wind – hence wind is called O  in Greek, because we seem to stay alive by drawing air into the mouth. But this is quite clearly untrue, since the soul is generated much earlier than air can be
231
taken into the mouth, because it is already alive in the mother’s womb. 8. Therefore the soul is not air, as was believed by some people who were unable to grasp its incorporeal nature. 9. The spirit (spiritus) is the same as what the Evangelist calls the ‘soul’ when he says (John 10:18): “I have the power to lay down my soul (anima), and I have the power to take it up again.” With regard to the soul of the Lord at the time of his Passion, the aforementioned Evangelist wrote in these words, saying (John 19:30): “And bowing his head, he gave up the spirit (spiritus).” 10. What else can “to give up the spirit” be if it is not to lay down one’s soul? – for soul is so calledbecauseitisalive:spirit,however,issocalledeither because of its spiritual (spiritalis) nature, or because it inspires (inspirare) in the body.
11. In like manner some people say that the will (animus)andthesoul(anima)arethesame,eventhough soul is characteristic of life, while will is characteristic of intention.Whencethephilosopherssaythatlifecancontinue to exist even without the will, and that the soul can endure without the mind (mens) – which is why we use the term ‘the mindless’ (amens). The mind is so called in that it knows; the will, in that it desires. 12. The mind (mens) is so called because it is eminent (eminere) in the soul, or because it remembers (meminisse). This is why one calls ‘forgetful people’ (immemoris) also ‘mindless’ (amens). Because of this, ‘mind’ is not the word we use for the soul, but for that which is the superior part in the soul, as if the mind were its head or its eye. It is for this same reason also that the human being, due to his mind, is said to be the image of God. Further, all these things areadjoinedtothesoulinsuchawaythatitisoneentity. Different terms have been allotted to the soul according to the effects of its causes. 13. Indeed, memory is mind, whenceforgetfulpeoplearecalledmindless.Thereforeit issoulwhenitenlivensthebody,willwhenitwills,mind when it knows, memory (memoria) when it recollects, reason (ratio) when it judges correctly, spirit when it breathes forth, sense (sensus) when it senses something. Will is said to be sense (sensus) with regard to what it
 
XI.i.14–i.30
senses (sentire) – whence also the word ‘idea’ (sententia) derives its name.
14. The body (corpus) is so called, because it ‘perishes when it disintegrates’ (corruptum perire). It can be dissolved and it is mortal, and at some point it has to be dissolved. 15. The flesh (caro), however, derives its name fromcreating(creare).Themaleseediscalledcrementum becausethebodiesofanimalsandhumansareconceived from it. This is also why parents are called creators (creator). 16. Flesh is a composite of four elements. Earth is in flesh, air in breath, moisture in blood, fire in the vital heat. Each element in us has its own physical part, something of which must be repaid when the composite dissolves. 17. However, what is meant by flesh and what is meant by a body (corpus) are different; in flesh there is always a body, but in a body there is not always flesh, for the flesh is what is alive, and this is a body. A body that is not alive is not flesh. The word ‘body’ is applied to what is dead after life has departed, or to what has been brought forth without life. Sometimes also there is a body that is alive and yet lacks flesh, like grass or trees.
18. The body has five senses: vision, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. Among these, two become active or inactive,whileanothertwoarealwaysreceptive.19.They arecalledsenses(sensus),becausewiththeirhelpthesoul activates the entire body in a most subtle way with the power of sensation (sentire). Hence one speaks of things that are present (praesentia), because they are ‘before the senses’ (prae sensibus), just as we call things that are present to our eyes ‘before our eyes’ (prae oculis). 20. Vision (visus) is what the philosophers call vitreous humor. There are those who maintain that vision is created from external light in the air, or it is from a luminous inner spirit that proceeds from the brain through thinpassagesand,afterithaspenetratedtheoutermembranes, goes out into the air, where it produces vision upon mixing with a similar substance. 21. And it is called vision (visus) because it is more vivid (vivacior) than the rest of the senses, and also more important and faster, and endowed with greater liveliness (vigere), like memory among the rest of the faculties of the mind. Moreover, it is closer to the brain, from which everything emanates; this makes it so that we say “See!” (vide, i.e. imperative from videre) even for those stimuli that pertain to other senses, as when for instance we say “See how this sounds,” or ‘See how this tastes,” and so on.
22. Hearing (auditus) is so called, because it draws (aurire, i.e. haurire) in voices; that is to say, it catches sounds when the air is reverberating. Smell (odoratus) is so called as if it meant ‘touched by the smell’ (odoris adtactus) of the air, for it is activated when the air is touched. So one also says ‘olfactory sense’ (olfactus), because one is ‘affected by smells’ (odoribus adficere). Taste (gustus) comes from the word for the throat (guttur). 23. Touch (tactus) is so called, because it strokes (pertractare) and ‘makes contact’ (tangere, ppl. tactus), and distributes the power of this sense through all the limbs. Indeed, we examine with the sense of touch what we cannot judge with the rest of the senses. There are two kinds of touch: one that comes from the outside to strike us, and another that originates within, inside the body itself. 24. Each sense has been given its own natural function.Thus,whatistobeseeniscapturedbytheeyes, what is to be heard, by the ears; soft and hard things are judged by the sense of touch, flavor by the sense of taste, while smell is drawn in through the nostrils.
25. The primary part of the body is the head (caput), and it was given this name because from there all senses and nerves originate (initium capere), and every source of activity arises from it. In it, all sensations become evident. Whence it plays the role, so to speak, of the soul itself, which watches over the body. 26. The crown (vertex) is the place where the hairs of the head concentrate, and where the hair growth spirals (vertere, “turn”) – whence it is named. 27. The word ‘skull’ (calvaria) comes from its ‘bald bones’ (ossa calva) through ellipsis of letters, and it is treated as a neuter noun. The occiput (occipitum) is the back part of the head, so called as if it were against the ‘head-covering’ (capitium), or because it is the back of the head (caput, gen. capitis).
28. Hair (capilli) is so called as if it came from ‘strands belonging to the head’ (capitis pilus), made so as both to be an ornament, and to protect the head against the cold and defend it from the sun. ‘Strands of hair’ (pilus) are so called after the skin (pellis) from which they grow, just as the pestle (pilo, i.e. pilum) is so called from a mortar (pila), where pigment is ground. 29. A ‘head of hair’ (caesaries) is so called from ‘needing to be cut’ (caedere, ppl. caesus); this term is only applied to men, for it is fitting that men have shorn hair, but not women. 30. ‘Long hair’ (comae) in the strict sense of the word is hair that has not been cut, and it is a Greek word, for the Greeks call long hair caimos, from being cut, whence
 
they also say  for shearing. From this curls (cirrus) derive their name as well, which the Greeks call . 31. Tresses strictly speaking are characteristic of women. They are called tresses (crines) because they are separated (discernere) by headbands. Hence also headdresses (discriminale) are so called, with which divided tresses are tied up.
32. The temples (tempus) are the parts that lie under thecraniumontheleftandrightsides.Theyaresocalled because they move and, just like the seasons (tempus), they change, due to this mobility, at certain intervals. 33. The word for face (facies) comes from ‘visible likeness’ (effigies), for all of the characteristic form (figura) of a human being and the ability for every person to be recognized resides in the face. 34. But ‘facial expression’ (vultus) is so called because the inclination (voluntas) of the will is displayed by it. The expression changes in various movements according to the will, whence the two terms for the face differ from each other, for while the face refers simply to someone’s natural appearance, facialexpressionrevealswhathehasonhismind.35.The forehead (frons) derives its name from the eye-sockets (foramen oculorum). This, a kind of likeness of the soul, expresses the movement of the mind, whether it is joyful or sad, through its own look.
36.Eyes(oculus)aresocalled,eitherbecausethemembranes of the eyelids cover (occulere) them so as to protectthemfromtheharmofanychanceinjury,orbecause they possess a ‘hidden light’ (occultum lumen), that is, one that is hidden or situated within. Among all the sensory organs, they are closest to the soul. Indeed, every indication of the mental state is in the eyes, whence both distress and happiness show in the eyes. The eyes are alsocalledlights(lumen)becauselight(lumen)emanates fromthem,eitherbecausetheyholdalightthathasbeen closed up in them from the beginning, or because they reflectlightthathasbeentakenfromtheoutsideinorder to supply vision. 37. The pupil (pupilla) is the middle point of the eye in which the power of vision resides; because small images appear to us there, they are called pupils, since small children are called pupils (pupillus, a termforaminorunderthecareofaguardian).Thereare many who use the form pupula, but it is called pupilla because it is pure (pura) and unpolluted (inpolluta), just like ‘young girls’ (puella). Physiologists say that those who are going to die within three days no longer have thepupilsthatweseeintheeyes,andwhenthepupilsare
XI.i.31–i.45
no longer visible they are surely beyond hope. 38. The circle with which the white parts of the eye are separated from the distinct blackness of the pupil is called the iris (corona), because with its roundness it adorns (ornare) the edge of the pupil.
39. The eyelids (palpebrae) are the sheltering folds of the eyes. Their name comes from palpitation (palpitatio), because they are forever in motion. They meet together to renew the power of the gaze with their frequent motion. They are well protected by a barrier of hairs, so that if something were to fall toward the open eyes it would be repelled, and so that, when they are closed in sleep, they may rest hidden, as though under a cover. 40. At the tips of the eyelids, where they touch each other when closed, the hairs growing in an orderly row stand out and serve to protect the eyes, so that they may not easily sustain injury from objects falling into the eye and be hurt, and so as to prevent contact with dustorwithsomecoarsermaterial;byblinkingtheyalso soften the impact of the air itself, and thus they cause vision to be precise and clear. 41. Some believe that the word for tears (lacrima) comes from an injury of the mind (laceratio mentis); others maintain that it is identical with what is called "  (“tear”) in Greek. 42. The upper eyelids (cilium) are coverings with which the eyes are concealed; they are so called because they hide (celare) the eyes and cover them with a safeguard. The eyebrows (supercilium) are so called, because they are ‘placed above’ (superponere) the eyelids (cilium); they arefurnishedwithhairssothattheymayextendasaprotection for the eyes and repel the sweat that flows down from the head. The intercilium is the space between the eyebrows that is without hair.
43. The cheeks (gena) are the parts underneath the eyeswherethebeardbeginstoform,forinGreek‘beard’ is called B . They are so called also for this reason, that from the cheeks the beard begins to grow (gignere, ppl. genitus). 44. The cheekbones are the parts that protrudeundertheeyes,setbelowthemfortheirprotection. They are called cheekbones (mala; cf. malum, “apple”) eitherbecausetheyprotrudeundertheeyesinarounded shape, which the Greeks called H  (“apple,” also “cheek”), or because they are above the jaws (maxilla). 45. The word jaws (maxilla) is a diminutive of cheekbone (mala), just as peg (paxillus) is derived from stake (palus) and small cube (taxillus) from large die (talus). The mandibles (mandibulae) are parts of the jaws, from
 
XI.i.46–i.58
whichtheyalsotaketheirname.Theancientsnamedthe beard (barba) that which pertains to men (vir) and not to women.1
46. The ear (auris) owes its name to the fact that it drawsin(aurire,i.e.haurire,“drinkin”)sounds,whence Vergil also says (cf. Aen. 4.359):
He drank in with these ears (auribus ausit) his words.
Or it is because the Greeks called the voice itself L", from ‘hearing’ (auditus); through the change of a letter ears (auris, pl. aures) are named as if the term were audes. Indeed, the voice makes a sound when it rebounds through the curvature of the ears, whereby the ears receive the sense of hearing. The highest part of the ear is called pinnula from its pointedness, for the ancients used to call a point pinnus, whence also we get the words for ‘two-headed axe’ (bipinnis) and feather (pinna).
47.Nostrils(naris,ablativenare)aresocalled,because through them odor and breath ceaselessly ‘swim’ (nare), or because they warn us with odor, so that we ‘know’ (noscere,withformsinnor-)andunderstandsomething. Hence the opposite: those who do not know anything and who are unrefined are called ignorant (ignarus). Our forefathers used the word for ‘smelling something’ (olfacere) to mean knowing (scire), as in Terence (cf. The Brothers 397):
And would they not have ‘sniffed it out’ (olfacere) six whole months before he started anything?
48.	Because it is equal in its length and its curvature, thestraight part of the nose is called the column (columna); its tip is pirula, from the shape of the fruit of a pear-tree (pirus); the parts to the left and right are called ‘little wings’(pinnula),fromsimilaritytowings(ala;cf.pinna, “feather”), and the middle part is called interfinium.
49.	The mouth (os) is so called, because through the mouthasifthroughadoor(ostium)webringfoodinand throw spit out; or else because from that place food goes in and words come out. 50. The lips (labia) are so called from licking (lambere). The upper lip we call labium, the lower – because it is thicker – labrum. Others call the lips of men labra, the lips of women labia. 51. Varro is of the opinion that the tongue (lingua) was given this name because it binds (ligare) food together. Others think that this is because it binds together words from articulated sounds, for, just as the plectrum strikes upon strings, so also the tongue strikes against the teeth and makes a vocal sound.
52. Teeth (dens, plural dentes) the Greeks call C"7  , and from there the word seems to have been introduced into Latin. The first of these are called incisors (praecisor) because they bite beforehand (i.e. as if ‘preincise’) into everything ingested. The next in line are called canines (caninus), two of which are in the right jaw and two in the left. And they are called canines because they resemble dogs’ teeth, and dogs crush bones with them, as does a human being; so that what the teeth in front cannot cut they pass on to these, so that they may break it apart. The common people call these colomelli (cf. columella, “column”) due to their length and roundness. The last ones are the molars (molaris), which break up what has been bitten off and crushed by the teeth in front and grind (molere) it and mush it; whencetheyarecalledmolars.53.Fromtheteethonecan tell apart the sexes, for in men there are more, in women fewer.
54. The gums (gingiva) derive their name from producing (gignere) teeth. However, they were also created asdecorationfortheteeth,foriftheteethexistedwithout cover, they would cause horror rather than being considered an ornament. 55. Our palate is placed, like the heavens, above, and thence palate (palatum) is derived from sky (polus). In the same vein the Greeks call the palate  L (“palate, vault of the sky”), because, due to its concave shape, it bears a resemblance to the sky.
56. The throat (fauces) gets its name from pouring forth (fundere) voices, or else because with its help we ‘speak voices’ (fari voces). The windpipe (arteria) is so calledeitherbecausebyitsmeansair(aer),thatis,breath, is conducted from the lungs, or else because it retains the vital breath in tight (artus) and narrow passageways, whence it emits the sounds of the voice. These sounds would all sound alike if the movement of the tongue did not cause a modulation of the voice. 57. In the Gallic language toles (cf. classical Latin toles, “goiter”) – what in the diminutive are commonly called tonsils (tusilla, i.e. tonsilla) – is the name for the part in the throat that often swells up (turgescere). The chin (mentum) is so called, because from there the jaws (mandibula) begin – that is, because there they are joined together.
1 Here and elsewhere Isidore’s observation indicates that the distinction between the sounds b and v has been lost. See for example 76 below.
 
58. The gullet (gurgulio) derives its name from the throat (guttur), whose passageway extends to the mouth and nose. It has a path along which the voice is sent to the tongue, so that it can articulate the sounds of words. Whence we also say ‘chatter’ (garrio). 59. The esophagus (rumen) is very close to the gullet; through it food and drink are swallowed. Because of this, animals that bring food back to the mouth and chew it again are said to ruminate (ruminare). The epiglottis (sublinguium) is a covering of the gullet, a kind of small ‘tongue’ (lingua), which opens or closes the aperture of the tongue.
60. The neck (collum) is so called, because it is rigid androundedlikeacolumn(columna),carryingthehead and sustaining it as if it were a citadel. Its front is called thethroat(gula),itsback,thenape(cervix).61.Thenape (cervix), however, is so called, because through this part the brain extends to the marrow of the spinal cord, as if it were the ‘path of the brain’ (cerebri via). In former times only the plural, cervices, was used; Hortensius was the first who used the singular word cervix. Nevertheless, cervix in the singular refers to the part of the body, while in the plural it often means ‘obstinacy’ (contumacia). Thus Cicero says in the Second Action Against Verres (5.110): “Would you accuse a praetor? Break his
cervix!”
62. We say shoulder (humerus, i.e. umerus), as if the word were the ‘forequarter of an animal’ (armus), to distinguish humans from mute animals, so that we say human beings have shoulders, whereas animals have forequarters, for forequarters in the proper sense belong toquadrupeds.Thehighestpartinthebackofthehuman shoulder is called ola. 63. The arms (bracchium) derive their name from strength: for  in Greek means “heavy and strong.” In the arms is the brawn of the upper arms (lacertus), and there the marked strength of the muscles is located. This is called the brawn, that is, the muscles (musculus): and they are called the brawn (torus)becauseatthatplacethesinewsseemtobetwisted (tortus).64.Theelbow(cubitum)issocalled,becausewe recline on it (cubare) in order to eat. According to some, the ulna is an extension of either hand (i.e. the forearm), according to others, it is the elbow – and this is more accurate, because in Greek h  (i.e. >B) means “elbow.”
2 InVergil’sGeorgicsoscillaarelittlemaskshungontreestoensure the fertility of vines.
XI.i.59–i.71
65.	The underarms (subbracchium) are called ‘armpits’(ala,lit.“wing”),becausefromthemthemovement of the arms originates in the manner of wings. Some call the armpit ascilla (i.e. axilla), because from there the arm is raised (cellere), that is, moved; similarly also a ‘small mask’ (oscillum) is so called, because ‘a face swings’(os...cillatur),thatis,ismoved,forcilleremeans “move.”2 There are those who call the armpit subhircus, because in many humans they give off the foul odor of goats (hircus).
66.	The hand (manus) is so called because it is in the service (munus) of the whole body, for it serves food to the mouth and it operates everything and manages it; withitshelpwereceiveandwegive.Withstrainedusage, manus also means either a craft or a craftsman – whence we also derive the word for wages (manupretium, lit. “hand-price”). 67. The ‘right hand’ (dextra) is so called from‘giving’(dare),foritisgivenasapledgeofpeace.Itis clasped as a sign of good faith and of greeting; and this is thesenseinCiceroAgainstCatiline3.8:“Atthecommand of the Senate I gave a pledge of protection,” that is, his right hand. Whence also the Apostle [says (Galatians 2:9): “They gave their right hands to me”]. 68. The ‘left hand’(sinixtra,i.e.sinistra)issocalledasifthewordwere derivedfrom‘withouttherighthand’(sinedextra),oras if it ‘permitted’ something to happen, because sinixtra is derived from ‘permitting’ (sinere). 69. The hand with outstretched fingers is called palm (palma); when they are clenched, it is called fist (pugnus). ‘Fist’ is derived from ‘handful’ (pugillus), just as ‘palm’ is derived from the extended branches of the palm tree (palma).
70. The fingers (digitus) are so called, either because there are ten (decem) of them, or because they are connected handsomely (decenter), for they combine in themselvesboththeperfectnumberandthemostappropriate order. The first finger is called thumb (pollex), because among the rest it prevails (pollere) in strength and power. The second is the index finger (index), which isalsocalledthe‘greeter’(salutaris)or‘pointer’(demonstratorius),becausewegreetsomeone(salutare)orpoint something out (ostendere) usually with it. 71. The third fingeriscalled‘immodest’(impudicus),becauseoftenan accusation of a shameful action is expressed by it. The fourth is the ring (anularis) finger, because it is the one on which the ring (anulus) is worn. It is also called medical (medicinalis), because physicians (medicus) use it to scoop up ground eye-salves. The fifth is called auricularis, because we use it to scrape out the ear (auris).
 
XI.i.72–i.88
72. The nails (ungula) we call by this name from the Greek, for they call a fingernail d?.
Thetorso(truncus)isthemiddlepartofthebodyfrom the neck to the groin. Nigidius says of it (fr. 108): “The head is held up by the neck, the torso is sustained by the hipbones, the knees, and the legs.” 73. The Greeks called the front of the torso from the neck to the stomach the thorax;thisiswhatwecallthechest(arca),becauseinthat place is a hidden (arcanus), that is, a secret thing, from whichotherpeopleareshutout(arcere).Fromthisalsoa strong box (arca) and an altar (ara) derive their names, as if the words meant ‘secret things.’ The protruding, fleshy parts of the chest are called the breasts (mamilla), and between them the bony part is the pectus, and what is to its right and left are the ribs (costa). 74. It is called pectus,becauseitis‘flatteneddown’(pexus)betweenthe protruding parts, the breasts. The word comb (pecten) is alsoderivedfromthis,becauseitmakesthehairflattened down. The breasts (mamilla) are so called, because they are as round as apples (malum); it is a diminutive term.
75. The nipples are the tips of the breasts, which nursing infants grasp. And they are called nipples (papilla) because it appears as if infants were eating (pappare) them while they suck milk. The breast (mamilla) is accordingly the whole protrusion of the female breast, the nipple only the small part from which milk is drawn. 76.Thefemalebreasts(uber)aresocalled,eitherbecause they are abundant (ubertus) with milk, or because they are moist (uvida), that is to say, filled with the liquid of the milk as if they were grapes (uva). 77. Milk (lac) derives the meaning of its name from its color, because it is a white liquid: for in Greek  means “white.” It becomes what it is through a transformation of blood, for after birth, if any blood is not consumed as nourishmentinthewomb,itflowsalonganaturalpassagewayto the breasts and, whitened due to their special property, it takes on the quality of milk.
78. The skin (cutis) is that which is uppermost in the body, so called, because in covering the body it is the first to suffer from an incision, for in Greek,   means “incision.”3 It is also called pellis (i.e. another word for “skin”), because it repels (pellere) external injuries from the body by covering it, and it endures rain, wind, and the fierce heat of the sun. 79. Pellis, however, is the word used for skin soon after stripping, while skin that has been treated is called ‘hide.’ It is called hide (corium) by derivation from flesh (caro), because flesh is covered by it, but properly speaking the word is used in reference to brute beasts. 80. The word for the pores (porus) of the body is Greek – these in Latin properly are called air-passages (spiramentum), because through them the enlivening breath (spiritus) is supplied from the outside. 81.Arvinaisthefatthatadherestotheskin.A‘fleshypart’ (pulpa) is flesh without fat, so called because it pulsates (palpitare): for it often quivers. Many also call it viscus (“flesh”; cf. the homophone viscus, “birdlime”) because it is sticky.
82. The limbs (membrum) are the parts of the body. The joints (artus), with which the limbs are connected, are so called from ‘drawing together’ (artare). 83. The sinews (nervus) are so called through a derivation from theGreek,astheycallasinew N .Othersbelievethat ‘sinews’ comes from Latin, because the connections of the joints attach (inhaerere) to them each in turn. But this much is certain: the sinews constitute the greatest part of the substance of strength, for the thicker they are, the more they are disposed to augment strength. 84. The joints (artus) are so called because, being bound to each other by the tendons, they are ‘drawn together’ (artare), that is, they are bound tight. The diminutive form of artus is articulus; we use the word artus in reference to main limbs, like the arms, but the word articulus in reference to minor limbs like the fingers. 85. The heads of thebonesarecalledcompago,becausetheyholdtogether through being connected (compingere, ppl. compactus) with sinews as if with a kind of glue.
86. The bones (os, gen. ossis) are the firm parts of the body. They support all postures of the body and give it strength. The bones are so called from burning (urere,ppl.ustus),becausetheywouldbecrematedbythe ancients; or, as others believe, from mouth (os), because there they are visible, while in the rest of the body they are hidden, covered by skin and flesh. 87. ‘Bone marrow’ (medulla) is so called, because it moistens (madefacere) the bones, for it supplies fluid and strengthens them. The vertibulum is the end point of a bone, rounded in a thicker knot; it is so called because it is turned (vertere) when the limb is bent. 88. Cartilage consists of soft bones without bone marrow, the kind that the ear, the septum, and the ends of the ribs have, or also the covering of bones, which moves. And it is called cartilage
3 A Greek word   is not otherwise known. Latin cutis is in fact cognate with Greek N  , “skin, hide”;   , “hollow, vessel.”
 
(cartilago) because it ‘lacks pain’ (carere dolorem) when flexed, because of reduced friction.
89. Some believe that the ribs (costa) are so called because the interior parts are guarded (custodire) by them and the whole soft region of the belly, encased by them, is protected. 90. The side (latus) is so called, because it is hidden (latere) when we are lying down; it is also the left (laeva) part of the body. The movement of the right side is more readily controlled, while the left is stronger and better suited to carrying heavy loads. Whence the left side is also so called because it is more apt at lifting (levare) something and at carrying it. This same left side carries the shield, the sword, the quiver, and the remaining load, so that the right side may be unhampered for action. 91. The back (dorsum) extends from the neck down to the loins. It is so called because it is a rather hard (durior) surface of the body, like a stone, strong both for carrying and for enduring things. 92. The back (tergum) is so called because when we lie on the ground (terra) we are stretched out on our backs – something that only a human being can do, for dumb animals all lie down either on their bellies or on their sides. This is also why we speak incorrectly of the tergum in animals.
93. The shoulder-blades (scapula) . . . The interscapilium is so called because it is situated between the shoulder-blades, whence its name. 94. The palae (lit. “spades,” hence another word for ‘shoulder-blades’) are the prominent parts on the left and on the right side of the back, so called, because we pin them down in wrestling; the Greeks call wrestling !. 95. The spine (spina, also meaning “thorn”) is the backbone (iunctura dorsi, “linkage of the back”), so called because it has sharp spurs; its joints are called vertebrae (spondilium) on account of the part of the brain (i.e. the spinal cord) that is carried through them via a long duct to the other parts of the body. 96. The ‘sacred spine’ (spina sacra) is the lowest part of the spinal column; the Greeks call it R C  N,becauseitisthefirstbonewhichisformed when a child is conceived, and for this reason it was the first part of a sacrificial animal that would be offered by the pagans to their gods – whence it is called ‘sacred
spine.’
97. Varro says that the kidneys (renes) are so called because they produce a stream (rivus) of filthy liquid. Now blood vessels and marrow exude a fine liquid into the kidneys; this liquid in turn flows down from the
XI.i.89–i.105
kidneys, released by the heat of sexual intercourse. 98. The loins (lumbus) derive their name from wantonness of desire (libido), because in males the cause of bodily pleasure is located there, just as in women it is in the navel. Whence it is also said in the beginning of the speech addressed to Job (38:3): “Gird up thy loins (lumbus) like a man,” so that there would be a preparation for resistance in the very loins in which the occasion for overpowering lust customarily arises. 99. The navel (umbilicus) is the center of the body, so called, because it is a protuberance (umbus) of the belly. Whence also the place in the middle of a shield is called a ‘boss’ (umbo), from which it hangs, for the infant hangs from it in the uterus and it is also nourished from it.
100. The private parts (ilium, i.e. ilia) are referred to with a Greek word, because there we cover ourselves up, for in Greek ilios (i.e. :) means “cover up.” 101. The buttocks (clunis) are so called, because they are situated next to the colon (colum), that is, to the large intestine(longao).Thenates(natis)aresocalledbecause we support ourselves (inniti) with them when we are seated. Hence also the flesh is bunched up in them, so thatthebonesmaynothurtfromtheheavyweightofthe body when it presses down. 102. The parts of the body called genitals (genitalia) receive their name, as the word itself shows, from the begetting (gignere, ppl. genitus) of offspring, because with them one procreates and begets. They are also known as ‘organs of modesty’ (pudenda) on account of a feeling of shame (cf. pudor, “shame”), or else from ‘pubic hair’ (pubis), by which they are also hiddenwithacovering.However,theyarealsocalledthe ‘indecent parts’ (inhonestus), because they do not have the same kind of comeliness as limbs that are placed in open view.
103. For the genitals the word veretrum is also used, either because it is applied to ‘males only’ (vir tantum), orbecausefromthemsperm(virus)issecreted.Properly speaking, virus is used to refer to the liquid that flows from the male organs of generation. 104. The word for
‘testicles’(testiculus)isadiminutiveformoftestis(“testicle”), of which there are always at least two. They supply sperm via a reed-shaped conduit, and both the kidneys and loins receive sperm from the spinal cord for the sake of procreation. The scrotum (fiscus, lit. “purse”) is the skin that contains the testicles. 105. The hind-parts (posteriora) are certainly so called because they are on the
 
XI.i.106–i.118
backside and on the opposite side from the face, so that while we purge the bowels we may not defile the sense of sight. The anus (meatus) is so called because excrement passes (meare) through it, that is, it is discharged.
106.Thethighs(femur)aresocalled,becausethemale sex differs from the female (femina) with respect to this part.Theyextendfromthegrointotheknees.Byderivation, the femina (i.e. a plural form of femur) are the parts of the thighs with which we cling to the backs of horses when riding. Hence formerly a warrior was said to lose his horse from underneath his femina (i.e. when his horse was slain). 107. The hips (coxa) are so called, as if the word were ‘conjunction of axes’ (coniuncta axis); the thighs are moved by them. Their concave parts are called vertebra, because in them the heads of the thighs areturned(vertere).Theyarealsocalledhocks(suffrago), because they are ‘broken off underneath’ (subtus frangere), that is, jointed underneath, not on the upper side, as in the arms.
108. The knees (genu) are points where thighs and shins meet; and they are called genua because in utero they are situated opposite the eye-sockets (gena). There theyclingtoeachother,andtheyareco-engenderedwith the eyes as signs of tearfulness and an appeal for pity.4 In this way genu is named after gena. 109. Thus, when a human being is folded together in the process of gestation and taking shape, the knees are raised up, and with their help the eye-sockets are formed, so that they may become hollow and recessed. Ennius (Courtney fr. 41) writes:
And the eye-socket (gena) presses close to the knees (genua).
This is the reason why people are immediately moved to tears when they fall on their knees, for nature wanted them to remember the womb of the mother, where they sat in darkness, so to speak, before they came to the light (cf. Matthew 4:16).
110. The shins (crus, gen. crura) are so called, because with their help we run (currere) and take steps (gressus). They extend from below the knees to the calves (sura). The tibias (tibia) are so called as if the word were ‘trumpets’ (tuba), for they are similar in length and shape. 111. The ankle (talus) is so called from tolus, for a tolus is a protrudingroundness;whencealsothedomeofaround temple is called a tolus. The ankle is situated beneath the shinsandabovetheheel.112.Thefeet(pes,gen.pedis)are assigned a name from Greek etymology, for the Greeks call those parts !", and they move forward set on the earth in alternating motion.
113. The soles (planta) have their name from flatness (planities), because they are not of a round shape, as in quadrupeds – otherwise the two-legged human being couldnotstandupright–butinsteadareofaflat(planus) and elongated shape, so that they may stabilize the body. The frontal parts of the soles consist of many bones. 114. The back part of the soles is called the heel (calcis, i.e. calx); the name was imposed on it by derivation from ‘hardened skin’ (callum), with which we tread (calcare) on the earth (cf. solum, “soil”); hence also calcaneus (i.e. anotherwordfor‘heel’).115.Thesole(solum)isthelower partofthefoot,socalledbecausewithitweimpressfootprintsintheearth.Butanythingthatsustainssomething is called a solum, as if it were derived from ‘solid ground’ (solidum);whencethegroundisalsocalled‘soil’(solum), because it sustains everything; and the sole of the foot is so called, because it carries the entire weight of the body.
116.Wesayvisceranotonlyforthe‘intestines,’butalso for whatever is under the skin, from the word viscus (i.e. thetissueundertheskin),whichislocatedinbetweenthe skinandtheflesh.Thevisceraarealsocalled‘vitalorgans’ (vitalia), namely the places surrounding the heart (cor), as if the word were viscora, because in that place life (vita), that is, the soul, is contained. 117. Likewise the endings of the sinews, made of sinews and blood joined together, are called viscera. Muscles (lacertus), otherwise known as ‘mice’ (mus), because in the individual limbs they take the ‘place of the heart’ (locus cordis), just as the heart itself is in the center of the whole body, and theyarecalledbythenameoftheanimalstheyresemble, that lurk under the earth, for muscles (musculus) are so called from their similarity to mice.5 Muscles are also called brawn (torus), because there the innards appear to be twisted (tortus).
118. The word ‘heart’ (cor) is either derived from a Greek term, because they call it ", or from care (cura), for in it resides all solicitude and the origin of knowledge. It is next to the lungs, so that, when anger is
4	Knees(inkneeling)andeyes(inweeping)bothcansignalaneed for mercy.
5	The word musculus (“muscle”) does indeed derive from mus (“mouse”), from the look of the movement of a muscle like the biceps. Cf. Greek N, “mouse, muscle”.
 
kindled, it may be moderated by the fluid of the lungs. It has two arteries (arteria), of which the left one has more blood, the right one more air – for this reason we examine the pulse in the right arm. 119. The praecordia are places close to the heart in which sensation is perceived; and they are called praecordia because the origins (principium) of the heart (cor, also meaning “the seat of understanding” – see 127 below) and of deliberating thought (cogitatio) are to be found there. 120. The pulse (pulsus) is so called because it throbs (palpitare); from what it indicates we understand whether someone is ill or in good health. Its motion is two-fold: either simple or composite. It is simple when it consists of one beat, composite when it consists of several irregular and unequal motions. These motions have fixed intervals: a dactylic rhythm, as long as they are healthy, but they are a sign of death when they are quite fast – as in " "7 ;  (lit., “swift as a gazelle”) – or quite slow – as in ;  (lit., “weak as ants”).
121. The ‘blood vessels’ (vena) are so called because they are passageways (via) for the flowing blood and conduits (rivus) spreading throughout the body, with which all limbs are supplied with fluid. 122. Blood took itsnamefromaGreeketymology,becauseitisanimated, strengthened, and alive (perhaps cf. ;, “live”). It is called ‘blood’ as long as it is in the body, ‘gore’ when it is shed. Gore (cruor) is so called because once it has been shed it ‘runs away’ (decurrere), or because in running (currere) it falls (corruere). Others interpret ‘gore’ as corrupted (corrumpere) blood, which is secreted. Still others say that blood (sanguis) is so called, because it is sweet (suavis). 123. Blood, however, is untainted only in young people, for physiologists say that blood diminishes with age – hence also old people have a tremor. Properly speaking, however, blood is possession of a soul. Hence women will lacerate their cheeks in grief, and crimson robes and crimson flowers are offered to the dead.
124. ‘Lung’ (pulmo) is a word derived from Greek, for the Greeks call the lung !A, because it is a fan (flabellum) for the heart, in which the !N, that is, thebreath,resides,throughwhichthelungsarebothput in motion and kept in motion – from this also the lungs aresonamed.Now,inGreek !N means“breathing,”
6 Greek   means “mouth,”   9 , “gullet.” Latin stomachus can mean “gullet,” more commonly, “stomach.”
XI.i.119–i.132
which, by blowing and exhaling, sends the air out and draws it back. The lungs are moved through this, and they pump, both in opening themselves, so that they may catch a breath, and in constricting, so that they may expel it. The lungs are the engine of the body.
125. The liver (iecur) has this name because there the fire (ignis) that flies up into the brain (cerebrum) has its seat. From there this fire is spread to the eyes and to the other sense organs and limbs, and through its heat the liver converts the liquid that it has drawn to itself from food into blood, which it furnishes to individual limbs for sustenance and growth. Those who debate medical questions also maintain that the liver is the seat of pleasure and desire. 126. The lobes of the liver are its edges, resembling the edges of chicory leaves, or tongues that stick out. They are called ‘lobes’ (fibra) because among the pagans they were carried by the soothsayers in their sacredritestothe‘altarsofPhoebus’(Phoebiara),sothat afterthelobeswereofferedandsetonfirethesoothsayers might receive the god’s responses.
127. The spleen (splen) is so called from filling in (supplementum) a place opposite to the liver, so that there may not exist an empty space. Some are also of the opinionthatitwasmadeforthesakeoflaughter,forwelaugh thankstothespleen,areangrythankstothegall-bladder, have knowledge thanks to the heart, and love thanks to the liver. When these four elements come together, the living creature is complete. 128. The ‘gall bladder’ (fel) is so called because it is a small sack (folliculus) producing a liquid that is called bile (bilis). In Greek, the stomach (stomachus) is called ‘mouth,’ because it is the gateway of the belly, and it receives food and passes it on to the
intestines.6
129. The intestines (intestina; cf. intestinus, “inward”) are so called because they are confined in the interior (interior) part of the body; they are arranged in long coils like circles, so that they may digest the food they take in little by little, and not be obstructed by added food. 130. The caul (omentum) is a membrane that contains the greater part of the intestines; the Greeks call it !!  . The diaphragm (disseptum, i.e. dissaeptum) is an inner organ that separates the belly and the other intestines from the lungs and the heart. 131. The cecum (caecum, “blind gut”) is an intestine without opening or outlet; the Greeks call it  R	   (“blind gut”). The jejunum (ieiunum) is a thin intestine, whence also the word ‘fasting’ (ieiunium). 132. The belly, the bowels,
 
XI.i.133–i.145
and the womb are distinct from each other. The belly is what digests food that has been taken in, is visible from the outside, extends from the chest to the groin and is called belly (venter) because it causes life’s nutriments to pass through the whole body. 133. The bowels constitute the part that receives the food and is purged. Sallust writes (Histories 1.52): “Pretending to purge his bowels (alvus).” And they are called ‘bowels’ (alvus) because they are cleansed (abluere), that is, purged, because fecal filth flows out from them.
134. The womb (uterus) is something only women have and in which they conceive; in shape it is similar to a small stalk. Nevertheless there are many authors who like to use uterus for the belly of either sex – not only poets, but also other writers. 135. However, it is called uterus because it is two-fold and divides on both (uterque)sides,intotwopartsthatextendapartandbend back in the shape of a ram’s horn; or because it is filled with the fetus within (interius). Hence also ‘leather bag’ (uter), because it contains something inwardly (intrinsecus), namely the limbs and the viscera. 136. The word ‘paunch’ (aqualiculus), however, is properly used only in reference to a pig, and was transferred metaphorically to the belly (venter). The matrix (matrix) is so called, because the fetus is engendered in it, for it fosters the received semen, gives a body to what is fostered and differentiates the limbs of that which has been given a body. 137. The vulva (vulva) is so called as if the word were ‘folding-door’ (valva), that is, the door of the belly, either because it takes up semen or because the fetus emerges from it.7 The bladder (vesica) is so called, because it is filled with urine collected from the kidneys as a ‘vessel’ is filled up with ‘water’ (vas . . . aqua), and it is swollen by the liquid. Birds do not have this function.
138. Urine (urina) is so called, either because it burns (urere),orbecauseitcomesoutofthekidneys(renes).By itsindicationsareshownfuturehealthandsickness.This liquid is called ‘piss’ (lotium) by the common people, because with its help clothes are washed (lavere, ppl. lotus), that is, cleaned. 139. Seed (semen) is what is ‘taken up’ (sumere) by either the earth or the uterus after it is cast,sothateitheraplantorafetusmaygrowfromit.Itis afluid,madefromadecoctionoffoodandthebody,and diffusedbythebloodvesselsandthebonemarrow.From there it is sweated out like bilge water and condenses in the kidneys. Ejaculated in sexual intercourse and taken into the uterus of a woman, it somehow takes shape in the body under the influence of the heat of the viscera and the irrigation of menstrual blood.
140. The menses consist of an overflow of women’s blood. They are called ‘menses’ (menstrua) after the cycle of moonlight in which this flux regularly comes to pass–forinGreekthemooniscalled .Thesearealso called ‘womanish things’ (muliebria), for the woman is the only menstruating animal. 141. If they are touched by the blood of the menses, crops cease to sprout, unfermented wine turns sour, plants wither, trees lose their fruit,ironiscorruptedbyrust,bronzeturnsblack.Ifdogs eat any of it, they are made wild with rabies. The glue of pitch, which is dissolved neither by iron nor water, when polluted with this blood spontaneously disperses. 142. Moreover, semen cannot germinate after several days of menstruation, because there is not then enough menstrual blood by which it could be moistened to the point of being thoroughly wet. Thin semen doesn’t adhere to the female organs; it slides down and doesn’t have the power to cling to them. Similarly, thick semen also lacks thepowertobegetanything,because,duetoitsexcessive thickness, it cannot mix with the menstrual blood. This causes sterility in both men and women; it is either due to the excessive thickness of the semen or blood, or to their excessive thinness.
143. It is said that the heart of a human being is made first, because it is the seat of all life and wisdom. Thereafter it takes forty days for the whole work to be completed – they say that these facts are adduced from miscarriages. Others are of the opinion that the fetus begins to grow with the head, whence we also see the eyes made first in birds’ fetuses in eggs. 144. The fetus (foetus) is so called because it is still ‘being kept warm’ (fovere, ppl. fotus) in the uterus. The small sac that contains the fetus andisbornwiththeinfantiscalledtheafterbirth(secundae),becauseatbirthitfollows(sequi,gerundivesequendus). 145. They say that newborn children resemble their fathers if the paternal seed is stronger, and their mothers if the maternal is stronger. Looks that are similar (i.e. to both parents) are explained by this reason: those who resemble the features of both parents were conceived from equally mixed paternal and maternal seed. Similarity to grandparents and great-grandparents comes to
7 While “womb” is the meaning of vulva in classical Latin, it appears that the term here refers to the vulva, vagina, or cervix.
 
pass because, just as a great deal of seed is hidden in the earth, so also seed that can assume the shape of our parents is hidden in us. However, from the paternal seed girls may be born, and from the maternal seed boys, because all offspring is made of two kinds of seed, and thegreaterportion,becauseitpredominates,determines the similarity of the sex.
146. Some parts in our body were created solely for reasons of usefulness, as for instance the viscera; some for usefulness and ornament, like the sense organs in the face, and the hands and feet in the body, limbs that are both of great usefulness and most pleasing form. 147. Some are purely for ornament, as for instance breasts in men, and the navel in both sexes. Some are there to allow us to tell the difference between the sexes, as for instancethegenitals,thegrownbeard,andthewidechest in men; in women the smooth cheeks and the narrow chest; although, in order to conceive and carry a fetus, they have wide loins and sides. That which pertains to human beings and the parts of the body has been partly treated;nowIwilladdsomethingontheagesofahuman being.
ii. On the ages of human beings (De aetatibus hominum) 1. There are six stages in a lifetime: infancy, childhood, adolescence, youth, maturity, and old age. 2. The first age, the infancy (infantia) of a newborn child, lasts seven years. 3. The second age is childhood (pueritia), that is, a pure (purus) age, during which a child is not yet suited for procreating; it lasts until the fourteenth year. 4. The third age, adolescence (adolescentia), is mature (adultus, ppl. of adolescere) enough for procreating and lasts until the twenty-eighth year. 5. The fourth age, youth (iuventus), is the strongest of all ages, ending in the fiftieth year. 6. The fifth is the age of an elder person (senior), that is, maturity (gravitas), which is the decline from youth into old age; it is not yet old age, but no longer youth, because it is the age of an older person, which the Greeks call !  – for with the Greeks an old person is not called presbyter, but BA. This age begins in the fiftieth and ends in the seventieth year. 7. The sixth age is old age (senectus), which has no time limit in years; rather, however much life is left after the previous five ages is allotted to old age. 8. Senium,
8 The received Vulgate text of Psalm 9:14 reads orphanus where Isidore and other Latin versions have pupillus.
XI.i.146–ii.13
however, is the last part of old age, so called because it is the end of the sixth (cf. seni, “six”) age.
Into these six intervals, therefore, the philosophers have divided human life – ages in which life is changed, runs its course, and reaches the final point of death. Let us therefore proceed briefly through the aforementionedstagesinalifetime,demonstratingtheiretymologies with regard to the terms used for a human being.
9. A human being of the first age is called an infant (infans); it is called an infant, because it does not yet know how to speak (in-, “not”; fari, present participle fans,“speaking”),thatis,itcannottalk.Notyethavingits full complement of teeth, it has less ability to articulate words.10.Aboy(puer)issocalledfrompurity(puritas), because he is pure and still retains, without the hint of a beard, the bloom of the cheeks. They are ephebes (ephebus), so called after Phoebus, gentle youths, not yet [grown]men.11.Thewordchild(puer),however,isused in three ways: in reference to birth, as in Isaiah (cf. 9:6): “A child (puer) is born to us.” To indicate age, as in “an eight-year-old,” “a ten-year-old”– whence the following expression (Courtney fr. 3):
Now he took a child’s (puerilis) yoke on his tender neck.
Andfinally,inreferencetoobedienceandpurityoffaith, as in the words of the Lord to the prophet (cf. Jeremiah 1:6–8): “You are my child (puer), do not be afraid,” spoken when Jeremiah had already left behind the years of childhood a long time before.
12.	Puella is “little girl” (parvula), as if the term were ‘chick’ (pulla). Hence we use the term ‘wards’ (pupillus), not because of the legal status of wards, but because of their youthful age. A ward, named like the pupil (pupillus) of the eye, is one bereft of parents. Those truly called pupilli, however, are children whose parents died before giving them a name. Other ‘bereft ones’ (orbus) are called orphans (orphanus), the same as are those called pupilli; for orphanus is a Greek word and pupillus a Latin word. Thus in the psalm, where it is said (Psalm 9/10:14 Vulgate): “Thou wilt be a helper to the orphan (pupillus),” the Greek has the word C.8
13.	Those who have reached puberty (puberes) are so called from pubes, that is, the private parts, for this is the first time that this area grows hair. There are those who calculate puberty from age, that is, they take someone who has completed his fourteenth year to have reached puberty, even though he may begin to show the signs of
 
XI.ii.14–ii.27
puberty very late; however, it is most certain that he who showstheoutwardsignsofpubertyandcanalreadyprocreate has reached puberty. 14. Puerpera are those who give birth at a youthful (puerilis) age. Whence Horace says (cf. Odes 4.5.23):
The young woman in labor (puerpera) is praised for her firstborn.
And they are called puerperae either because they are burdened with their ‘first birth’ (primus partus), or else because they first ‘give birth to children’ (pueros parere). 15. An adolescent (adolescens) is so called because he is ‘old enough’ (adultus, ppl. of adolescere) to procreate, or by derivation from ‘growing’ (crescere) and ‘being strengthened’ (augere). 16. A youth (iuvenis) is so called because he begins to be able to help (iuvare), just as we name the young bullocks (iuvencus) among oxen, when they have separated from the calves. A youth is at the peak of his development and ready to give assistance – for a person’s ‘helping’ is his contributing some work. As in human beings the thirtieth year is the time of full maturity, so in cattle and beasts of burden the third year is the strongest.
17. A man (vir) is so called, because in him resides greater power (vis) than in a woman – hence also ‘strength’ (virtus) received its name – or else because he deals with a woman by force (vis). 18. But the word woman (mulier) comes from softness (mollities), as if mollier (cf. mollior, “softer”), after a letter has been cut and a letter changed, is now called mulier. 19. These two are differentiated by the respective strength and weakness of their bodies. But strength is greater in a man, lesser in a woman, so that she will submit to the power of the man; evidently this is so lest, if women were to resist, lust should drive men to seek out something else or throw themselves upon the male sex. 20. As I was saying, woman (mulier) is named for her feminine sex, not for a corruption of her innocence,9 and this is according to the word of Sacred Scripture, for Eve was called woman as soon as she was made from the side of her man, when she had not yet had any contact with a man, as is said in the Bible (cf. Gen. 2:22): “And he formed her into a woman (mulier).”
21. The term ‘virgin’ (virgo) comes from ‘a greener (viridior) age,’ just like the words ‘sprout’ (virga) and ‘calf’ (vitula). Otherwise it is derived from lack of corruption, as if the word were formed from ‘heroic maiden,’ because she has no knowledge of female desire. 22. A ‘heroic maiden’ (virago) is so called because she ‘acts like a man’ (vir + agere), that is, she engages in the activities of men and is full of male vigor. The ancients would call strong women by that name. However, a virgin cannot be correctly called a heroic maiden unless she performs a man’s task. But if a woman does manly deeds, then she is correctly called a heroic maiden, like an Amazon.
23. She who is nowadays called a woman (femina) in ancient times was called vira; just as ‘female slave’ (serva)wasderivedfrom‘maleslave’(servus)and‘female servant’ (famula) from ‘male servant’ (famulus), so also woman (vira) from man (vir). Some people believe that the word for ‘virgin’ (virgo) is from vira. 24. The word ‘woman’ (femina) is derived from the parts of the thighs (femur, plural femora or femina) where the appearance of the sex distinguishes her from a man. Others believe that through a Greek etymology femina is derived from ‘fiery force,’ because she desires more vehemently, for females are said to be more libidinous than males, both in human beings and in animals. Whence among the ancients excessive love was called feminine (femineus) love.
25.	The ‘elder’ (senior) is still fairly vigorous. In the sixth book Ovid speaks of the elder, who is (Met. 12.464)
Between the youth and the old man (senex).10 And Terence (The Mother-in-Law 11):
By the privilege I enjoyed when I was younger
(adulescentior).
26.	[Younger (adulescentior)] undoubtedly does not mean ‘more grown up’ (magis adolescens), but rather ‘less grown up,’ and in the same way ‘elder’ (senior) means ‘less old,’ where the comparative degree signifies less than the positive. Therefore, senior does not mean “fully old,” just as ‘rather young’ (iunior, i.e. a comparative form, lit. “younger”) means “among the youths,” and‘ratherpoor’(pauperior,i.e.thecomparativeofpauper, “poor”) means “between rich and poor.”
27.	The term ‘old man’ (senex), however, some believe to be derived from decay of the senses (sensus), because from that time on they act foolishly due to old age.
9	Mollities could bear a connotation of sexual licentiousness.
10	Senex, gen. senis, is the positive degree of senior. Isidore will go on to make the point that senior actually means less old than senex.
 
Physiologistsmaintainthathumanbeingsarestupiddue to colder blood, wise due to warm blood. Hence also old people, in whom blood has turned cold, and children, in whom it has not yet warmed up, are less wise. This is the reason why infancy and old age resemble one another: old people dote because they are too old, while children have no insight into their actions due to playfulness and childishness.
28. The term ‘old man’ (senex), however, is only masculine in gender, just as ‘old woman’ (anus) is feminine, for anus is exclusively said of a woman. ‘Old woman,’ moreover, is so called from many ‘years’ (annus), as if the word were ‘full of years’ (annosus). Indeed, if the word senex were a common noun (i.e. used of either gender),whythenwouldTerencesay(Eunuch357):“Old woman (senex mulier)”? Similarly we say ‘little old lady’ (vetula), because she is ‘aged’ (vetusta). In like manner ‘old age’ (senectus) is derived from ‘old man’ (senex) and ‘a woman’s old age’ (anilitas) from ‘old woman’ (anus). 29. ‘Gray hair’ (canities, also meaning “old age”) comes from ‘whiteness’ (candor), as if the word were candities. Whencethefollowing:“floridyouth,milkyoldage(canities),”asifitsaid“white”(candidus)oldage.30.Oldage brings with it much that is good and much that is bad. Muchthatisgood,becauseitfreesusfromdespoticmasters, imposes moderation on desires, breaks the drive of lust, augments wisdom, and imparts riper counsel. Much that is bad, however, because of the weakness and unpopularity it brings, for (Vergil, Geo. 3.67):
Diseases and sorrowful old age creep up.
Indeed, there are two things whereby the forces of the body are diminished, old age and disease.
31. Death (mors) is so called, because it is bitter (amarus), or by derivation from Mars, who is the author of death; [or else, death is derived from the bite (morsus) of the first human, because when he bit the fruit of the forbidden tree, he incurred death]. 32. There are three kinds of death: heartrending, premature, and natural death. That of children is heartrending, that of young people premature, that of old people merited, that is, natural. 33. However, it is uncertain from which part of speech mortuus (“dead, a dead person”) is inflected. Indeed, as Caesar says, because it is the perfect participle
11 Both portentum and monstrum can mean “omen, portent” or
“monstrosity.”
XI.ii.28–iii.2
of morior (“die”) it ought to end in -tus – that is, it ought to have one u only, not two. Where the letter u is doubled, it is inflected substantively, not as a participle, as in fatuus (“foolish”) and arduus (“difficult”). This makes sense in this way: just as what mortuus means cannot be “declined” by any behavior of ours (i.e. we cannot avoid death),sothetermitselfcannotbe“declined”grammatically.
Everyone who is dead is either a corpse (funus), or a cadaver. 34. It is a corpse if it is being buried. It is called funus from the ropes (funis) set on fire; these were carried before the bier in the form of papyrus reeds enveloped with wax. 35. The term cadaver, on the other hand, is used if the body lies unburied, for ‘cadaver’ (cadaver) comes from ‘falling down’ (cadere), because it cannotstanduprightanymore.Whilethecadaveriscarried, we speak of it as the exsequiae; when cremated, the remains (reliquiae); when already interred, the buried (sepultum). However, in common usage a cadaver is still spoken of as a body (corpus, i.e. ‘corpse’), as in the following (Vergil, Geo. 4.255):
Then the bodies (corpus) of those deprived of the light.
36. The deceased (defunctus) is so called, because he has completed his part in life. Thus we say that those who havecompletedservicestheyowedhave‘dischargedtheir duty’ (functus officio); whence also the phrase ‘having held (functus) public office.’ Hence therefore ‘defunct,’ because such a person has been ‘put aside from his duty’ (depositus officio) in life, or else because he has fulfilled (functus) his number of days. 37. Buried (sepultus) is said ofapersonwhoisalready‘withoutpulse’(sinepulsu)and heartbeat, that is, without motion. To bury (sepelire) is to put a body out of sight, for we say ‘inter’ (humare) for coveringoverabody,thatis,forthrowingearth(humus) upon it.
iii. Portents (De portentis)11 1. Varro defines portents as beings that seem to have been born contrary to nature – but they are not contrary to nature, because they are created by divine will, since the nature of everything is the will of the Creator. Whence even the pagans addressGodsometimesas‘Nature’(Natura),sometimes as ‘God.’ 2. A portent istherefore not created contrary to nature, but contrary to what is known nature. Portents are also called signs, omens, and prodigies, because they are seen to portend and display, indicate and predict
 
XI.iii.3–iii.13
future events. 3. The term ‘portent’ (portentum) is said to be derived from foreshadowing (portendere), that is, from ‘showing beforehand’ (praeostendere). ‘Signs’ (ostentum), because they seem to show (ostendere) a futureevent.Prodigies(prodigium)aresocalled,because they ‘speak hereafter’ (porro dicere), that is, they predict the future. But omens (monstrum) derive their name from admonition (monitus), because in giving a sign they indicate (demonstrare) something, or else because they instantly show (monstrare) what may appear; and this is its proper meaning, even though it has frequently been corrupted by the improper use of writers.
4. Some portents seem to have been created as indications of future events, for God sometimes wants to indicate what is to come through some defects in newborns,andalsothroughdreamsandoracles,bywhichhe may foreshadow and indicate future calamity for certain peoples or individuals, as is indeed proved by abundant experience. 5. In fact, to Xerxes a fox born of a mare was a portent for the destruction of the empire. A monster to which a woman gave birth, whose upper body parts were human, but dead, while its lower body parts came from diverse animals, yet were alive, signified to Alexander the sudden murder of the king – for the worse parts had outlived the better ones. However, those monsters that are produced as omens do not live long – they die as soon as they are born. 6. There is a difference between a ‘portent’ (portentum) and ‘an unnatural being’ (portentuosus). Portents are beings of transformed appearance, as, for instance, is said to have happened when in Umbria a woman gave birth to a serpent. Whence Lucan says (Civil War 1.563):
And the child terrified its own mother.
Butanunnaturalbeingstrictlyspeakingtakestheformof a slight mutation, as for instance in the case of someone born with six fingers.
7. Portents, then, or unnatural beings, exist in some cases in the form of a size of the whole body that surpasses common human nature, as in the case of Tityos who,asHomerwitnesses,coveredninejugers(i.e.about sixacres)whenlyingprostrate;inothercasesintheform of a smallness of the whole body, as in dwarfs (nanus), or those whom the Greeks call pygmies (pygmaeus), because they are a cubit tall. Others are so called due to the size of parts of their bodies, as for instance a misshapen head, or due to superfluous parts of their limbs, as in the case of two-headed and three-headed individuals, or in the case of the cynodontes (i.e. “dog-toothed” people),whohaveapairofprojectingfangs.8.Yetothers aresocalledduetomissingpartsofthebody,individuals in whom one corresponding part is deficient compared with the other, as when one hand is compared with the other hand and one foot with the other foot. Others due to a cutting off, as in the case of those born without a hand or without a head, whom the Greeks call steresios (cf.  B, “deprivation”). Others in the form of praenumeria, when only the head or a leg is born.
9. Others, who are transformed in a part of the body, as for instance those who have the features of a lion or of a dog, or the head or body of a bull, as they relate in the case of the Minotaur born of Pasiphae – what the Greeks call K   . Others become a portent due to a complete transformation into a different creature, as in the story of a woman who gave birth to a calf. Others, who have a change in the position of features without any transformation, such as those with eyes in their chest or forehead, or ears above their temples, or, as Aristotle relates, someone who had his liver on the left side and his spleen on the right. 10. Others, because of a joined begetting, as when in one hand several fingers are foundjoinedatbirthandfusedtogether,andintheother hand fewer – and likewise with the feet. Others, with a feature that is premature and untimely, as those who are born with teeth or a beard or white hair. Others, with a complexofseveraloddities,likethemultiformedportent of Alexander’s about which I spoke above (see section 5). 11. Others, from a mixing of sexes, like those they call the "  (“androgynes”) and K "@ . Hermaphroditesaresonamedbecausebothsexesappear in them, as in Greek [ H signifies the male, J "  thefemale.These,havingamalerightbreastandafemale left breast, in sexual intercourse sire and bear children in turn.
12. Just as, in individual nations, there are instances of monstrous people, so in the whole of humankind there are certain monstrous races, like the Giants, the Cynocephali (i.e. ‘dog-headed people’), the Cyclopes, and others. 13. Giants (Gigantes) are so called according to the etymology of a Greek term; the Greeks suppose that they are @, that is, “earthborn,” because in their fable the parent Earth begot them as like itself, with their immense mass – for H means “earth” and B  “offspring.” However, those whose parentage is
 
The Etymologies	XI.iii.14–iii.34
 
uncertain are also commonly called ‘sons of the earth.’ 14. But some, inexperienced with Holy Scripture (i.e. Genesis6:4),falselysupposethatapostateangelslaywith thedaughtersofhumansbeforetheFlood,andthatfrom this the Giants were born – that is, excessively large and powerful men – and filled the earth. 15. The Cynocephali are so called because they have dogs’ heads, and their barking indeed reveals that they are rather beasts than humans.TheseoriginateinIndia.16.Indiaalsoproduces the Cyclopes, and they are called Cyclops because they are believed to have a single eye in the middle of their foreheads. These are also called  @ , because they eat only the flesh of wild animals.
17. People believe that the Blemmyans in Libya are born as trunks without heads, and having their mouth and eyes in their chest, and that another race is born without necks and having their eyes in their shoulders. 18. Moreover, people write about the monstrous faces of nations in the far East: some with no noses, having completely flat faces and a shapeless countenance; some withalowerlipsoprotrudingthatwhentheyaresleeping it protects the whole face from the heat of the sun; some with mouths grown shut, taking in nourishment only through a small opening by means of hollow straws. Some are said to have no tongues, using nods or gestures inplaceofwords.19.TheytellofthePanotiansofScythia, whohavesuchhugeearsthattheycoverallthebody–for !Y is the Greek word for “all,” and ]  means “ears.” 20. The Artabatitans of Ethiopia are said to walk on all fours, like cattle; none passes the age of forty.
21. The Satyrs are little people with hooked noses; they have horns on their foreheads, and feet like goats’ – thekindofcreaturethatSaintAnthonysawinthewilderness. When questioned by the servant of God, this Satyr issaidtohaveresponded(Jerome,LifeofPaultheHermit 8; PL 23.23): “I am one of the mortals that dwell in the desert, whom the pagans, deluded by their fickle error, worship as Fauns and Satyrs.” 22. There are also said to be a kind of wild men, whom some call Fauns of the fig. 23. The race of Sciopodes are said to live in Ethiopia; they have only one leg, and are wonderfully speedy. The Greeks call them  !" (“shade-footed ones”) because when it is hot they lie on their backs on the ground and are shaded by the great size of their feet.
24.	The Antipodes in Libya have the soles of their feettwisted behind their legs, and eight toes on each foot.
25.	The Hippopodes are in Scythia, and have a humanform and horses’ hooves. 26. In India there are said to be a race called + , who are twelve feet tall. There, too, is a race a cubit tall, whom the Greeks from the term ‘cubit’ call pygmies (pigmaeus; cf. !, “cubit”), of whom I have spoken above (section 7). They live in the mountainous regions of India, near the Ocean. 27. They claim also that in the same India is a race of women who conceive when they are five years old and do not live beyond eight.
28. Other fabulous human monstrosities are told of, which do not exist but are concocted to interpret the causes of things – like Geryon, the Spanish king fabled to have three bodies, for there were three brothers of such like minds that there was, so to speak, one soul in theirthreebodies.29.AndtherearetheGorgons,harlots with serpentine locks, who would turn anyone looking atthemintostone,andwhohadonlyoneeyewhichthey would take turns using. But these were three sisters who hadasinglebeauty,asiftheyhadasingleeye,whowould so stun those beholding them that they were thought to turn them into stone.
30. People imagine three Sirens who were part maidens, part birds, having wings and talons; one of them would make music with her voice, the second with a flute, and the third with a lyre. They would draw sailors, enticed by the song, into shipwreck. 31. In truth, however, they were harlots, who, because they would seduce passers-by into destitution, were imagined as bringing shipwreck upon them. They were said to have had wings and talons because sexual desire both flies and wounds. They are said to have lived among the waves because the waves gave birth to Venus. 32. People tell of Scylla as a woman girded with the heads of dogs, with a great barking, because of the straits of the sea of Sicily, in which sailors, terrified by the whirlpools of waves rushing against each other, suppose that the waves are barking, waves that the chasm with its seething and sucking brings into collision.
33. They also imagine certain monstrosities from among irrational living creatures, like Cerberus, the dog of the nether world that has three heads, signifying through him the three ages in which death devours a human being – that is, infancy, youth, and old age. Some think that he is called Cerberus as if the term were    (“flesh-eating”),thatis,devouringflesh. 34. They talk also of Hydra, a serpent with nine heads, which in Latin is called ‘water-snake’ (excetra), because
 
XI.iii.35–iv.3
when one head was cut off (caedere) three would grow back.ButinfactHydrawasaplacethatgushedoutwater, devastatinganearbycity;ifoneopeninginitwereclosed, many more would burst out. Seeing this, Hercules dried upthearea,andthusclosedtheopeningforthewater.35. Indeedhydrameans“water”(cf. X"A).Ambrosemakes mention of this in a comparison of it with heresies, saying (On Faith 1.4): “For heresy, like a certain hydra in the fables, grew from its own wounds, and as often as it would be cut down, it spread; it should be fed to the fire and will perish in a conflagration.”
36. They also imagine the Chimaera as a tri-form beast: the face of a lion, the rear of a dragon, and a she-goat in the middle. Certain natural scientists of the Physiologus12 say that the Chimaera is not an animal but a mountain in Cilicia that nourishes lions and she-goats insomeplaces,emitsfireinsomeplaces,andisfullofserpents in some places. Because the Physiologus made this thedwellingplaceofBellerophon,heissaidtohavekilled the Chimaera. 37. Their appearance gave their name to theCentaurs,thatis,amancombinedwithahorse.Some say that they were horsemen of Thessaly, but because, as they rushed into battle, the horses and men seemed to have one body, they maintained the fiction of the Centaurs.
38. Again, the Minotaur took its name from ‘bull’ and ‘man.’ They say in their fables that a beast of this kind wasenclosedintheLabyrinth.Onthis,Ovid(Art ofLove
2.24):
The man half bull, and the bull half man.
39. The Onocentaur is so called because it seems to look half like a human, half like an ass. Likewise the Hippocentaur, which is thought to combine the natures of horse and human in itself.
iv. Metamorphoses (De transformatis) 1. There are accounts of certain monstrous metamorphoses and changes of humans into beasts, as in the case of that mostnotorioussorceressCirce,whoissaidtohavetransformed the companions of Ulysses into beasts, and the case of the Arcadians who, when their lot was drawn, would swim across a certain pond and would there be converted into wolves. 2. That the companions of Diomede were transformed into birds is not a lie from story-telling, but people assert this with historical confirmation. Some people claim that witches (Striga) were transformedfromhumans.Withregardtomanytypesof crimes, the appearance of the miscreants is changed and they wholly metamorphose into wild animals, by means of either magic charms or poisonous herbs. 3. Indeed, many creatures naturally undergo mutation and, when they decay, are transformed into different species – for instance bees, out of the rotted flesh of calves, or beetles from horses, locusts from mules, scorpions from crabs. Thus Ovid (Met. 15.369):
If you take its curved arms from a crab on the shore a scorpion will emerge and threaten with its hooked tail.
12 Isidore may refer to the bestiary called Physiologus (fourth century ce?) and its progeny.
 
Book XII Animals (De animalibus)
 
 
i. Livestock and beasts of burden (De pecoribus et iumentis) 1. Adam was the first to confer names on all the animals, assigning a name to each one at the moment of its creation, according to the position in nature that it holds. 2. The different nations have also given names to each of the animals in their own languages – for Adam did not assign these names in the Latin or Greek language, or in any of the languages of foreign nations, but in that language which, before the Flood, was the language of all peoples, which is called Hebrew. 3. In Latin they are called animals (animal) or ‘animate beings’ (animans), because they are animated (animare) by life and moved by spirit. 4. Quadrupeds (quadrupes) are so called because they walk on four feet (quattuor pedes); while these may be similar to livestock, they are nevertheless not under human control – such as deer, antelopes, onagers, et cetera. But they are not beasts,suchaslions,noraretheybeastsofburden,which could assist the useful activities of humans.
5. We call any animal that lacks human language and form ‘livestock’ (pecus). However, strictly speaking, the term ‘livestock’ is usually applied to those animals that are either suitable for food, such as sheep and swine, or are suitable for use by humans, such as horses and oxen. 6. There is a distinction between the terms pecora (i.e. the plural of pecus, neuter) and pecudes (i.e. the plural of pecus, feminine), for the ancients commonly used to say pecora with the meaning “all animals,” but pecudes were only those animals that are eaten, as if the word were pecuedes (cf. esse, 1st person edo, “eat”). But in general every animal is called pecus from the word ‘pasturing’ (pascere). 7. ‘Beasts of burden’ (iumenta) derive their name from the fact that they assist (iuvare) our labor and burdens by their help in carrying or plowing, for the ox pulls the carriage and turns the hardest clods of earth with the plowshare; the horse and ass carry burdens, and ease people’s labor when they travel. Whence they are called beasts of burden because they assist humans, for these are animals of great strength. 8. They are also called a herd (armentum) either because
247
they are suited for arms (arma), that is, warfare, or because we use them when we are armed. Others understand herds to be oxen only, from ‘plowing’ (arare), as if the word were aramentum, [or because they are armed (armare) with horns]. There is a distinction between herds and flocks (grex), for ‘herd’ is used for horses and oxen, while ‘flock’ is used for goats and sheep.
9. A sheep (ovis) is a mild livestock animal, with wool, a defenseless body, and a peaceful temperament, and it is so called from sacrifice (oblatio), because at first the ancients offered not bulls, but sheep, in sacrifice. They call some of them bidens (lit. “two-toothed”) – those with two of their eight teeth longer than the rest; most often the pagans used to sacrifice these. 10. The wether (vervex) is either named from ‘force’ (vis, gen. viris), because it is stronger than the other sheep, or because it is male (vir), that is, masculine; or because it has a worm (vermis) in its head – irritated by the itching of these worms they butt against each other and strike with great forcewhentheyfight.11.Theram(aries)iseithernamed after the word g#, that is, after ‘Mars’ – whence we call the males in a flock ‘males’ (mas, gen. maris) – or becausethisanimalwasthefirsttobesacrificedonaltars (ara, gen. aris) by pagans. So, the ‘ram’ because it was placed on the altar; whence also this (Sedulius, Paschal Poem 1.115):
The ram is offered at the altar.
12.	Although the Greeks name the lamb (agnus) from i (“holy”) as if it were sacred, Latin speakers think that it has this name because it recognizes (agnoscere) its mother before other animals, to the extent that even if it hasstrayedwithinalargeherd,itimmediatelyrecognizes the voice of its parent by its bleat.
13.	The kid (haedus) is so called from eating (edere), for the young ones are very juicy and pleasing in flavor. Whence also [‘eat’ (edere) and] foodstuffs (edulia) are named. 14. The he-goat (hircus) is a lascivious animal, butting and always eager to mate; his eyes look sideways on account of wantonness, whence he has taken his
 
XII.i.15–i.30
name, for according to Suetonius (Prata, fr. 171), hirqui are the corners of the eyes. His nature is so ardent that hisbloodbyitselfdissolvesadamantinestone,whichcan be overpowered by neither fire nor iron. Larger he-goats are called cinyphii from the river Cinyps in Libya, where they are born large. 15. Some people have said he-goats (caper)andshe-goats(capra)arenamedfromtheircropping (carpere) of bushes, others because they ‘hold to uneven places’ (captare aspera). Some say it derives from the creaking (crepitus) of their legs, whence also they are often called crepae – these are the wild goats which the Greekscalled "  (properlyinGreek,“deer”)because theycanseeverykeenly,thatis, C?"B   (“rather sharp-sightedly”). They dwell in the high mountains, and even from a great distance they can still see anyone who is approaching. 16. And a wild goat is likewise a caprea (in classical Latin, a roe-deer), and an ibex (ibex), as if the word were avex, because they hold to the steep and lofty places as the birds (avis) do, and inhabit the heights, so that from these heights they are scarcely (vix) visible to human gaze. 17. Whence also the southern part of the world calls the birds that inhabit the floods of the Nile ibexes (ibex, i.e. ibis). These animals, as we have said,dwellinthehighestcrags,andifevertheyespydanger from beasts or humans, they throw themselves down fromthehighestpeaksontheirhornsandliftthemselves up unharmed.
18. Deer (cervus) are so called from the word B , that is, from their horns, for ‘horn’ is called B in Greek. They are antagonistic to serpents; when they sense themselves burdened with infirmity, they draw the serpents from their caves with the breath from their nostrils, and having overcome the malignancy of the poison, the deer are restored to health by eating the serpents. They were the ones to discover the herb dittany (dictamnus), for after they have eaten it, they shake out any arrows that have stuck in them. 19. Moreover, they are fascinated by the whistling of reed pipes. They listen intently with ears pricked, but if their ears are lowered, they hear nothing. If ever they swim across great rivers or seas, they place their head on the haunches of the one in front of them, and with each one following the next, they feel no difficulty from the weight. 20. Tragelaphi were named by the Greeks; while they have the same appearance as deer, nevertheless they have shaggy flanks like he-goats, and hairy chins with long beards. They are found nowhere except around the river Phasis.
21. The ‘young stag’ (hinnulus) is the offspring of deer [socalledfrom‘nodding’(innuere),becausetheyconceal themselves at a nod from their mother]. 22. The young doe (dammula) is so called because she flees ‘from one’s hand’ (de manu). She is a timid animal and unwarlike, concerning which Martial says (Epigrams 13.94):
The boar is feared for his tusk, horns defend the stag; what are we unwarlike does (damae) but prey?
23. The hare (lepus), as if the word were levipes (“swift foot”), because it runs swiftly. Whence in Greek it is called E, because of its swiftness, for it is a speedy animalandquitetimid.24.Rabbits(cuniculus),atypeof field animal, are so called as if the word were caniculus, because they are seized or driven out of their holes by hunting packs of dogs (canis).
25. The sow (sus) is so called because she roots up (subigere) feeding grounds, that is, she searches for food by rooting the earth up. The boar (verres), because he hasgreatstrength(vis,pluralvires).Thepig(porcus)asif the name were ‘unclean’ (spurcus), for he gorges himself on filth, immerses himself in mud, and smears himself with slime. Horace (Epistles 1.2.26) says:
And the sow, a friend to mud.
Hence also ‘uncleanness’ (spurcitia) or ‘illegitimate children’(spurius)arenamed.26.Thehairsofpigsarecalled bristles,andbristles(seta)arenamedfromthesow(sus). From these we also name ‘shoemakers’ (sutor), because theysew(suere),thatis,stitchtogether,leatherwithbristles.27.The‘wildboar’(aper)issonamedfromitsferocity(feritas),withtheletterfremovedandapsubstituted. Whence he is also named  , that is “wild” (i.e. “wildboar”)inGreek(cf. O ,“wild”),foreverything that is wild and untamed, we call, with loose usage, ‘of the country’ (agrestis).
28. The bullock (iuvencus) is so called because it was first to assist (iuvare) the activity of humans in cultivating the earth, or because a bullock always used to be sacrificed to Jupiter (Iuppiter, gen. Iovis) everywhere by the pagans – never a bull, for age was a consideration in the choice of sacrifice. 29. ‘Bull’ (taurus) is a Greek word, just as is ‘ox’ (bos). The Indian bulls are tawny and they are as swift as a bird; their hair is turned backward; with their flexibility they turn their head around as they wish; by the hardness of their skin they repel every dart in their fierce wildness. 30. The Greeks call the ox  N.
 
Latin speakers call them triones (i.e. “plowing oxen”) thus because they ‘tread’ (terere) the earth, as if the word were teriones. Naevius (Tragedies 62) says:
This rustic driver of the triones.
Thespanofitshidefromthechintotheforelegsiscalled the dewlap (palear), from the term ‘skin’ (pellis) itself, as ifthewordwerepellear.Thisisasignofgoodbreedingin an ox. Oxen possess an extraordinary affection for their comrades, for one will seek the other with whom he has been accustomed to share the yoke, and with constant lowing show its devoted fondness if by chance the other is missing. 31. The cow (vacca) is so called as if the word were boacca. The noun has the same type of variation as ‘lion’ (leo) and ‘lioness’ (leaena), ‘dragon’ (draco) and ‘dragoness’ (dracaena). 32. Calves (vitulus) and heifers (vitula) are named from their greenness (viriditas), that is, their green (i.e. “vigorous”) age, just as a maiden (virgo) is. A heifer, therefore, is small and has not yet produced young, for after she has been put to breed, she is called a iuvenca or a cow. 33. Buffaloes (bubalus) are so called by derivation, since they are similar to oxen (bos). Theyaresoungovernablethattheydonottolerateayoke on their necks due to their wildness. Africa produces these. 34. The aurochs (urus) is the wild ox of Germania, possessing such long horns that supports for royal tables are made from them due to their size. [They are called urus from the word d , that is, “mountain”].
35. The camel (camelus) takes its name from its characteristics, either because, when they are being loaded, they lie down so that they become shorter and low – for the Greeks say 9 (lit. “on the ground”) for ‘low’ and ‘short’ – or because their backs are humped, for   means “curve” in Greek.1 Although some other regions produce camels, Arabia produces the most. They differ from each other in that the Arabian camels have two humps on their backs and those from the other regions have one hump. 36. The dromedary (dromeda) is a kind ofcamel,smallerinheightbutfaster.Fromthisittakesits name, for ‘race’ and ‘speed’ are called "  in Greek. It is accustomed to travel one hundred Roman miles or more in a single day. This animal ruminates, just like the ox and sheep and camel. 37. Rumination (ruminatio) is named from the rumen (ruma), the upper part of the
1 The word   is not elsewhere attested.
XII.i.31–i.44
gullet through which the food that has been taken down is regurgitated by some animals.
38. The ass (asinus) and the ‘small ass’ (asellus, dim. of asinus) are so called from ‘sitting’ (sedere), as if the wordwereasedus.Theasstookthisname,whichisbetter suited to horses, because before people captured horses, they began by domesticating (praesidere, lit. “sit on”) the ass. Indeed, it is a slow animal and balks for no reason; it allowed itself to be domesticated as soon as mankind wished it. 39. The wild ass is called an onager (onager), for the Greeks call the ass d , and O  is “wild.” Africa possesses large untamed onagers wandering through the desert. Individual onagers lead herds of females. When male colts are born, the adult males become jealous and bite off their testicles, so that the wary mothers hide the male colts in concealed places. 40. Some asses are called ‘Arcadian’ because, large and tall, they were first imported from Arcadia. The smaller asellus is needed more in the field because it tolerates hard work and makes almost no objection to neglect.
41. Horses (equus) are so called because when they were yoked in a team of four they were balanced (aequare); those equal in size and alike in gait would be joined together. 42. The packhorse (caballus) was formerly called a cabo, because when walking it hollows (concavare) the ground with the imprint of its hoof, a property that the other animals do not have. Whence also the ‘charger’ (sonipes) because it ‘clatters with its feet’(pedibussonare).43.Horseshaveagreatdealofliveliness, for they revel in open country; they scent out war; they are roused to battle by the sound of the trumpet; whenincitedbyavoicetheyarechallengedtorace,grieving when they are defeated, and exultant when they are victorious. Some recognize the enemy in war and seek to bite the foe. Some also respond to their own masters, andlosetheirtamenessiftheirownershipchanges.Some willallownooneontheirbackexcepttheirmaster;many of them shed tears when their master dies or is killed, for only the horse weeps and feels grief over humans. Whence [also] in the Centaur the nature of horses and of humans is combined. 44. People who are about to engage in battle are accustomed to deduce what the outcome will be from the dejection or the eagerness of the horses.
Persian, Hunnish, Epirian, and Sicilian horses have a long life span, exceeding fifty years, while the common opinion is that Spanish, Numidian, and Galician
 
XII.i.45–i.60
horses have a shorter life span. 45. In well-bred horses, so the ancients said, four things were considered: form, beauty,quality,andcolor.Form,thatthebodyshouldbe strong and solid, the height appropriate to the strength, the flank long, very lean, with well-rounded haunches, broad in the chest, the entire body knotted with dense musculature, the foot firm and solid with a concave hoof. 46. Beauty, that the head should be small and firm, the skin clinging close to the bones, the ears short and expressive, the eyes large, the nostrils flaring out, the neck upright, the mane and tail thick, the hooves of a firm roundness and solidity. 47. Quality, that it should be daring in spirit, swift of foot, with quivering limbs, which is a sign of strength, and easily roused from the deepest repose and controlled without difficulty when urged to speed. Indeed, the alertness of a horse is made known by its ears, and its valor by its quivering limbs.
48. These colors in particular should be noted: chestnut, golden, ruddy, myrtle-colored, fawn, pale yellow, bright gray, piebald, gray-white, shining-white, flat white, spotted, and black. But in the following list ‘variegated’ (varius) as a mixture of black and chestnut is a special case, but other variegations and ash-color are the least good. 49. The ancients used to call a chestnut (badium) horse vadium, because it runs (vadere) more stronglythantheotheranimals.Thisisalsodate-brown, which people call ‘scarlet.’ And it is called date-brown (spadix) from the color of the date, which Sicilians call spadix. 50. But a ‘bright gray’ (glaucus) horse is as if colored like blue-grey eyes, perfused with a kind of luster, fortheancientswouldcallthis‘brightgray.’Dun(gilvus) is the color of quinces, somewhat whitish. Piebald (guttatus) is white with intervening black spots. 51. ‘Shining white’ (candidus) and ‘flat white’ (albus) are different from each other, for ‘flat white’ has a kind of pallor, but ‘shining white’ is snowy and drenched with pure light. Grey-white (canus) is so called because it is composed of the colors white and black. Spotted (scutulatus) horses are so called because they have round markings, white on maroon. 52. A ‘variegated’ (varius) horse, because it has bands (via) of unlike colors. Horses whose feet alone are white are called petilus; the ones with a white foreheadarecalledcalidus.53.Afawn-colored(cervinus) horseiswhatispopularlycalled guaranen.Thecommon peoplecallthis‘bronzish’(aeranis),becauseitresembles bronze (aes, gen. aeris) in color. A myrtle-colored (mirteus)horseisasubduedmaroon.54.Thedosinushorseis so called because its color is that of an ass (de asinus); it is also known as ash-colored (cinereus). These originate from wild stock, which we call equiferus, and therefore they cannot be used as city horses. 55. The mauros is black, for the Greeks call ‘black’ N .
The cob (mannus) is a smaller horse, which is commonly called brunicus. The ancients named the veredus so because it ‘conveys carriages’ (vehere redas), that is, it pulls them, or because it travels on public roads (via), by which carriages (reda) were also accustomed to go.
56. There are three kinds of horses: one well-bred, suited for battles and riders; the second common and ordinary, suited for draft work, not for riding; the third originating from a mixture of different species, which is called hybrid (bigener), because it is born from different species, like the mule. 57. The mule (mulus) has a name derived from Greek – for it is this in Greek – or because, forced by the miller’s yoke,
It draws the slow millstone (mola) around in grinding
(molere).2
The Jews claim that Ana, Esau’s great-grandson, was the first to have herds of mares mounted by asses in the desert, so that new animals, mules, might be conceived contrary to nature. They also say that onagers were set to mount she-asses for this purpose, and this type of breeding was invented so that very speedy asses would be born from these unions.
58. Indeed human intervention has forced animals of different species to breed with each other, and has thus developedanothertypeofanimalbymeansofanunnaturalcombination.InthiswayJacobobtainedsimilarities of colors contrary to nature, for his sheep conceived offspring similar to the image of the ram mounting them from above that they saw as a reflection in the water (cf. Gen. 30:32–42). 59. And then this same thing is reported tohaveoccurredinherdsofmares,sothatpeoplepresent well-bred stallions to the view of the mares as they conceive, to enable them to conceive and create offspring resembling these stallions. Dove fanciers also place pictures of the most beautiful doves in those places where thedovesaremated,sothat,catchingsightofthepicture, they may produce offspring similar in appearance. 60. Whence also people advise pregnant women not to gaze
2 This verse, identified as metrical by Jacques Andre in his edition´ of Book XII (1986), is of unknown authorship.
 
at repulsive animal faces, such cynocephali or apes, lest they should bear offspring resembling what they have seen. Indeed, the nature of women is such that whatever sort of thing they look at or imagine in the extreme heat of desire, while they are conceiving, is the sort of progeny they will bear. Thus in the act of procreation an animal conveys external forms internally, and since she is filled with the images of these things, she combines their appearance with her own particular quality. 61. Among the animals those born of differing species are called hybrids (bigener), such as the mule from a mare and an ass, the hinny (burdo) from a stallion and a jenny, the hybrida from wild boars and domestic sows, the tityrus from a ewe and a he-goat, and the musmo from a she-goat and a ram. This latter is the leader of the flock.
ii. Beasts (De bestiis) 1. The term ‘beast,’ properly speaking, includes lions, panthers, tigers, wolves, foxes, dogs, apes, and other animals that attack either with their mouth or their claws, excepting serpents. They are called beasts (bestia) from the force (vis) with which they attack. 2. They are termed wild (ferus) because they enjoy a natural freedom and are driven (ferre) by their owndesires–fortheirwillsarefreeandtheywanderhere and there, and wherever their spirit leads, there they go.
3. The term ‘lion’ (leo, gen. leonis) is of Greek origin butisdeclinedinLatin,foritiscalled BA inGreek,and it is a mongrel term, because it is partly corrupt.3 But ‘lioness’ (leaena) is completely Greek, just as ‘dragoness’ (dracaena) is. It is a usage among poets that leaena is called lea. And the Greek word leo is translated as ‘king’ in Latin, because he is the ruler of all the beasts. 4. His kind is said to be of three types. Of these the small ones with curly manes are peaceful, and the long ones with straightmanesarefierce.Theirforeheadsandtailsreveal theirspirit.Theirstrengthisindicatedintheirchest,their steadfastnessintheirhead.Whensurroundedbyhunters they look at the ground so as not to be frightened by the
3	The Latin word leo is “mongrel” because, while its nominative case has a Greek appearance, its oblique cases show regular Latin forms.
4	The Latin terms panther, pardus, and leopardus were not clearly distinguished in early sources. We have arbitrarily translated them as ‘panther,’ ‘pard,’ and ‘leopard.’ Andre (´ 1986) proposes that the etymologies are Greek !Y + , “beast,” and !Y +  , “in
return.”
XII.i.61–ii.10
sightofhuntingspears.Theyfeartherattleofwheels,but they fear fire even more. 5. Even when they are sleeping theireyesarewatchful.Whentheywalktheirtailbrushes away their tracks, so that a hunter cannot find them. When they bear their cubs, the cub is said to sleep for three days and nights, and then after that the roaring or growling of the father, making the den shake, as it were, is said to wake the sleeping cub. 6. Around humans, the lion’s nature is such that unless they are hurt they are unable to become angry. Their tender-heartedness is obvious from continual examples, for they spare those whoarelyingprone,theyallowcaptiveswhomtheymeet to return home, and they never kill a human except in great hunger. Concerning them Lucretius says (On the Nature of Things 5.1036):
And the cubs (scymnus) of lions.
7.	The tiger (tigris) is so called because of its rapid flight, for this is what the Persians and Medes call an arrow. It is a beast distinguished by varied markings, amazing in its strength and speed. The river Tigris is called after the name of the animal, because it is the mostrapidofallrivers.Hyrcania,inparticular,produces tigers.
8.	The panther (panther) is so called either because it is the friend of ‘all’ animals, except the dragon, or because it both rejoices in the society of its own kind and gives back whatever it receives in the same kind4 – for in Greek !Y means “all.” This beast is ornamented with tiny round spots, in such a way that it is marked with little round eyes, varying black and white against a tawny background. 9. It only gives birth once. The reason for this characteristic is obvious, for when the cubs grow in their mother’s womb and, as their powers mature, become strong enough to be born, they detest the delay in time so much that they tear with their claws at the laden womb since it is standing in the way of delivery. The mother gives birth to the cubs, or rather, driven by the pain, casts them out. Thus, afterwards, the generative seed, when it has been infused and received, does not adhere to the injured, scarred matrix of the womb,butrecoilstonoeffect.HencePlinysays(Natural History 8.43) that animals with sharp claws are unable to give birth many times, for they are injured by the cubs moving inside the womb.
10. The pard (pardus), comes next after the panther; this type has a mottled coat, and is extremely swift and
 
XII.ii.11–ii.22
headlong for blood, for it rushes to kill with a leap. 11.Theleopard(leopardus)isbornfromthecross-mating of a lioness and a pard, and yields a third breed. So also Pliny in his Natural History (cf. 8.42) says a lion mates with a female pard, or a male pard with a lioness, and from either union this mixed-breed offspring is created, just like a mule or hinny.
12.Therhinoceros(rhinoceron)isnamedwithaGreek word; in Latin it means “horn on the nose.” This is also the monoceron, that is, the unicorn (unicornus), because it has a single four-foot horn in the middle of its forehead, so sharp and strong that it tosses in the air or impales whatever it attacks. It often fights with the elephant and throws it to the ground after wounding it in the belly. 13. It has such strength that it can be captured by no hunter’s ability, but, as those who have written about the natures of animals claim, if a virgin girl is set before a unicorn, as the beast approaches, she may open her lap and it will lay its head there with all ferocity put aside, and thus lulled and disarmed it may be captured.
14. The Greeks believe that the elephant (elephans) is namedfromthesizeofitsbody,whichlookslikeamountain,forinGreekamountainiscalled  .Amongthe inhabitantsofIndiaanelephantiscalledabarroafterthe sound it makes, whence also its trumpeting is called barritus, and its tusks called ivory (ebur). Its snout is called a trunk (proboscis) because with it the beast moves its ‘foodtoitsmouth’(pabulum+os;cf. ,“tofeed”), and it is like a snake protected by an ivory palisade. 15.Theseanimalswerecalled‘Lucancows’bytheancient Romans; ‘cows’ because they had seen no animal larger than a cow, and ‘Lucan’ because it was in Lucania that Pyrrhus first set them against the Romans in battle. This kind of animal is suited to warfare, for the Persians and Indians, having set wooden towers on them, attack with javelins as if from a rampart. Elephants are very strong in intellect and memory. 16. They proceed in herds; they give a greeting with a gesture, as they can; they flee from mice; they mate facing away from each other; and when they give birth they deliver the offspring in the water or on an island on account of serpents, because serpents are their enemies, and kill them by coiling around them. They carry the fetus for two years, never bearing more than once nor more than one; they live three hundred years. At first elephants were found only in Africa and India, but now only India produces them.
17. The griffin (grypes) is so called because it is an animal with feathers (perhaps cf. grus, “crane”) and four feet (pes). This kind of wild animal is born in the Hyperborean mountains. They are lions in their entire torso, but they are like eagles in their wings and faces. They are violently hostile to horses. They also tear humans apart when they see them. 18. The chameleon (chamaeleon) does not have one color alone, but is speckled with a diverse variety like the pard. It is named thus . . . The small body of the chameleon changes with a very easy transformation to whatever colors it may see, while the larger body size of other animals is not as suited to an easy transformation. 19. The giraffe (camelopardus) is so called because while it is speckled with white spots like the pard (pardus), it has a neck like a horse, ox-like feet, andaheadlikeacamel(camelus).Ethiopiaproducesthis animal.
20. The lynx (lyncis, i.e. lynx) is so called because it is reckoned among the wolves (lupus) in kind; it is a beast thathasspottedmarkingsonitsback,likeapard,butitis similartoawolf;whencethewolfhasthename   and the other animal, ‘lynx.’ People say that its urine hardensintoapreciousstonecalledlyncurius.Thatthelynxes themselvesperceivethisisshownbythisproof:theybury as much of the excreted liquid in sand as they can, from a sort of natural jealousy lest such excretion should be brought to human use. Pliny Secundus (cf. Natural History 8.43) says that lynxes do not bear more than one offspring. 21. Beavers (castor) are so called from ‘castrating’ (castrare). Their testicles are useful for medicines, onaccountofwhich,whentheyanticipateahunter,they castratethemselvesandamputatetheirowngenitalswith their teeth. Concerning them Cicero said in his Scaurian oration (2.7): “They ransom themselves with that part of their body for which they are most sought after.” And Juvenal (Satires 12.34):
(The beaver) who makes himself a eunuch, wishing to escape with the loss of his testicles.
They are also called fibri, and also ‘Pontic dogs.’
22. The bear (ursus) is said to be so called because it shapes its offspring in its ‘own mouth’ (ore suo), as if the wordwereorsus,forpeoplesaythatitproducesunshaped offspring, and gives birth to some kind of flesh that the mother forms into limbs by licking it. Whence this is said (Petronius, Anthol. Latina, ed. Riese, 690.3):
 
Thus with her tongue the bear shapes her offspring when she has borne it.
But prematurity is what causes this kind of offspring; the bear gives birth after at most thirty days, whence it happens that its hurried gestation creates unshaped offspring. Bears have weak heads; their greatest strength is in their forepaws and loins, whence they sometimes stand up erect.
23.Wolf(lupus)comesintoourlanguagederivedfrom Greek, for they call wolves  ; and   is named in Greekfromitsbehavior,becauseitslaughterswhateverit finds in a frenzy of violence (perhaps cf. , “rage”). Others say wolves are named as if the word were leopos, because their strength, just like the lion’s (leo), is in their paws (pes). Whence whatever they tread on with their paws does not live. 24. It is a violent beast, eager for gore. Concerningthewolf,countryfolksaythatapersonloses hisvoiceifawolfseeshimfirst.Whencetosomeonewho suddenly falls silent one says, “The wolf in the story.” Certainly if a wolf perceives that he is seen first, he puts asidehisboldferocity.Wolvesdonotcopulatemorethan twelve days during the entire year. They endure hunger foralongtime,anddevouralargeamountafteralengthy fast.Ethiopiaproduceswolvesthathavemanesaboutthe neck, and of such a variety of shades that people say that there is no color these wolves do not possess.
25. The Latin word ‘dog’ (canis) seems to have a Greek etymology, for the animal is called A in Greek. Still, some people think it is named for the sound (canor) of barking because it is loud, whence also the word ‘sing’ (canere).Noanimalissmarterthanthedog,fortheyhave more sense than the others. 26. They alone recognize their own names; they love their masters; they defend their master’s home; they lay down their life for their master; they willingly run after game with their master; they do not leave the body of their master even when he hasdied.Finally,itispartoftheirnaturenottobeableto liveapartfromhumans.Therearetwoqualitiesfoundin dogs:strengthandspeed.27.Theoffspringofanykindof animalareincorrectlycalled‘pups’(catulus),for,strictly speaking, pups are the offspring of dogs (canis), formed as a diminutive. 28. Dogs born from the chance mating
5 Elementumhereseemstomean“planetarybody”(i.e.themoon) rather than “material element”; the former meaning is common in later Latin, and in the Greek equivalent term   9@ .
XII.ii.23–ii.36
of wolves with dogs are called lycisci, as Pliny says (cf. Natural History 8.148). Also the Indians are accustomed to tie up female dogs in the forest at night, to expose them to wild tigers, and the tigers mount the dogs; from this mating are born dogs so fierce and strong that they overcome lions in combat.
29. Foxes (vulpes) are so named as if the word were volupes, for they are ‘shifty on their feet’ (volubilis + pes) andneverfollowastraightpathbuthurryalongtortuous twistings. It is a deceitful animal, tricking others with its guile, for whenever it has no food it pretends to be dead, and so it snatches and devours the birds that descend to its apparent corpse.
30.‘Ape’(simia)isaGreekword,thatis,‘withflattened nostrils’(cf. ,“pug-nosed”),whencewenameapes, becausetheyhaveflattenednostrilsandanuglyface,with disgustingly baggy wrinkles, although having a flattened nose is also characteristic of goats. Other people think that apes are named from a Latin word, because they are felt to have a great similarity (similitudo) to human behavior, but this etymology is false. 31. Apes, in their knowledge of the elements,5 rejoice at the new moon, and are downcast at the half moon and the crescent moon. They carry the offspring whom they love before them; the ones that are neglected cling to their mother. There are five kinds of apes. Of these the cercopitheci have tails, for it is the ape with a tail, which some people call the clura. 32. The sphinga (i.e. sphinx) is shaggy with hair, and has protruding breasts; they are tame to the point of forgetting their wildness. Cynocephali are themselves also similar to apes, but with a face like that of a dog, hence their name (cf. A, “dog”; , “head”). 33. Satyrs (satyrus) have a somewhat pleasing appearance and are restless, with gesticulating movements. Callitriches are almost entirely different from the others in appearance, for they have a long beard on their face, and a broad tail.
34. The leontophonos (cf.   -, “of a lion”;  , “slaughter”) is a small animal; it is so named because when captured it is burnt, and its flesh, sprinkled with ash and placed at the crossroads, kills lions, if they take even a small amount of it. 35. The porcupine (histrix) is an African animal similar to the hedgehog, named for the ‘clattering’ (stridor) of its quills, which it spreads out and shoots from its back, so as to wound any dogs that chase it. 36. The enhydros is a small beast so named because it dwells in water (cf. X"A, “water”),
 
XII.ii.37–iii.9
particularly in the Nile. If these beasts discover a sleeping crocodile, first they roll themselves in the mud and then enter the crocodile’s stomach through its mouth, and eat everything inside it, so that the crocodile dies. 37. The ichneumon (ichneumon) is so named from Greek (cf. :9, “track down”), because it recognizes both healthful foods and poisons by its sense of smell. Concerning this animal Dracontius (cf. Praises of God 1.515) says:
The suillus destroys (variant: “reveals”) the force of any poison.6
Moreover, it is called suillus from its ‘bristles’ (saeta). This beast hunts snakes. When it fights against an asp, it raises its tail and the asp begins to see the tail as the most threatening. When the asp, thus deceived, turns its force on the tail, it is seized.
38. The mouser (musio) is so called because it is troublesome to mice (mus). Common people call it the cat (cattus) from ‘catching’ (captura). Others say it is so named because cattat, that is, “it sees” – for it can see so keenly(acute)thatwiththegleamofitseyesitovercomes thedarknessofnight.Hence‘cat’comesfromGreek,that is, ‘clever,’ from  (“lit up,” i.e. the passive form of , “kindle”). 39. The mole (furo) is named from ‘dark’ (furvus), whence also comes the word ‘thief’ (fur), for it digs dark and hidden tunnels and tosses out the prey that it finds. 40. The badger (melo, i.e. meles) is so named either because it has a very rounded member (cf. malum, H , “round fruit”; cf. XVII.vii.3 and XIV.vi.28) or because it seeks honeycombs and carefully removes the honey (mel).
iii. Small animals (De minutis animantibus) 1. The mouse (mus) is a tiny animal. Its name is Greek, but any form declined from it becomes Latin.7 Some people say that they are called mice because they are born from the moisture of the earth, for mus is “earth,” whence also the word ‘soil’ (humus). In these creatures the liver growsduringthefullmoon,justassomemarineanimals growlargeratthistimeandgrowsmalleragainwhenthe moon is new. 2. ‘Shrew’ (sorex) is a Latin word, and it is so called because it gnaws and cuts things off like a saw (serra). The ancients said saurex for sorex just as they said claudus for clodus (“lame”). 3. The weasel (mustela) is so named as if it were a long mouse (mus), for a dart (telum) is so named due to its length. This animal, by its nature, practices deceit in the houses where it nurses its pups, and it moves and changes its dwelling. It hunts snakes and mice. There are two kinds of weasels; one, which the Greeks call V , lives in the wild and is larger, while the other wanders into houses. Those people who supposethattheweaselconceivesthroughitsmouthand bears its young through its ear are mistaken.
4. The shrew-mouse (mus araneus, lit. “spider mouse”) is called a spider because of its bite. There is a tiny animal in Sardinia with the shape of a spider that is called solifuga (lit. “sun-fleeing”) because it avoids the daylight. It is plentiful in silver mines, crawling secretly, and it causes death for those who sit on it inadvertently. 5. The mole (talpa) is so called because it is condemned to perpetual blindness in the dark (tenebrae), for, having no eyes, it always digs in the earth, and tosses out the soil, and devours the roots beneath vegetables. The Greeks call it ?. 6. Dormice (glis) are so called becausesleepmakesthemfat,forwesaythattogrowisto ‘swell’ (gliscere). They sleep for the entire winter and lie motionless as if they were dead; in the summertime they revive. 7. The hedgehog (ericium) is an animal covered with quills, from which it is said to be named because it stiffens (subrigere) itself up with its quills when it is cornered; with these quills it is protected on all sides against attack. Immediately when it senses something it first stiffens itself up and, turning itself into a ball, covers itself with its own shield of quills. This animal has a certain cleverness, for when it has plucked a grape from the vine, it rolls itself backwards over it and in this way takes it (i.e. stuck to the quills) to its offspring.
8. The cricket (gryllus) takes its name from the sound of its call. This animal walks backward, bores through theearth,andchirpsatnight.Itmaybecaughtbytossing an ant tied with a string into its hole, first making a puff of dust so that it doesn’t hide itself. When the cricket grabs the ant, it is drawn out of its hole. 9. The ant (formica) is so named because it ‘carries bits of grain’ (fert micas farris). It has great shrewdness, for it provides
6	Dracontius is not speaking in this passage of the ichneumon (a kind of mongoose; cf. :9A, “a tracker, an Egyptian weasellike animal that hunts eggs”) or the suillus, but of the Libyan people called Psillus (cf. Pliny, Natural History 21.28); Isidore’s source-text wasfaulty.InclassicalLatinsuillusisanadjectivemeaning“ofswine”; cf. vi.12 below.
7	The sense is that mus in Latin is declined with Latin, not Greek, forms in the oblique cases.
 
for the future and prepares during the summer what it consumes in the winter; during the harvest it selects the wheat and does not touch the barley. When it rains on the ant’s grain, the ant throws it out.8 It is said that in Ethiopia there are ants in the shape of dogs, who dig up golden sand with their feet – they guard this sand lest anyone carry it off, and when they chase something they pursue it to death. 10. The ‘ant lion’ (formicoleon) is so called either because it is the lion (leo) of ants or, more likely, because it is equally an ant and a lion, for it is a small animal very dangerous to ants because it hides itself in the dust and kills the ants carrying grain. And thus it is called both an ‘ant’ and a ‘lion,’ because to the rest of the animals it is like an ant, but to ants it is like a lion.
iv. Snakes (De serpentibus) 1. ‘Serpent’ (anguis) is the term for the family of all snakes, because they can bend and twist; and thus it is anguis because it is ‘turned at angles’ (angulosus) and never straight. Snakes were always considered among the pagans as the spirits of places, whence Persius (Satires 1.113):
Paint two snakes; boys, the place is sacred.9
2. The coluber (i.e another word for ‘snake’) is named thus because it ‘inhabits the shadows’ (colit umbras) or because it glides in slippery (lubricus) courses with sinuous curves. And whatever slips away when it is grasped is called ‘slippery’ – like the fish and the snake. 3. The snake (serpens) takes its name because it creeps (serpere) bysecretapproaches;itcrawlsnotwithopenstepsbutby tiny thrusts of its scales. But those animals that support themselves on four feet, like the lizard and the newt, are not snakes, but are called reptiles (reptile). Snakes are also reptiles, because they crawl (repere) on their stomach and breast. Of these animals there are as many poisons as there are kinds, as many varieties of danger as there are of appearance, and as many causes of pain as there are colors.
4. The dragon (draco) is the largest of all the snakes, or of all the animals on earth. The Greeks call it "A, whence the term is borrowed into Latin so that we say draco. It is often drawn out of caves and soars aloft, and
8	The sense may rather be that the ant puts the grain out to dry.
9	The genius loci, “spirit of a place,” was often represented as a snake.
XII.iii.10–iv.11
disturbs the air. It is crested, and has a small mouth and narrow pipes through which it draws breath and sticks out its tongue. It has its strength not in its teeth but in its tail, and it causes injury more by its lashing tail than with its jaws. 5. Also, it does not harm with poison; poison is not needed for this animal to kill, because it; kills whatever it wraps itself around. Even the elephant with his huge body is not safe from the dragon, for it lurks around the paths along which the elephants are accustomed to walk, and wraps around their legs in coils andkillsthembysuffocatingthem.ItisborninEthiopia and India in the fiery intensity of perpetual heat.
6. ‘Basilisk’ (basiliscus) is a Greek word, translated into Latin as “little king” (regulus; cf. , “king”), because it is the king of the snakes, so that they flee when they see it because it kills them with its odor – it also kills a human if it looks at one. Indeed no flying bird may pass unharmed by the basilisk’s face, but however distant it may be it is burnt up and devoured by this animal’s mouth. 7. However, the basilisk may be overcome by weasels. For this reason people take weasels into caves where the basilisk lies hidden; and as the basilisk takes flight at the sight, the weasel chases it down and kills it. Thus the Creator of nature sets forth nothing without a remedy. It is half a foot in length, and markedwithwhitespots.8.Basilisks,likescorpions,seek after parched places, and when they come to water they become hydrophobic – I" <  – and frantic. 9. The sibilus (lit. “the hissing one”) is the same as the basilisk, and it kills by means of a hissing, before it bites and burns.
10.	The viper (vipera) is so named because it is ‘born throughforce’(viparere),forwhentheirmother’swomb is groaning to deliver, the offspring, not waiting for nature’s suitable time, gnaw at and forcibly tear open theirmother’ssides,causingherdeath.Lucan(CivilWar 6.490) says:
When the body has burst apart, the knotted vipers gather.
11.	It is said that the male spits his seed into the mouthof the female viper, and she, turned from the passion of lust to rage, bites off the head of the male that is in her mouth. Thus it happens that each parent dies; the male when they mate and the female when she gives birth. From the viper comes the pill that the Greeks call .
 
XII.iv.12–iv.25
12.Theasp(aspis)isnamedthusbecausewithitsbiteit introduces and scatters (spargere) venom, for the Greeks call venom :. Whence the term ‘asp,’ because it kills with a venomous bite. There are different kinds with different appearances, some more harmful than others. And it is said that when an asp begins to give in to an enchanter who has called it with certain special chants so that he may draw it from its cave, and the asp does not want to come out, it presses one ear against the ground and blocks and closes up the other with its tail [so that] by not hearing the magic words it does not go out to the enchanter. 13. The dipsas is a type of asp, called situla in Latinbecausewhomeverithasbittendiesofthirst(sitis). 14. The hypnalis, a type of asp, is so called because it kills by means of sleep (cf. X! , “sleep”). Cleopatra held this snake to herself and thus was overcome by death as if by sleep. 15. The haemorrhois asp is so named because whoever has been bitten by it exudes blood, with the effect that as the veins dissolve it draws out through the blood whatever life there is – for blood is called T in Greek.
16. The prester asp hurries with its mouth always open andsteaming.Thepoetrecalledthisanimalthus(Lucan, Civil War 9.722):
The greedy prester, swelling out its steaming mouth.
Whoever it strikes swells up and is killed by a tremendous bodily swelling, and this swelling is accompanied by putrefaction. 17. The seps, a corrosive asp that, when it has bitten a person, immediately consumes him, so that the victim is entirely liquefied in the snake’s mouth. 18. The horned (cerastes) serpent is so called because it has horns on its head like a ram, for the Greeks call horns B . It has four small horns, and it displays them as if they were food, so that it kills the animals roused by this enticement. It covers its entire body with sand, and reveals no sign of itself exceptthatpartbywhichitattacksthebirdsandanimals thatithaslured.Anditismoreflexiblethanothersnakes, so that it seems to have no spine. 19. The scytale snake is so named because it gleams with so much variegation of its skin that it slows onlookers by the charm of its markings (perhaps cf. scintilla, “spark, glimmer”). And because it is rather slow at crawling, it captures those it is too slow to catch when they are mesmerized and wondering at it. It is an animal of such heat that even in the winter it sheds the skin of its heated body. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.717):
And only the scytale will shed its skin with frost still scattered about.
20. The amphisbaena is named because it has two heads (cf. , “on both sides”; , “go”), one in the proper place and one on the tail, and it advances with both heads leading, its body trailing in a loop. This aloneofthesnakestrustsitselftothecold,andcomesout first of all the serpents. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.719):
Grievous is the amphisbaena, turning toward its two heads.
Its eyes glow like lamps. 21. The enhydris is a serpent living in the water, for the Greeks call water X"A. 22. The hydros is an aquatic snake; people struck by it become swollen. Some people call the ill effects of this boa, because it is remedied with cow (bos) dung. 23. The hydra (hydra) is a dragon with many heads; this kind of dragon was in the Lernean swamp in the province of Arcadia. It is called excetra in Latin, because when one head is ‘cut off, three’ (caesus tria) more grow back. But this is only a story; for it happens that Hydra was a place that spewed out floods that devastated the neighboring city. If one outlet for the water were closed up in this Hydra, many others would burst forth. When Hercules saw this he dried up the place itself and thus closed up the path of the floods. Hydra is named from ‘water’ (cf. X"A, “water”).
24. The chelydros is a snake that is also known as the chersydros, as if it were cerim,10 because it dwells both in the water and on land; for the Greeks call land 9B  and water X"A. These make the earth on which they move smoke, as Macer thus describes it (fr. 8):
Whether their backs froth out poison, or it smokes on the earth, where the hideous snake crawls.
And Lucan (Civil War 9.711):
And the chelydri drawn along with their smoking trails.
But it always proceeds in a straight line, for if it turns when it moves, it immediately makes a sharp noise. 25. The natrix is a snake that contaminates water with its
10 The term cerim appears to be a textual corruption.
 
poison.Whateverspringitwasin,itwouldmixitspoison into it. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.720):
The natrix, polluter of water.
26.Thecenchris(i.e.akindofspottedsnake)isasnake that cannot bend so that it always makes a straight path. Whence Lucan (Civil War 9.712):
The cenchris, always bound to crawl in a straight path.
27.	The parias is a snake that always travels on its tail, and appears to make a furrow. Again, Lucan said this concerning it (Civil War 9.721):
Whence the parias is pleased to plow a path with its tail.
28.	The boa (boas), a snake in Italy of immense size, attacks herds of cattle and buffaloes, and attaches itself to the udders of the ones flowing with plenty of milk, and kills them by suckling on them, and from this takes the name ‘boa,’ from the destruction of cows (bos). 29. The iaculus is a flying snake. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 9.720):
And the flying iaculi.
For they spring up into trees, and whenever some animal happens by they throw (iactare) themselves on it and kill it, whence they are called iaculus (cf. iaculum, “javelin”). Also in Arabia there are snakes with wings, called sirens (sirena); they move faster than horses, but they are also said to fly. Their venom is so powerful that when someone is bitten by them death ensues before the pain is felt. 30. The ophites is so named because it has the color of sand. Concerning it the poet says (Lucan, Civil War 9.714):
How the Theban ophites is painted with small spots, and
the ammodytes, of the same color as parched sand and indistinguishable from it.11
31. The seps is a small snake that consumes not only the body but also the bones with its venom. The poet refers to it thus (Lucan, Civil War 9.723):
The corrosive seps, dissolving bones along with the body.
11	As Isidore observes in XVI.v.3, ophites is a marble mottled like a serpent; the text of Lucan is here misconstrued.
12	The sense seems to be that the saura recovers its sight when the sun rises, as in the Physiologus.
XII.iv.26–iv.39
32.	The dipsas is said to be a snake so tiny that when it is stepped on it is not observed. Its venom kills before it is felt, so that the face of one about to die displays no horror of his impending death. Of this one the poet says (cf. Lucan, Civil War 9.737):
With its head twisted back the dipsas, when it was stepped on, bit the young standard-bearer Aulus, of Tyrrhenian blood; there was barely any pain or sensation of fangs.
33.	The salpuga is a snake that is invisible. The caecula is so named because it is small (i.e. has the diminutive ending –ula) and has no eyes (cf. caecus, “blind”). The centipede (centupeda) is so named for the great number of its feet (pes, gen. pedis). 34. The lizard (lacertus) is a typeofreptile,sonamedbecauseithasarms(cf.lacertus, “upper arm”). There are many kinds of lizards, such as the botrax, the salamander, the saura, and the newt. 35. The botrax is so named because it has the face of a frog, for the Greeks call the frog  9 . 36. The salamander(salamandra)issonamedbecauseitprevails against fire. Of all the venomous creatures its force is the greatest; the others kill people one at a time, but the salamander can slay many people at once – for if it should creep in among the trees, it injects its venom into all the fruit, and so it kills whoever eats the fruit. Again, if it falls into a well, the force of its venom kills whoever drinks from it. This animal fights back against fire; it alone of all the animals will extinguish fire, for it can live in the midst of flames without feeling pain or being consumed – not only because it is not burned but also because it extinguishes the fire.
37. The saura is a lizard whose eyes go blind as it grows old. It goes into a chink in an east-facing wall, and stretches out and receives light when the sun rises.12 38. The newt (stellio) has its name given according to its color, for on its back it is marked with glittering spots in the manner of stars (stella). Ovid says concerning it (Met. 5.460):
It has a name appropriate for its color, star-strewn (stellatus) with variegated spots on its body.
This animal is considered to be the antagonist of scorpions, so that when it is seen by them it induces fear and stupefaction. 39. There are other kinds of snakes, such as the ammodyta, the elephantia, the chamaedraco. Finally, there are as many deaths caused by snakes as
 
XII.iv.40–v.4
there are names for them. Further, all snakes are cold by nature, and they do not strike except when they are warm. 40. When they are cold they injure no one; hence their venom is more noxious during the day than at night, for they are sluggish in the chill of the night, and understandably so, since they are cold in the evening dew. Thus their venom, which is cold by nature, draws toitselfthewarmthoftheirchilledbodies.Henceduring thewintertheyliemotionlessincoils,butinthesummer they are uncoiled. 41. Hence it is that whenever someone is injected with snake venom, he is stupefied at first and then, when the poison is heated up in him and becomes fiery, it kills him forthwith.
Venom (venenum) is so named because it rushes through the veins (vena), for its destructive effect, once infused, travels through the veins when bodily activity increases, and it drives out the soul. 42. Hence venom is unable to cause harm unless it reaches a person’s blood. Lucan (Civil War 9.614):
The pestilence of snakes is fatal when mixed in with blood.
Further, all venom is cold, and hence the soul, which is fiery, flees the cold venom. Among the natural advantages that we see are common to humans as well as to irrationalanimals,thesnakeexcelsinacertainquickness of sense. 43. Hence it is written in Genesis (cf. 3:1): “For theserpentwasshrewderthanallthebeastsoftheearth.” And Pliny says (i.e. a false attribution from Servius), if it may be believed, that if a snake’s head escapes with only two inches of its body, it will still live. Hence it will cast its entire body towards those striking it in order to save its head.
44. Vision in snakes generally is feeble – they rarely look directly forward, with good reason, since they have eyes not in the front of their face but in their temples, so that they hear more quickly than they see. No other animal darts its tongue as quickly as the snake, so that it appears to have three tongues when in fact it has one. 45. The snake’s body is moist, so that it leaves a trail of moisture wherever it goes. The tracks left by snakes are such that, although they are seen to lack feet, they nevertheless crawl on their ribs with forward thrusts of their scales, which are spread evenly from the highest part of the neck to the lowest part of the belly. They support themselves on their scales, which are like nails, and with their ribs, which are like legs. 46. Hence if a snake is crushed by some blow to any part of the body, from the belly to the head, it is unable to make its way, having been crippled, because wherever the blow strikes it breaks the spine, which activates the ‘feet’ of the ribs and the motion of the body.
Snakes are said to live for a long time, because when theyshedtheiroldskintheyaresaidtoshedtheir‘oldage’ (senectus, also meaning the “cast-off” skins of snakes) and return to youth. 47. Snake skins are called ‘castoffs’ (exuviae)becausewhensnakesagethey‘castoff’(exuere) these skins from themselves, and having cast them off, returntoyouth.Likewise‘castoffs’and‘garments’(induviae) are so called because they are cast off and ‘put on’ (induere).48.Pythagorassaysthatasnakeiscreatedfrom the spinal cord of a dead person. Ovid mentions this in his Metamorphoses when he says (15.389):
There are those who believe the human spinal cord is changed to a snake when the spine, in the sealed sepulcher, has rotted.
This, if it is believed, occurs with some justice, in that as a human’s death comes about from a snake, so a snake comes about from a human’s death. It is also said that a snake will not dare to strike a naked human.
v. Vermin (De verminibus)13 1. Vermin (vermis) are animals that are generated for the most part from flesh or wood or some earthy substance, without any sexual congress – but sometimes they are brought forth from eggs,likethescorpion.Thereareverminoftheearth,the water, the air, flesh, leaves, wood, and clothing. 2. Spiders (aranea) are vermin of the air (aer), named from the air that is their nourishment. They spin out a long thread from their little body and, constantly attentive to their webs, never leave off working on them, maintaining a perpetual suspension in their own piece of craftsmanship. 3. The leech (sanguisuga) is a water vermin, so named because it sucks blood (sanguinem sugere). It lies in wait for creatures when they are drinking, and when it glides into their throat, or attaches itself somewhere, it drinks in their blood. When it is sated by too much blood, it vomits out what it has drunk so that it may once more suck in fresher blood. 4. Scorpions (scorpio) are land vermin; they are counted more appropriately amongtheverminthanamongthesnakes.Thescorpion
13 Vermis can mean “vermin,” or more specifically, “worm.”
 
is an animal armed with a sting, and was named from thisinGreek(cf.  ! ),becauseitstingswithitstail and infuses venom through the bow-shaped wound.14 It is characteristic of the scorpion that it does not attack the palm of the hand.
5. The ‘Spanish fly’ (cantharis) is a land vermin [that with its burning makes blisters full of liquid as soon as it is applied to the human body]. 6. The multipes is a land vermin, so named from its ‘great number of feet’ (multitudo pedum); it rolls up into a ball when it is touched. They are generated under rocks, out of the moisture and earth. 7. Slugs (limax) are mud vermin, so named because they are generated either in mud (limus) orfrommud;hencetheyarealwaysregardedasfilthyand unclean. 8. Silkworms (bombyx) are leaf vermin. Silkcloth (bombycinum) is prepared from their web. They are called by this name because they are emptied out whentheyspintheirthread,andairaloneremainsinside them.15 9. Cankerworms (eruca) are leaf vermin that are wrapped up in vegetable greens or in vine-leaves; they are named from ‘gnawing away’ (erodere). Plautus refers to them in (The Casket 728):
He folds himself up, imitating a vile, malignant beast wrapped in a vine-leaf.
This animal does not fly as the locust does, hurrying hereandthereandleavinghalf-consumedplantsbehind it; instead it remains on the fruit, which is doomed to die, and consumes everything with slow gliding and lazy bites.
10.TheGreekscallwoodverminteredo(i.e.  "E) because they ‘eat by grinding’ (terendo edere). We call them wood-worms (termes, i.e. tarmes). So wood vermin are called by Latin speakers; trees that are felled at the wrong time generate these vermin. 11. Moth-worms (tinea) are clothes vermin, so named because they hold fast (tenere), and they settle in right at the place they eat away. Whence also the word ‘tenacious’ (pertinax) for someone who keeps at the same thing again and again.
14	The “bow-shaped” wound links the animal scorpio with the militarymachinealsonamedscorpio–seeV.xxvii.18andXVIII.viii.3.
15	Andre (´ 1986) suggests that Isidore alludes to another meaning of the Greek word ?, i.e. “flute,” through which air passes.
16	The translation here follows a convincing emendation proposed by Klussman (see Andre´ 1986, note ad loc.), transposing the phrase “as snakes do.”
XII.v.5–vi.3
12. There are flesh vermin: the hemicranius, the mawworm, the ascaris, the costus, the louse, the flea, the nit (lens), the tarmus, the tick, the usia, the bed-bug. 13. Hemicranius is the name of a vermin of the head. The maw-worm (lumbricus) is a vermin of the intestines, named as if the word were lumbicus, because it glides (labi) or because it is found in the loins (lumbus). Ascaris . . . Costus . . . 14. Lice (peduculus) are skin vermin named from the feet (pes, gen. pedis). Hence those on whose bodies lice swarm are called peducosus. 15. But fleas(pulex)aresonamedbecausetheyaremainlynourished by dust (pulvis). Nits . . . The tarmus is a vermin found in fat. The tick (ricinus) is a vermin found on dogs (canis), so called because it sits in the ‘ears of dogs’ (auribus canum), for A is the Greek word for dog. 16. The usia is a vermin of swine, named because it ‘burns’ (urere, ppl. ustum), for wherever it has bitten, that spot becomes so inflamed that blisters are formed there. 17. The bedbug (cimex) is named for its similarity to a certain plant (i.e. cimicia; see XVII.ix.57) whose stench it possesses.
18. In particular, vermin (vermis, here specifically “maggots”) are generated in putrid meat, the mothworm in clothing, the cankerworm in vegetables, the wood-worm in wood, and the tarmus in fat. 19. Vermin do not crawl with obvious steps, or with a pushing of scales as snakes do, because vermin do not possess the strong support of a spine, as in serpents.16 Rather, they achieve motion by extending the contracted parts of their little bodies forward by degrees, and contracting them again, and set moving like this they glide along.
vi. Fish (De piscibus) 1. Fish (piscis) are named from the same source as livestock (pecus), that is, from ‘grazing’ (pascere). 2. Animals that swim are called reptiles (reptile), because they possess the look and natural habit of creeping (reptare); even though they submerge themselves in the deep, still they creep in their swimming. Hence David says (cf. Psalm 103:25 Vulgate): “This sea is great and spacious; there are creeping things (reptilis) without number.” 3. Amphibians (amphibia) are a certain type of fish, so called because they possess the habit ofwalkingonthelandandtheactionofswimminginthe water – for in Greek  means “both,” that is, because they live (cf. A , “live”) both in water and on land – such as seals, crocodiles, and hippopotami, that is, ‘river horses.’
 
XII.vi.4–vi.20
4. People gave names to livestock and beasts and flyinganimalsbeforenamingfish,becausetheformerwere seen and recognized before. Later, as the types of fish gradually came to be known, names were established based either on a similarity to land animals or on their particular appearance or behavior [or color or shape or sex]. 5. Based on a similarity to land animals, such as ‘frogs’ (i.e. “frog-fish,” and so for the rest) and ‘calves’ and ‘lions’ and ‘blackbirds’ and ‘peacocks,’ colored with various hues on the neck and back, and ‘thrushes,’ mottled with white, and other fish that took for themselves the names of land animals according to their appearance. Based on land behavior, such as ‘dogs’ in the sea, so called from land dogs because they bite, and pikes (lupus, lit. “wolf”), because they pursue other fish with cruel voracity. 6. Based on color, as the maigre (umbra, lit. “shadow”), which are the color of shadows, and ‘giltheads’ (aureta), because they have the color of gold (aurum)ontheirheads,andvariifromvariegation;these arecommonlycalled‘trout’(tructa).Basedonshape,like the orbis (lit. “circle”), because it is round and consists entirely of its head, and like the sole (solea) because it looks like the sole (solea) of a shoe. Based on sex, like the musculus, because it functions as the male (masculus) for whales; for it is said that ‘female sea-monsters’ (bellua) conceive through intercourse with these animals. Hence also the mussel (musculus cochlearum), by whose milt oysters conceive. 7. Whales (ballena) are beasts of enormous size, named from casting forth and spraying water, for they throw waves higher than the other sea animals; in Greek  means “cast forth.” 8. The sea-monster (cetus, plural cete) is named H  , plural  , that is, on account of its vastness.17 These are huge types of sea-monsters (bellua), and their bodies are the same size as mountains. Such a cetus swallowed Jonah; its belly was so big that it resembled hell, as the prophet says (cf. Jonah 2:3): “He heard me from the belly of hell.”
9.Sea-horses(equusmarinus),becausetheyarehorses (equus)intheirfrontpartandthenturnintofish.Bogues (boca) are said to be marine ‘cows’ (bos), as if the word were boacas. 10. The caerulei (lit. “azure”) are named from their color, for azure is green mixed with black, like the sea. 11. Dolphins (delphin) have their appointed name because they follow the voices (cf. A, “voice”) of humans, or because they gather in a group at the sound of music (symphonia).18 Nothing in the sea is faster than they are, for they often jump over ships as they leap. When they play in the billows and dash themselves headlong against the mass of the waves in their leaping, they seem to portend storms. Properly, they are calledsimones.ThereisakindofdolphinintheNilewith a saw-tooth back; it kills crocodiles by cutting the soft parts of their bellies. 12. Sheatfish (porcus marinus, lit. “sea pigs”), commonly called suilli (lit. “small swine”), are so named because when they seek food they root up the earth underwater like swine. At their throat they have what functions as a mouth, and unless they submergetheirsnoutintothesand,theydonotcollectfood. 13. Corvi (lit. “ravens”) are named ‘from the sound of their breast’ (a cordis voce), because they croak in their breast and, betrayed by their characteristic sound, they are captured.
14. The tuna (thynnus) has a Greek name. They come in the spring. They approach on the right and depart on the left; hence it is believed that they see more acutely with the right eye than with the left. 15. The swordfish (gladius) is so called because it has a snout like a sword (cf. gladius, “sword”); because of this it pierces ships and sinksthem.16.Thesaw-fish(serra,lit.“saw”)issonamed becauseithasaserrated(serratus)crest,andcutsthrough boats when it swims under them. 17. The scorpion-fish (scorpio) is so called because it causes injury when it is picked up in the hand. They say that when ten crabs are bound with a bundle of basil, all the nearby scorpionfish will gather in that spot. 18. The weever (aranea, lit. “spider”) is a kind of fish so called because it strikes with its ear (auris); for its ear has stingers with which it attacks.
19.Thecrocodile(crocodillus),namedfromitssaffron (croceus) color, is born in the Nile. It is a quadruped animal, powerful on land and also in the water. It is commonly twenty cubits in length, armed with huge teeth and claws, with skin so tough that it repels blows from stones, however strong, against its back. 20. It rests in the water at night, and on the land during the day. It incubates its eggs on land, the male and the female taking turns to guard them. Certain fish with a serrated
17	Isidore misconstrues Servius, quoting Vergil’s “Huge seamonsters” (Aen. 5.822), as meaning “sea-monsters (cete), i.e. ‘huge ones.’” Bellua and cetus can both mean either “large sea monster” or “whale.”
18	As symphonia can mean “a musical instrument,” Isidore may here allude to the term delphinus, a part of the water organ.
 
crest may kill a crocodile by sawing into the soft parts of its belly (see section 11 above). [It is said to be the only animal that moves its upper jaw]. 21. The hippopotamus (hippopotamus) is so named because it is similar to the horse (cf. j!! , “horse”) in its back, its mane, and its neighing; its snout is tilted back, and it has boar-like teeth and a curled tail. It stays in the water (cf. ! , “river”) during the day and grazes on crops at night. The Nile also produces this animal.
22. The pagrus (perhaps the sea-bream or the fraize), whichtheGreekscall   becauseitsteetharesohard that it feeds on oysters in the sea (perhaps cf. @, “eat”). 23. The bream (dentix) is named for the great number and size of its teeth (dens, gen. dentis). The seahare (lepus, lit. “hare”) is named for the similarity of its head to that of a hare. 24. The pike (lupus, lit. “wolf”), as hasbeensaid,isnamedforitsvoracity.Itisadifficultfish tocatch;itissaidthatwhenapikeissurroundedbyanet, it digs into the sand with its tail, and, hidden in this way, slips by the net. 25. The ‘red mullet’ (mullus) is named becauseitissoft(mollis)andverydelicate.Peoplesaythat as food red mullets inhibit desire and dull the acuity of the eyes. People who often eat them smell of fish. When a red mullet is killed in wine, those who drink from it developadistasteforwine.26.The‘graymullet’(mugilis) takes its name from being ‘very agile’ (multum agilis), for wherever they sense fishermen’s traps they immediately turn back to leap over the net, so that you may see the fish fly. 27. The black-tail (melanurus) is named becauseithasablacktail(cf.  L,“tail”)andblackfins, and black lines on its body – for the Greeks call ‘black’ B. 28. The glaucus is named for its color, because it is white, for the Greeks call ‘white’ . This fish rarely appears in the summer, except on cloudy days. 29. The thymallus takes its name from a flower – indeed the flower is called ‘thyme’ (thymus) – for although it is pleasing in appearance and agreeable in flavor, still, just like a flower, it smells and exhales aromas from its body.30.Theescarus(i.e.scarus)issonamedbecauseitis saidtobetheonlyonetoruminateitsfood(esca);forthe otherfishdonotruminate.Peoplesaythatthisisaclever fish, for when it is enclosed in a wicker trap, it does not break through with its brow or thrust its head through the opposing twigs, but, turning around, with repeated blows of its tail it widens an opening and so goes out backwards. If by chance another escarus sees its struggle from the outside, it helps its efforts to break out by seiz-
XII.vi.21–vi.42
ing the tail with its teeth. 31. The sparus (lit. “spear,” i.e. a smallseabream)takesitsnamefromthethrowinglance, becauseithasthesameshape–forterrestrialthingswere discovered before marine ones. Sparus refers to a rustic throwing spear, so named for ‘casting’ (spargere).
32. The ‘southern-fish’ (australis piscis, properly the name of a constellation) is named either because it takes up (cf. (h)aurire, ppl. (h)austus, “drink,” and cf. XIII.xi.6) a wave of water in its mouth (os, gen. oris) or because it appears (oriri) at the time when the Pleiades begintodeclineinthewest.33.Therock-dwellinghamio is marked on its right and left sides by unbroken stripes of purple and other colors. It is called hamio because it is not caught except with a hook (hamus). 34. The remora (echenais), a small fish half a foot long, takes its name becauseitholdsashipfastbyclingingtoit.Evenifwinds rush and storms rage, still the ship seems to stand in the sea as if rooted, and is not moved, not as a result of being held back, but simply by being clung to. Latin speakers have named this the mora (lit. “delay”) because it forces boats to stand still. 35. The uranoscopus (cf.  L, “heaven”;  !@, “gaze”) is named from the eye that it has in its head, with which it is always looking upward. 36.Themillago(perhapstheflyinggurnard)issonamed becauseitfliesoutoverthewater.Andwheneveritisseen flying above the water, the weather is changing. 37. The squatus is named because it has ‘sharp scales’ (squamis acutus).Forthisreasonwoodispolishedwithitsskin.38. The Syrian city now called Tyre was once called ‘Sarra’ after a certain fish that is abundant there, which they call sar in their language. From this name was drawn the name of small fish similar to these called sardae and ‘sardines’ (sardina). 39. The allec (i.e. hallec) is a small fish suitable for ‘pickled fish sauce’ (salsamentum; cf. b, “salt”), whence it is named. 40. The aphorus is a small fish that cannot be caught on a hook due to its smallness (perhaps cf. b<   with a sense like “unable to be held”). 41. The eel (anguilla) was given its name from its similarity to a serpent (anguis). Eels originate from mud; hence, when one is caught, it is so slippery that the tighter you hold it, the more quickly it slips away. They saythattheriverGanges,intheEast,produceseelsthirty feet long. When eels are killed in wine, whoever drinks it then develops a distaste for wine.
42.	The sea-dragon (draco marinus) has stingers in its arms, oriented toward the tail. When it strikes, it emits poison into whatever spot it attacks, [whence its name].
 
XII.vi.43–vi.56
43.	The Greeks call the murena (muraena) , becauseittwistsitselfincircles.19 Peoplesaythisfishonly exists in the female sex and that it conceives by means of a snake; on this account it can be summoned and caught by fishermen making a hissing sound like a snake. It can be killed with difficulty by a cudgel blow, but immediately with a rod. It clearly has its vital principle in its tail, forwhenitsheadisbeaten,itcanscarcelybekilled,butit dies immediately when the tail is struck. 44. Conger-eel (congrus) . . . The octopus (polypus), that is, ‘with many feet’ (cf. ! , “many”; ! , “foot”), for it possesses many tentacles. This ingenious animal reaches for the hookandgraspsitwithitsarms,notbitingit,anditdoes not release the hook until it has eaten around the food on it. 45. The ‘electric ray’ (torpedo) is named because it makes the body become numb (torpescere) if anyone touches it while it is alive. Pliny Secundus recounts (cf. Natural History 32.7): “From the Indian Ocean the electric ray, even if it is far distant, or if it is touched with a spear or stick, numbs one’s muscle, no matter how strong it is, and fetters one’s feet, no matter how swift they are.” Its force is such that even the aura of its body weakens the limbs. 46. The cuttlefish (sepia) is named because it is more easily caught when it is hemmed in by enclosures (sepes, i.e. saepes). It is a disgusting species with respect to coition, for it conceives in its mouth as do vipers. There is so much strength in its black ink that some say that when it is placed in a lamp, with the light first removed, people appear to be Ethiopian. 47. The squid (lulligo, i.e. loligo): they say that in the Ocean by Mauretania, not far from the river Lixus, such a multitude of squid fly out from the water that they can even sink ships.
48. Shellfish (concha) and ‘water snails’ (cochlea) are so named because during the waning moon they are ‘hollowed out’ (cavare), that is, they are emptied out, for all the enclosed sea animals and shellfish have their body parts swell up with the waxing of the moon, and shrink back with its waning. Thus the moon, when it waxes, increases the humors, but when it wanes, the humors decrease – this is what natural philosophers say. The word concha is a primary noun, while cochlea is a diminutive, as if it were conchlea. 49. There are many kinds of shellfish, among which some are pearl-bearing. These are called oceloe;20 the precious stone is solidified in their flesh. People who have written on the nature of animals say concerning these creatures that they seek the shore at night, and conceive the pearls by means of celestial (caelestis) dew; hence they are called oceloe. 50.Thepurple-fish(murex,alsomeaning“asharprock”; cf. XVI.iii.3) is a shellfish of the sea, named for its sharpness and roughness. It is called by another name, conchilium (also meaning “a purple dye”), because when it is cut round with a blade, it sheds tears of a purple color, withwhichthingsaredyedpurple.Andfromthisostrum (i.e. purple dye) is named, because this dye is drawn out from the liquid of the shell (cf. section 52 below).
51. Crabs (cancer) are so called because they are shellfish (concha) possessing legs (crus, gen. cruris). They are animals hostile to oysters. With marvelous ingenuity they live on oyster flesh, for, because the oyster’s strong shell cannot be opened, the crab spies out when the oyster opens the closed barricade of its shell, and then stealthily puts a pebble inside, and with the closing thus impeded, eats the oyster’s flesh. Some people say that when ten crabs are bound with a bundle of basil, all the nearby scorpion-fish come to that place to mate. There are two kinds of crabs, river crabs and sea crabs. 52.Theoyster(ostrea)isnamedfromtheshellwithwhich the inner softness of its flesh is guarded, for the Greeks call a shell C  (i.e. d  ). People use the word ostrea as a neuter, but its flesh is of the feminine gender grammatically. 53. The mussel (musculus), as we have said above (see section 6), is a shellfish from whose milt oysters conceive, and they are called musculus as if the word were masculus (i.e. “male”). 54. The peloris (i.e. a kind of mussel) is named after Pelorus, a promontory in Sicily where they abound: (Vergil, Aen. 3.687):
Behold, Boreas from the narrows of Pelorus.
55. The unguis (perhaps the razor-fish) is named from its similarity to human nails (unguis). 56. The tortoise (testudo)issocalledbecauseitsbackiscoveredoverwith a shell (testa) in the manner of a vaulted roof. There are four kinds of tortoise: land turtles; sea turtles; mud turtles, that is, those living in mud and swamps; the fourth kind are the river turtles, which live in fresh water. Some peoplesay–andthisisunbelievable–thatshipsgomore
19	Isidore may derive the term muraena from the biblical term murenula,anecklace–thelatterwordinfactderivedfromtheformer; cf. XIX.xxxi.14.
20	The term oceloe seems to be a corruption. Maxwell-Stuart proposes a connection with Greek CB, “run aground,” as their shore-seeking may suggest – see Andre’s note (´ 1986).
 
slowly when they carry the right foot of a turtle. 57. The ‘sea urchin’ (echinus) has taken its name from the land echinus (i.e. “hedgehog”), which is commonly called iricius (i.e. ericius). The sea urchin’s shell is two-fold, sharp with spines like chestnuts when they fall from the tree still covered. Its flesh is soft and like vermilion . . . in three ways:21 as a turtle, a mussel (peloris), and a seasnail. Indeed, the part that we eat, as well as the part that contains the flesh, are both called ‘mussel.’
58. Frogs (rana) are named from their garrulity (cf. rancare, “roar”) because they fill their native swamps with noise, and make their voices resound in unruly croaking. Of these, some are called aquatic frogs, some swamp frogs, and some toads (rubeta, lit. “briar-patch”) because they live in thorn bushes – these are larger than all the rest. Other frogs are called calamitis, because they live among reeds and bushes (cf. calamus, “reed”); they are the smallest and greenest of all, and are mute and without voice. 59. Agredulae are small frogs dwelling in dry places or in fields (ager), whence they are named. Some people claim that dogs will not bark if a live frog is given to them in a lump of food.
60. Sponges (sfungia) are named from ‘tidying’ (fingere), that is, polishing and cleaning. Afranius (fr. 415):
I approach you, so that I might tidy your neck with linen, that is, that I might clean it. Cicero (cf. Defense of Sestius 77): “The blood would be wiped up (effingere) with sponges,” that is, cleaned up. That the sponge is an animal is shown by its blood clinging to the rocks. Hence also, when it is cut, it bleeds. 61. Some of the creatures livinginwatermoveabout,likefish,butothersstayfixed, likeoysters,seaurchins,sponges.Ofthese,somesponges are said to be male, because their openings are small and more tightly packed, and others female, because they have larger, continuous openings. Some are harder – ones that the Greeks call    (also meaning “goat”), and we can call them hircosa (lit. “goatish”) on account oftheirroughness.62.Thesoftestkindofspongeiscalled penicillus because they are good for swellings of the eyes
21	Early manuscripts read nonsensical uris, etc., at the head of this sentence. The reading should perhaps be, “And the covering of a shellfish is spoken of in three ways: . . .,” with reference to three classes of shell shapes.
22	Penicillus can mean “a sponge; a medicament for the eyes; a swab.”Thename,fromthissponge’selongatedshape,isadiminutive
of penis, “tail.”
XII.vi.57–vii.2
and for cleaning away rheum.22 Sponges are made white with special treatment, for during the summer they are spread out in the sun, and like Punic wax they absorb whiteness.
63. Pliny (Natural History 32.142) says there are 144 names for all the animals living in the waters, divided into these kinds: whales, snakes common to land and water, crabs, shellfish, lobsters, mussels, octopuses, sole, Spanishmackerel(lacertus),squid,andthelike.Ofthese, many recognize the order of their seasons by a kind of natural understanding, while some [wander in their places without change]. 64. Among female fish, some conceive by means of intercourse with a male, and bear offspring, while others deposit their eggs formed without any involvement on the part of the male, who, after the eggs have been deposited, floods them with the casting of his seed. The eggs that have been touched by this service become fertile, but those that have not remain sterile and decay.
vii. Birds(Deavibus) 1.Thereisasinglewordforbirds, but various kinds, for just as they differ among themselves in appearance, so do they differ also in the diversity of their natures. Some are simple, like the dove, and others clever, like the partridge; some allow themselves to be handled, like the falcon, while others are fearful, like the garamas; some enjoy the company of humans, like the swallow, while others prefer a secluded life in deserted places, like the turtledove; some feed only on the seeds they find, like the goose, while others eat meat and are eager for prey, like the kite; some are indigenous and always stay in the same location, like [the sparrow], whileothersaremigratoryandreturnatcertainseasons, like the stork and the swallow; some are gregarious, that is, they fly in a flock, like the starling and the quail, while others are loners, that is, they are solitary, on account of the strategies of hunting, like the eagle, the hawk, and others of this type. Some make a racket with their calls, like the swallow. Some produce the sweetest songs, like the swan and the blackbird, while others imitate the speech and voices of humans, like the parrot and the magpie. 2. But there are innumerable others differing in kind and behavior, for no one can discover how many kinds of birds there are. Indeed, no one could penetrate all the wildernesses of India and Ethiopia and Scythia, so as to know the kinds of birds and their differentiating characteristics.
 
XII.vii.3–vii.18
3.Theyarecalledbirds(avis)becausetheydonothave set paths (via), but travel by means of pathless (avia) ways. ‘Winged ones’ (ales, gen. alitis) because they strive ‘with their wings for the heights’ (alis alta), and ascend to lofty places with the oarage of their wings. 4. ‘Flying ones’ (volucres, plural of the adjective volucer, “flying,” and also of the substantive volucris, “bird”) from flying (volare), for we say ‘fly’ (volare) and ‘walk’ (ambulare) from the same root. The term vola means the middle part of the sole of the foot or the palm of the hand, and for birds vola is the middle part of the wings, by whose motion the feathers are put into action, hence volucer.
5. The young of all birds are called hatchlings (pullus), but the young of four-legged animals may also be called pullus, and a small human is a pullus. Therefore, those recently born are pulli, because they are stained (pollutus). Hence black clothing is also called pullus. 6. Wings are those appendages on which the feathers, fixed in order, offer the function of flight. They are called ‘wings’ (ala) because with them birds nourish (alere) and warm the hatchlings that they enfold. 7. Feathers (pinna) are named from ‘being suspended’ (pendere¯ , 2nd conjugation), that is, from flying – hence also the word pend˘ere (“suspend,” 3rd conjugation) – for flying creatures move with the aid of feathers when they commit themselves to the air. 8. Plumes (pluma) are named as if the word were piluma, for just as there are hairs (pilus) on the bodies of quadrupeds, so there are plumes on birds.
9.	Many bird names are evidently constructed fromthesoundoftheircalls,suchasthecrane(grus),thecrow (corvus), the swan (cygnus), the peacock (pavo), the kite (milvus), the screech owl (ulula), the cuckoo (cuculus), thejackdaw(graculus),etcetera.Thevarietyoftheircalls taught people what they might be called.
10.	The eagle (aquila) is named from the acuity of its vision (acumen oculorum), for it is said that they have such sight that when they soar above the sea on unmoving wings, and invisible to human sight, from such a height they can see small fish swimming, and descending like a bolt seize their prey and carry it to shore with theirwings.11.Itissaidthattheeagledoesnotevenavert its gaze from the sun; it offers its hatchlings, suspended from its talons, to the rays of the sun, and the ones it sees holding their gaze unmoving it saves as worthy of the eagle family, but those who turn their gaze away, it throws out as inferior.
12. The vulture (vultur) is thought to be named from its ‘slow flight’ (volatus tardus), for indeed it does not have a swift flight, due to the size of its body. They say that some vultures do not unite in coition, but conceive and reproduce without copulation, and their offspring livetobealmostonehundredyearsold.Vultures,justlike eagles, can sense carrion even beyond the seas; indeed, when they are flying high, they can see many things fromtheirheightthatareotherwisehiddenbyobscuring mountains. 13. The bird called gradipes by the Greeks is our ‘bustard’ (tarda, lit. “slow”) because, held back by its heavy flight, it cannot mount high on the speed of its wings like other birds.
14.Cranes(grus)tooktheirnamefromtheirparticular call, for they whoop with such a sound. When they fly, they follow a leader in formation like a letter (i.e. *,
Greek lambda). Concerning them Lucan says (Civil War 5.716):
And the letter-shape is disturbed and lost in their scattered flight.
They seek the heights, from which they can more easily seewhichlandstomakefor.15.Theoneleadingtheflock chides with its voice, but, when it begins to grow hoarse, another crane takes its place. At night they divide up the watches, and alternate their vigils; they hold stones in their extended claws to let it be known if they fall asleep – the noise (i.e. of the stones dropping) indicates the need to be on the alert. Their color reveals their age, for they turn black as they grow old.
16. Storks (ciconia) are named from the chattering noisetheymake,asiftheirnamewerecicania(cf.canere, i.e.“sing”).Althoughthissoundismadewiththemouth, it is not really a vocal call, because they produce it with a clappingoftheirbeak.Theyaremessengersofthespring, socially companionable, enemies of snakes; they cross the sea, and migrate into Asia in a gathered flock. Crows goaheadofthemasleaders,andthestorksfollowjustlike an army. 17. They have an uncommon concern for their offspring, for they guard their nestlings so earnestly that they pull out their own feathers in assiduous brooding. Whateverlengthoftimetheygivetorearingtheirchicks, forthatsamespantheyarethemselvesnourishedinturn by their offspring.
18. The swan is the bird that the Greeks call  . It is called ‘swan’ (olor) because it is ‘entirely’ white in its plumage; for no one mentions a black swan; in Greek
 
‘entire’ is called S . The cycnus (i.e. cygnus, another word for swan, borrowed, in fact, from the Greek   just cited) is named for singing (canere) because it pours out a sweetness of song with its modulated voice. It is thoughttosingsweetlybecauseithasalongcurvedneck, and a voice forcing its way by a long and winding path necessarily renders varied modulations. 19. People say that in the Hyperborean regions, when musicians are singing to citharas, swans come flocking in large numbers, and sing with them quite harmoniously. Olor is the Latin name, for in Greek they are called  . Sailors say that this bird makes a good omen for them, just as Aemilius (Macer) says (fr. 4):
The swan is always the most fortunate bird in omens. Sailors prefer this one, because it does not immerse itself in the waves.23
20. The ostrich (struthio) is named with a Greek term; this animal is seen to have feathers like a bird, but it does notriseabovetheground.Itneglectstoincubateitseggs, buttheabandonedeggsarebroughttolifebythewarmth the earth alone. 21. The heron (ardea) is named as if the word were ardua (i.e. “steep”) – this is on account of its lofty flight. Lucan (Civil War 5.553) says:
And that the heron dared to fly.
It is afraid of rainstorms, and flies above the clouds so thatitcannotfeelthestormsintheclouds,andwhenever it flies higher, this indicates a storm. Many people call it the tantulus. 22. The phoenix (phoenix) is a bird of Arabia, so called because it possesses a scarlet (phoeniceus) color, or because it is singular and unique in the entire world, for the Arabs say phoenix for ‘singular.’ This bird lives more than five hundred years, and when it sees that it has grown old it constructs a funeral pile for itself of aromatic twigs it has collected, and, turned to the rays
23	Isidore’s source for Macer’s lines, Servius’s commentary on Aen.1.393,originallyread“isneverimmersed”for“doesnotimmerse itself.” Because swans are never overwhelmed by waves, they are an omen of good weather.
24	Lindsay emended the early manuscript readings, strophalides, etc.,andstrophades,etc.TheStrophalidesarelegendarybird-women, the Harpies, who lived on the Strophades, islands off the coast of Messinia. The stymphalides are the loathsome raptors slain by Hercules.
25	A Greek king and warrior in the Trojan War who emigrated to
Apulia.
XII.vii.19–vii.28
of the sun, with a beating of its wings it deliberately kindles a fire for itself, and thus it rises again from its own ashes.
23. The cinnamolgus is also a bird of Arabia, called thus because in tall trees it constructs nests out of cinnamon (cinnamum) shrubs, and since humans are unable to climb up there due to the height and fragility of the branches, they go after the nests using lead-weighted missiles. Thus they dislodge these cinnamon nests and sell them at very high prices, for merchants value cinnamon more than other spices. 24. The parrot (psittacus) comesfromtheshoresofIndia.Itisgreenincolor,witha scarletcollarandalargetongue,widerthan thatofother birds. Hence it pronounces articulate words so that if you did not see the bird you would think a human was speaking. It makes a greeting naturally, saying “Have!” (i.e.Ave,aLatingreeting)or“@!”(i.e.aGreekgreeting). Other words it learns by being taught. Hence it is spoken of (Martial, Epigrams 14.73):
I, a parrot, would learn from you the names of others, but on my own I have learned to say this:
“Hail (Have), Caesar!”
25.Thealcyon(i.e.“halcyon,”inclassicalLatin,“kingfisher”), a sea bird, is named as if the word were ales oceana (ocean bird), because in winter it makes its nest and raises its young on still waters in the Ocean. It is said that when they are brooding on its expansive surface, the sea grows calm with the winds silent in continuous tranquillityforsevendays,andnatureherselfcooperates in the rearing of their young. 26. The pelican (pelicanus) is an Egyptian bird inhabiting the solitary places of the river Nile, whence it takes its name, for Egypt is called Canopos. It is reported, if it may be true, that this bird killsitsoffspring,mournsthemforthreedays,andfinally wounds itself and revives its children by sprinkling them with its own blood.
27. The stymphalis is a bird named from the islands of Stymphades (cf. Stymphales, a lake in Arcadia), where theyareabundant;Herculesusedarrowsagainstthem.24 They are sea birds living on islands. 28. Diomediae are birdsnamedfromthecompanionsofDiomedes;25 fables say that his companions were transformed into these very birds. They are similar to coots in shape, the size of a swan, white in color, with large hard beaks. They are found near Apulia on the island Diomedia, flying between the crags of the shore and the rocks. They
 
XII.vii.29–vii.42
distinguish between their own people and foreigners. 29. If someone is Greek, they come up close and fawn on him, but if someone is of alien birth, they attack and wound him by biting, grieving as if with tearful voices either their own transformation or the death of their king – for Diomedes was slain by the Illyrians. These birds are called diomediae in Latin, but the Greeks call them A"  (“herons, shearwaters”).
30. Memnonides are Egyptian birds named after the place where Memnon26 perished. They are said to fly in flocks from Egypt to Troy near the tomb of Memnon, and hence the Trojans call them memnonia. They come toTroyeveryfifthyear,andaftertheyhaveflownaround fortwodays,onthethirddaytheyenterintoabattlewith each other, lacerating themselves with talons and beaks. 31. The hercynia is a bird named from the Hercynian forest of Germany where they are born. Their feathers sparkle so much in the shade that, however dark the night is with thick shadows, these feathers, when placed on the ground, give off light that helps to mark the way, and the sign of the glittering feathers makes clear the direction of the path. 32. The Greeks call the onocrotalos (i.e. another word for “pelican”) a bird with a long beak. [There are two types of this bird; one aquatic and the other of the desert.] 33. The ibis (ibis) is a bird of the Nileriverthatpurgesitselfbyspurtingwaterintoitsanus with its beak. This bird feeds on snake eggs, carrying the most pleasing food that it takes from them back to its nestlings.
34. The bee-eater (merops) is the same as the gaulus, who is said to guard its parents and feed them. The coredulus (perhaps “lark”) is a type of bird, as if the name were cor edens (lit. “eater of the heart”). 35. The jackdaw (monedula)27 is a bird named as if the word were monetula (cf. moneta, “money”) because whenever itfindsgolditcarriesitoffandhidesit.Cicero,Defenseof ValeriusFlaccus(76):“Nomoregoldshouldbeentrusted to you than to a jackdaw (monedula).”
36. The bat (vespertilio) takes its name from the time of day, because it avoids the light and flies around in theduskofevening(vespertinus),makingdartingmovements and supported by delicate arm-like limbs.28 It is an animal similar to a mouse, producing not so much a call as a squeak. In appearance it is a quadruped at the same time as being equipped to fly; this is not usually found among other birds. 37. The nightingale (luscinia) is a bird that took its name because it is accustomed to indicate by its song the onset of the rising sun, as if its name were lucinia (cf. lux, gen. lucis, “light, sun”). This same bird is also the acredula, concerning which Cicero says in his Prognostics (fr. 6):
And the acredula performs her morning songs.
38. The ‘screech owl’ (ulula) is a bird named from the word C ;, that is, from wailing and lamentation, for its calls resemble either weeping or groaning. Whence, according to augurs, if it hoots it is said to indicatesorrow,andifitissilent,prosperity. 39.The‘horned owl’(bubo)hasanamecomposedofthesoundofitscall; it is a wild bird, loaded with feathers, but always constrained by heavy sluggishness; it is active among tombs day and night, and always lingers in caves. Concerning it Ovid said (Met. 5.549):
He has become a loathsome bird, messenger of approaching sorrow, the lazy owl (bubo), a dire omen for mortals.
Thus,accordingtoaugurs,itissaidtoportendillfortune, forwhenithasbeenseeninacity,theysaythatitsignifies desolation.40.The‘nightowl’(noctua)isnamedbecause it flies around at night (nox, gen. noctis) and cannot see duringtheday,forwhendaylightappears,thenightowl’s visionisweakened.Thisbirdisnotfoundontheislandof Crete, and if it should come there from somewhere else, it immediately dies. The night owl is not the same as the horned owl, for the horned owl is bigger. 41. The nycticorax is likewise a night owl, because it loves the night. It is a bird that flees the light and cannot bear to look at sunlight. 42. The strix (perhaps another word for the screech owl) is a nocturnal bird, taking its name fromthesoundofitscall,foritscreeches(stridere) when it calls. Lucan says concerning it (Civil War 6.689):
That which the restless horned owl and the nocturnal strix lament.
This bird is commonly call the amma, from loving (amare) its young, whence also it is said to offer milk to its hatchlings.
26	An Ethiopian king and warrior in the Trojan War.
27	Monedula and graculus both mean “jackdaw”; see sections 9 and 45.
28	Aplausiblealternativeforthelastclause,readingmembranisfor membris (“limbs”), as in Isidore’s source in Ambrose’s Hexameron, would be “supported by the thin membranes of its fore-limbs.”
 
43. The raven (corvus), or corax, takes its name from the sound of its throat, because it croaks (coracinare) with its voice. It is said that this bird does not fully provide food for the young it has produced until it recognizes in them a similarity to its own color through the blackness of their feathers, but after it sees that they are horribleofplumageitnourishesthemmoreabundantly, as completely acknowledged offspring. This bird seeks the eyes of a corpse before any other part. 44. The crow (cornix), a long-lived bird, is named by Latin speakers with a Greek word (i.e.  E). Augurs say that this bird by its signs is attentive to the concerns of humans, and shows the paths where ambush lies, and predicts the future. It is a great sin to believe that God would entrust his counsels to crows. Among many omens, they even ascribe to these birds the predicting of rain by their calls. Whence this passage (Vergil, Geo. 1.388):
Then the impudent crow calls the rain with its loud voice.
45. The jackdaw (graculus) is named for its garrulity (garrulitas); not, as some people would have it, because they fly ‘in flocks’ (gregatim), since it is quite clear that they are named for their call, for it is the most talkative species and importunate in its calls. 46. The magpie (pica), as if the word were ‘poetic’ (poetica), because they pronounce words with a distinct articulation, like a human. Perching on the branches of trees, they sound out in unmannerly garrulity, and although they are unable to unfold their tongues in meaningful speech, still they imitate the sound of the human voice. Concerningwhichsomeonehassaid,appropriately(Martial, Epigrams 14.76):
I, a chattering magpie, salute you as master with a clear voice – if you did not see me, you would deny that I am a bird.
47.Thewoodpecker(picus)tookitsnamefromPicus,the son of Saturn, because he would use this bird in augury. People say this bird has a certain supernatural quality because of this sign: a nail, or anything else, pounded into whatever tree the woodpecker has nested in, cannot stay there long, but immediately falls out, where the bird has settled. This is the Martius woodpecker (picus), for the magpie (pica) is another bird.
29 A gallus was a castrated priest of Cybele.
XII.vii.43–vii.55
48.	The peacock (pavo) has its name from the sound of its call. Its flesh is so hard that is scarcely experiences decay, nor is it easily cooked. Someone speaks of it in this way (Martial, Epigrams 13.70):
You marvel whenever it unfolds its jeweled wings; and can you, pitiless man, give this bird to the cruel cook?
49.	The pheasant (phasianus) is named from Phasis, an island of Greece, whence it was first imported. This old distich bears witness to this (Martial, Epigrams 13.72):
I was transported first in an Argive ship – before that I knew nothing but Phasis.
50. The rooster (gallus) is named from castration, for of all the birds only this one has its testes removed. Indeed, the ancients used to call a castrated man a gallus.29 And just as the word leaena (“lioness”) is formed from leo (“lion”), and dracaena (“dragoness”) from draco (“dragon”), so gallina (“hen”) is formed from gallus. The rooster’s limbs, some people say, are consumed if they are mixed with molten gold.
51.Theduck(ans,i.e.anas)takesitsappropriatename from its persistent swimming (natare). Certain ones of the duck species are called ‘true’ (germanus) ducks because they are more nourishing than the others. 52. The duck gives its name to the goose (anser) by derivation, either from their resemblance, or because it too is frequently swimming. The goose bears witness to its vigils at night with persistent honking. No other animal is as sensitive to the smell of humans as is the goose; whence the ascent of the Gauls to the Capitolium in Rome was discovered from the noise of the geese. 53. The coot (fulica) is so named because its flesh tastes of hare; now E means “hare,” whence this bird is also called E by the Greeks. It is a marsh bird, having its nest in the middle of the water or on rocks surrounded by water; it is always attracted to the deep seas. When it senses a storm approaching, the coot flees into the shallows and dallies there.
54. The mergus has its name from its continuous diving (mergere). Often, with its head lowered under the waves into the depths it gathers signs of winds and, foreseeing a storm at sea, turns noisily to shore. There must be a very strong storm at sea when the mergi flee to the shore. 55. The hawk (accipiter) is a bird armed more with spirit than with talons, bearing great valor in its small body. It assumes its name from ‘taking’ (accipere),
 
XII.vii.56–vii.71
that is, seizing, for it is a bird very eager to snatch up other birds, so that it is called accipiter, that is, ‘raptor’ (raptor). Whence the apostle Paul says (cf. II Corinthians 11:20): “For you withstand it, if anyone takes from you” – where he meant “if anyone seizes (rapit),” he said “if anyone takes (accipit).” 56. It is said that hawks are undutiful toward their nestlings, for as soon as they see that the nestlings can try to fly, they no longer furnish them with any food, but beat their wings and cast them from the nest; and from infancy they compel them to hunt prey, lest perhaps as adults they should grow sluggish.
57. The capus is named in the language of Italy from ‘seizing’ (capere). We call this one the falcon (falco), because its talons are curved inward (cf. falx, gen. falcis, “sickle”). 58. The kite (milvus) is weak in both its strength and its flying, as if it were a ‘weak bird’ (mollis avis), whence it is named. However, it is most rapacious and is always a predator of domestic birds. 59. The osprey (ossifragus) is the common name for a bird thatcastsbonesdownfromtheheightsandbreaksthem. Hence it takes its name from ‘breaking bones’ (ossa frangere). 60. The ‘turtle dove’ (turtur) is named from its call; it is a bashful bird, always dwelling in mountain heights and desert wildernesses. It flees human homes and interaction, and dwells in forests. [In winter, after it has lost its feathers, it is said to take shelter in hollow tree trunks.] In contrast to this, the dove loves human society; it is always a pleasant inhabitant in a house. 61. They are called doves (columba) because their necks (collum) change color every time they turn. They are tame birds, comfortable amid a large group of humans, and without bile. The ancients called them ‘love birds,’ because they often come to the nest and express their love with a kiss.
62. The wood-pigeon (palumbes) [from ‘food’ (pabulum), because they are stuffed – they are commonly called titus] is called a ‘chaste bird’ (avis casta) from its behavior,becauseitisacompanionofchastity(castitas), foritissaidtoproceedaloneafterithaslostitsmate,nor does it need any further carnal union. 63. The partridge (perdix) takes its name from its call. It is a crafty bird, and filthy, for the male mounts another male; its violent lust ignores gender. It is deceitful to the extent that it will steal and hatch the eggs of another, but this deceit is fruitless, for at last when the hatchlings hear the call of their true parent, through a kind of natural instinct they abandon the bird that has reared them and return to the one who conceived them.
64. The quail (coturnix) is named from the sound of its call; the Greeks call them d  because they were first seen on the island of Ortygia (i.e. Delos). These birds have a season for their return migration, for, when they driven off by the summer heat, they cross the sea. 65. The bird that leads the flock is called an ortygometra. The hawk seizes this bird when it sees it approaching land; for this reason all quails are careful to secure a leader of a different species – through this carefulness they safeguard those first crucial moments. They have poisonous seeds as their favorite food; for this reason the ancients forbade their consumption. This animal alone suffers from ‘falling sickness’ (caducum morbum; see IV.vii.6), as do humans.
66. The Greeks name the hoopoe (upupa) thus because it would settle on human waste, and feed on foul dung. It is a most loathsome bird, helmed with a protruding crest, always dwelling in tombs and human waste.Anyonewhoanointshimselfwiththebloodofthis bird and then goes to sleep will see demons suffocating him. 67. The cuckoo (tucus), which the Spaniards call ciculus (i.e. cuculus), is named from its particular call. These birds have a proper season for their return migration, at which time they are taken up on the shoulders of kites because of their brief and small spans of flight, lest their strength fail, fatigued by the long expanse of sky. Cicadas are born from their saliva. 68. Sparrows (passer) are tiny little birds, named from their smallness (parvitas), whence small things are also called pusilli.
69. The merle (merula) was called medula in ancient times, because it ‘makes music’ (modulare). Others say the merle is so named because it flies alone, as if the term were mera volans (“flying alone”). Although this is a black bird everywhere, it is white in Achaea. 70. The swallow (erundo, i.e. hirundo) is so named because it does not take food when it has alighted, but seizes and eats its food in the air (aer). It is a garrulous bird, flying around in convoluted loops and twisted circles, and it is verycleveratconstructingitsnestsandraisingitsyoung. It even has a certain foresight, for it abandons and never seeks out roofs that are about to fall in. Also, it is not attacked by fierce birds, nor is it ever their prey. It flies across the sea and remains there for the winter. 71. The thrush(turdus)isnamedfromitstardiness(tarditas),for at the very beginning of winter it returns. The turdela
 
is a larger thrush, as it were. It is thought to produce mistletoebymeansofitsdroppings.Whencetheancients had a proverb: “The bird shits trouble for itself.”30
72. The furfurio (cf. furfur, “husk”) is so named because formerly it used to feed after grain (far) had been ground into flour. 73. The figpecker (ficedula) is so named because it mostly eats figs (ficus). This is revealed by that ancient couplet (Martial, Epigrams 13.49):
Although the fig feeds me, since I am nourished by sweet grapes, why was it not the grape (uva) rather that gave me my name (i.e. uvedula)?
74.	The goldfinch (carduelus), because it is nourished by thorns and thistles (carduus), whence among the Greeks it is also called acalanthis, from O, that is, “thorn,” by which it is nourished.
75.	Augurs say that omens are found in the gesturesand movements and flights and calls of birds. 76. Those birds are called oscines that produce auspices with their mouths (os) and their song (cantus), such as the raven, thecrow,andthewoodpecker.77.Thealitesarethosethat seem to show the future by their flight (cf. ala, “wing”); if they are unpropitious, they are called inebrae, because they inhibit (inhibere), that is, they forbid; if they are propitious, they are called praepetes. The reason they are called praepetes is that all birds, when they fly, ‘pursue what is ahead’ (priora petere). 78. People define a third type of augur among the birds, which they call ‘common’; it is a combination of both, this is, when birds provide omens from both their mouths and their flight. All this is not worthy of belief.
79. All species of birds are born twice. They are born first as eggs, after which they are formed and animated by the warmth of their mother’s body. 80. Eggs (ovum) are so called because they are ‘moist’ (uvidus). Whence also grapes (uva) are so named because they are full of liquid inside. Whatever has liquid on the outside is ‘wet’ (humidus); whatever has it on the inside is ‘moist.’ Some believe that ‘egg’ has a Greek source for the term; the Greeks say >= , with the letter  left out. 81. Some eggs are conceived by means of empty wind, but eggs are not fertile unless they have been
30 As birdlime was made from mistletoe berries, the sense is that birds produce their own doom, “foul their own nest.” It was believed that mistletoe seeds had to be digested by birds before they could germinate.
XII.vii.72–viii.6
conceived by coition with the male and have been penetrated by the seminal spirit. People say that the strength of eggs is such that wood soaked with egg doesn’t burn, and not even clothing becomes scorched. And when mixed with lime it is said to glue fragments of glass together.
viii. Tinyflyinganimals(Deminutisvolatibus) 1.Bees (apis) are so named either because they cling to each other with their feet (pes), or because they are born withoutfeet(cf.a-,“without”),fortheydevelopfeetand wingsafterwards.Theseanimals,skilfulatthetaskofcreating honey, live in allocated dwellings; they construct their homes with indescribable skill; they make their honeycombs from various flowers; they build wax cells, and replenish their fortress with innumerable offspring; they have armies and kings; they wage battle; they flee smoke;theyareannoyedbydisturbance.2.Manypeople know from experience that bees are born from the carcassesofoxen,forthefleshofslaughteredcalvesisbeaten tocreatethesebees,sothatwormsarecreated[from]the putrid gore, and the worms then become bees. Specifically, the ones called ‘bees’ originate from oxen, just as hornets come from horses, drones from mules, and wasps from asses. 3. The Greeks name costri those larger beesthatarecreatedintheedgesofthehoneycomb;some people think they are the kings. They are so named because they rule the hive (castra). The drone is larger than a bee, and smaller than a hornet. And the ‘drone’ (fugus, i.e. fucus) is so called because it eats what is produced by others, as if the word were fagus (cf. @, “eat”), for it eats food that it has not toiled over. Concerning it Vergil says (Geo. 4.168):
They keep the drones, a lazy flock, from the hives.
4. Wasps (vespa) . . . The hornet (scabro, i.e. crabro) is named from cabo, that is, from the packhorse (caballus), because it is created from them. Just as hornets are born from the rotting flesh (caro) of horses, so scarabs (scarabaeus) are often born likewise from such flesh – whencetheyarenamed.5.Earthscarabs,similartoticks, are called tauri (lit. “bulls”). The buprestis (i.e. a venomous beetle) is a small animal in Italy, similar to the scarab,along-leggedanimal.Itliesinwaitforcows(bos) in particular among the pasturage, whence it takes its name, and if it is eaten it so inflames with the contagion of its poison that the cow bursts. 6. The glow-worm
 
XII.viii.7–viii.17
(cicindela) is a kind of scarab, named because it gives off light when it walks or flies (cf. candela, “candle”).
7. Moths (blatta) are named from their color, since indeed they stain one’s hand when they are caught, whence people also name a color ‘purple’ (blatteum). Thisanimalcannotbeartoseelight,incontrasttothefly, for the fly is light-seeking and the moth is light-fleeing, and it only goes about at night. 8. Butterflies (papilio) are small flying creatures that are very abundant when mallows bloom, and they cause small worms to be generated from their own dung. 9. Locusts (locusta, also meaning “lobster” or “crawfish”) are so called because their legs are ‘long, like spears’ (longis . . . asta, i.e. hasta, “spear”). Whence the Greeks call the sea as well as the landcreature   (i.e.“lobster”).Cicadas(cicas,i.e. cicada) are born from the saliva of the cuckoo (ciculus). In the Reggio region of Italy these creatures are mute, but nowhere else.
11. The word for fly (musca) comes from Greek, as does ‘mouse’ (mus). These animals, just like bees, when drowned in water, sometimes revive after an hour has elapsed. 12. The cynomya is named with a Greek word, thatis,a‘dog-fly,’for A isGreekfor‘dog.’13.Thegnat (culex) is named from ‘sting’ (aculeus) because it sucks blood, for it has a tube in its mouth, like a needle, with whichitpiercesthefleshsothatitmaydrinktheblood.31 14. Sciniphes are very tiny flies, very troublesome with their stinging. The proud populace of Egypt was struck down by these flies in the third plague (see Exodus 8:16– 18). 15. The horse-fly is associated with cattle, and is very troublesome with its stinging. The name for the horsefly(oestrus)isaGreekword;inLatinitiscalledtheasilus, and is commonly known as the tabanus.
16.	Bibiones (i.e. drosophilae) are creatures that are generated in wine; they are commonly called mustiones from wine-must (mustum). Whence Afranius (fr. 407) says:
When you look towards me and begin to tell stories, bibiones fly from your mouth into your eyes.32
17.	The weevil (gurgulio, lit. “gullet”) is so named because it is almost nothing except a throat (guttur).
31	Isidore seems to take culex to mean “mosquito,” and sciniphes may mean “gnat” or “mosquito.”
32	Afranius means that you tell lies when drunk.
 
Book XIII The cosmos and its parts (De mundo et partibus)
 
 
Now in this little book we have noted in a short sketch, as it were, certain principles of the heavenly bodies and locations of the land and expanses of the sea, so that the readermaygothroughtheminashorttime,andthrough thissuccinctbrevitycometoknowtheiretymologiesand causes.1
i. The world (De mundo) 1. The world consists of the sky and the land, the sea and the creations of God within them. Whence it is said (John 1:10): “And the world was made by him.” ‘World’ (mundus) is named thus in Latin by the philosophers, because it is in eternal motion (motus), as are the sky, the sun, the moon, the air, the seas. Thus no rest is allowed to its elements; on this account it is always in motion. 2. Whence to Varro the elements seemed to be animate, “Because,” he says, “theymoveoftheirownaccord.”ButtheGreeksadopted a term for world (mundus, also meaning “cosmetics”) derived from ‘ornament,’ on account of the diversity of elements and the beauty of the heavenly bodies. They call it  , which means “ornament,” for with our bodily eyes we see nothing more beautiful than the world.
3. There are four zones in the world, that is, four regions: the East and the West, the North and the South. 4. The East (oriens) is named from the rising (exortus) of the sun. The West (occidens) is named because it makes the day set (occidere) and perish, for it hides the light from the world and brings on darkness. 5. The North (septentrio) is so called from the seven (septem) stars at the North Pole (i.e. the Big Dipper), which wheel as they rotate around it. Strictly speaking this is called the vertex (i.e. the celestial pole) because it turns (vertere), as the poet says (Vergil, Aen. 2.250):
The heavens turn (vertere) in the meantime.
1 Some material in this book repeats information from the treatment of astronomy in III.xxiv-lxxi. Note that the Latin word caelum may be translated “sky” or “heaven(s)” – i.e. anything above the earth.
271
6. The South (meridies) is so named either because there the sun makes midday (medium diem), as if the word were medidie, or because at that time the aether sparkles more purely, for merus means “pure.” 7. The sky has two portals: the East and the West, for the sun enters through one portal and withdraws through the other. 8. The world has two poles (cardo, i.e. celestial poles), the North and the South, for the sky revolves around them.
ii.	Atoms (De atomis) 1. Atoms (atomus) are what the philosopherscallcertaincorporealparticlesintheworld that are so tiny that they are not visible to sight, and do not undergo   , that is, “splitting,” whence they are called O   . They are said to fly through the void of the entire world in unceasing motion and to be carried here and there like the finest dust motes that may be seen pouring in through the window in the sun’s rays. Somepaganphilosophershavethoughtthatalltreesand plants and fruits have their origins from these particles, and that from them fire and water and the universe were born and exist. 2. There are atoms in bodies, in time, and in number. In a body, such as a stone. You may divide it into parts, and the parts into grains, like sand; then divide the grains of sand themselves into the finest dust, until, if you can, you will reach a certain minute particle, which no longer can be divided or split. This particle is the atom in bodies. 3. With reference to time, the atom is understood in this way: you may divide a year, for example, into months, months into days, days into hours. The parts of hours still admit division until youcometoapointoftimeandaspeckofaninstantsuch that it cannot be extended through any small interval, and thus can no longer be divided. This is an atom of time. 4. In number, take for example eight divided into four,andfourintotwo,andthentwointoone.Butoneis an atom, because it is indivisible. Thus also with letters (i.e. speech-sounds), for speech is divided into words, words into syllables, syllables into letters. But a letter, the smallest part, is an atom and cannot be divided.
 
XIII.iii.1–v.6
Therefore an atom is whatever cannot be divided, like a point in geometry, for    means “division” in Greek, and O    means “non-division.”
iii.	Elements(Deelementis) 1. The Greeks call the primary material of things X (“matter,” also “wood, woodland”),whichisnotformedinanyway,butiscapable of underlying all bodily forms; from this material the visible elements (elementum) are formed, whence they took their name from this derivation.2 Latin speakers have named this X ‘matter’ (materia, also meaning “wood”) because every unformed substance, of which something is made, is always called matter. Whence the poetshavenameditsilva(lit.“woodland”),notinappropriately,becausemateriaisconnectedwithwoods.2.The Greeks name the elements   9@, because they agree with each other in a certain accord and communion of association (cf.   9@, “agree with”). Indeed, they are said to be joined thus among themselves with a certain natural logic, now returning to their origin, from fire to earth,nowfromearthtofire,sincefireendsinair,andair is condensed into water, and water thickens into earth; and in turn, earth is loosened into water, water rarefied into air, and air thinned out into fire. 3. For this reason, all the elements are present in all, but each one has taken itsnamefromwhicheverelementismoreabundantinit. The elements are assigned by Divine Providence to the appropriate living beings, for the Creator himself has filled heaven (i.e. the fiery realm) with angels, air with birds, water with fish, and earth with humans and the rest of the living things.
iv.	Thesky(Decaelo) 1. The sky (caelum)3 is so named because, like an engraved (caelatum) vessel, it has the lights of the stars pressed into it, just like engraved figures; for a vessel which glitters with figures that stand out is called caelatus. God embellished the heaven and filled it with bright light – that is, he adorned it with the sun and the gleaming orb of the moon, and the glorious constellations of glittering stars. [In a different way, it is named from engraving (caelare) the superior bodies.] 2. It is called  L in Greek, after the term QY, that is, ‘seeing,’ because the air is transparent and clearer forseeing.InSacredScripturetheskyiscalledthefirmament (firmamentum), because it is secured (firmare) by the course of the stars and by fixed and immutable laws.
3. Sometimes the word ‘sky’ is used for the air, where winds and clouds and storms and whirlwinds arise. Lucretius (cf. On the Nature of Things 4.133):
The sky (caelum), which is called air (aer).
And the Psalm (78:2; 103:12, Vulgate) refers to “fowls of the sky (caelum),”when itis clear thatbirds fly intheair; out of habit we also call this air, ‘sky.’ Thus when we ask whether it is fair or overcast we sometimes say, “How is the air?” and sometimes “How is the sky?”
v. Parts of the sky (De partibus caeli) 1. The ether (aether) is the place where the stars are, and signifies that fire which is separated high above from the entire world. Of course, ether is itself an element, but aethra (i.e. another word for ether) is the radiance of ether; it is a Greek word. 2. The sphere (sphaera) of the sky is so named because it has a round shape in appearance. But anything of such a shape is called a sphaera by the Greeks from its roundness, such as the balls that children play with. Now philosophers say that the sky is completely convex, in the shape of a sphere, equal on every side, enclosing the earth, poised in the center of the world’s mass. People say that the sky moves, and with its motion the stars fixed in it go around from east to west, with the stars of the Big Dipper proceeding around the pole in shorter rotations. 3. The axis (axis) is a straight line from the North that extends through the center ball of the sphere, and it is called ‘axis’ because around it the sphere turns like a wheel, or because the Wain (i.e. ‘wagon,’ another name for the Big Dipper) is there. 4. The poles are the ends of the axis, and they are called poles (cardo, lit. ‘pivot’) because the sky turns around them. 5. There are circular polar regions that run around the axis. One of them is the northern, which never sets, and is called ‘Boreus,’ the other is the southern, which is never visible, and is called ‘Austronotius.’ And they are called ‘polar regions’ (polus), because they are circles around the axis (i.e. “axle”), after the usage of a wagon, named specifically from ‘polishing’ (polire). But the Boreus polar region is always visible, and the Austronotius never, because the right side of the heavens is higher and the southern side is pressed down. 6. The vaults (convexum) are the edges of the sky, named from their curvature, for a convex (convexus) thing is
2 Isidore is linking the words X and elementum by sound. 3 See footnote 1 above.
 
The Etymologies	XIII.v.7–ix.1
 
curved and inclined and bent in the manner of a circle. 7. The Milky Circle (lacteus circulus, i.e. the Milky Way) is the road seen in the sphere of the sky, named for its brightness, because it is white. Some people say that this road is where the sun makes its circuit, and that it shines from the splendor of the sun’s transit.
vi.	The circles of heaven (De circulis caeli) 1. Our dwelling-place is divided into zones according to the circles of the sky and has allowed some regions to be inhabited due to their mildness, and denied this to other regions due to their excessive cold or heat. There are five zones, which are either called zones (zona, lit. “belt”) or circles because they consist of a circle drawn around the sphere of the world. 2. The first of these circles is called the   (“the Arctic”)4 because enclosed within it can be seen the constellations of the Bears (Arctos) – the name that, imagining the shape of bears, we give to the Septentriones. 3. The second circle is called R (i.e. “summer”)   ! because the sun, when causing summer at the northern edge of this circle, does not go beyond this circle, but immediately turns back, and thus it is called   ! (“at the turning point”). 4. The third circle is Z, which is called the equinoctial (aequinoctialis) by Latin speakers because the sun, when itreachesthisregion,makesanequinox(aequinoctium). In Latin Z (in Greek actually “of day”) is translated as ‘day and night,’ and in this circle we observe that the medial segment of the sphere (i.e. the equator) is set. 5. The fourth circle is called    because it is opposite to the circle we call  . 6. The fifth circle is the 9R (i.e. “winter”)   !, which in Latin is called ‘winter’ or ‘of the winter solstice,’ because when itcomestothiscirclethesunmakeswinterforthosewho live in the north and summer for those in the southern parts. 7. The zodiac is a circle . . .
vii.	Airandclouds(Deaereetnube) 1. Air is an emptiness of more open texture than other elements. Concerning it Vergil says (Aen. 12.354):
Following (him) through the long emptiness.
Air (aer) is named from the word V (i.e. ,
“to raise”) because it bears the earth or because it is
4 Isidore gives the names of the five zones (belts, not circles) in Greek.
borne. The term refers partly to earthy and partly to heavenly material. That which is very fine, where winds and tempests cannot exist, makes up the celestial part, but that which is more turbulent, which takes on bodily substance with exhalations of moisture, is defined as earthy; it gives rise to many forms of itself. For when it is stirred, it makes winds; when more vehemently agitated,itmakeslightningandthunder;whencompressed, clouds;whencondensed,rain;whenithasfrozenclouds, snow; when denser clouds freeze with more turbulence, hail; when it expands, bright weather. Thus dense air is cloud, and dispersed and loosened cloud is air.
2.Clouds(nubes)arenamedfrom‘veiling’(obnubere), that is, covering the sky; whence also brides (nupta), because they veil their faces, and also Neptune (Neptunus), because he casts a veil (nubere), that is, covers the sea and earth. The condensation of air makes clouds, for the winds lump the air together and make a cloud, whence this in Vergil (Aen. 5.20):
And the air is forced into a cloud.
viii.	Thunder(Detonitruo) 1. Thunder (tonitrus) is so namedbecausethesoundofitterrifies,foratone(tonus) isasound.Sometimesthisshakeseverythingsoviolently that it seems to have split the sky, because, when a blast of very violent wind suddenly throws itself into clouds, withanincreasinglypowerfulwhirlwindseekinganexit, with a great crash it tears through the cloud, which it has hollowed out, and thus thunder is carried to the ears with a horrendous din. 2. No one should be amazed at this, since when a vessel explodes it makes a loud noise,howeversmallitis.Aflashoflightningisproduced at the same time as the thunder, but it is seen sooner because it is bright; thunder reaches the ears later. The lightthatappearsbeforethethunderiscalleda‘lightning bolt’ (fulgetra). As we have said, it is seen first because its light is bright, and the thunder comes to one’s ears later.
ix.	Lightning (De fulminibus) 1. Lightning (fulgur) andthe‘lightningbolt’(fulmen),thestrokesofacelestial dart,arenamedfrom‘striking’(ferire);forto‘flash’(fulgere) is to ‘strike’ and to ‘cut through.’ Colliding clouds causelightning,forthecollisionofanythingscreatesfire, as we notice with stones, and the rubbing of wheels, and in forests of trees; in a similar way fire occurs in clouds.
 
XIII.ix.2–x.14
For this reason the clouds come first, then the fires. 2.Lightningboltsaremadeinthecloudsbythewindand fire, and are sent out by a blast of wind. Hence the fire of lightning has a greater power to penetrate, because it is made of finer elements than our fire, that is, the fire we make use of. It has three names: fulgus, fulgor and fulmen. Fulgus because is touches (tangere), fulgor because it ignites and burns (urere), and fulmen because it splits (findere). Hence lightning bolts are represented with three rays.
x.	Therainbowandphenomenaoftheclouds(Dearcuetnubiumeffectibus) 1. The celestial rainbow (arcus) is named for its likeness to the curve of a bow (also arcus). Iris is its proper name. It is called iris as if the word were aeris, that is, something that descends to earth through theair(aer).Ittakesitslightfromthesun,wheneverhollow clouds receive the sun’s rays from the opposite side and make the shape of a bow. This circumstance gives it variouscolors,becausethethinnedwater,brightair,and misty clouds, when illuminated, create various colors. 2. Rain-clouds (pluvia) are so called because they flow, as if the word were ‘streams’ (fluvia). They arise out of the earth and sea through exhalation. When they are lifted higher,ordissolvedbytheheatofthesun,orcompressed bytheforceofthewind,theyfallasrainontotheearth.3. A‘stormcloud’(nimbus)isastormy,darkmassofcloud, and the word nimbus comes from ‘cloud’ (nubes). The rains from storm clouds are sudden and precipitate. We can also refer to rains (pluvia) as ‘leisurely’ and ‘continual,’ just like streams (fluvia) or flowing (fluens) things. 4. Downpours (imber) have to do with both clouds and rains, and are named with a Greek term (cf. d , “rainstorm”) because they soak (inebriare) the ground so that germination can take place. Indeed, all things are created thanks to these, as Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 1.715):
(All things) are born from fire, earth, breath, and downpours.
Moreover, this is a Greek name.
5.Hail(grando)issonamedbecauseithastheshapeof grains (grana). These are hardened in the cloud by the rigor of the winds, solidified into snow, and released when the air is rent. 6. Snow (nix) is named from the cloud (nubes) whence it falls, while ice (glacies) is named from ‘freezing’ (gelu) and ‘water’ (aqua), as if the word were gelaquies, that is, ‘frozen water’ (gelata aqua). 7. Frost (gelus) is named because the earth is bound by it, for the earth is called H. Further, the earth is bound by a heavier frost when the night is clear. 8. Hoar-frost (pruina) is a freezing during the morning hours, and it took this name because it burns like a fire – for the word !N means “fire,” and ‘burning’ pertains both to freezing and to the sun. Thus by a single word two different processes are signified, because they have a single effect. Indeed, the forces of freezing and of heat are similar, and either of them can split stones. Thus heat burns, as in (Vergil, Aen. 4.68):
The wretched Dido burns.
And freezing burns, as in (Vergil, Geo. 1.93):
Or the piercing cold of the north wind burns.
9. Dew (ros, gen. roris) is a Greek term, for they call it " . Some people think it is called ros because it is fine (rarus), and not thick like rain. 10. Mist (nebula) is named from the same source as nubila (“overcast sky”), thatis,from‘veiling’(obnubere),thatis,hidingtheearth, or it is what ‘flying cloud’ (nubes volans) makes. Damp valleys exhale mist and clouds are formed; thence comes overcast sky, thence snow. Mists seek the lowest point when it is clear, the highest when it is cloudy. Fog is a shadow formed from a thickness of air. 11. And it is called fog (caligo) because it is mainly generated from the warmth (calor) of the air. 12. Darkness (tenebrae) is named because it ‘holds shadows’ (tenere umbras). Actually, darkness is nothing, but the very absence of light is called darkness, just as silence is not some actual thing, but when there is no sound, it is called silence. Thus darkness is not something, but when there is no light,itiscalleddarkness.13.Ashadow(umbra)isairthat islackingsunlight.Itissonamedbecauseitoccurswhen we block (obicere) the rays of the sun. It is movable and unsettled, and arises from the circuit of the sun and the movement of the winds. Whenever there is movement in the sun, a shadow seems to move with us, because wherever we block some spot from the rays of the sun, in thesamewayweremovethelightfromit.Thusashadow seems to walk along with us and to imitate our gestures. 14. Light (lux) is the substance itself, while illumination (lumen) is so called because it ‘emanates from light’ (a luce manare), that is, it is the brightness of light – but authors confuse this.
 
xi. Winds (De ventis) 1. Wind is air that is stirred up and put into motion, and it is assigned different names according to the different parts of the sky. It is named wind (ventus) because it is furious (vehemens) and violent (violentus), for its power is such that it not only uproots rocks and trees but even disturbs the sky and the earth and tosses the seas. 2. There are four principal winds: the first of these, from the east, is Subsolanus; from the south is Auster; from the west Favonius; and from the north blows a wind of the same name (i.e. Septentrio,“thenorth”).Eachofthesehasapairofwinds associated with it. 3. Subsolanus has Vulturnus from the right side and Eurus from the left; Auster has Euroauster from the right and Austroafricus from the left; Favonius has Africus from the right and Corus from the left; finally SeptentriohasCirciusfromtherightandAquilofromthe left. These twelve winds whirl around the globe of the world with their blowing. 4. Their names were assigned for specific reasons; for Subsolanus is named because it arises beneath (sub) the rising of the sun (sol); Eurus because it blows from `E, that is, from the East, for it is related to Subsolanus; Vulturnus, because it ‘resounds deeply’ (alte tonare). 5. Concerning this Lucretius says (On the Nature of Things 5.743):
Deep-resounding (altitonans) Vulturnus and Auster, brandishing lightning.
6.	Auster is named from gathering (aurire, i.e. haurire) waters, with which it makes the air thick and feeds the rain-clouds. It is called    in Greek, because it sometimes corrupts the air (cf.  , “corrupt, adulterate”), for when Auster blows, it brings to other regions pestilence, which arises from corrupted air. But just as Auster brings pestilence, so Aquilo drives it away. Euroauster is named because on one side it links with Eurus and on the other with Auster.
7.	Austroafricus because it is joined on its left and right with Auster and Africus. This is also called Libonotus, because on one side of it is Libs (i.e. Africus) and on the other Notus (i.e. Auster). 8. [Favonius is named because it nourishes (fovere) fruits and flowers. In Greek this is Zephyrus, because it generally blows in the spring; whence this (Vergil, Geo. 1.44):
And the crumbling soil loosens with the Zephyr (i.e.
west wind).]
5 The Hyperboreans are a storied people of the far north.
XIII.xi.1–xi.20
Zephyrus is called by this name in Greek because it gives life (cf. ;A, “life”) to flowers and seeds with its breath. In Latin it is called Favonius because it nurtures (fovere) the things that are generated, for flowers are released by Auster and fashioned by Zephyrus. 9. Africus is named from its particular region, for it is in Africa that it starts to blow. 10. Corus is the one that blows from the west in the summer, and it is called Corus because it closes the circle of winds, and makes them like a ringdance (chorus). Earlier it was called Caurus, and most people call it Argestes – not Agrestis as the ignorant common people do. 11. Septentrio is so named because it rises in the circle of the seven (septem) stars (i.e. the Big Dipper), which, when one’s head is tipped back, seem to be carried by the world turning itself. 12. Circius is named because it is next to Corus. The Spanish call it Gallicus, because it blows on them from the direction of Galicia. 13. Aquilo is named because it constrains the waters (aqua) and dissipates clouds, for it is a cold dry wind. It is also called Boreas, because it blows from the Hyperborean mountains – for that is the source of this wind, whence it is cold.5 The nature of all the septentrional winds is cold and dry, and that of the austral winds is moist and warm. 14. And of all the winds, there are two principal ones: Septentrio and Auster. 15. The Etesiae are gusts from Aquilo, and they have been given their name because they begin to blow at a specific season of the year, for   is the Greek word for ‘year’ (cf. also	  , “year”). These make a straight course from the north into Egypt; they blow opposite to Auster.
16. Besides these there are two everywhere that are more puffs of air than winds: the breeze and the seabreeze. 17. The breeze (aura) is named from air (aer), as if the word were aeria, because it is a gentle motion of air; for air that is stirred up makes a breeze, whence Lucretius says (On the Nature of Things 5.503):
Airy breezes (Aerias auras) . . .
18. The sea-breeze (altanus), which is over the seas, is derivedfromtheterm‘thedeep’(altus),thatis,thesea.It isdifferentfromthewindthatblowsontheshore,which we have named a breeze, for a breeze is associated with the land. 19. A whirlwind (turbo) is a whirling of winds, and it is named from ‘soil’ (terra), whenever the wind surgesandsendsthesoilintoaspiral.20.Storm(tempestas, also meaning “period of time”) is named either for ‘season’ (tempus), just as historians are always using it
 
XIII.xi.21–xiii.11
when they say, “in that tempestas” – or it is named from the condition (status) of the sky, because due to its size, a storm brews for many days. Spring and autumn are the seasonswhenthebiggeststormsoccur,whenitisnotfull summer and not full winter. Hence storms are created out of a confluence of opposing airs at the midpoint and changeofthesetwoseasons.21.Athunder-peal(fragor)is namedfromthesoundofthingsbeingbroken(frangere), because anything dry and brittle breaks easily. 22. A gale (procella) is so named because it ‘hits hard’ (percellere), that is, it strikes (percutere) and uproots (evellere); it is the power of wind along with rain. Gales are caused by lightningorwinds.Nothingisfasterthanthewinds,and because of their swiftness poets picture both winds and lightning as winged, as in (Vergil, Aen. 8.430):
Of winged Auster . . .
xii.	Waters (De aquis) 1. Water (aqua) is so named because its surface is ‘even’ (aequalis), hence it is also called aequor (lit. “level surface,” used metaphorically for the sea), because its height is even. 2. The two most potentelementsofhumanlifearefireandwater,whence those to whom fire and water are forbidden are gravely condemned. 3. The element of water rules over all the rest, for water tempers the sky, makes the earth fertile, gives body to the air with its exhalation, ascends to the heights, and claims the sky for itself. Indeed, what is more amazing than water standing in the sky? 4. And it isnotenoughthatitreachessuchaheight,butitsnatches a school of fish with it (i.e., perhaps, in a waterspout), and when poured out becomes the cause of all growing things on earth. It brings forth fruits and trees, produces shrubs and grasses, cleans away filth, washes away sins, and provides drink for all living creatures.
xiii.	Differentkindsofwater(Dediversitateaquarum)1. There is a great diversity in the different qualities of water, for some water is salty, some alkaline, some with alum, some sulfuric, some tarry, and some containing a cure for illnesses. Near Rome the waters of the Abula (i.e. the Tiber) heal wounds. 2. In Italy the spring of Cicero cures eye injuries. In Ethiopia there is a lake that makes bodies drenched with it glisten, just as oil does. The spring of Zama in Africa makes voices melodious. Whoever drinks from Lake Clitorius in Italy will have a distaste for wine. 3. There is said to be a spring on the island of Chios that makes people sluggish. In Boeotia there are two fountains; one confers memory, the other, forgetfulness. The fountain of Cyzicus removes carnal desire. 4. In Boeotia there is a lake that causes madness; whoever drinks from it burns with the heat of lust. In Campania there are waters that are said to cure sterility in women and insanity in men. Whoever drinks from the fountain Rubrus in Ethiopia becomes frantic. 5. The fountain Leinus in Arcadia does not allow an untimely birth to occur. In Sicily there are two fountains; one of them makes the sterile fertile, and the other renders the fertile sterile. In Thessaly there are two rivers; sheep drinkingfromoneofthembecomeblack,thosedrinking fromtheotherwhite,andthosedrinkingfrombothhave mixedcolors.6.ThelakeClitumnusinUmbriaproduces very large oxen. The hooves of livestock are hardened by the swamp water of Reate. Nothing that is alive is able to sink in the lake Asphaltites (i.e. the Dead Sea) in Judea.
7.InIndiathereisastandingpoolcalledSide,inwhich nothing can swim; everything sinks. In contrast to this, everything floats in the lake Apuscidamus in Africa and nothing sinks. The spring of Marsida in Phrygia casts up stones. In Achaea, water called the Styx flows from rocks; this water, when it is drunk, kills immediately. 8. The Gelonian pool of Sicily repels those who approach it with its foul smell. There is a spring in Africa around the temple of Ammon that binds soil together with the bonds of its water; it even solidifies ashes into soil. The fountain of Job in Idumaea is said to change color four times a year; that is, dust-colored, blood-colored, green, and clear. It keeps each one of these colors for three months out of the year. 9. There is a lake in the country of the Troglodytes; three times a day it becomes bitter, and then, just as often, sweet again. The Siloan spring at the foot of Mount Zion has no continuous flow of water, but bubbles forth at certain hours and days. In Judea a certain river used to go dry every Sabbath. 10. In Sardinia warm springs heal eyes, and expose thieves, for when blindness is cured, their crimes are revealed. TheysaythereisaspringinEpirusinwhichlittorchesare extinguished and extinguished torches are lit. According to the Garamantes (i.e. Africans) there is a fountain that is too cold to drink from during the day, and too hot to touch at night. 11. Indeed, in many places waters now flow with perpetual boiling of such vigor that they make baths hot. There are some lands that have a great deal of sulfur and alum. And thus, when the cold water comes
 
through hot passages, it is affected by the adjacent heat of the sulfur and is itself heated; it does not flow from its source at such a temperature, but is changed as it travels. Indeed, waters may carry sulfur and alum with them; both materials are full of fire and grow hot with the slightest movement.
xiv.	The sea (De mari) 1. A sea is a general gathering of waters, for every confluence of waters, whether they are salt or fresh, is, loosely, a ‘sea,’ according to this (Genesis 1:10): “And the gathering together of waters, he called seas (maria).” But strictly speaking something iscalledsea(mare)becauseitswatersarebitter(amarus). 2. The sea-surface (aequor) is named because it is evenly (aequaliter) raised up, and although surging waters may swell up like mountains, when the storms have quieted the sea-surface returns to flatness. The depth of the sea varies, but the appearance of its surface is unvarying. 3. The reason why the sea has no increase in its size, even though it receives all the rivers and springs, is partly because its own huge size is not affected by the waters flowing in; then again, it is because the bitter water consumes the fresh water flowing in; or because the clouds themselves draw up and absorb a great deal of water; or because the winds carry away part of the sea, and the sun dries up part; finally, because it is percolated through certain hidden openings in the earth, and runs back again to the source of springs and fountains. The sea has no specific color; it changes with the quality of the winds. Sometimes it is golden, sometimes muddy, and sometimes black.
xv.	TheOcean(Deoceano) 1.GreekandLatinspeakers so name the ‘Ocean’ (oceanus) because it goes around the globe (orbis) in the manner of a circle (circulus), [or from its speed, because it runs quickly (ocius)]. Again, because it gleams with a deep blue color like the sky: oceanusasifthewordwere   (“blue”).Thisiswhat encircles the edges of the land, advancing and receding with alternate tides, for when the winds blow over
6	‘Hyrcanian’ is usually another name for the ‘Caspian’ Sea.
7	Isidore’s phrase iuxta Graecias et Illyricum is puzzling. He may be using Illyricus as another name for Greek (cf. xiv.iv.7), or it may conceal a reference to Ilium, as a reference to the Troad would make good sense here. A stade is about 607 (modern) feet, so Isidore’s Hellespont is about eight-tenths of a mile wide; the modern strait is about a mile wide at its narrowest point.
XIII.xiv.1–xvi.5
the deep, the Ocean either disgorges the seas or swallows them back. 2. Also, the Ocean takes different names from nearby areas, such as Gallic, Germanic, Scythian, Caspian, Hyrcanian,6 Atlantic, Gaditanian. The Gaditanian straits (i.e. the Straits of Gibraltar) are named from Gades (i.e. Cadiz), where the entrance of the Great Sea (i.e. the Mediterranean) first opens from the Ocean. Hence, when Hercules came to Gades he placed pillars there, believing that the end of the lands of the world was at that place.
xvi. The Mediterranean Sea (De mediterraneo mari) 1. The Great Sea is the one that flows from the Ocean out of the west, turns to the south, and finally stretches to the north. It is called ‘great’ because the other seas are smaller in comparison with it. This is also called the Mediterranean because it flows through the ‘middle of the land’ (media terrae) all the way to the East, separating Europe, Africa, and Asia. 2. The curve of its first part, which washes the Spanish regions, is called Iberian and Balearic. Then comes the Gallic part, which washes against the province of Narbonne (i.e. presentday southern France). Soon it becomes the Ligurian Sea, which is near the city of Genoa. After this is the Tyrrhenian Sea, which touches Italy – the Greeks call this the Ionian,andtheItalianstheInferum(lit.‘thelower’).And thentheSeaofSicilywhichgoesfromSicilytoCrete.And then the Sea of Crete, which extends to Pamphylia and Egypt. 3. And then the Hellespont, which after turning north, with many a deep inlet around the various shores of Greece and Illyricus, narrows into a passage seven stadesacross.7 AtthispointXerxesmadeabridgeofships and crossed into Greece; Abydos is there. From there it widens into open sea and is hemmed back again and makes the Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmara), which is soon narrowed to fifty passus (i.e. about 250 feet) and becomes the Thracian Bosphorus, where Darius transported his forces. 4. From there begins the vast Pontic gulf, with the marshes of Maeotis (i.e. the Sea of Azov) at its furthest point. This sea has fresher water than the othersbecauseofthegreatnumberofrivers,andisfoggy and rather shallow. Accordingly it is called Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), because it is traversable (cf. pons, gen. pontis, “bridge”), and for that reason it supports seals, tuna, and dolphins, but no larger sea-creatures.
5. And just as the land, though it is a single thing, may be referred to with various names in different places, so
 
XIII.xvi.6–xviii.3
alsothisGreatSeaisnamedwithdifferentnamesaccording to the region; for it is called Iberian and Asiatic from the names of provinces, and Balearic, Sicilian, Cretan, Cypriot, Aegean, Carpathian from the names of islands. Between Tenedos and Chios there is in the sea a rock – ratherthananisland–whichisbelievedtolook,tothose who view it from a distance, like a she-goat, which the Greeks call V? (gen. :) – and from this the Aegean Sea is named. Thus also the Carpathian Sea between Egypt and Rhodes is named from the island Carpathos which is situated there. 6. The Gallic, Ausonian, Dalmatian and Ligurian Seas are named from peoples. The Argolic,Corinthian,TyrianandAdriaticSeasarenamed from cities, for Adria was a certain city near the Illyrian Sea, which gave its name to the Adriatic Sea. 7. They may be named from their position with respect to the sky, such as the Upper (Superum) and the Lower (Inferum) Seas – because the east is upper and the west is lower – that is, the Tuscan (i.e. Tyrrhenian, known as Mare Inferum) and the Adriatic (Superum).
They may be named as a memorial to a king, such as the Ionian. Thus Io was the king of Greece, whence the Athenians are also known as Ionians. This sea is also called the Tyrrhenian, either because it washes against Tuscany – that is, Tyrrhenia – or from the Tyrrhenian sailors who threw themselves into this sea. One should know that the Ionian Sea is a huge curve from Ionia to Sicily, and has as its parts the Adriatic, the Achaean, and the Epirotic Seas. The Euxine Sea (i.e. the Black Sea) is named from the behavior of those who live beside it
(cf. k? , “hospitable”); earlier it was called ‘Axenus.’ 8. Seas may be named from the calamities of people who perished in them, such as the Hellespont, the Icarian and the Myrtoan. Now the Myrtoan sea is named from the drowning of Myrtilus, because at this spot he was thrown in by Oenomaus. Icarus was from Crete, as the stories have it, and in seeking the heights, when his feathers had been loosened by the heat of the sun, he gave his name to the sea in which he fell and perished. Phrixus,alsofleeingwithhissisterHellefromtheirstepmother’s snares, embarked on a ship bearing the sign of the ram, on which he escaped. But his sister Helle, a victim of shipwreck, died in the sea, and once dead gave her name to the Hellespontic Sea. 9. The Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmara) is named from the direction of the current,foritiscalledPropontisbecauseitcomesbefore the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea). The Bosphorus is named from the ford (cf. ! , “ford”) or narrow crossing for cattle (bos). The Egyptian Sea is assigned to Asia, the Gallic to Europe, and the African to Libya – for they are assigned to those regions that are closest to them. 10. A pelagus is an expanse of sea without shore or harbor; it is named after the Greek term !  (“oblique”), that is,“breadth,”whencealso‘openbeach’(plagia),because they are without harbors.
xvii.	Gulfs of the sea (De sinibus maris) 1. The larger inlets of the sea are called gulfs (sinus), as the Ionian in the Mediterranean, and in the Ocean, the Caspian, Indian, Persian and the Arabian gulf – which is also the Red Sea, which is assigned to the Ocean. 2. The Red Sea is so named because it is colored with reddish waves; however, it does not possess this quality by its nature, but its currents are tainted and stained by the neighboring shores because all the land surrounding that sea is red and close to the color of blood. From there a very intense vermilion may be separated out, as well as other pigments with which the coloring of paintings is varied. 3. Therefore, since the soil has this nature, it is washed away in rivers, and whatever pigment is eroded lends color to the water. It is for this reason that red gemstones are found on these shores, for when a pebble covered with this type of soil is eroded in the sand, it has the color of both the earth and the sea. 4. The Red Sea is divided into two gulfs. Of these, the one to the east is called the Persian Gulf because the Persians live at its mouth.TheotheriscalledtheArabian,becauseitisnext to Arabia.
xviii.	Tides and straits (De aestibus et fretis) 1. Tides pertain to the Ocean, and straits pertain to the connectionbetweentwoseas.Atide(aestus)isarisingorfalling of the sea, that is, a restlessness, whence also the word ‘estuary’(aestuaria),throughwhichtheseabyturnsrises andfalls.2.But‘straits’(fretum)arenamedbecausethere the sea is always seething (fervere); for a strait is narrow, a‘seethingsea’(fervensmare)asitwere,namedfromthe agitation of the waves, as if it were ‘agitating the sea’ (fervens mare), like the Straits of Gibraltar or of Sicily. Varro (Latin Language 7.22) says that they are called fretum as if the word were ‘violently agitated’ (fervidus), that is, ‘seething’(ferventia),andhavingthemotionof‘extreme agitation’ (fervor). 3. Sallust (Histories, 4.26) writes that theStraitsofSicily,whicharecalledRhegium,arenamed
 
for this reason, that at one time Sicily had been joined to Italy, and when they were a single land, the intervening space was either overwhelmed by the waters due to its low elevation, or was cut through due to its narrowness. And it is named [.  because in Greek this word means “broken off” (cf. G, “break apart”). It is exceedingly narrow, dividing Sicily from Italy by a distance of three Roman miles, and is notorious for fabulous monsters; on one side appears Scylla, and on the other Charybdis. 4. Indeed, neighboring people give the name Scylla to a rock jutting over the sea that is similar to the fabled shape when seen from a distance. Accordinglytheyhaveattributedtoitthemonstrousappearance of the story, as if it had the shape of a human girded with the heads of dogs, because the current rushing together there seems to produce the sound of barking. 5. Charybdis is named because it swallows ships up in its hidden maelstrom, for it is a sea filled with whirlpools, and for that reason mangled shipwrecks come out of its depths. Three times a day its waters rise, and three times a day it sucks them back in, for it takes waters in so that it may spit them back out, and spits them out so that it may take them back in again. 6. The Syrtes are sandy places in the sea. Sallust (War with Jugurtha 78.3) says they are called Syrtes from ‘dragging’ (cf.  , “cord for dragging, rein,” from , “drag”) because they drag everything towards themselves, and they cling fast to whoever approaches the shallows of the sea. These places are in the sea near Egypt, close to one another and confused with one another. ‘Shallows’ (vadum), however, are those places in which people and animals can cross (vadere) the sea or rivers on foot; Vergil calls them ‘shoals’ (brevia), and the Greeks 9B.
xix.	Lakes and pools (De lacis et stagnis) 1. There are certain bodies of water that are not mixed with the currents of the Ocean or the Mediterranean, and these are calledlakesandpools.2.Alakeisabasininwhichwateris heldandnotmixedwithcurrents,suchasLakeAsphalti, Lake Benacus (i.e. present-day Garda), Lake Larius (i.e. Como),andtheotherswhichtheGreekscall ,that is, ‘pools.’ Springs fall into streams, and rivers rush into channels,butalakestaysinplaceanddoesnotflowforth. And it is called lake (lacus) as if the term were ‘place’ (locus) of water. 3. Lake Asphalti (i.e. Lake Asphaltites) is the same as the Dead Sea, so named because it generates nothing living and tolerates no type of living crea-
XIII.xviii.4–xix.9
ture, for it has no fish and does not allow itself to be used by birds that are accustomed to water and rejoice at diving. But whatever living creatures you might try to submerge in it, they would spring back up; by whatever proceduretheywereimmersed,andhoweverfirmlythey were shoved in, they would immediately be cast out. It is not moved by winds, since the asphalt, which makes its water stand still, is resistant to winds. Nor does it allow sailing, because everything that is not alive sinks into its depths, and it does not support any material unless it is made bright with asphalt. 4. People say that a lighted lamp floats on top, but when its light is extinguished, it sinks. This is also called the Salt Sea, or Lake Asphalti, that is, ‘of bitumen,’ and it is in Judea between Jericho and Zoara. In length it stretches 780 stades (i.e. about ninety miles) to Zoara in Arabia and its width is 150 stades, up to the neighborhood of Sodom.
5. Lake Tiberius is named from the town Tiberias, which Herod at one time founded in honor of Tiberius Caesar, and it is more salubrious than all the other lakes in Judea, and more efficacious somehow at healing bodies. Its circumference in stades . . . 6. Lake Gennesaret (i.e. the Sea of Galilee, the same as Lake Tiberius) is the biggest in Judea with a length of 140 stades, and a width of 40. It has choppy waters and produces a breeze for itself not from the winds, but from its own self. For this reason it is named with a Greek word, Genesar, as if the term were ‘generating a breeze for itself’ (generans sibi auram). The Lake, then, is agitated over a wide area by these frequent puffing breezes, with the result that it is pure draught, sweet and good for drinking. 7. Benacus (i.e. Garda) is a lake in Italy, in Venetia, whence the river Mincius arises. Due to its size, this lake imitates the storms of the sea. 8. Lucrinus and Avernus are lakes in Campania. Lucrinus is so named because at one time it furnished great revenues (cf. lucrum, “profit”) due to its abundance of fish. Lake Avernus was named because birds (avis) were unable to fly over it, for in an earlier time it was so surrounded with a thick forest that the overpowering odor of its sulfurous water, evaporating in an enclosed space, would kill the birds flying over it with its exhalation. Caesar Augustus on hearing of this cut down the trees and made the place pleasant again, restored from its unwholesome state. 9. Further, a lake is the same as a pool where an immense amount of water collects. And it is called ‘pool’ (stagnus) because there the water stands (stare) and does not run forth.
 
XIII.xx.1–xxi.9
xx. Theabyss(Deabysso) 1.Theabyssisanimpenetrable depth of waters, either caves of hidden waters from which springs and rivers rise, or waters that secretly flow below the earth, whence it is called the abyss (abyssus, cf. O , “fathomless,” from - “without” +  , “depth”). Indeed, all waters, even if they are torrents, return through hidden passages to the central abyss. 2. Surges (fluctus) are so named because they arise from blowing winds (flatus), for waters that are agitated by the force of winds ‘surge up’ (fluctuare). Aqua is water that is still and level (aequalis), without motion. 3. But a ‘wave’ is rising water that is always in motion. Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 2.152):
Aerial waves (undas),
that is, motion, and the mass that surges and falls back. A wave is not water per se, but water in a certain motion and agitation, whence it is called wave (unda), as if from ‘going’ (eundo) and ‘returning’ (redeundo).
4. Latex, strictly speaking, is the liquid of a fountain, andiscalledlatexbecauseithides(latere)inthepassages of the earth. 5. A drop (gutta) is that which stands hanging,stilla(i.e.anotherwordfor‘drop’)isthatwhichfalls. Hence the word stillicidium (i.e. drippings from eaves), asifitwere‘fallingdrop’(stillacadens).Stiria(lit.“frozen drop, icicle,” here simply “drop”) is a Greek word, that is ‘drop’ (gutta); from it the diminutive that we call stilla is formed.8 As long as it stands or hangs suspended from roofs or trees, it is a gutta, as if ‘glutinous’ (glutinosus), but when it has fallen it is a stilla. 6. Foam (spuma) is named because it is spewn (spuere); it consists of the residue of waves; whence new wine, and things that are boiled, are purified by foam. Hence also the word ‘spit’ (sputum).
xxi. Rivers (De fluminibus) 1. A river (fluvius) is an unceasingflowofwater,namedfromperpetuallyflowing (fluere).Strictlyspeaking,flumenisthewateritself,while fluvius is the channel of the water. The word flumen is earlier than fluvius, that is, water comes before its flow. Therearetwotypesofriver;oneisatorrentandtheother is ‘naturally flowing’ (vivus). Concerning the latter type, Vergil says (Aen. 2.719):
Until I have bathed myself in running (vivus) water.
2. A torrent is water that is flowing furiously. It is called a torrent (torrens) because it increases with the rain, and during a drought it ‘becomes parched’ (torrescere), that is, it dries up. Concerning it Pacuvius (fr. 13) says:
The torrent dries up (torrens torrere) with the fiery vapor.
The Greeks assigned a torrent its name from winter (cf. 9  , “winter-flowing; torrent”), while we assigned it from summer; they named it from the season in which it is renewed and we from the season in which it dries up. 3. An amnis (i.e. another word for ‘river’) is a river surrounded by forests and leafy boughs and is called amnis from its pleasantness (amoenitas). 4.Strictlyspeakingthe‘channel’(decursus)istheboundary of a course (cursus), whether of water or of whatever else you like. Ditches (rivus) are so named because they arediverted(derivare)forirrigation,thatis,forbringing water into the fields, for ‘to irrigate’ is to ‘bring in.’ A whirlpool (gurges) is, strictly speaking, a deep spot in a river. 5. A well (puteus) is a place that has been dug out, fromwhichwaterisdrawn.Itissonamedfrom‘drinking’ (potatio). A spring (fons) is a source of water springing forth, as if it were ‘pouring out’ (fundere) water.
6. Some rivers have taken their names for specific reasons; some of these should be noted, as they are frequently mentioned in histories. 7. Geon is a river going out of Paradise and surrounding all Ethiopia; it is called by this name because it irrigates the land of Egypt with the rising of its floods, for H in Greek means “earth” in Latin. This river is called the Nile by the Egyptians on account of the mud that it carries, which makes the land fertile; hence it is called Nile, as if the term were B : (“new mud”). The Nile used to be called Melo in Latin. It arises in Lake Nilides; from there it turns to the south, and is received by Egypt, where it is struck by windsfromthenorth,andswellsupasitswatersstruggle against them, and causes the flooding of Egypt.
8. The Ganges is the river that the Sacred Scriptures call Phison, going out from Paradise and continuing on to the regions of India. And it is called Phison, that is, ‘throng,’becauseitis filled withten great tributaries and is made into one. It is called Ganges from Gangarus, the king of India. This river is said to rise up in the manner of the Nile and burst out over the lands of the Orient. 9. The Tigris is a river in Mesopotamia, rising from Paradise and continuing up toward Assyria, and after much
8 Isidore’s source here, Servius, does not say that stiria is a Greek word.
 
twisting it flows into the Dead Sea. It is called by this name on account of its speed, like that animal, the tiger (tigris), which runs exceedingly fast. 10. The Euphrates is a river in Mesopotamia rising from Paradise, well supplied with gemstones; it flows through the middle of Babylonia. This river took its name from fruits, or from abundance, for in Hebrew Ephrata means “fertility,” and it irrigates Mesopotamia in certain regions just as the Nile irrigates Alexandria. Sallust, a most trustworthy authority, asserts (Histories 4.77) that the Tigris and the Euphrates flow from a single source in Armenia; taking different courses they flow further apart, leaving a space of many miles in between. The land that they surround is called Mesopotamia (Greek “land between therivers”).Basedonthis,Jeromenotes(SiteandNames ofHebrewPlaces202[PL23.939])thattheseriversshould be understood as different from the rivers flowing from Paradise.
11. The Indus is a river of the Orient, which empties into the Red Sea. 12. In very ancient times Hystaspes was akingoftheMedes,fromwhomthespringintheOrient that is now called Hydaspes takes its name. Concerning this Lucan . . . (see Civil War 3.236, 8.227, mentioning the Indus and Hydaspes). Although it is a Persian river, it is nevertheless said to flow toward the east. 13. The Arar is a river of the Orient. Concerning it Vergil says (Ecl. 1.62):
Or (sooner) shall the Parthian drink from the Arar, for it flows through Parthia and Assyria.9 14. The Bactrus is a river of the Orient said to be named from King Bactrus, from whom the Bactrians and their city are also named. 15. The Choaspes (i.e. the Karkheh) is a river in Persia, so named in their language because it has amazingly sweet waters, such that the Persian kings claimed thedrinkingwaterfromitforthemselvesforthedistance that the river runs between Persian riverbanks. Some people think the river Cydnus in Cilicia originates from thisriver.16.TheriverAraxis(i.e.theAraks)inArmenia, which arises from the same mountain as the Euphrates, but from different underground channels, is so named because it destroys everything with its rapacity (rapacitas, from rapax, “rapacious”). Hence, when Alexander wishedtocrossit,andabridgewasbuilt,theriverrushed
9 The Arar is the Saone in modern France. Isidore or his sourceˆ mistakes the Vergil, which speaks of the impossibility of (Central Asian) Parthians drinking from the Arar.
XIII.xxi.10–xxi.24
past with such force that it demolished the bridge. This river has its head a short distance from the source of the Euphrates, and then it flows into the Caspian Sea.
17. The Syrian river called the Orontes flows along the walls of Antioch; originating (oriens) from the east (solis ortus), it joins the sea not far from that city. The ancients called it Orontes in Latin from the tracing of its origin.Thewholecityiscooledalmostallthetimebythe impact of the rather cold current of this river, and by the westerlybreezesblowingthereconstantly.18.TheJordan isariverinJudea,namedfromtwosprings,oneofwhich is called Ior and the other Dan. These rivers, once far apart from each other, are joined into a single channel, whichisthencalledtheJordan.Itoriginatesatthefootof Mount Libanus (i.e. Mt. Lebanon), and separates Judea fromArabia;aftermanytwistsandturnsitflowsintothe Dead Sea near Jericho. 19. The Eusis flows forth from the mountainsoftheCaucasusand,alongwithmanyothers, empties into the Euxine Sea, (i.e. the Black Sea), whence it is named. 20. The Cydnus is a river in Cilicia that comes from Mount Taurus, possessing amazingly sweet waters, and is so called because whatever is white the Syrians call cydnus in their native language. Whence the name is also given to this river because it swells (i.e. runs white) in the summer when the snows melt, but in the other seasons of the year it is calm and quiet. 21. Hylas is a river in Asia. Pactolus is a river in Asia that carries golden sands. Vergil says of it (Aen. 10.142):
And Pactolus waters (fields) with gold.
People give it another name, Chrysorrhoa, because of its goldenflow(cf. 9,“gold”; G ,“stream”).22.Hermus is a river in Asia that divides the Smyrnean plains, and its currents are filled with gold and sand; Smyrna is named from it (cf. , “myrrh,” golden in color).
23.	The Meander is a twisting river in Asia that, withits course bending back between Caria and Ionia, rushes intothegulfthatseparatesMiletusandPriene.Itiscalled the Meander because it is twisting and never flows in a straightcourse(perhapscf.meare,“traverse”).OfitOvid says (Met. 2. 246)
The Meander amuses itself along its curving waters.
24.	Tanus was the first king of the Scythians; the riverTanais(i.e.theDon),whichproceedsfromtheRhipaean forest and divides Europe from Asia, is said to be named afterhim.Itflowsbetweenthetwopartsoftheworldand
 
XIII.xxi.25–xxii.4
empties into the Black Sea. 25. The Inachus (i.e. the Banitza) is a river in Achaea that waters the Argolic plains. King Inachus, who gave the Argive people their origin, named it after himself. There too is the river Erymanthus, issuing from Mount Erymanthus. 26. The Padus (i.e. the Po), a river in Italy flowing from the Alpine heights, arises from three sources. The name of one of these sources is Padus, which, having spread out like a lake, sends the river from its lap. The river Padus is named from this. The Greeks also give it the cognomen Eridanus, from Eridanus the son of the Sun, whom people call Phaeton. After being struck by lightning he fell into this river and died. It is fed by melting snows at the rising of the Dog Star (i.e. in the dog days of summer), and with the addition of thirty other streams it empties into the Adriatic Sea near Ravenna.
27. The Tiber (Tiberis), a river of Italy, is said to be named after Tiberinus, king of the Albans; he died in thisriverandfromhisdeathgaveithisname.Beforethis time it had the ancient name Albula because of its color, since it is white (albus), due to the snows. It is also called theTibris,whichisthesameasTiberis,butTiberisisused ineverydayspeech,andTibrisinpoetry.28.TheDanube (Danubius) river of Germany is said to be named from the abundance of snow (nix, gen. nivis) by which it is much swelled. This is more famous than all the other rivers of Europe. It is also called the Ister, because, as it wanders through innumerable peoples, it changes its name and gathers more force as it travels. It arises in the mountains of Germania and the western regions belonging to the barbarians. It proceeds toward the east, and receives sixty tributaries. It flows into the Black Sea through seven mouths. 29. The Rhodanus (i.e. the Rhone), a river in Gaul, is named after the city Rhodos, which was founded by colonists from Rhodes. It rushes with a swift current, cutting channels into the Tyrrhenian Sea. It creates no small danger for sailors, when the waves of the sea and the currents of the river wrestle together.
30. The Rhenus (i.e. the Rhine) is said to be named from association with the Rhodanus, because it rises from the same province as the Rhodanus. It is a river of Germany counted among the three greatest rivers of Europe. It directs its waters from the Alpine heights to thedepthsoftheOcean.31.TheIberus(i.e.theEbro)isa riverthatoncegaveitsnametoallofSpain.32.Mineus,a riverofGalicia,tookitsnamefromthecolorofapigment that is found abundantly in it (i.e. minium, “cinnabar”). 33. The river Durius (the present-day Douro in Spain) is so called by the Greeks, as if the word were ‘Doric.’ Carthago (i.e. a Carthaginian colony in Spain, presentday Cartagena) has given its name to the Tagus (i.e. the Tajo), a river of Spain that issues from that city. It is rich in gold-bearing sands and for this reason is preeminent among the Spanish rivers. 34. The river Baetis (i.e. the Guadalquivir) gave its name to the province Baetica
(i.e. present-day Andalusia). Martial says of it (Epigrams
12.98.1):
Baetis, wreathe your hair with an olive-bearing crown, you who dye your fleece gold in sparkling waters –
because woolen fleeces were dyed there to a beautiful color.10 And it is named Baetis because it runs through low ground, for the Greeks say bitin11 for ‘low’ or ‘submerged.’35.Somerivers,duringtheFlood,wereblocked by loosened masses of earth; whereas other rivers, which did not exist before, burst forth to the surface at that time through the ruptured passages of the abyss.
xxii. Floods (De diluviis) 1. A ‘flood’ (diluvium) is so named because it destroys (delere) everything it washes over with the scourge of its waters. 2. The first flood occurred at the time of Noah, when the Almighty was offended by the sins of humans. The entire world was covered, everything was destroyed, there was a united expanse of sky and sea. To this day we observe evidence of this in the stones we are accustomed to see on remote mountains, stones that have hardened with shellfish and oystersinthem,andoftenstonesthathavebeenhollowed out by the waters. 3. The second flood was in Achaea at the time of the patriarch Jacob and of Ogygus, who was the founder and king of Eleusis, and who gave his name to both the place and the age. 4. The third flood was in ThessalyinthetimeofMosesandAmphictyon,whowas the third to reign after Cecrops. During their lifetimes, an influx of water consumed the greater part of the population of Thessaly, although a few survived – those who fled to the mountains, particularly to Mount Parnassus. Deucalion took possession of a kingdom at that time by going around the mountain, rescuing people who
10	Fleece was used to trap gold dust suspended in rivers.
11	Bitin is a corruption; perhaps cf. Greek , “deep,” or
 , “submerged.”
 
The Etymologies	XIII.xxii.5
 
came to him by boat, seeking refuge; he provided them with shelter and sustenance across the twin peaks of Parnassus. The fables of the Greeks say that humankind was recreated from stones by Deucalion, because of the ingrainedstoninessofthehumanheart.5.Butwhenever rivers, swollen with unusual rains, overflow to a degree that is beyond what is normal in duration or magnitude, and cause widespread destruction, they too are called ‘floods.’ One must bear in mind, however, that when rivers rise higher than normal, they not only bring destruction in the present moment, but they also signify something yet to happen.
 

 
Book XIV The earth and its parts (De terra et partibus)
 
 
i.	The earth (De terra) 1. The earth is placed in the central region of the world, standing fast in the center equidistant from all other parts of the sky. In the singular the word ‘earth’ (terra) signifies the whole globe, but in the plural, distinct parts. Logic supplies the earth’s diverse names, for the word terra is derived from the upper surface that is worn away (terere); soil (humus) fromthelower,ormoist(humidus)earth,likethatunder the sea; ground (tellus), because we carry away (tollere) what it produces; as such it is also called Ops (i.e. the earth-goddess of plenty) because it produces wealth (ops)fromitscrops;andalso‘arableland’(arvum),from plowing (arare) and cultivating. 2. However, to distinguish it properly from water, earth is called ‘dry land’ (aridum),asScripturesays(cf.Genesis1:10):“Godcalled thedryland(aridus)Earth.”Theearth’snaturalattribute is that of dryness, for if it is moist, that comes from a union with water. Of its motion some say that it is the wind in its hollows that, itself moved, moves the earth. Sallust (Histories 2.28): “A number of mountains and hills subsided, sundered by the wind rushing through the hollows of the earth.” 3. Others maintain that lifegiving water moves in the earth and simultaneously shakes it, like a vessel, as for instance Lucretius (see On the Nature of Things 6.555). Yet others are of the opinion that the earth is !  " (“spongy”), and that its mostly hidden, collapsing interior shakes everything placed upon it. Also, an opening in the earth is created through the movement of water in the lower regions, or through repeated thunder, or through winds that erupt from cavities of the earth.
ii.	The globe (De orbe) 1. The globe (orbis) derives its namefromtheroundnessofthecircle,becauseitresembles a wheel; hence a small wheel is called a ‘small disk’ (orbiculus).1 Indeed, the Ocean that flows around it on all sides encompasses its furthest reaches in a circle. It
1 Throughout Book XIV we translate orbis as “globe.” The term refers to the ‘circle’ of lands around the Mediterranean, and hence to the total known extent of land.
285
is divided into three parts, one of which is called Asia, the second Europe, the third Africa. 2. The ancients did not divide the three parts of the globe equally, for Asia extendsfromsouthtonorthintheeast,butEuropefrom the north to the west, Africa from the west to the south. 3.Whenceitisclearthattwoofthem,EuropeandAfrica, occupy half of the globe, Asia the other half by itself. But the former pair are divided into two regions, because from the Ocean the Mediterranean enters in between them and separates them. Wherefore, if you divide the globe into two parts, the east and the west, Asia will be in one, Europe and Africa in the other.
iii. Asia(DeAsia) 1. Asia (Asia) is named after a certain womanwho,accordingtotheancients,hadanempirein the east. It lies in a third sector of the globe, bounded in theeastbytherisingsun,inthesouthbytheOcean,inthe westbytheMediterranean,inthenorthbyLakeMoeotis (i.e. the Sea of Azov) and the river Tanais (i.e. the Don). It has many provinces and regions, whose names and locations I will briefly explain, beginning with Paradise. 2.Paradiseislocatedintheeast.Itsname,translatedfrom Greek into Latin, means “garden.” In Hebrew in turn it is called Eden, which in our language means “delights.” The combination of both names gives us the expression “garden of delights,” for every kind of fruit-tree and non-fruit bearing tree is found in this place, including the tree of life. It does not grow cold or hot there, but the air is always temperate. 3. A spring which bursts forth in the center irrigates the whole grove and it is divided into the headwaters of four rivers. Access to this location was blocked off after the fall of humankind, for it is fenced in onallsidesbyaflamingsword,thatis,encircledbyawall of fire, so that the flames almost reach the sky. 4. Also the Cherubim, that is, a garrison of angels, have been drawn up above the flaming sword to prevent evil spirits from approaching, so that the flames drive off human beings, and angels drive off the wicked angels, in order that access to Paradise may not lie open either to flesh or to spirits that have transgressed.
 
XIV.iii.5–iii.17
5. India is so called from the river Indus, by which it is bounded on the west. It stretches from the south sea to the place where the sun rises, and reaches in the north up to the Caucasus range. It has many peoples and towns, also the islands Taprobane (i.e. Sri Lanka), fullofpreciousstonesandelephants,Chrysa(cf. 9, “gold”) and Argyre (cf. O , “silver”), rich in gold and silver (argentum), and Tile, where the trees never lose their foliage. 6. It also has the rivers Ganges, Indus, and the Hypanis, which make India famous. India’s soil, very healthful because of the breeze of the west wind, yields two harvests annually; in winter in turn it submits to the Etesian trade-winds. It produces human beings of color, huge elephants, the animal called monoceros (i.e. the unicorn), the bird called parrot, a wood called ebony, and cinnamon, pepper, and sweet calamus. 7. It alsoyieldsivoryandpreciousstones:beryls,chrysoprase, and diamonds, carbuncles, white marble, and small and large pearls much coveted by women of the nobility. There are also mountains of gold there, which one cannot approach because of dragons, griffins, and human monsters of immense size.
	8.	The	region	from	the	border	of	India	to
Mesopotamia is generally called Parthia. Due to the invincible strength of the Parthians, Assyria and other adjoining regions also came to be included under its name. Among them are Aracusia, Parthia, Assyria, Media, and Persia – areas that adjoin each other, beginning at the river Indus and ending at the Tigris. Harsh and mountainous places are found in them, as well as the rivers Hydaspes and Arbis. These regions are divided from each other by their own borders and they thus derive their names from their respective founders. 9. Aracusia takes its name from its city. Parthia was occupied by the Parthians, who came from Scythia, and they named the area after themselves. South of it is the Red Sea, north of it the Caspian Sea, in the west the territory of the Medes. There are eighteen kingdoms in it, stretching from the shores of the Hyrcanian (i.e. Caspian) Sea to the territories of the Scythians.
10.AssyriaderivesitsnamefromAsshur,sonofShem, who was the first inhabitant of this region after the Flood. It reaches from India in the east to Media in the south, in the west to the Tigris and in the north to the Caucasus, where the Caspian passes are. In this region the purple-fish was first put to use, and from here came the first lotions and perfumes for hair and body, with which the luxury of the Romans and the Greeks abounded. 11. Media and Persia (Persida) are named after the kings Medus and Persus, who invaded these regionsinwar.AmongtheseMediaobliquelybordersthe Parthiankingdomsinthewest;inthenorthitisenclosed by Armenia; in the east it overlooks the Caspians; in the south,Persia.Itssoilproducesthetree‘Medica,’whichis rarely found in any other region. There are two Medias, Greater and Lesser Media. 12. Persia reaches in the east totheIndus,inthewestithastheRedSea,inthenorthit touchesMedia,inthesouth-southwestCarmania,which is connected to Persia and in which the most renowned cityofSusaislocated.Persiaisthebirthplaceofthemagicalarts.ThegiantNebrothwentthereaftertheconfusion of the tongues and taught the Persians to worship fire, for in those regions everyone worships the sun, which is called El in their language.
13. The word Mesopotamia has a Greek etymology, because it is “bounded by two rivers” (cf. B , “in the middle”; ! , “river”), for in the east it has the Tigris, in the west the Euphrates. In the north its territory begins between Mount Taurus and the Caucasus; in the south it borders on Babylonia, then Chaldaea, and lastly Arabia Felix. 14. The city of Babylon is the capital of Babylonia, from which it also derives its name. It is so famous that at one time or another Chaldaea, Assyria, and Mesopotamia came to be included under itsname.15.Theword‘Arabia’means“sacred”;itisinterpreted to mean this because the region produces incense and perfumes: hence the Greeks called it L"A (“happy”), our Latin speakers beatus (“happy”).2 Its woods produce both myrrh and cinnamon: it is the birthplace of the bird phoenix, and one finds precious stones there: the sardonyx, iris crystal, malachite, and opals. This region is also known as Sabaea, after the son of Cush whose name was Saba. In the east, this land extends in a narrow tract to the Persian gulf; in the north it borders on Chaldaea, in the west on the Arabian Sea.
16. It is said that a certain Syrus, a native of the land, named Syria after himself. In the east its boundary is the Euphrates, in the west the Mediterranean and Egypt; in the north it touches Armenia and Cappadocia, in the south the Arabian Sea. Its territory extends immensely in length, more narrowly in width. 17. It comprises
2 Isidore alludes to a common term for one section of Arabia, Arabia Felix, “Arabia the Blessed.”
 
the provinces Commagene, Phoenicia, and Palestine, to which Judea belongs, except for the Saracens and the Nabateans. Commagene, the first province of Syria, received its name from the city of Commaga, which was once considered to be the capital there. North of it lies Armenia, to the east Mesopotamia, to the south Syria, to thewesttheMediterranean.18.Phoenix,brotherofCadmus, came from Egyptian Thebes into Syria and ruled over Sidon, and this province was called Phoenicia after hisname.InthisprovinceTyreislocated,ofwhichIsaiah speaks (Isaiah 23). East of it lies Arabia, south of it the Red Sea.
19. The city of Philistis is the capital of the province of Palestine. It is now called Ascalon. From this city all of the surrounding region receives the name ‘Palestine.’ East of it lies the Red Sea, on the southern side it is bordered by Judea, in the north it is bounded by the borders of the Tyrians, in the west it comes to an end at the Egyptian border. 20. The Palestinian region Judea (Iudaea) is so called after Judah, from whose tribe it had its kings. Previously it was called Canaan (Chanaan), afterasonofCham(i.e.Ham),orelseafterthetentribes of the Canaanites, whose territory the Judeans occupied after they had expelled them. It stretches lengthwise from the village Arfa up to the village Julias, which is inhabited in equal parts by a community of Judeans and of Tyrians. In its width it stretches all the way from Mount Libanus (i.e. Mount Lebanon) to Lake Tiberias (i.e. the Sea of Galilee). 21. In the center of Judea is the city Jerusalem, as if it were the navel of the whole region. It is a land wealthy in various resources, fertile in fruits of the earth, renowned for its waters, rich in balsam-trees. Hence, thanks to the benefits of its natural goods, the Judeans considered it the land flowing with milk and honey promised to their forefathers, because in this place God offered them a foreshadowing of the Resurrection.
22. Samaria is a region in Palestine that received its name from a certain city called Samaria, which was once aroyalresidenceinIsrael;nowadaysitisknownasSebastia, a name that is derived from Augustus (cf.  , “august”). This region lies in the middle between Judea and Galilee; it begins in the village called Eleas and ends in the territory called Agrabath. The nature of its territory resembles and in no way differs from that of Judea. 23. Galilee (Galilaea) is a region in Palestine which is so called because it produces lighter-skinned people than
XIV.iii.18–iii.30
Palestine does (cf. , “milk”). It has two parts, an upper and a lower, which are nevertheless connected and border on Syria and Phoenicia. Its earth is rich, fertile, and rather abundant in produce. 24. Pentapolis is a region located where Arabia borders on Palestine. It derives its name from the five wicked cities that were consumed by heavenly fire (see Wisdom 10:6, Vulgate, and cf. v.5 below). Once this land was more fertile than Jerusalem, but today it is deserted and scorched, for due to the wickedness of its inhabitants fire descended from heaventhatreducedthisregiontoeternalashes(Genesis 19:24–25). 25. A kind of shadow and image of it is visible to this day in its ashes and trees, for in this area there is flourishing fruit with such an appearance of ripeness that it makes one want to eat it, but if you gather it, it falls apart and dissolves in ashes and gives off smoke as if it were still burning. 26. Nabathea is a region named after Nabaioth, son of Ishmael. It lies between Judea and Arabia; rising from the Euphrates it stretches to the Red Sea – it is part of Arabia.
27. Egypt (Aegyptus), which was formerly called ‘Aeria,’ later took its name from Aegyptus, brother of Danaus, who reigned there. In the east it is adjoined by Syria and the Red Sea, to the west lies Libya, in the north the Mediterranean, while in the south it extends toward the interior, reaching Ethiopia, a region unaccustomed to rain and unacquainted with downpours. 28. The Nile alone waters it when it overflows and renders it fertile with its flood; whence it is rich in produce and feeds many parts of the earth with grain. Furthermore, it overflows with other articles of trade to such an extentthatitfillstheworldwithindispensablemerchandise. Egypt ends at Canopea, named after the helmsman of Menelaos, Canopus, who is buried on the island that marks the beginning of Libya and the mouth of the Nile.
29. Seres is a city of the east after which both the Seres and their region (i.e. China and East Asia) are named. TheareabendsfromtheScythianOceanandtheCaspian Sea to the eastern Ocean. It is rich in a renowned foliage, fromwhichsilk-fleeceisgathered,whichtheSeressellto other peoples for the manufacture of garments. 30. The river Bactrus itself gave its name to Bactria. The parts of it that are further out are surrounded by the range of the Propanisus,whilethosefacingusterminateatthesource of the river Indus; the river Ochus is the boundary for the remaining parts. Bactria exports camels of the greatest strength, whose feet never wear out.
 
XIV.iii.31–iii.41
31. Like the country of the Goths, Scythia is said to have been named after Magog, son of Japheth. Formerly its territory was immense; it stretched from India in the east and from the Maeotian swamps (i.e. the Sea of Azov) in the north between the Danube and the Ocean up to the borders of Germania. To be sure, later it was reduced in size and then reached from the right-hand region of its east, where the Chinese Ocean extends, up to the Caspian Sea, which is on its west. From there it spreads in the south to the summits of the Caucasus, under which Hyrcania lies, having in like manner many tribes in the west who are nomads due to the infertility of the soil. 32. Among these tribes some cultivate the land, whereas others who are monstrous and savage live on human flesh and blood. Many parts of Scythia have good land, but many are nevertheless uninhabitable, for while many places abound in gold and precious stones, they are rarely visited by human beings because of the savagery of the griffins. The best green gems come from there; lapis lazuli and the purest crystal are Scythian. It also has the great rivers of the Moschi, the Phasis, and the Araxes.
33.	Hyrcania is so called after the Hyrcanian forest,which lies below Scythia, having in the east the Caspian Sea, in the south Armenia, in the north Albania and in the west Hiberia (i.e. present-day Georgia). It is a rough forest, full of savage wild beasts such as tigers, panthers, and pards. Vergil says of it (Aen. 4.367):
And Hyrcanian tigresses suckled you.
34.	Albania3 gets its name from the color of its inhabitants, because they are born with white (albus) hair. In the east it rises from below the Caspian Sea and extends to the Maeotian swamps (i.e. the Sea of Azov) along the shores of the Ocean in the north, by deserts and uncultivated regions. This land has enormous dogs; their ferocity is such that they attack bulls and kill lions.
35.	Armenia is so called from Armenus, the com-panion of Jason of Thessaly. After the death of King Jason he gathered a group from among the crowd of Jason’s followers who were wandering aimlessly about, seized Armenia and named it after himself. It is located between the Taurus and the Caucasus ranges, reaching fromCappadociatotheCaspianSea,havinginthenorth the Ceraunian mountains, in whose hills the river Tigris originates, and in whose mountains the Ark is said to have settled after the Flood. There are two Armenias, Upper and Lower Armenia, just as there are two Pannonias. 36. Hiberia is a region in Asia, near the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), connected to Armenia. There herbs grow which can be used for dyeing. 37. Cappadocia was named after its chief city. It is located where Syria begins and touches Armenia in the east, Asia Minor in the west, and the Cimmerian Sea and the Themiscyrian plains, which belong to the Amazons, in the north; in the south itreachestheTaurusmountains,underwhichCiliciaand Isauria stretch out to the Gulf of Cilicia, which faces the isle of Cyprus. Its territory excels as a breeding-ground for horses. Through it flows the river Halys, which formerlyseparatedthekingdomofLydiafromthePersians.
38. Asia Minor is girt by Cappadocia in the east and surrounded by the sea in all other directions, for it has the Black Sea in the north, the Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmora) in the west, and the sea of Egypt in the south. ItsprovincesareBithynia,Phrygia,Galatia,Lydia,Caria, Pamphylia, Isauria, Lycia, and Cilicia. 39. The first of these provinces of Asia Minor, Bithynia, stretches eastward from where the Black Sea begins, opposite Thracia, and it was previously called many different names, first Bebrycia, then Mygdonia, then Bithynia, after king Bithynus. It is also known as Phrygia Major. The city Nicomedia lies in it, where Hannibal took refuge and died from a drink of poison. 40. Galatia takes its name from ancient tribes of the Galli, by whom it was occupied, for the Galli, called upon by the king of Bithynia to assist him, divided the kingdom when victory was achieved. Thus, after they had intermarried with the Greeks, they were first called Gallograeci and are now called Galatians, after the name of the ancient Galli, and their territory is called Galatia.
41. Phrygia is named after Phrygia, the daughter of Europa. It is also called Dardania, after Dardanus, the son of Jupiter, concerning whom Homer says (cf. Iliad
20.215):
Whom Jupiter first begot in the celestial citadel.
Having left from the city of Corythus, he was the first to arrive in Phrygia. This territory is situated above the Troad, with the region of Galatia to the north; in the south it is a neighbor of Lyconia, it borders Lydia in
3 The province of Albania is not coextensive with present-day Albania, but lies on the west coast of the Caspian Sea – now parts of Azerbaijan and Russia.
 
the east, and in the west it is bounded by the Hellespont. It contains the region of Troy, which Tros, the king of the Trojans and father of Ganymede, named after himself. There are two Phrygias: Phrygia Major and Phrygia Minor. Smyrna lies in Phrygia Major and Ilium in Phrygia Minor. 42. Lycaonia . . . The river Hermus separates Caria from Phrygia. 43. Lydia is an old seat of kingdoms, which the waters of the Pactolus have raised to riches with their golden floods. Previously it was called Maeonia. Because of its smallness it could not support the two brothers, Lydus and Tyrrhenus, as kings. They therefore drew lots and it fell to Tyrrhenus to leave, with a large number of people, and occupy an area in Gaul that he named Tyrrhenia. Lydia, however, is named after Lydus, the brother of the king, who remained in the province. In the west it borders on Phrygia Minor, in the east it has the city of Smyrna, which is encircled by the river Helles;4 the rivers Pactolus and Hermus, very rich in golden sand, flow around its fields.
44. Pamphylia . . . It is said that Isauria is named after the place where it is located, because it lies everywhere exposed to blasts of wind (aura). It has the city of Seleuciaasitsmetropolis.45.Ciliciaowesitsnametoacertain Cilix who, they say, was descended from Phoenix, and they assert that he was older than Jupiter. Many plains lie there, meeting in the west Lycia, in the south the Sea ofIssus,atitsbacktheridgesofMountTaurus.Theriver Cydnus flows through it. Its capital is Tarsus. The city of Corycus is also located there, whence comes the most and the best saffron, more fragrant in scent and more goldenincolor.46.Lyciaissocalledbecauseintheeastit bordersonCilicia,forCiliciabordersonitintheeastand it has the sea to the west and the south; in the north lies Caria. There lies Mount Chimera, which exhales fire in nightly surges, like Etna in Sicily and Vesuvius in Campania.
iv. Europe (De Europa) 1. After Asia I must turn my pen to Europe. Europa was the daughter of Agenor, king of Libya, whom Jupiter carried to Crete after she had been abducted from Africa, and the third part of the globe is named after her. This Agenor is the son of Libya, after whom Libya, that is, Africa, is said to have been named; whence it seems Libya took its name first,
4 Isidore or his sources are evidently confused about the location of Smyrna. The river name, Helles, too, is unclear.
XIV.iii.42–iv.6
and then Europe. 2. The third of the globe that is called Europe (Europa) begins with the river Tanais (i.e. the Don), passing to the west along the northern Ocean as far as the border of Spain, and its eastern and southern parts rise from the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea) and are bordered the whole way by the Mediterranean and end in the islands of Gades (i.e. Cadiz). 3. The first region of Europe is lower Scythia, which begins in the Maeotian swamps (i.e. the Sea of Azov), stretching between the Danube and the northern Ocean up to Germania. And this land is called Barbarica in general usage on account of the barbaric people by whom it is inhabited. Its first part is Alania, which touches on the Maeotian swamps; after this Dacia, where Gothia is; then Germania, where the Suevi inhabit the greater part.
4. Germania lies beyond lower Scythia. It starts at the DanubeandisenclosedbytheriverRhineandtheOcean. In the north and in the west the Ocean is its boundary, in the east the Danube, in the south the river Rhine. The country is rich in men and has a numerous and fierce (immanis) population; due to this and its fecundity in producing peoples it is called Germania (cf. germinare, “germinate”). It produces the Hyrcanian birds, whose feathers shine at night; it also produces wild bison, wild oxen, and elk. It exports precious stones, crystal, and amber, as well as green callaica and white ceraunium. There are two parts to Germania: Upper Germania, adjoining the northern Ocean, and Lower Germania, beside the Rhine. 5. The provinces that the Danube separates from Barbaric territory and that stretch to the Mediterraneanareasfollows:thefirstisMoesia,socalled for its abundant harvests (messis); whence the ancients also called it the granary of Ceres. In the east it is connected to the delta of the Danube, in the south-east to Thracia, in the south to Macedonia, in the west to Istria. After Moesia comes Pannonia. Then Noricum, a cold territory of scant productivity. Thereafter Raetia, teeming in produce, which comes next to Gallia Belgica.
6. Thracia is said to have gotten its name from Tiras, the son of Japheth, upon his arrival there; others have suggested that Thracia was named after the savagery of its inhabitants (perhaps cf. trux, gen. trucis, “savage,” or  9, “rough, savage”). In the east it lies opposite the Propontis (i.e. the Sea of Marmara) and the city of Constantinople, in the north it is bordered by the Ister, in the south by the Aegean, in the west it adjoins Macedonia. Once this region was inhabited by the Bessi,
 
XIV.iv.7–iv.14
the Massagetes, the Sarmatians, the Scythians and many other nations; for it is a spacious region and therefore it contained a great number of tribes. From Thracia the river Ebrus flows forth, which also touches upon many barbarian tribes.
7.Greece(Graecia)issocalledfromkingGraecus,who settled this entire region as a kingdom. There are seven Greek provinces. From the west the first is Dalmatia, thenEpirus,thenHellas,thenThessaly,thenMacedonia, then Achaea, and two in the sea, Crete and the Cyclades. ‘Illyricus’ generally refers to all of Greece. 8. Dalmatia is thought to have taken its name from Delmi, the most important city of this province. It borders Macedonia in the east, Moesia in the north, to the west it ends in Istria, while in the south it ends at the Adriatic Sea. 9. Epirus is so called from Pyrrhus, son of Achilles. Part of it is Chaonia, which was formerly called Molossia, after Molossus, son of Pyrrhus, whom Pyrrhus fathered with Andromache. But after Pyrrhus was slain by the treachery of Orestes, Helenus took Andromache as wife, and held the kingdom for his stepson, who had succeeded his father. From him a part of Epirus was called Molossia, which Helenus afterwards named Chaonia, after his brotherChaon,whomheissaidtohavekilledbyaccident during a hunt – as if this had been done in remembrance of his dead brother.
10. Hellas is so called from king Hellen, the son of Deucalion and Pyrrha; from him the Greeks first took the name Hellenes. This is the same territory as Attica, earlier called ‘Acte.’ There was a certain Granus, a native of Greece, after whose daughter’s name, Attis, Attica was named. It lies in the middle between Macedonia and Achaea, connected to Arcadia on its northern side.5 This is the true Greece, where the city of Athens was located, the mother of the liberal arts and the nurse of philosophers; there was nothing nobler and more illustrious in all of Greece. In it (Attica) lies the field of Marathon, by repute once drenched with the blood of battle. 11. There are two provincesofHellas:BoeotiaandthePeloponnese.Boeotia is so called for the following reason: when Cadmus, son of Agenor, searched under command of his father forhissisterEuropa,whohadbeenseizedbyJupiter,and he could not find her, he made up his mind to choose a placeforexile,fearingthewrathofhisfather.Hefollowed the tracks of a cow that he had seen by chance and took a liking to the place where it had lain down, and so he named the place Boeotia, after the word ‘cow’ (bos). There he built the city of Thebes, in which in ancient times civil wars erupted, and there Apollo was born, and Hercules, most famous of the Thebans. This city is also known by the name of Aeonia, after a certain spring consecrated to Apollo and the Muses, which is located in this same Boeotia. The second part of Hellas is the Peloponnese, named for and ruled by Pelops.
12. Thessaly (Thessalia) takes its name from King Thessalus. It borders on the southern region of Macedonia and it has Pieria at its back. Many are the rivers [and cities] and towns in Thessaly, Thessalonica being the most outstanding among them. There one also finds Mount Parnassus, which was once consecrated to Apollo. Thessaly was the birthplace of Achilles and the original home of the Lapiths, of whom it is said that they were the first to break horses to the bit, whence they were also called Centaurs (cf. B  , “bit”).6 In Thessaly golden solidi (i.e. coins) were first manufacturedandthefirstuseoftamedhorseswasdevised.13.In the beginning Macedonia was called Emathia, after king Emathius, but afterwards Macedo, who was the maternal grandson of Deucalion, took over the rule and he changedthenameandcalleditMacedonia,afterhisown name. It is bounded in the east by the Aegean Sea, in the south by Achaea, in the west by Dalmatia, in the north by Moesia. It is the fatherland of Alexander the Great, and a region very rich in gold and silver ore. This land produces a stone they call paeanites. Mount Olympus is in this region, which with its lofty peak rises up to such heights that neither clouds nor wind are perceived on its peak.
14. Both the city and the province Achaea are named after king Achaeus. This is almost an island (i.e. the Peloponnese peninsula); for, except for the northern region, which is conjoined to Macedonia, it is surrounded on all sides by the sea. In the east it has the Myrtean Sea, in the southeast the Cretan Sea, in the south the Ionian Sea, from the southwest and the west the Cassiopan islands, and only in the northern region is it adjoined to Macedonia and Attica. Corinth is its chief city,theornamentofGreece.InachusisariverinAchaea.
5	‘Northern’ here seems to be a slip for ‘southern’; see section 15 below.
6	Isidore has confused the Lapiths with their legendary opponents, the Centaurs.
 
15. Arcadia is the inmost part of Achaea, shaped like the leaf of a plane tree. It is placed in between the Ionian and the Aegean Sea; Arcas, the son of Iupiter and Callisto, named it Arcadia according to his own name after he had subjugated the Pelasgians. This is also known as Sicyonia, from king Sicyon, after whom the kingdom of the Sicyonians is also named. Arcadia contains the great river Erimanthus. It possesses the stone asbestos, which, once set on fire, is never extinguished. Dazzling white merles are also born there. 16. Lacedaemonia . . .
Pannonia is named after the Apennine (Appenninus) Alps, by which it is separated from Italy. It is a region strong in men that enjoys good soil and it is surrounded by two rivers that are very rough, the Drava (Dravus) and the Sava (Savus). It is adjacent to Noricum and Raetia; east of it lies Moesia, southeast Istria, southwest the Apennine Alps, in the west Belgian Gaul, in the north the source of the Danube and the border that divides Germania and Gaul. 17. The river Ister, which flows through this land, gives Istria its name. It is also known as the Danube. Pannonia lies to the north of
Istria.
18. In times past Italy was called Magna Graecia by the Greeks who occupied it, and then Saturnia, from the name of its king. Later it was also called Latium, because it was here that Saturn hid (latere) after Jupiter had pushed him from his throne. Finally it was called Italy (Italia) after Italus, king of the Sicilians, who reigned there.Itsterritoryisofgreaterlengththanwidth,extending from west-northwest to southeast. Enclosed by the Tyrrhenian Sea to the south and the Adriatic Sea to the north it is bounded in the west by the mountain range of theAlps.Itisthemostbeautifullandinallrespects,most pleasing in the fertility of its soil and the richness of its pasture. 19. It has Lake Garda (Benacus), Lake Avernus andtheLucrineLake,theriversPo(Eridanus)andTiber, and the warm springs of Baiae. It produces the precious stonessyrtites,lyncurium,andcoral,andalsotheserpent called boa, the wild lynx, and the birds of Diomedes. However, both Italy and Spain are called Hesperia because the Greeks, when they traveled to either Italy or Spain, navigated with the help of the evening star Hesperus. These are distinguished in the following manner: when you speak of Hesperia alone you refer to Italy, whereas when you add Ultima (Farthest) to it you refertoSpain,becauseitliesinthefurthestreachesofthe west.
XIV.iv.15–iv.27
20. Tuscia (cf. Tuscany) is a part of Italy, Umbria a part of Tuscia. Tuscia is named from its frequent use of religious rites and incense (tus), after the term ; (“offer sacrifice”). 21. Umbria, as the histories tell, survived the rains (imber) during the time of a disastrous flood and on this account was named  - (“rain”) in Greek. It is located in the mountain range of the Apennines, in the part of Italy toward the south. 22.Etruria,apartofItaly,issonamedbecauseitsboundaries are extended up to the river bank of the Tiber, as if the word were K  , for U   means “other,” and S  means “boundary” – in former times the boundaries of Rome extended to only one bank of the river Tiber. Others think that Etruria is so named from prince Etruscus. Likewise Tyrrhenia is named from Tyrrhenus, brother of Lydus who, as a result of a drawing of lots, came to Italy from Maeonia with part of his people. This is also known as Tuscia, but we ought not to say Tuscia, because we never see it in writing. Moreover, Tuscia is so named from its frequent use of sacrifice and incense, after the term N (“to sacrifice”). And there, they say, theartoftheharuspexwasdiscovered.23.Apulia[where Brindisiislocated,whichtheAetolianswhohadfollowed Diomedesasleaderfounded].24.Campania[hasterritoriesthataregreeninwinterandinsummer.Therethesun is mild, the temperature pleasing, and the air pure and gentle].
25. Gaul (Gallia) is so called from the whiteness of its people, for milk is called  in Greek. The mountains and the chilliness of the sky keep the heat of the sun from this region, so that the whiteness of bodies does not darken in color. The Alpine ridges overlook it from the east and the Ocean limits it in the west, the rugged terrain of the Pyrenees in the south, and in the north the river Rhine and Germania. It begins with Belgica and ends with Aquitania. The region is characterized by rich and grassy soil and is well suited for animal husbandry, well watered by streams and springs, with the two great rivers Rhine and Rhone flowing through it. 26. Belgis is a city in Gaul from which the province Belgica is named. Cisalpine Gaul is so called because it is ‘on this side of the Alps’ (citra Alpes, i.e. from Rome’s point of view); Transalpine Gaul, that is, ‘across the Alps’ (trans Alpes), to the north. Raetia is so called because it is next to the Rhine (Rhenum). 27. Aquitania owes its name to the transverse ‘waters’ (aqua) of the river Loire (Liger), which is the
 
XIV.iv.28–v.10
boundary of most of it, and which encloses it almost in a circle.
28. Hispania was first named ‘Iberia’ after the river Iberus(i.e.Hiberus,theEbro),later‘Hispania’fromHispalis (i.e. Seville). This is the real Hesperia (see section 19 above), named after Hesperus, the evening star. It is situated between Africa and Gaul, closed off by the Pyrenees mountains to the north and everywhere else shut in by the sea. It is temperate in its healthy climate, abundant in all types of produce, and very rich in its abundance of precious stones and metals. 29. Great riversflowthroughit:theBaetis(Guadalquivir),Mineus (Mino), Iberus (Ebro), and Tagus (Tajo), which carries˜ gold, just like the Pactolus (see iii.43 above). It is composed of six provinces: the Tarraconian (i.e. of Tarragona), the Cartagenian, Lusitania, Gallicia, Baetica and, across the straits in Africa, the Tingitanian (i.e. of Tangiers). 30. Furthermore there are two Spains: Inner Spain, whose area extends in the north from the Pyrenees to Cartagena; and Outer Spain, which in the south extends from Celtiberia to the straits of Cadiz. Inner (citerior) and Outer (ulterior) are so called as if it were citra (on this side) and ultra (beyond); but citra is formed as if the term were ‘around the earth’ (circa terras), and ultra either because it is the last (ultimus), or because after it there is not ‘any’ (ulla), that is, any other, land.
v. Libya(DeLibya) 1. Libya (Libya) is so called because the Libs, the African wind, blows from there. Others say thatEpaphus,thesonofJupiterandfounderofMemphis in Egypt, had a daughter named Libya with his wife Cassiopeia, and Libya afterwards established a kingdom in Africa. From her name the land Libya received its name. 2. Further, there are those who think that Africa (Africa) is named as though the word were aprica (“exposed to the sun”), because it is open to the sky and the sun and without bitter cold. Others say Africa is named from one of the descendants of Abraham and Keturah, who was called Afer (i.e. Epher), of whom we made mention above (IX.ii.115). 3. Africa begins at the borders of Egypt, stretching along the south through Ethiopia up to the Atlas range. In its northern region it is enclosed by the bordering Mediterranean and is bounded by the straits of Cadiz (i.e. Gibraltar), containing the provinces of Libya Cyrenensis, Pentapolis, Tripolis, Byzacium, Carthage, Numidia, Mauretania Sitifensis, Mauretania Tingitana, and Ethiopia under the burning sun.
4. Libya Cyrenensis is in the first part of Africa and is named after Cyrene, the chief city within its borders. From here Egypt is in the east, the Greater Syrtes and the Trogodytae (i.e. the Troglodytes) are in the west, the LibyanSealiestothenorth,andinthesouthareEthiopia and various barbarian nations and inaccessible wilderness, which also brings forth basilisk serpents. 5. ‘Pentapolis’intheGreektongueissocalledafterits‘fivecities’ (cf. !B , “five”; !, “city”), namely Berenice, Ceutria, Apollonia, Ptolomais, and Cyrene; of these Ptolomais and Berenice were named after their rulers. Pentapolis is next to Libya Cyrenensis and is considered to be within its borders. 6. In their own tongue the Greeks also name a province ‘Tripolitana’ from the number of its three great cities: Oea, Sabrata and Leptis Magna. This province has the Greater Syrtes and the Trogodytae (i.e. the Troglodytes) to the east, the Adriatic Sea in the north, in the west Byzacium and in the south the Gaetuli and the Garamantes, extending to the Ethiopian Ocean.
7.TheBizaceneregionisallotteditsnamefromitstwo very famous towns, one of which is called Hadrumetum (perhaps cf. bi-, “two”; ;, “yoke, pair”). This region islocatedbelowTripoli,extendingfortwohundredmiles or more, rich in oil, and so rich in its soil that seeds that are sown there return a crop nearly a hundredfold. 8. Great Carthage is in Zeugis. This is the true Africa, situatedinbetweenByzaciumandNumidia,boundedinthe north by the Sicilian Sea. In the south it stretches as far as the region of the Gaetuli. The nearer part of it is fruitful, but the more remote part is filled with wild beasts and serpents and great onagers wandering in the desert. Gaetulia is the interior region of Africa. 9. Numidia is so called after inhabitants that wander about far and wide because they do not have a fixed abode. For in their language temporary and mobile settlements are called numidia. It begins at the river Amsiga and it marks its endinZeugis.EastofitaretheLesserSyrtes,inthenorth the sea that stretches toward Sardinia, in the west Mauretania Sitifensis, in the south the tribes of Ethiopia: it is a region of very fertile fields. However, in areas covered by forest it produces wild animals, in steep mountains horses and onagers. It is also renowned for its excellent marble, which is called Numidian marble. It has distinguished cities as well: Hippo Regius and Rusicada.
10. Mauretania is so called after the color of the inhabitants; for the Greeks call ‘black’ N . Just as the name for Gaul is derived from the whiteness of its
 
The Etymologies	XIV.v.11–vi.1
 
inhabitants,soalsothenameforMauretaniafromblackness. Its principal province is Mauretania Sitifensis, whichcontainedthetownofSitifi,fromwhichthename for the region is thought to be derived. 11. With regard to Mauretania Caesariensis: the main city was a colony called Caesarea, whose name was given to the province. The two provinces are linked together and are bounded in the east by Numidia, in the north by the Mediterranean, in the west by the river Malva, in the south by Mount Astrixis, which forms the border between fertile earth and the sands that extend up to the Ocean. 12. Mauretania Tingitania is so called after the capital of the province, Tingis (i.e. Tangiers). This end of Africa rises up from seven mountains, bounded in the east by the river Malva, in the north by the straits of Cadiz, in the west by the Atlantic Ocean, in the south by the tribes of the Gaulales, who roam as far as the Hesperian (i.e. “Western”) Sea. The region produces wild beasts, apes, dragons,andostriches.Onceitwasalsofullofelephants, which now only India produces.
13.GaramawasthecapitaloftheGaramantianregion. ItliesbetweenCyreneanLibyaandEthiopiaandaspring is located there that cools down in the heat of the day and becomes warmer in the cold of night. 14. Ethiopia is so called after the color of its inhabitants, who are scorched by the proximity of the sun (cf. V, “burn”; h4, gen. >!, “face”). Indeed, the coloring of the people demonstrates the force of the sun, for it is always hot there, because all of its territory is under the South Pole. Around the western part it is mountainous, sandy in the middle, and desert toward the east. It stretches from Mount Atlas in the west to the borders of Egypt in the east, bounded in the south by the Ocean and in the north by the river Nile. It has very many tribes, fearsome with their different faces and strange appearance. 15. It also teems with a multitude of wild beasts and serpents. There, indeed, the rhinoceros and the giraffe are found, the basilisk, and huge dragons from whose brains precious stones are extracted. There one finds the hyacinth stone as well as the chrysoprase, and cinnamon is gathered there. 16. There are two Ethiopias: one to the east, another to the west, in Mauretania.
17.	Apart from these three parts of the world thereexists a fourth part, beyond the Ocean, further inland towardthesouth,whichisunknowntousbecauseofthe burning heat of the sun; within its borders are said to live the legendary Antipodes. Mauretania, however, lies next to Spain; then comes Numidia, then the territory of Carthage, after which we gather that there is Gaetulia, and after that Ethiopia; beyond that are places scorched by the heat of the sun.
18.	It should, indeed, be understood that someprovinces were first named after their founders; afterwards the name of the inhabitants was derived from the name of the province. Thus, ‘Italy’ (Italia) comes from ‘Italus’ (see IX.ii.85), and in turn from ‘Italy’ comes the term ‘an Italian’ (Italus); and in this way we use a name forthepeoplethatisthesameasthenameofthefounder, fromwhosenamederivesthenameoftheprovince.And thisishowithappensthatacity,aterritory,andapeople are all named after a single name. 19. Provinces, moreover,receivedtheirnameforareason.Aprincipate(principatus) over nations is a term that that applied to foreign kings; when the Romans brought these under their own jurisdiction by conquering (vincere) it, they called such far-off regions provinces (provincia). A fatherland (patria) is so called because it is common to all who were born in it (cf. pater, “father”). 20. Earth (terra), as we have said before (cf. XIII.iii), signifies an element: lands (terrae, i.e. the plural of terra), by contrast, signify certain parts of the world, such as Africa or Italy. It is the same with areas (locus); for in the ‘globe of lands’ (orbis terrarum) areas and expanses of land contain in themselves many provinces; just as in the body an area is a single part, containing many members; and just as a house has many rooms in it. Thus, expanses of land are called lands and areas, and provinces are parts of those, as Phrygia is part of Asia, Raetia part of Gaul, and Baetica part of Spain.
21. Now Asia is an area, Phrygia is a province of Asia, Troy is a region of Phrygia, and Ilium is a city of Troy. Likewise regions are parts of provinces, and are commonly called conventus, such as Troy in Phrygia, Cantabria and Asturia in Galicia. The term ‘region’ (regio)comesfromgovernors(rector),andterritoriesare parts of regions. 22. A territory (territorium) is so called as if it were tauritorium, that is, ‘broken by a plow’ (tritum aratro) and by a team of oxen (cf. taurus, “bull”) – for the ancients used to designate the boundaries of their possessions and territories by cutting a furrow.
vi. Islands (De insulis) 1. Islands (insula) are so called becausetheyare‘insaltwater’(insalo),thatis,inthesea. Of these the best known and the biggest, which many of
 
XIV.vi.2–vi.13
the ancients investigated with expert effort, should be noted.
2. Britannia is an island in the Ocean, cut off from the whole globe by the intervening sea; it takes its name from the name of its inhabitants. It is situated opposite the region of Gaul, looking towards Spain; its circumference is 24,000 (Roman) miles. There are many great riversthere,hotsprings,agreatandvariedabundanceof metals:itisrichinjetandpearls. 3.Thanetisanislandin the Ocean in the Gallic (i.e. English) channel, separated from Britannia by a narrow estuary, with fruitful fields and rich soil. It is named Thanet (Tanatos) from the death of serpents (cf.   , “death”). Although the island itself is unacquainted with serpents, if soil from it is carried away and brought to any other nation, it kills snakes there. 4. Ultima Thule (Thyle ultima) is an island of the Ocean in the northwestern region, beyond Britannia, taking its name from the sun, because there the sun makes its summer solstice, and there is no daylight beyond (ultra) this.7 Hence its sea is sluggish and frozen.
5. The Orkneys (Orcades) are islands of the Ocean within Britannia, numbering thirty-three, of which twenty are uninhabited and thirteen colonized. 6. Ireland (Scotia), also known as Hibernia, is an island next to Britannia, narrower in its expanse of land but more fertile in its site. It extends from southwest to north. Its near parts stretch towards Iberia (Hiberia) and the Cantabrian Ocean (i.e. the Bay of Biscay), whence it is calledHibernia;butitiscalledScotia,becauseithasbeen colonized by tribes of the Scoti.8 There no snakes are found, birds are scarce, and there are no bees, so that if someone were to sprinkle dust or pebbles brought from there among beehives in some other place, the swarms would desert the honeycombs.
7. Cadiz (Gadis) is an island located at the edge of the province of Baetica. It separates Europe from Africa. The pillars of Hercules can be seen there, and from there the current of the Ocean flows into the entrance of the Tyrrhenian Sea. It is divided from the mainland by a distance of six hundred (Roman) feet. When the Tyrians, who had come from the Red Sea, occupied it, they called it in their language Gadir, that is, “enclosed,” because it is enclosed on all sides by the sea. This island produces a palm-like tree whose sap, when mixed with glass, produces the precious stone called ceraunius. 8. The Fortunate Isles (Fortunatarum insulae) signify by their name thattheyproduceallkindsofgoodthings,asiftheywere happy and blessed with an abundance of fruit. Indeed, well-suited by their nature, they produce fruit from very precious trees; the ridges of their hills are spontaneously covered with grapevines; instead of weeds, harvest crops and garden herbs are common there. Hence the mistake of pagans and the poems by worldly poets, who believed that these isles were Paradise because of the fertility of their soil. They are situated in the Ocean, against the left sideofMauretania,closesttowherethesunsets,andthey are separated from each other by the intervening sea.
9. The Gorgades are islands of the Ocean opposite the promontory that is called Hesperian Ceras, inhabited by the Gorgons, women with swift wings and a rough and hairy body; the islands take their name from them. They areseparatedfromthemainlandbyapassageoftwodays’ sailing. 10. The isles of the Hesperides are so called after thecityofHesperis,whichwaslocatedwithintheborders of Mauretania. They are situated beyond the Gorgades, at the Atlantic shore, in the most remote bays of the sea. Stories tell of an ever-watchful dragon guarding golden applesintheirgardens.There,itissaid,isachannelfrom the sea that is so twisted, with winding banks, that when seen from afar it looks like the coils of a serpent.
11.ChryseandArgyreareislandssituatedintheIndian Ocean, so rich in metal that many people maintain these islands have a surface of gold and silver; whence their names are derived (see iii.5 above). 12. Taprobane (i.e. SriLanka)isanislandthatliestothesouth-eastofIndia. The Indian Ocean begins there. It is 875 (Roman) miles long and 625,000 stades wide.9 It is intersected by a river andeverywherefullofpearlsandpreciousstones.Partof it is full of wild beasts and elephants, while another part is occupied by human beings. It is said that this island has two summers and two winters every year, and that flowers bloom twice there. 13. Tiles is an Indian island where the vegetation is green in every season. Thus far of islands in the Ocean.
7	The sense is, or should be, that the term Ultima, “farthest,” describes the limit of the sun’s reach at the Arctic Circle at the winter solstice; Thyle is dark all winter.
8	In early medieval writings the inhabitants of Ireland were called Scotti, and those of Scotland called Picts – but cf. IX.ii.103.
9	There is clearly an error in the width given (the equivalent of 72,000miles).Deletingthewordstadiorum,notpresentinthesources and in any case disrupting a parallelism, yields the plausible reading
“625 (Roman) miles wide.”
 
The Etymologies	XIV.vi.14–vi.26
 
14. Further, islands are situated in the Mediterranean, from the Hellespont to Cadiz. The island of Cyprus (Cypros) took its name from the city of Cyprus, which is located there. This island is also known as Paphos, dedicated to Venus, and it lies in the southern part of the Carpathian Sea. Once it was well known for its wealth, especially for copper, for this metal was first discovered and put to use there. 15. Crete is a part of Greece, close to and opposite the Peloponnese. Due to its mild climate it was first called Macaronnesos (cf.  , “blessed”; H  “isle”); thereafter it was called Crete (Creta), after one of its inhabitants, a certain Cres (gen. Cretis), who people say was one of the Curetes; Jupiter was concealed there and nursed by them. This is the Greek island that stretchesthelongestdistancefromeasttowest,bathedby Greekcurrentsinthenorth,andbyEgyptianwavesinthe south.Onceitwasennobledbyahundredcities,whence it was also called Hecatompolis (cf. K , “hundred”; !, “city”). 16. It was the first to be famous for rowing andarchery,thefirsttoputlawsintowriting,andthefirst to train cavalry units. The pursuit of music composed in Idaean dactyls began on this island. It is plentiful in goatsandlacksdeer;itnowhereproduceswolvesorfoxes or other harmful wild beasts; there are no serpents there and no night owls, and if one comes upon the island, it dies immediately. It is abundant in vines and trees. The herb dittany grows in Crete, as well as purslane, which when chewed stops hunger for a day. It produces venomous spiders and a stone that is called ‘dactyl of Ida.’
17. Abydos is an island in Europe, positioned above the Hellespont, cut off by a narrow and dangerous sea; it is called l"  in Greek because it is at the entrance to the Hellespont, where Xerxes built a bridge constructed fromshipsandcrossedoverintoGreece(cf. O  ,“not fordable”). 18. Cos (Coos) is an island lying adjacent to the province of Attica; on it the physician Hippocrates was born and, as Varro testifies, it was first famous for the art of preparing wool for the adornment of women.
19. The Cyclades were in ancient times islands of Greece,andpeoplebelievethattheywerecalledCyclades because, although they project out a rather long way from Delos, they are nevertheless arranged in a circle
10	The terms ‘Aegean’ and ‘Hellespont’ seem to have been interchanged in this passage.
11	A favorite epithet of Venus was ‘Cytherea.’
around it – for the Greeks call a circle  . But others think that they are so called not because the islands are arranged in a circle, but because of the sharp rocks that are situated around them (i.e. that encircle them). 20. They lie in the Hellespont, between the Aegean and the Malean Sea,10 and they are surrounded by Myrtoan waters. They are fifty-three in number, extending from north to south for five hundred miles, and from east to west for two hundred (Roman) miles. Their principal city is Rhodes.
21. Delos is the island located in the center of the Cyclades. It is said to be called Delos because, after the deluge known to have occurred during the reign of Ogygus, when the globe was cast into continuous night for many months, it was the first among all places of the earth to be lit by the rays of the sun; it was allotted its name from having been the first to become visible to the eyes; for the Greeks say "H  for “plainly visible.” The island is also called Ortygia, because there the birds called ‘quails’ were seen for the first time; the Greeks call them d . On this island, Latona gave birth to ApolloandDiana.ThenameDelosisappliedtoboththe city and the island. 22. Rhodes is the first of the Cyclades from the east. The rosebud is said to have been discovered there when the city was founded, whence both the town and the island are called Rhodes (Rhodos; cf. G" , “rose”). In this city was the bronze Colossus of the Sun, seventy cubits high; there were also one hundred smaller colossi on this island. 23. Tenedos, one of the Cyclades, is located in the north, where a city was founded formerly by a certain Tenes. After him the city, or rather the island, was named; for this Tenes was infamous for having had intercourse with his stepmother, [and]inescapinghetookpossessionofthisisland,which was empty of inhabitants; whence it was called Tenedos. Thus says Cicero (cf. Second Action Against Verres 1.49): “Tenes himself, after whom Tenedos was named.”
24. Carpathos, another one of the Cyclades, is located in the south, facing Egypt; the Carpathian Sea is named after it, while the island itself is so called because crops ripen there so quickly (cf. !, “crops”). It lies between Egypt and Rhodes. Carpasian ships, which are big and spacious, are also said to come from this island. 25. The island Cytherea is one of the Cyclades located in the west; its former name was Porphyris. It was called Cytherea because Venus was born there.11 26. Icaria is an island of the Cyclades which gives the Icarian Sea its
 
XIV.vi.27–vi.39
name.LocatedbetweenSamosandMykonos,itisinhospitable due to jutting rocks and a lack of bays offering harbor.ItissaidthatIcarustheCretandiedthereinshipwreckandthatuponhisdeathhisnamewasgiventothat place. 27. The island of Naxos is named after Dionysius (i.e. Dionysus, the god of wine), as if it were Dionaxos, because it surpasses all others in the fertility of its vines. It lies eighteen (Roman) miles from Delos. Once upon a time Jupiter is said to have proceeded from there to fight the Titans.
28. Melos is the roundest island among all of the Cyclades;wherefromitsnameisderived(cf. H ,Latin malum, “round fruit,” and see XVII.vii.3). 29. History says that Iasion had two sons, Philomelus and Plutus, and that Philomelus fathered Pareantus, who gave his nametotheislandandthecityofParos;firstitwascalled Minoia, then Paros. Vergil writes of it (Aen. 3.126):
And snow-white Paros,
for it produces the whitest marble, which is called Parian marble. It also exports the sarda stone (i.e. carnelian), more outstanding than marble, but when considered as a gemstone, the cheapest. 30. The island of Chios is so called in the Syrian language because mastic is produced there, for the Syrians call mastic chio. 31. Samos is an island in the Aegean Sea. Juno was born there and the Samian Sybil as well as Samian Pythagoras camefromthere.Thelattercoinedtheterm‘philosophy’ (philosophia). Tradition has it that clay vases were first invented on this island – whence vases are also called Samian.
32. Sicily (Sicilia) was named ‘Sicania’ after king Sicanus, then ‘Sicily’ after Siculus, the brother of Italus. ButinearliesttimesitwasknownasTrinacria,becauseit has three O (“capes”), that is, promontories: Pelorus, Pachynum,andLilybaeum.TrinacriaisinGreekwhatin Latin would be triquetra, as if divided into ‘three pieces’ (tres quadrae). It is separated from Italy by a narrow strait, and looks out upon the African Sea; it has rich soil and abundant gold, and is riddled with caves and tunnels, full of winds and sulfur; accordingly the flames ofMountEtnashowthemselvesthere.InthisstraitScylla and Charybdis either swallow up ships or smash them. 33. At one time this was the native land of the Cyclopes, andafterwardsthenurseoftyrants;fertileincrops,itwas the first of all lands to be riven by the plow and planted with seed. It has Syracuse as its principal city, the spring Arethusa, and the river Alpheus, “parent of magnificent horses” (cf. Vergil, Aen. 3.704). On this island comedy wasfirstinvented.34.Thisislandfirstproducedfromthe river Achates the agate (achates) stone. Its sea produces coralandityieldstheAgrigentiansalts,whichdissolvein fire and crackle in water. Its entire circumference is three thousand stades (i.e. 375 Roman miles). Sallust (see Histories 4.26) moreover says that Sicily used to be joined to Italy, but that the intervening space was divided by the onslaught of the sea and cut across its narrowest part.
35.	The island Thapsus lies ten stades (i.e. 1.25 Roman miles) away from Sicily and is rather low-lying, whence its name (cf.  !, “low-lying”). Vergil writes of it (Aen. 3.689):
And low-lying Thapsus.
36.	The Aeolian islands of Sicily (i.e. the Lipari) arenamed after Aeolus, son of Hippotes, whom poets feigned to have been the king of the winds: to the contrary,accordingtoVarro,hewastheruleroftheseislands and, because he would predict from their clouds and smoke the future direction of winds, he seemed to na¨ıve people to have controlled the winds by his own power. These islands are also called Vulcanian, because they burnlikeEtna(i.e.siteoftheforgeofVulcan).37.Nineof theseislandshavepropernames.AcertainLiparuscalled the first of these Lipare. He ruled Lipare before Aeolus. The second is called Hiera, because it has the loftiest hills (perhaps cf. , “holy”). As for the rest, they are Strongyle (i.e. Stromboli), Didyme, Eriphusa, Hephaestia, Phaenicusa, Euonymos, Tripodes, and Sonores. Because they burn at night, they are called the Aeolians or the Vulcanians. Some of them did not exist at first; later they were elevated from the sea and they remain up to this day.
38. The Stoechades (i.e. Isles d’Hyeres) are islands of` Massilia (i.e. Marseilles) sixty (Roman) miles distant from the mainland, facing the province of Narbonne where the river Rhone empties into the sea. They are named /  9" in Greek as if they were placed ‘in a row’ (cf.   9, “in a row”) by design. 39. Sardus, son of Hercules, occupied Sardinia after he came from Libya with a great host, and named the island after himself. This island, located in the African Sea, has the shape of a human footprint; it is broader in the east than in the west, whereas the southern and northern coasts are
 
The Etymologies	XIV.vi.40–viii.2
 
practically the same length, and for this reason, before therewastrafficthere,itwascalledbyGreeksailors g (9  (“footprint”). 40. The land extends 140 (Roman) miles in length and 40 miles in width. No serpent or wolf is born there, only the solifuga, a small animal that is most hurtfultohumans.Also,nothingpoisonousgrowsthere, except the plant, mentioned by many writers and poets, that is similar to wild parsley, makes people contort in a rictus, and kills them as if they were grinning. Sardinia has hot springs that bring healing to the sick and blindness to thieves if they touch their eyes with this water after an oath has been given.
41. Ligurian settlers founded the island of Corsica, naming it after the one who guided them there, a certain Ligurian woman by the name of Corsa, who saw a bull from the herd she was guarding close to the shore habitually swim across and return fattened shortly afterwards. Eager to discover his unknown pasture, when he strayed from the herd she followed the bull in a boat to the island. Learning of the island’s fertility after her return, the Ligurians went there on rafts and named the island after the woman who found it and guided them there. 42. This island is also known in Greek as ), from having been inhabited by Cyrnus, the son of Hercules. Vergil says of it (cf. Ecl. 9.30):
Corsican (Cyrneus) yews.
It is separated from Sardinia by a strait of twenty (Roman) miles and surrounded by the Ligurian gulf on its Italian side. It has many sheer headlands, produces quite delightful pastures, and a stone that is called catochites by the Greeks.
43. Ebosus (i.e. Ibiza) is a Spanish island, so called because it is not far ‘from Zanium’ (a Zanio), as if its name were abozus; for it lies seventy stades (i.e. about nine miles) from it. Serpents flee its soil. Opposite it is Colubraria (cf. coluber, “serpent”), which is full of serpents.44.TheBalearesaretwoSpanishislands:AphrosiadesandGymnasides,abiggerone(maior)andasmaller one (minor), whence they are also called Maiorica (i.e. Majorca) and Minorica (i.e. Minorca) by the common people. In these islands the sling with which stones are hurled was first invented – whence they are called the Baleares, for  in Greek means “throw.” From the
12 The erroneous equation of Borion with Hippo Regius was caused by a misreading of the source, Solinus’s Collectanea.
same root are derived the terms ballista (i.e. a kind of catapult),asifitwere“theonethrown,”andfundibalum (i.e. another such machine; see XVIII.x.2). Vergil says of them (Geo. 1.309):
The thongs of the Balearic sling.
vii. Promontories (De promuntoriis) 1. It is characteristic of islands that they ‘jut out’ (prominere), whence these places are called promontories (promuntorium). Thus, Sallust says of Sardinia (Histories 2.2): “It juts out (prominere) wider in the east than in the west.”
2. Sigeum is a promontory of Asia, located where the Hellespont opens out more widely. It is called Sigeum due to the silence of Hercules, because, denied hospitality by the Trojan king Laomedon, he feigned his departure and from there came back against Troy in silence, which is called . 3. Maleum is a promontory in Greece that juts out into the sea and extends for fifty (Roman) miles; the waves in this place are so fierce that they seem to pursue those traveling by ship. This promontory was named after Maleus, king of the Argives.4.TheSicilianpromontoryofPelorum,whichis oriented toward the north, according to Sallust (cf. Histories 4.39) was named after a general of Hannibal’s who is buried there. 5. The Sicilian promontory Pachynum, which looks towards the south-west, is so called from the density of its air – for the term !9 means “thick” and “dense” – as the south-west wind blows there. 6. Lilybaeum is a promontory of Sicily, extending to the west. It is named after a city of the same name that is located there. 7. Borion is a promontory in Numidia, so calledbecauseitstretchesnorth(cf.boreas,“thenorth”). AfterwardsitwascalledHippoRegius,becauseitwascut off by the sea.12 Calpis is a Spanish promontory.
viii. Mountains and other terms for landforms (De montibus ceterisque terrae vocabulis) 1. Mountains (mons) are the highest swellings of the land, so called because they ‘stand out’ (eminere). Some of them owe their names to particular causes. We should mention those that are commonly thought to be the greatest.
2.TheCaucasusrangestretchesfromIndiatotheTaurus and has many different names because of the variety of peoples and of languages in every direction through which it passes. Thus, toward the east, where it rises to greater height, it is called Caucasus, due to the whiteness
 
XIV.viii.3–viii.18	Isidore of Seville
 
of its snow, for in an eastern language, caucasus means “white,” that is, shining white with a very thick snow cover.ForthesamereasontheScythians,wholivenextto this mountain range, call it Croacasim, for among them whiteness or snow is called casim. 3. The Taurus range is likewise called the Caucasus by many. 4. Libanus (i.e. Mount Lebanon) is the highest mountain in Phoenicia, mentioned by the prophets. It gets its name from incense (cf. libanus, “frankincense”), because incense is collected there. That part of Libanus that is beyond it, facing toward the east, is called the Antilibanus, that is “opposite Libanus.” 5. Ararat is a mountain in Armenia, on which historians attest that the ark settled after the Flood. Whence even to this day remnants of its wood can be seen there.
6.TheAcroceraunianmountainsaresocalledbecause of their height (cf. O , “highest”) and the hurling of thunderbolts, for in Greek a thunderbolt is called 7 . They lie between Armenia and Iberia (see iii.33 and 36 above), begin at the Caspian passes, and extend to the source of the river Tigris. 7. The Hyberborean mountains of Scythia are so called because the north wind (Boreas) blows above, that is, beyond them (cf. I!B, “beyond”). 8. The Riphaean mountains are in the farreachesofGermania,namedfromtheperpetualgusts of wind; for G in Greek means “thrust” and “Q” (i.e. another Greek word meaning “thrust”), from the term G!  (“hurl”).9.Olympusisanexceedinglyhigh mountain in Macedonia, so high that they say there are cloudsbelowit.Vergilsaysaboutit(actuallyLucan,Civil War 2.271):
Olympus towers over the clouds.
It is called Olympus as if the word were Ololampus, that is, as if it were “sky” (cf. Q !, “entirely resplendent”). This mountain divides Macedonia from Thracia. 10. Athos is a mountain in Macedonia that also rises higher than the clouds, so high that its shadow reaches to Lemnos, which lies seventy-six (Roman) miles away.
11. Parnassus is a mountain in Thessaly, close to Boeotia, whose twin peaks reach into the heavens. This one is split into two ridges, Cyrrha and Nissa; whence also its name, because Apollo and Liber are worshipped on the respective ridges. These ridges are also named Cithaeron and Helicon, after two brothers, for Helicon is named after Helicon, the brother of Cythaeron. 12. The Ceraunians are a mountain range in Epirus, named after frequent lightning, for in Greek lightning is called . 13. The Apennines are so called as if they were the ‘Carthaginian Alps’ (Alpes Poeninae), because when he came to Italy, Hannibal laid these Alps open. Whence Vergil also says (Aen. 10.13):
He throws open the Alps,
becauseHannibal,afterthewarinSpain,rentthemopen with vinegar; thus Juvenal (Satires 10.153):
And he rent the mountain with vinegar.
And thereafter those places that he rent were called the Apennine Alps.
14. Mount Etna is so called from fire (cf. V, “burn”) and sulfur; Gehenna likewise (see ix.9 below). It is well known that, in the part in which the southeast wind or the south-west wind blows, it has caves that are filled with sulfur and that lead to the sea. When the waves rush into these caves, they create a wind that, whenstirredup,ignitesafireinthesulfur;thiscreatesthe flamesthatonesees. 15. The Pyrenees(Pyrenaeus)themselves are also named after the frequent fires caused by lightning,forinGreek‘fire’iscalled !N.Theyareplaced between Gaul and Hispania as if they were a man-made bulwark.
16.MountSolurius(i.e.Solorius)isnamedaftersingularity, because it alone (solus; and cf. d , “mountain”) is seen to be higher than all the rest of the mountains of Hispania, [or else, because when the sun (sol) rises, its rays are seen there even before the sun]. 17. Calpe (i.e. the Rock of Gibraltar) is a mountain at the extreme limit of the Ocean, and it separates Europe from Africa; it is said to be the place where the Atlas range ends. Lucan writes of it (Civil War 1.555):
(With great waves the sea) covered Hesperian Calpe and highest Atlas.
Atlas was Prometheus’ brother and the king of Africa, and is said to have been the inventor of astrology (i.e. in modern terms astronomy and astrology) and for that reason he is said to have held up the heavens. Therefore, because of his expertise in that art and his knowledge of the heavens, the African mountain range was named after him that nowadays is called Atlas. Because of its height it seems as if it supports the celestial spheres and the stars. 18. The Alps are properly speaking a mountain rangeinGaul.Vergilcallsthem(Geo.3.474)“loftyAlps,”
 
The Etymologies	XIV.viii.19–viii.40
 
andincallingthem“lofty”herenderswordforword,for in the Gallic language high mountains are called alpes. ThesearemountainsthatfunctionasthedefenseofItaly.
19. Foothills (colles) are the more prominent ridges of mountains, as if their name were derived from collum (“neck”). 20. Mountain ridges (iugum) are so called because they are joined (iungere) in their proximity. 21. A hill (tumulus) is a low mountain, as if the word were derived from ‘swelling earth’ (tumens tellus). Likewise, tumulus is the word for heaped-up earth (i.e. a burial mound), where there is no monument. 22. Valleys (vallis) are low-lying places, as if the word were vulsus (“torn away,” ppl. of vellere). Hence also ‘enclosed valleys’ (convallis) are low places of land between mountains. 23. A plain (campus) is a flat piece of land. It is called a plain because it lies low ‘for feet’ (pes, gen. pedis; cf. ! , gen. ! "), not raised like the mountains, but stretched out and leveled in its space and lying flat; whence in Greek it is called !" . It takes its name from a Greek etymology, for the Greeks say 9 (lit. “on the ground”) for
‘low’.
24. ‘The ground’ (solum) is anything that supports, andissocalledfromitssolidity(soliditas).WhenceVergil also says with regard to the sea (Aen. 5.199):
And the ground (solum, i.e. sea floor) is pulled away.
25.Woodlands(saltus)arevast,woodedplaces,wherethe trees rise (ex(s)ilire, from salire, “leap”) high. 26. Passes (fauces) are narrow passages between high mountains, narrow and tight places, so called from a likeness to the throat (faucis), as if the word were foces. 27. Confrages are places into which winds rush from all sides, and there they dash themselves. As Naevius says (fr. 58):
Into the mountains, where the winds would dash against the place.
28.Scabraareplacesthatareroughwithneglect.Whence one also says scabies, from a roughness of the body. 29. Dens (lustrum) are secret hiding-places of wild beasts and lairs of wolves. Whence also brothels (lupanar) are called lustra, namely by antiphrasis, because they are poorly lit (illustrare).
30. A grove (lucus) is a place enclosed by dense trees thatkeeplight(lux,gen.lucis)fromreachingtheground. It is also possible that the word is derived from the lighting (conlucere) of many lights, which were kindled there because of pagan beliefs and rituals. 31. Wildernesses (desertum) are so called because they are not planted (serere), and therefore, in a manner of speaking, they are abandoned (deserere), as are wooded and mountainous areas, places that are the opposite of fruitful regions that have the richest soil. 32. ‘Remote places’ (devium) are secret and concealed, as if they were away from the road (via). The same places are also called impassable places (invium).Whencealsosecretplacesthatlieoutoftheway and are only accessible to birds (avis) are called nestingplaces (aviarium). Whence also as follows (Vergil, Geo.
2.430):
The wild nesting-places (aviaria) grow red with berries.
33. According to Varro, ‘pleasant places’ (locus amoenus)aresocalledbecausetheypromotelove(amor) only and draw to themselves things that ought to be loved. According to Verrius Flaccus they are so called, because they are without a ‘public function’ (munus), nor is anything in them like business, as if the term were amunia, that is, without profit, whence no profit is rendered. Thence also those that are responsible for nothing are called ‘exempt ones’ (immunis). 34. ‘Sunny spots’ (apricum) are places which enjoy the sun, as if the term were O , that is, “without cold”; or else because they are open to the sky (apertus caelo). 35. By contrast, shady (opacus) places are the opposite of sunny spots, as if the word were opertum caelum (“hidden sky”). 36. A place is called a ‘slippery place’ (lubricum) because someone slips (labi) there; and it is called a slippery place, not because it slips, but because in this place a person slips. 37. ‘Summer pastures’ (aestiva) are shady places in which cattle avoid the heat of the sun in summer (aestas). Statius writes (Thebaid 1.363):
And the summer pastures (aestiva) of shady Lycaeus lay open.
38. Dockyards (navalia) are places where ships (navis) are built. This place is also called a shipyard (textrinum). 39. An anchorage (statio) is where ships stay (stare) for a while; a harbor (portus), where they winter; an unsuitable (inportunus) place, however, is one where there is norefuge,inamannerofspeaking,noharbor.40.Moreover,aharborisaplacethatisprotectedfromexposureto the winds, where the winter winds would make things difficult, and harbor (portus) is derived from conveying (deportare) trade-goods. The ancients would call it a harbor ‘for shipping’ (baia), from conveying (baiolare)
 
XIV.viii.41–viii.11	Isidore of Seville
 
merchandise, with the same declension – baia, gen. baias – as the declension familia, gen. familias (“household”). 41. The shore (litus) is land next to water and the sea: and it is called litus, because it is dashed (elidere) by the waves, or else because it is bathed (alluere) by water. Cicero says in Topics (32): “The shore is where the waves play (eludere).” 42. ‘Alluvial land’ (circumluvium) is a place which water ‘flows around’ (circumluere); a ‘flood plain’ (alluvium) is an eroding of riverbanks by water. A border (margo) is a part of every place, as for example of the sea (mare); after which it is also named. ‘Maritime places’ (maritime) are so called as if the word were maris intima (“near the sea”). 43. River-mouths (ostium) are so called from the entrance and exit of a river into the sea. A mainland (continens) is a stretch of continuous land uninterrupted by any sea, what the Greeks call e! .
ix. The lower regions (De inferioribus) 1. A cave (specus)isasubterraneanriftfromwhichitispossibleto ‘look out’ (prospicere); it is !  in Greek, spelunca (“cave”) in Latin. 2. Fumarole (spiraculum) is the name given to all places of pestilential exhalation (spiritus), whichtheGreekscall E,or J9 .13 Varro, too, calls such a place a fumarole; and fumaroles are so called because they are places where the earth produces an exhalation. 3. A cleft (hiatus) is a deep break of the earth, as if the term were ‘a departure’ (itus, ppl. of ire). Properly speaking, however, hiatus is the opening of the mouth of a human being, with the sense transferred from wild beasts, whose eagerness for something is shown through opening of the mouth. 4. The deep (profundum) is properly said of something as if its bottom (fundus) were ‘far off’ (porro). Incorrectly, however, ‘the deep’ is applied to what is on high as well as what lies below, as in (Vergil, Aen. 1.58):
The seas, the lands, and the deep (profundus) sky.
5. Abyss (baratrum, i.e. barathrum, i.e.  , “pit”) is the word for an excessive depth: and it is called baratrum, as if the term were vorago atra (“black abyss”),thatis,blackfromitsdepth.6.Erebusisthedeep inner part of the underworld. Styx is so called after the term  , that is, from “wretchedness,” because it makes people wretched, or else because it brings forth wretchedness.7.Cocytusisanunderworldplaceofwhich Job speaks thus . . . (see Job 21:33). Cocytus, however, has taken its name from Greek, from affliction and sighing (cf. A , “wailing”). 8. Tartarus is so called either because everything in it is disturbed (turbatus), after the word   ; (“quake”), or, more likely, from  9 (“disturbance, upheaval”), that is, from shivering, through being numb with cold, because, of course, it lacks light and sunshine. In that place exist neither the warmth generated by sunlight, nor any breath of air stirredbythemovementofthesun,butinsteadaperpetualnumbness,for   ; means“shuddering”and “trembling” in Greek. Indeed, in that place is “weeping and gnashing of teeth” (Matthew 8:12, etc.).
9.Gehennaisaplaceoffireandsulphurthatisbelieved to have been named from a valley, consecrated to idols, that is next to the city wall of Jerusalem, and which was once filled with the corpses of the dead – for there the Hebrewsusedtosacrificetheirchildrentodemons–and the place itself is called Gehennon. Therefore the place of future punishment (i.e. hell), where sinners are to be tormented, is designated by the name of this place. They also say that there are two Gehennas, one of fire and one of cold. 10. The underworld (inferus) is so called because it is underneath (infra). Just as with reference to physical bodies if things are arranged according to their weight, all heavier ones are lower, so with reference to the spirit, allthemoregrievousonesarelower;whenceintheGreek languagetheoriginofthetermbywhichtheunderworld is called is said to echo ‘what has nothing sweet’ (i.e. taking the Greek f #", “Hades, underworld,” as from  + Z",“notsweet”).11.Justastheheartofananimalisin itscenter,soalsotheunderworldissaidtobeinthecenter of the earth. Whence we read in the Gospel (Matthew 12:40): “In the heart of the earth.” But philosophers say that the ‘lower regions’ (inferi) are so named because souls are carried (ferre) there from here.
13 Drawn from the netherworld terms Charon and Acheron, the Greek words for fumaroles indicate the belief that such vaporous orifices were entrances to the underworld.
 
Book XV Buildings and fields (De aedificiis et agris)
 
 
i. Cities (De civitatibus) 1. Frequently we find dissension about who was responsible for the founding of cities, to such an extent that not even the origin of the city of Rome can accurately be known. Thus Sallust says (War with Catiline 6), “As I understand it, at first the Trojans, and with them the native peoples, first founded and settled the city of Rome.” Others say the founding was by Evander, as Vergil (Aen. 8.313):
Then King Evander, founder of the Roman citadel . . .
Others, by Romulus, as (Vergil, Aen. 6.781):
Behold, my son, under his (i.e. Romulus’s) auspices that illustrious Rome . . .
2.	Hence if no sure account of so great a city is available,it is no wonder that there is some doubt about opinion concerning other cities. Therefore we should not ignorantly condemn the historians and commentators who allegevariousthings,forantiquityitselfcreatedtheerror. It is indeed proper to treat briefly some cities concerning which either the Sacred Scriptures or pagan histories reliably report the origin.
3.	Before the Flood, Cain was the first to found acity, the city of Enoch in Naid, after the name of his son, and he filled that city with only the throng of his own descendants. 4. After the Flood, the giant Nimrod (Nembroth) first founded the Mesopotamian city of Babylon. Queen Semiramis of the Assyrians enlarged it, and made the wall of the city with bitumen and fired brick. Babylon takes its name from ‘confusion’, because there the languages of those building the tower were confused and mixed up.1 5. The Jews say that Noah’s son Shem (Sem), whom they call Melchizedech, was the first to found a city after the Flood, Salem in Syria, in which this same Melchizedech ruled. Afterwards the Jebusites held it, from whom it got the name Jebus.
1	Isidore alludes to the common derivation of the ‘Babylon’ from ‘Babel’, and the common interpretation of ‘Babel’ as “confusion.”
2	The name ‘Jerusalem’ was regularly interpreted as “city of peace,” as if from Hebrew ’ir shalom.
301
Thus Jerusalem (Hierusalem) was named, from the coupling of the two names Jebus (Iebus) and Salem. Later it was called Hierosolyma by Solomon, as if it were Hiero-solomonia (cf. , “holy”). It is also named by the poets, incorrectly, Solyma, and later it was called Aelia by Aelius Hadrian. [Within] it is also Zion, which means “lookout” (speculatio) in Hebrew, because it is built on a height and looks out on things approaching from afar. Jerusalem means “peaceable” (pacificus) in our language.2
Famous towns, and which men or women established them (Oppida nobilia, qui vel quae constituerunt)
6. Dionysius (i.e. Dionysus, the god of wine), who is also Father Liber, when as conqueror he walked through India, founded the city Nysa next to the river Indus, nameditafterhisownname,andfilleditwithfiftythousand people. 7. Medus, son of Aegius, built Media, and from it his country of Media took its name. 8. Perseus, son of Adea, founded the city Persepolis, capital of the realm of Persia, very famous and stuffed with riches. Persia (Persida) was also named from him 9. The Parthians also founded Ctesiphon in Parthia in emulation of the city of Babylon. 10. They say that Memnon’s brother established the city of Susa in Persia. It was named Susa because it overlooks the river Susa. The royal palace of Cyrus is there, distinguished by its white and variegated stone, with golden columns and paneled ceilings and jewels, even containing a replica of the sky embellished with twinkling stars, and other things beyond human belief.
11. The Bactrians founded the city of Bactrum, naming it after its river Bactros. 12. Carrhae, a city of Mesopotamia beyond Edessa, was founded by the Parthians. A Roman army was once slaughtered there, and its general Crassus was captured. 13. Nimrod (Nembroth), son of Chus, founded the Mesopotamian city Edessa after he moved from Babylon, and he reigned there. Formerly it was called Arach. He also built
 
XV.i.14–i.29
Chalane, which afterwards, its name changed by king Seleucus, was called Seleucia. The Raphaim, a very ancient people whom the sons of Lot killed, founded the city Philadelphia of Arabia. 14. Seleucus, one of Alexander’s followers, after the death of the same Alexander, having seized the rule of the East, founded a city in Syria and named it Antioch after the name of his father, Antiochus, and made it the capital of Syria. The same man alsobuiltthecitiesofLaodiceaandSeleucia,Apameaand Edessa. 15. Damascus of Syria was founded and named by Damascus, son of Abraham’s steward. This formerly was the chief city in all Syria, for Antioch, Laodicea, and Apamea were not yet flourishing there – we know that these cities were built after Alexander’s time. This is the Damascus that Abraham called his future heir, before Isaac was promised to him.
16. The Eveians founded the city of Gaza in Palestine, inwhichtheCappadocianslivedaftertheoriginalinhabitants were killed. It was called Gaza, because Cambyses, king of the Persians, located his treasury there when he waged war against Egypt – for in Persian a ‘treasury’ is calledgaza.17.TheAllophyli(allophylus,lit.“foreigner”) foundedthecityofthePhilistines;itisAscalon,ofwhich we have spoken above, named after Chasluim (Cesloim), who was the grandson of Ham and son of Mesraim. 18. The city of Dor was once very powerful; in turn it was known as the Tower of Straton, and afterwards named Caesarea by Herod, King of Judea, in honor of Caesar Augustus. In this city the Church of Christ witnessed the house of Cornelius, and the little rooms of Philip, and the chamber of the four virgin prophetesses (see Acts 10:1 and 21:8–9).
19. The Palestinians built the seaside city Joppe of Palestine. There a rock is displayed which still retains traces of the fetters of Andromeda; it has the shape of a sea-monster larger than an elephant. 20. Jericho is said to have been founded by the Jebusites, from whom, it is held, it also took its name. Joshua overthrew it. After that Ozam of Bethel, of the tribe of Ephraim, built another Jericho. But this also, when Jerusalem was attacked by the Romans, was seized and destroyed, due to the treachery of its citizens; because of this a third city was built, and this remains today. 21. Emor built the Samarian city Sichem, which is called Sichima in Latin and Greek, and named it after the name of his son Sichem. It is now Neapolis, a Samaritan city.
22. The Jebusites founded Bethel, a city of Samaria. Earlier it was called Luz, but afterwards Jacob, sleeping there, saw the ladder stretching up to heaven and said (Genesis 28:17), “Truly this is the house of God, and the gate of heaven.” Hence the place got the name Bethel, that is, “house of God.” But when golden calves were forged there by Jeroboam (III Kings 12:28 Vulgate), what was earlier called the house of God was called Bethaven, that is, “the house of the idol.” 23. Bethlehem of Judah, the city of David, which gave birth to the Savior of the world, is said to have been founded by the Jebusites and first called Euphrata. But when Jacob pastured his cattle there, with a certain prophecy of the future he gave the sameplacethenameBethlehem,whichmeans“houseof bread,” because of him, the Bread who descended from heaven there.
24. Hebron (Chebron), the city of Judea that formerly was called Arbe, was founded by giants seven years before they founded the Egyptian city of Tanis. It was thus named ‘Arbe’ from the number (cf. Hebrew arba,“four”),becausetherethreepatriarchswereburied, and Adam was the fourth. It is also called ‘Mambre’ after a friend of Abraham. 25. Sennacherib, king of the Assyrians, built Samaria, from which the whole region that surrounded it took its name, and he called it ‘Samaria,’ that is, ‘The Watch,’ because when he delivered Israel into the hands of the Medes he set watchmen there. Antiochus leveled it when it was taken by siege. Later Herod restored it from its foundations, and he called it ‘Augusta’ in honor of Augustus, which is ‘Sebaste’ (Sebastia) in Greek. There the prophets Elisha and Abdias were buried, and John the Baptist; there was no greater among those born of women than he. 26. Another Herod (i.e. Herod Antipas) founded Tiberias in Judea, in the name of Tiberius
Caesar.
27. The Phoenician city Tyre was founded by the Phoenicians. This is the city from which gold was brought down for King Solomon, and that in which the best purple cloth is dyed, whence the noble purple is called ‘Tyrian.’ 28. The Phoenicians, having migrated from the Red Sea, founded the very rich city Sidon, which they called Sidon from its abundance of fish, for Phoenicianscallafishsidon.TheyfoundedTyreinSyria, Utica in Africa, as well as Hippo, Leptis, and other cities on seacoasts. 29. They built Thebes in Boeotia under the command of Cadmus; later, reaching the farthest part of the world, they built a city by the Ocean and named it Gades (i.e. Cadiz) in their language. It was an ancient custom for many of the Phoenician people to
 
set off from home together for the purpose of trading, and when they had won over the hearts of the natives by the trading of goods previously unknown to them, they would then take over those places that seemed suitable for founding cities. 30. When Dido, also a Phoenician, had journeyed to the shore of Africa, she founded a city and named it Carthada, which in Phoenician meant “new city.” Later, with altered pronunciation it wascalledCarthage(Carthago).Scipiodestroyedit;what existstherenowwasfoundedafterwardsbytheRomans. Carthage was once named Byrsa, later Tyrus, finally Carthage.
31. Epaphas, son of Jupiter, built the Egyptian city of MemphiswhenheruledoveraprosperousEgypt.Thisis the city where papyrus sheets are produced, and where the best mathematicians lived. Traces of their former error reveal that this city has been devoted to the magical arts up to the present time. 32. Tanis is the metropolis in Egypt where Pharaoh lived and Moses performed all the miracles that are written about in the book of Exodus. The Titans, that is ‘giants,’ are said to have built it and named it after their own name. 33. Heliopolis is an Egyptian city, which in Latin means “City of the Sun,” as the Septuagint translators have it. But it was built by the children of Israel, and the priest Petephres, whom Ezekiel mentions, lived there.
34. Alexander the Great founded the city of Alexandria, and it preserves his name. He established it at the boundary of Egypt and Africa and commanded that it be the capital of the province of Egypt. It lies between Egypt and the sea, as if it were a gate, as it had no harbor. This is the Egyptian city of No (Noo), later turned into Alexandria. 35. Cadmus founded Egyptian Thebes, which is held to be quite famous among Egyptian cities forthenumberofitsgates;Arabpeopletransportarticles ofcommercetoitfromeverywhere.TheEgyptianregion Thebaica is named after it. There is a Thebes in Boeotia and a Thebes in Egypt, but both were established by one founder.
36. Ptolomais and Berenice were named after the Egyptian rulers by whom they were built. 37. Caesarea
3	Does Isidore associate the words ‘Byzantium’ and tantum? According to Liddell/Scott’s dictionary, $;  was glossed by Hesychius as ^"  QY, which could mean “anchorage for wares” and thus receptaculum. The geography is confused. Better sense would be “. . . either because it is the only (tantum) way between the Black Sea and the Propontis . . .”
4	Greek offers no obvious rationale for this etymology.
XV.i.30–i.48
of Cappadocia. . . 38. Perseus, offspring of Danae, built Tarsus of Cilicia. The apostle Paul was from this city (Acts 22:3): “I was born,” he says, “at Tarsus in Cilicia.” A certain place in India is also called Tarsus. Seleucus founded Seleucia of Isauria, as well as Antioch. Ilus, son of Apollo, founded Ilium in Phrygia. 39. The Amazons built Ephesus in Asia. Theseus built Smyrna, which came to prominence as the home of the poet Homer. It is called ‘Smyrna’ because the river Ermus cuts through its fields. 40. Amphitus and Cercius, the charioteers of Castor and Pollux, constructed Dioscoria, the city of the Colchians, naming it after their name, for Castor and Pollux in Greek are called the   . 41. Nicomedia was built by Nicomedes, king of Bithynia. Bithynia, which was first called Mariandyna, was founded by Phoenix.
42. Constantine imposed his own name on the Thracian city of Constantinople; it alone is the equal of Rome in importance and power. It was first founded by Pausanias, king of the Spartans, and called Byzantium, either becauseitextends‘somuch’(tantum)betweentheAdriatic Sea and the Propontis, or because it is a ‘place for storage’ (receptaculum) for the wealth of land and sea.3 Hence Constantine decided to found this most suitable city, so that it would also become for him a refuge by land and sea. For this reason it is now also the seat of the Roman Empire and the head of the entire East, as Rome is of the West.
43.TheThraciancityofEpirus(Epirum)wasfounded byandnamedafterPyrrhus.44.CecropsfoundedAthens in Greece (Hellas), and named it ‘Cecropia’ after himself. Amphictyon, the same who reigned in Greece third after Cecrops, dedicated this city to Minerva and gave the name ‘Athens’ (Athenae) to the city, for Minerva in Greek is called J. Hence also the Greeks claim that Minerva is the inventor of many arts, because literature, and the arts of many schools, and philosophy itself have considered Athens as their temple. 45. Corinthus, son of Orestes, founded Corinth in Achaea. The Greeks call it Corinthea, that is, ‘the administration of the state.’4 46. Cadmus, coming from Phoenicia, founded Boeotian Thebes after he built Egyptian Thebes. 47. Mycenae [a Greek city] . . .
Lacedaemonia was founded by Lacedaemon, son of Semele.SpartaisnamedafterSpartus,sonofPhoroneus, whowasthesonofInachus.Spartaisthesameasthecity Lacedaemonia, and hence Spartans are called Lacedaemonians. 48. Achaea was built by Achaeus; Pelops,
 
XV.i.49–i.66
who ruled among the Argives, founded the city of Peloponnensis; Cecrops built Rhodes on the island of Rhodes; Carpathus built Cos; Aeos, son of Typhon, built Paphos; Angeus, son of Lycurgus, built Samos; DardanusfoundedDardania.Thessalus,sonofGraecus,built Thessalonica, and he also ruled there. 49. The Greeks built Brundisium (i.e. Brindisi), and it is called Brundisium in Greek because brunda means “head of a stag,” for it is the case that in the shape of the city may be seen the horns and head and tongue.5
50. In Italy Janiculum was founded by Janus, and SaturniaandLatiumbySaturn,thelattersonamedbecause thereinhisflighthehid(latere).51.Pompeiiwasfounded in Campania by Hercules, who as victor had led a triumphal procession (pompa) of oxen from Spain. 52. Aeneas, coming into this same Italy after the destruction of Troy, founded Lavinium after the name of his wife.53.ButAscanius,afterhehadlefthiskingdomtohis stepmotherLavinia,builtAlbaLonga.ItwascalledAlba, ‘White,’becauseofthecolorofasow,andLongabecause the town is elongated, in keeping with the great extent of thehillonwhichitissited.Fromthenameofthiscitythe kings of the Albans took their names. 54. Capys Silvius, king of the Albans, built Capua, named after its founder, although some say Capua was named from ‘capacity’ (capacitas), because its land holds (capere) all produce for living, and others say from the flat (campester) land inwhichitissituated.Further,itisthechiefcityofCampania, named with Rome and Carthage among the three greatest cities. The Italian province Campania is named after it.
55.	Romulus – when he had restored his grandfa-ther Numitor to his reign after Amulius had been killed at Alba – came down to the place where Rome now is and established a settlement there, built walls, and called the city Rome after his own name. But Evander is said to have founded it earlier, as in this line (Vergil, Aen. 8.313):
Then father Evandrus, founder of the Roman citadel . . .
56.	Ancus Marcius was born from the daughter of NumaPompilius; he founded a city at the mouth of the Tiber that would receive foreign goods and would ward off the enemy. From its site he named it Ostia (“entrance”).
57.	Certain Gauls, driven by their civil discord andincessant dissensions, set out for Italy seeking new territory, and after the Etruscans (Tuscus) had been expelled from their own land, they founded Mediolanum (i.e. Milan) and other cities. It was called Mediolanum because a sow that was ‘woolly around the middle’ (medio lanea) is said to have been found there. 58. Historians believe that Messapia owes its origin to the Greek Messapus. Originally Peucetius, brother of Oenotrus, named it Peucetia; afterwards the name was changed to Calabria. 59. They say that Manto, the daughter of Tiresias, brought to Italy after the destruction of the Thebans, founded Mantua; it is in the Venetian territory which is called Cisalpine Gaul, and it is called Mantua becauseit‘looksafteritsdepartedspirits’(manestuetur). 60. Parthenope was named Parthenope after the name of Parthenope, a certain maiden buried there. Afterwards Augustus preferred to call the town Neapolis (i.e. Naples). 61. Augustus waged war against Antony off the promontory Leucata, on which there was a temple of Actian Apollo. After Antony was defeated, he founded a city on the bay of Actium which he named Nicopolis (i.e. “city of victory”) because of his victory.
62. Phalantus, leader of the Parthenians, founded Parthenii.TaraswasthesonofNeptune,andhefounded and named the city of Tarentum. 63. When Cyrus besieged the maritime cities of Greece, and the Phocaeans attacked by him were brought to perilous straits, they swore that they would flee as far as possible from the Persian empire, where they would not even hear its name.So,havingtraveledtothefarthestharborsofGaul in their ships, trusting in their arms against the ferocity of the Gauls, they founded Massilia (i.e. Marseilles) and named it after their leader’s name. Varro says they were trilingualbecausetheyspokeGreek,Latin,andGallic.64. Their own colonists founded Narbona (i.e. Narbonne), Arelatum (i.e. Arles), and Pictavia (i.e. Poitiers). They saythatBurdigalis(i.e.Bordeaux)wassonamedbecause firstithadtheBurgianGauls(BurgosGallos)ascolonists, and it was filled with these farmers at an earlier time.
65. The Scipios built Terracona (i.e. Tarragona) in Spain; hence it is capital of the province of Tarragon. 66. [Caesar Augustus both situated and named Caesaraugusta (i.e. Saragossa) in the province of Tarragon, a city in Spain. With the loveliness of its situation and its charming features it stands out among all the cities of Spain and is famous, distinguished for its tombs of
5 We find no brunda as ‘head of a stag’ in Greek.
 
holy martyrs.]6 67. The Africans, occupying the coasts of Spain under Hannibal, built New Carthage (Carthago Spartaria;i.e.Cartagena).Latertakenandmadeacolony by the Romans, it gave its name to a province. But now it has been overthrown and reduced to desolation by the Goths.7 68. Greeks from the island of Zacynthus, who hadtraveledtoSpain,foundedSaguntum(i.e.Sagunto). Later the Africans destroyed it in the onslaught of war.
69. Caesar Augustus built Emerita (i.e. Merida) after he had seized the region of Lusitania and certain islands of the Ocean, giving it that name because there he stationed veteran soldiers – for veteran and retired soldiers are called emeriti. 70. Olisipona (i.e. Ulisippo, Lisbon) was founded and named by Ulysses (Ulixes); historians say that in this place the sky is separated from the earth and the seas from the lands. 71. Julius Caesar founded Hispalis (i.e. Seville), which he called Julia Romula from his own and Rome’s name. But Seville was nicknamed after its site, because it was placed in swampy ground on piles (palus; his palis = ‘on these piles’) driven deep so that it would not succumb to its slipperyandunstablefoundation.72.ThetownofGades (i.e. Cadiz) was founded by the Phoenicians, who also founded New Carthage. 73. The city Septe (i.e. Ceuta) is named from its seven (septem) mountains, called The Brothers (Fratres) because of their mutual resemblance, whichborderontheStraitofGibraltar(Gaditanusfretus, ‘Strait of Cadiz’).
74. The founder of Lix and Tingis (i.e. Tangiers) is Antaeus, whom Hercules is said to have beaten in a wrestling match and killed. Lix was named from the Mauretanian river Lixus, where the royal seat of Antaeus was; likewise Sala, because it borders the river Sala. 75. Juba, king of the Moors (Mauri), founded the city of Caesarea in Mauretania in honor of Caesar Augustus, and from his name he gave it the name Caesarea. Just so Herod named the other Caesarea in Palestine, which is now a very famous city. 76. When Hercules was passing that way, twenty of his company separated off and built the city of Icosium in Caesarean Mauritania. Lest any of them should gloat about his own name being imposed on the city, the name of Icosium was given to it, from the number of its founders (cf. V , “twenty”). 77. Cyrene
6	Many have suspected that this encomium of Saragossa was added by Braulio, bishop of that city.
7	Isidore’s family was originally from Cartagena.
XV.i.67–ii.6
wasthequeenofLibyawhofoundedthecityofCyrenein her own name, and from the city she named the region Cyrenian Libya.
ii. Public buildings (De aedificiis publicis) 1. A city (civitas) is a multitude of people united by a bond of community, named for its ‘citizens’ (civis), that is, from theresidentsofthecity(urbs)[becauseithasjurisdiction over and ‘contains the lives’ (contineat vitas) of many]. Now urbs (also “city”) is the name for the actual buildings, while civitas is not the stones, but the inhabitants. 2. In fact there are three kinds of community (societas): of households, of cities (urbs), and of nations (gens). 3. ‘City’ (urbs) is from ‘circle’ (orbis), because ancient citiesweremadecircular,orfrom‘plow-handle’(urbus), a part of the plow by which the site of the walls would be marked out. Whence this (Vergil, Aen. 3.109 combined with 1.425):
And he chose a seat for his kingdom, and marked out the limits with a furrow.
For the site of the future city was marked out with a furrow, that is, by a plow. Cato says (Origins 1, fr. 18): “One who founds a new city plows with a bull and cow. Where he has plowed, he makes a wall. Where he wants a gateway to be, he lifts and carries (portare) the plow, and he calls it a gateway (porta).” 4. Thus indeed a city would be encircled by a plow, with young oxen of different genders indicating the mingling of its households, as a sign of sowing and bearing fruit. Further, a city is founded by the plow, and razed by the plow. Whence Horace (Odes 1.16.20):
And draw an enemy plow over the walls.
5. Some have said the word ‘town’ (oppidum) is from the ‘opposing’ (oppositio) of its walls; others, from its hoarding of wealth (ops), due to which it is fortified; others, because the community of those living in it gives mutualsupport(ops)againstanenemy.Atfirstpeople,in effect naked and defenseless, had no protection against monstrous beasts, nor shelters from cold and heat, nor were they sufficiently safe among themselves from other people. 6. At last, with native cunning, having lived in shelters of caves and woods, they fashioned huts and cottages from twigs and thatch, that life might be safer, in that there would be no access for those who could do harm. This is the origin of towns, which are said to
 
XV.ii.7–ii.25
be named towns (oppidum) because they offer protection (ops). A town (oppidum) moreover differs in its size and its walls from a hamlet (vicus) or a fortress (castellum) or a ‘country village’ (pagus). 7. Further, cities (civitas) are called ‘colonial towns’ (colonia), or ‘free towns’ (municipium),orhamlets,fortresses,orcountryvillages.
8.Acityproperlysocalledisonethathasbeenfounded not by newcomers but by those native to its soil. Therefore communities (urbs) founded by their own citizens (civis) are named cities (civitas), not colonies. 9. On the other hand, a colony (colonia) is what is filled by new inhabitants (cultor) when there are no indigenous people. Hence also a ‘colony’ is so called from the tilling (cultus, ppl. of colere) of a field. 10. A free town is one that, while remaining in the status of a city, obtains from thesovereignsomelegalrighttoagreaterorlesserobligation. It is called ‘free town’ (municipium) from ‘official functions’ (munia), that is ‘obligations,’ because they yield only these functions, that is, as the owed tributes or services (munus). The most notorious court cases and those involving a person’s freedom, as well as those which proceed from the sovereign, are not conducted there; these belong to the jurisdiction of the city (civitas).
11. Hamlets and fortresses and country villages are communities that are distinguished by none of the dignity of a city, but are inhabited by a common gathering of people, and because of their small size are tributary to the larger cities. 12. A hamlet (vicus) is so called as consistingonlyofitsdwellings(cf.vicus,“rowofhouses”),or becauseitonlyhasstreets(via),andnowalls.Itiswithout the protection of walls – although the dwelling-places in a city (urbs) are also called neighborhoods (vicus). It is called a hamlet because it is ‘instead of’ (vice) a city, or because it has streets (via) only, with no walls. 13. The ancients called a town sited on a very high place a fort (castrum), as if it were a high ‘cottage’ (casa). The plural of this is ‘camp’ (castra), and its diminutive is ‘fortress’ (castellum), [or because within it the freedom of the inhabitants would be ‘cut off’ (castrare) lest the populace wandering here and there should expose the fort to the enemy.] 14. ‘Country villages’ (pagus) are places fitted out with buildings for those dwelling among fields. Thesearealsocalledmarketplaces(conciliabulum),from the gathering and association of many people in one place. 15. Crossroads (compitum) are places where gatheringsofcountrypeoplearecustomarilymade,andthey are called crossroads because many regions in the country meet (competere) there, and there country people assemble.
16. The suburbs (suburbanum) are the buildings that surround a city, as if the term were ‘below the city’ (sub urbe). 17. Ramparts (moenia) are the walls of a city, so called because they protect (munire) the city, as if they were the bulwarks (munimentum) of the city, that is, the guardians. 18. They are also called a defense (munium), as if “made by hand” (manu factum); and thus also the word‘duty’(munus).A‘citywall’(murus,pluralmuri)is so called from ‘defending’ (munitio), as if the term were ‘to be defended’ (muniri, passive infinitive of munire), because it defends and guards the inner parts of the city. Furthermore, ramparts (moenia) have a double meaning, for sometimes all the public buildings of a city are loosely called by this word, as (Vergil, Aen. 2.234):
We split the walls and expose the buildings (moenia) of the city.
But properly moenia are walls only.
19. A city wall is furnished with towers and bulwarks. Towers (turris) are so called because they are rounded (teres) and tall – for something tall and circular, like a column, is ‘rounded.’ Even though they may be constructed as squared off and wide, they still look round to thoseobservingfromfaroff,becauseeverythingappears round whose angular shape disappears and is lost across a long stretch of air. 20. Bulwarks (propugnaculum) are the pinnacles (penna) of city walls, so called because from them the city is ‘fought for’ (propugnare). 21. A ‘fore-wall’ (promurale), because it is for (pro) protection of the city wall (murus), for it is a wall in front of the city wall.
22. A gate (porta) is the name of the place where something can be carried in (importare) or carried out (exportare). The word ‘gate’ is properly used either of a city or of a military camp, as was mentioned above. A ‘row of houses’ (vicus), as was said above, comprises the dwelling-places of a city; hence neighborhoods (vicinus) are so called. Lanes (via) are the narrow spaces that lie between rows of houses. 23. Boulevards (platea) are the uninterrupted and spacious streets of a city, named for their breadth according to the proper sense of the Greek tongue, for in Greek !  means “broad.” 24. A ‘sidestreet’ (quintana) is one fifth (quintus) of a boulevard, through which a cart can pass. 25. Sewers (cloaca) are
 
so called because water is strained (percolare) through them.PeoplesaythatTarquiniusPriscusfirstmadethese in Rome in order that, whenever there was a downpour of rain, water would pass through them out of the city so that the destructive force of water in very great and prolonged storms would not destroy the level places or foundations of the city. 26. Porticos (imbolus) are so named either because they are ‘under the mass’ (subvolumen),8 orbecausepeoplewalk(ambulare)underthem, for they are the arcades found here and there along the boulevards.
27. A forum (forus, i.e. the archaic form of forum) is a place for practicing litigation, named from “speaking” (fari) [or from King Phoroneus, who first gave law to the Greeks]. These places are also called prorostra (lit. “beforetheprows”)becauseprows(rostrum)wereseized from captured Carthaginian ships in the Punic War and set up in the Roman Forum as a sign of this victory. 28. The Senate House (curia) is so called because there the oversight (cura) of all affairs is administered by the Senate. 29. A praetorium is so named because there a ‘judicial magistrate’ (praetor) has his seat for managing investigations. 30. A gymnasium (gymnasium) in general is a place for exercising, but in Athens it was a place where philosophy was discussed and the study of wisdomwasengagedin,fortheGreekscall   what is called ‘exercise’ in Latin, that is, ‘meditation’ (meditatio).9 Butgymnasiumsarealsobathhousesandplacesfor runners and athletes, because there people are trained in the study of their particular skills. 31. The Capitolium of Rome is so called because it was the highest head (caput) of the Roman city and its religion. Others say that when Tarquinius Priscus was uncovering the foundations of the Capitolium in Rome, he found on the site of the foundation the head (caput) of a human marked with Etruscanwriting,andhencehenamedittheCapitolium.
32. Citadels (arx) are the high, fortified parts of a city, for whatever are the safest places in a city are called citadels from their holding off (arcere) the enemy. Also from this term are ‘bow’ (arcus) and ‘strongbox’ (arca). 33. The Romans suppose that the Circus (Circus) was
8	We guess that by subvolumen Isidore means “under, i.e. supporting, the mass” of the portico roof, linking the syllable -vol- with the -bol- of imbolus.
9	Meditatiomeansboth“practice,exercise”and“meditation,contemplation.”
XV.ii.26–ii.40
named for the circling (circuitus) of horses, because there horses run around (circum) the turning-posts. 34. A theater (theatrum) is named from ‘spectacle’ (spectaculum), from the term A (“spectacle”), because peoplestandinginitandwatching(spectare)fromabove gaze at stage-plays. 35. And an amphitheater (amphitheatrum)issocalledbecauseitiscomposedoftwotheaters (cf. ,“onbothsides”),foranamphitheaterisround, butatheaterconsistsofhalfanamphitheater,havingthe shape of a semicircle.
36.	A labyrinth (labyrinthus) is a structure with intricate walls, of the kind made at Crete by Daedalus where the Minotaur was shut in. If anyone should enter into it without a ball of twine he would not be able to find the way out. This building is so situated that, for those who open its doors, a terrifying thunder is heard within.Itslopesdownmorethanahundredsteps.Inside are images and monstrous effigies, innumerable passages heading every which way in the darkness, and other things done to confuse the way of those who have entered,sothatitseemsimpossibletopassfromitsdarknesstothelight.Therearefourlabyrinths:firsttheEgyptian, second the Cretan, the third in Lemnos, the fourth in Italy. All were so constructed that not even the ages can destroy them.
37.	A lighthouse (farum; cf. Greek <Y ) is a very tall tower which the Greeks and Latins in common have named ‘lighthouse’ from its particular use, because thanks to its signal of flames it may be seen from far off by sailors. Ptolemy is said to have constructed such a lighthouse near Alexandria for eight hundred talents of gold. Its function was to show a light for ships sailing at night, in order to make known the channels and the entrancetotheport,sothatsailorswouldnotbedeceived in the darkness and run onto the rocks – for Alexandria has tricky access with deceptive shallows. Therefore from this, people call the devices built for the purposeofshiningalightinports‘lighthouses’(pharus),for W means “light”; S , “vision” (actually “landmark, pillar”). Hence Lucifer (i.e. the ‘Light-bearer’) is called <A  in Greek.
38.	Coclea are tall, round towers, and they are called cocleaasifthewordwere‘cycles’(cyclea),becauseinthem oneclimbsinaspiralingring.OneoftheseinRomeis175 (Roman) feet high. 39. Hot baths (thermae) are so called because they are warm, for the Greeks call heat .
40. Baths (balneum) are assigned their name from the
 
XV.ii.41–iii.9
idea of the lifting of sorrow, because the Greeks called it @  (cf. , “cast away”; , “grief”), since it takes away one’s anxiety of spirit. Gymnasiums (gymnasium) are so called because there athletes are trained, withtheirbodiesanointedandmassaged,for   in Greek means “training” in Latin. 41. A dressing-room (apodyterium), where the clothes of bathers are left, is namedfor‘disrobing,’for ! " inGreekmeans“disrobe.” 42. Propina is a Greek word, which now among us hasbeencorruptedtopopina.Itisaplacenexttoapublic bath where after bathing one may be refreshed of one’s hunger and thirst. From this are named both propina and propinare (“to drink a toast”), for !@ in Greek means “hunger” – because this place relieves hunger.
43. ‘Stalls’ formerly referred to the small buildings belonging to the common people, humble and simple neighborhood buildings that could be closed by planks and boards. From this also comes the word ‘shop girl’ (tabernaria), because there she usually would sit. They arecalledstalls(taberna)becausetheyareconstructedof boards (tabula) and planks; even though they no longer look this way now they still retain the original name. 44. A meat-market (macellum) is so called because there livestockisslaughteredandputupforsaletomerchants. 45. A market (mercatum) takes its name from commerce (commercium), for there things would be bought and sold. Likewise a custom house (teloneum) is the name of the place where the revenue of ships and the wages of sailors are paid, for there sits the tax collector who will set a price on things and demand it aloud from the merchants. 46. A prison is a place that we are prohibited from leaving, and it is called prison (carcer) from ‘confining’ (coercere). [Hence Fronto (fr. 12): “And they seemed to revel like the Greeks in pleasant places rather than ‘to be confined in prison’ (coerceri carcere).”]
iii. Dwelling-places (De habitaculis) 1. A habitation (habitatio) is so called from ‘having’ (habere), as in (Vergil, Ecl. 2.29):
To inhabit (habitare, the frequentative of habere) cottages.
‘House’ (domus) is named from a Greek term, for the Greeks call a shelter "W. A house is the dwelling of one family, as a city is of one population, as the world is the domicile (domicilium) of the whole human race. 2. The ancients called every edifice (aedificium) a building (aedes).Somethink‘building’(aedes)tookitsnamefrom ‘eating’(edere)something,givinganexamplefromPlautus (cf. The Little Carthaginian 529):
If I had called you into the building (aedes) for lunch.
Hencealsoedifice(aedificium),becauseitwasfirst‘made for eating’ (ad edendum factum). 3. A court (aula) is a royal house, or a spacious dwelling enclosed by four colonnades. 4. An atrium (atrium) is a large building, or a very roomy and spacious house, and it is called an atrium because three (tres, neuter tria) colonnades are added to it on the outside. Others say it is ‘atrium’ as if blackened (ater, neut. atrum) by fire and a lamp, for the blackening is caused by smoke. 5. A palace (palatium) is named after Pallas, prince of the Arcadians, in whose honortheArcadiansbuiltthetownPallanteum,andthey called the royal palace that they founded in his name
‘Palatium.’
6. They say the bedroom (thalamus, also “bridal chamber”) is so named for this reason: when the Sabine women were abducted by the Romans, one of them, morenoblethantheothersinappearance,wasabducted and greatly admired by all, and it was the response of an oracle that she be married to the general Thalamon. Because this marriage had gone happily, it was established that in every wedding the name thalamus would be repeated. The Egyptians also, in their own tongue, name those places in which newlyweds go down and lie together thalamus. 7. The dining room (coenaculum) is named from the gathering (communio; cf.  , “common”; cena, “dinner”) at dinner; hence also the cloister(coenobium)isagathering(congregatio).Indeed, the ancients used to dine in public and in common, nor was anyone’s feast private, lest the delicacies taken in secret should beget luxuriousness. 8. The “formal dining room” (triclinium) is the dining room named after the three couches for those reclining there. Thus among the ancients, in the place where the furniture for a dinner party was arranged, three couches were set up on whichthoserecliningwouldfeast.InGreek  means “bed” or “couch,” from which it developed that one would say triclinium. 9. A chamber (cella) is so called because it hides and conceals (celare) us. A sleepingchamber (cubiculum) is so named because there we lie down (cubare) and rest while sleeping. Likewise a bed (cubile) is a place for sleeping. A privy (secessus) is so
 
namedbecauseitisaprivatearea,thatis,‘withoutaccess’ (sine accessu).
10.Aninn(diversorium)issocalledbecausetherepeople meet who come from diverse (diversus) ways. Hospice (hospitium), a Greek word, is where a person dwells foratimeaccordingtothelawofhospitality,andpassing through, leaves again for elsewhere. Whence also campgrounds (metatum), because they are moved (mutare). Hence one reads, “They ‘laid out’ (metari) camp,” for “they moved” – for the army does not stay there but passes through. 11. Maenius, the colleague of Crassus, constructed bleachers in the Forum so that there would be places for spectators to stand, and these are called Maeniana (“galleries”) after his name. These are also called sun terraces (solarium), because they are exposed to the sun (sol). After these some built galleries of stone for their colonnades, some of wood, and they attached them to their marketplaces and houses. 12. A house formerly was made of wood, ‘boarded’ (tabulatus), and from this the name ‘floor’ (tabulatum) remains. A cellar (hypogeum; cf. I!, “under”; H, “earth) is a building constructed under ground, which we call a cavern or cave. A sun terrace (solarium) is so called because it is open to the sun (sol) and breezes (aura), as was the place fromwhichDavidsawBathshebabathingandfellinlove (II Kings 11:2 Vulgate).
13. When Antiochus besieged Jerusalem, Hyrcanus, leader of the Jews, took three thousand talents of gold from the tomb of David after it was opened, and gave three hundred of them to Antiochus to lift the siege. To remove the ill will attendant on this deed he is said to have used the rest of the money to establish the first ‘stranger’s hospice’ (xenodochium), which would support the arrival of poor people or pilgrims, whence it took the name – for it is named from the Greek ?7  " 9@ , in Latin, ‘support of pilgrims.’ Moreover, the place where sick people are collected from the streets is called a    @  (‘hospital’; cf.  , “sickness”) in Greek.10 There the limbs of wretched people, consumed with weariness and fasting, are given care.
iv. Sacred buildings (De aedificiis sacris) 1. Sanctuaries (sacrum) are places established for divine worship, namely those in which altars are consecrated (consecrare) for high priests making sacrifices according to
10 Latin nosocomium means “infirmary.”
XV.iii.10–iv.8
their custom. 2. Sanctums (sanctum) according to the ancients are the outer precincts of temples. The ‘Holy of Holies’ (sanctum sanctorum) is the inner part of the temple to which no one had access, excepting only the priest. It is called the Holy of Holies because it is holier than the outer oracle, or because it is holier in comparison with the sanctum, just as we speak of the Song of Songs, because it excels all songs. A sanctum is so called from the blood (sanguis) of sacrificial victims, for among the ancients nothing was called holy (sanctus) except what had been consecrated and sprinkled with the blood of a sacrifice. Again sanctum, what is known to have been sanctified (sancire, ppl. sancitum). Moreover to sanction (sancire) is to confirm, and to defend from wrong by imposing punishment. Thus both laws and city walls are said to be holy (sanctus). 3. A place of propitiation (propitiatorium) [is as it were a ‘place of prayers of propitiation’ (oratorium propitiationis), for a propitiation is an appeasing.] Oracles (oraculum) are so called because from there responses are given, and oracles are from the ‘mouth’ (os, gen. oris). 4. Penetralia are the secret places of oracles, and are called penetraliabecausetheyare‘interior’(penitus),thatis,‘almost inside’ (pene intus). An oratorium is dedicated to prayer (oratio) only, and no one should do anything in it except that for which it was made and from which it receives its name.
5. A monastery (monasterium) is the dwelling of one monk (monachus), for   is Greek for ‘alone’ (solus),    for ‘station’ – it is the dwelling of a solitary (solitarius).6.‘Convent’(coenobium)seemstobeacompound of Greek and Latin. It is the habitation of a number of people living in common, for   in Greek means “common.” 7. The term ‘temple’ (templum) is general, for the ancients would give the name ‘temples’ to all sorts of large places, and temples (templa) were so named as if they were called ‘spacious shelters’ (tecta ampla). But a place oriented to the east was also called a temple, from the idea of ‘observing for augury’ (contemplatio). A temple had four parts: the front facing to the east, the rear to the west, the left to the north, the right to the south. Hence when they would build a temple they would face toward the equinoctial sunrise, so that lines laid from the east to the west would divide the sky into equal parts on the right and the left, and thus whoever would take counsel or pray would look directly east. 8. Shrines (fanum) are named after fauns (faunus),
 
XV.iv.9–vi.2
forwhompaganerrorbuilttempleswherethosemaking consultations would hear the responses of demons.
9. The ancients called temples with fountains, where people would be washed before entering, ‘springshrines’ (delubrum), and these shrines were thus named after ‘washing’ (diluere). These are now buildings with holy(i.e.baptismal)fonts,inwhichthefaithfularepurified as reborn, and they are well termed spring-shrines by a certain foretelling, because they are for the ‘washing away’ (ablutio) of sins. 10. For the font (fons) in springshrinesistheplaceofthereborn,inwhichsevenstepsare made in the mystery of the Holy Spirit; there are three going down and three coming up: the seventh is the fourth step (i.e. the bottom of the waist-deep baptismal font), and that is like the Son of Man, the extinguisher of thefurnaceoffire,thesureplaceforthefeet,thefoundation of the water, in which the fullness of divinity dwells bodily. 11. The dwellings of kings were called ‘basilicas’ (basilica) at first, whence they take their name, for the term  means “king”, and basilicas, “royal habitations.”Butnow‘basilica’isthenamefordivinetemples because there worship and sacrifices are offered to God, the king of all. 12. A martyrium is a place of martyrs (martyr), derived from Greek, because each is built in memory of a martyr, or because the tombs of the saints there are those of martyrs.
13. Some have said that an altar (ara) is so called because there the kindled sacrifices burn (ardere). Others say it is from a ‘prayer,’ which the Greeks call , whence contrariwise a curse is called  . Others would derive it from altitudo (“height”), but wrongly. 14. However, altare (i.e. another term for ‘altar’) rightly is named from altitudo, as if the word were ‘a high altar’ (alta ara). 15. The ambo (pulpitum) is so called because the reader or psalmist stationed in it can be seen by the people (populus) in public (publicum), so that he may be heardmoreeasily.16.‘Tribunal’(tribunal),becausefrom there rulings about one’s manner of life are bestowed (tribuere) by a priest. It is a place set up on high, from whicheveryonecanhear.Inanotherview‘tribunal’takes its name from ‘tribe’ (tribus), because the tribe is called together before it. 17. The pulpit (analogium) is so called because the sermon is preached from there, for   in Greek means “sermon” – and it also is located in a rather high place [in order that the reader or psalmist thusstationedcanbeseeninpublicbythepeople,where he may be heard more easily].
v. Repositories (De repositoriis) 1. The sacrarium is properly the place in a temple where holy things (sacrum) are put away; similarly the ‘temple treasurechamber’ (donarium), where offerings are gathered; similarly the ‘rows of seating’ (lectisternium) where people are accustomed to sit. Hence the sacrarium is named from the taking of sacred things in and out. 2. However, thedonariumissonamedbecausethegifts(donum)that they customarily offer in temples are put away there. 3. The treasury (aerarium) is so called because formerly minted bronze (aes, gen. aeris) was hidden away there. It was in use in former times when gold and silver were not yet minted; although money was afterwards made from gold and silver, the name aerarium still remained, after the bronze from which money took its first name.
4. A cabinet (armarium) is a place where the tools or records of any sort of craft (ars) are placed. But an armory (armamentarium) is where only weaponry is placed. Whence Juvenal (Satires 13.83):
Whatever weapons the armories of heaven hold.
Both of them are so called from ‘shoulders’ (armus), that is, ‘arms,’ with which weapons are wielded. 5. A library(bibliotheca)isaplacewherebooksaredeposited, for   in Greek means “book,” , “repository.” 6. A ‘storeroom’ (promptuarium) is so called because from there foodstuffs are brought out (promere), that is, carried forth. 7. A pantry (cellarium), so called because in it are gathered (colligere) the dining implements, or whatever foodstuffs are left over. There is this difference between a storeroom and a pantry, that a pantry serves for a few days, but a storeroom for a long time. 8. However,storehouses(apotheca)orgranaries(horreum) can be called repositories (repostorium) or ‘hoarding places’ (reconditorium) by literal translation (cf. !, “back again”; ), because in them people deposit (reponere, ppl. repositus) harvested crops. Hence we call an ample supply of stored goods by the Greek word
‘hoard’ (entheca).
vi. Workplaces (De operariis) 1. A workshop (ergasterium) is where any work is done, from the Greek words	, “works,” and   , “station” – that is, work-station (operarii statio). 2. ‘Penitentiary workhouses’ (ergastulum) are also named from the same Greek word; there offenders are assigned to do some kind of work, of the kind that gladiators would
 
usually be assigned, and banished people, who cut marble but are still bound in custody by chains. 3. The ‘women’s quarters’ (gynaeceum) is so named from the Greek because there a gathering of women would meet to carry out the task of wool-working, for a ‘woman’ in Greekiscalled .4.Theterm‘millhouse’(pistrinum) is as if the word were pilistrinum, because formerly grain was pounded by a pestle (pilum). Whence among the ancients the term was not ‘millers’ (molitor) but ‘pounders’ (pistor), as if it were pinsores, from their crushing (pinsere) the kernels of grain – for they did not yet use millstones (mola), but would crush grain with a pestle. Whence Vergil (Geo. 1.267):
Now parch the grain with the fire, now grind it with a stone.
5. A furnace (clibanus) [is so called from ‘slope’ (clivus), because it narrows as it goes up, for we say an upward or winding path is a slope.] 6. An oven (furnus) is a term derived from ‘spelt’ (far), because bread made from spelt is baked there. 7. A press (torcular) is so called because there grapes are trod and, once they have been squeezed (extorquere), are pressed out. 8. A forus (i.e. forum) is a place where grapes are trod, so called because the grapes are brought (ferre) there – or because there they are smashed (ferire) with feet; hence it is also called a wine-press (calcatorium, “treading-place”; cf. calx, ‘heel’). But this term forum means many things: the first kind of forum is the place in a city set aside for market trading; second, where a magistrate will give judgments; third, the one we spoke of above, which we have called the wine-press; fourth, the decks of ships, of which Vergil (Aen. 6.412):
And he clears the decks (forus).
Avat(lacus)issocalledbecausethejuice(liquor)offruit runs down into it.
vii. Entranceways (De aditibus) 1. An entranceway (aditus) is so called from ‘going’ (ire, ppl. itus); through itwepassandareadmitted.2.Avestibule(vestibulum)is eithertheentrancewayofaprivatehouseoraspaceadjacent to public buildings. It is called a ‘vestibule’ because the entrance doors are covered (vestire) by it, or because it covers an entranceway with a roof, or from ‘standingplace’ (stare). 3. A portico (porticus), because it is a passagewayratherthanaplacewhereoneremainsstanding, as if it were a gateway (porta). Also porticus because it is
XV.vi.3–viii.1
uncovered (apertus). 4. A ‘front door’ (ianua) is named after a certain Janus, to whom the pagans dedicate any entrance or exit. Whence Lucan (Civil War 1.62):
Let her (Peace) shut the iron doors of war-making Janus.
Now this is the first entrance of a house; others, inside the front door, are generally called doorways. A doorway (ostium) is that by which we are prevented from any entrance, so called from ‘impeding’ (ostare, i.e. obstare) [or it is doorway (ostium) because it discloses (ostendere)somethingwithin].Otherssaydoorwayissocalled because it detains an enemy (ostis, i.e. hostis), for there we set ourselves against our adversaries – hence also the name of the town Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber, becauseitissettheretoopposetheenemy(cf.i.56above).
‘Doorpanels’(foris)orleaves(valva)arealsoelements ofadoor,buttheformeraresocalledbecausetheyswing out (foras), the latter swing (revolvere) inward, and they canbefoldeddouble–butusagehasgenerallycorrupted those terms. 5. Barriers (claustrum) are so called because they are closed (claudere). 6. Windows (fenestra) have a narrowexteriorandawidenedinterior,ofthekindwesee in barns. They are so called because they lend (fenerari, i.e. faenerari) light – for light in Greek is called W – or because a person inside sees (videre) out through them. Others suppose that window is so called because it provides (minestrare, i.e. ministrare) light, with the name a blending of a Greek and a Latin word, for light in Greek is W (i.e. W + minestrare).
7. A hinge (cardo) is the place on which a door swings and is always moved. It is so called after the term " (“heart”), because as the heart (cor) governs and moves the whole person, so this pivot governs and moves a door. Whence the proverbial expression, for a matter to be “at a turning point” (in cardine). 8. A threshold (limen) of a door is so called because it is set crosswise like a field’s boundary-line (limes), and one enters and leaves across it as one enters and leaves a field. 9. Doorposts (postis) and pilasters (antae) are so called as if the words were post and ante. Antae because they stand ‘in front’(ante),orbecauseweapproachthem‘beforehand’ (antea), before we enter a house; postes because they stand ‘behind’ (post) the door.
viii. Thepartsofbuildings(Departibusaedificiorum) 1. A foundation (fundamentum) is so called because it is the bottom (fundus) of a house. Likewise it is called
 
XV.viii.2–ix.1
quarry-stone (caementum), after ‘hewing’ (caedere), because it arises from the hewing of thick stone. 2. A wall (paries) is so called because there are always two of ‘equal size’ (par, plural pares), either from side to side or fromfronttoback.Whetherthebuildingisfour-sidedor six-sided, the facing walls will be of equal size; otherwise the construction is deformed.
3. We speak of ruins (parietinae), as if the word were ‘the ruins of walls’ (parietum ruina); these are walls standing without roofs or inhabitants. 4. The ‘corner’ (angulus), because it joins two walls into one (in unum coniungeret). Roofs (culmen) are so called because the ancients covered their roofing with straw (culmus), as country people still do. Hence the peak of a roof is called the ‘ridge’ (culmen).
5. Vaults (camera) are bending structures facing to the inside, so named from ‘curved,’ for   (otherwiseunattested)is“curve”inGreek. 6.‘Paneledceilings’ (laquearium) are what cover and decorate vaults, and theyarealsocalledlacunaria.Theprimarytermis‘panel’ (lacus), as in Lucilius (Satires, fr. 1290):
The building and the panels (lacus) resound.
The diminutive of this produces lacunar, as Horace (Odes 2.18.1):
Nor does a gilded lacunar glitter in my house.
Likewise the other diminutive lacunarium is made, and by   9  (i.e.antistoechum,substitutionofaletter) it produces the term laquearium. 7. A ‘vaulted chamber’ (absida) is from a Greek word (cf. 4, gen. 4@" , “arch, vault”) that means “full of light” in Latin, because it is resplendent with the light received through an arch. Butwhetherweoughttocallitabsidaorabsisisdoubtful, because certain experts consider the declension of this word ambiguous. 8. A ‘tortoise-shell vault’ (testudo, lit. ‘tortoise shell’) is a transverse vault of a temple, for the ancients would make the roofs of their temples in the shape of a tortoise shell. These would be made thus to duplicatetheimageofthesky,whichisevidentlyconvex. Others take the tortoise-shell vault to mean a place on the side of an atrium facing the people coming in (i.e. the narthex). 9. An arch (arcus) is so called because it is curved with a narrowed (artus) tip. These are also
‘archways’ (fornix).
10. Pavements (pavimentum) that are worked out with the skill of a picture have a Greek origin; mosaics (lithostratum) are made from little pieces of shell and tiles colored in various hues. They are called pavements because they are ‘rammed down’ (pavire), that is, beaten. From this also comes the word ‘dread’ (pavor), which strikes the heart. 11. An ostracus is a tiled pavement, because it consists of broken-up pots mixed with lime, for Greeks call pots d . 12. The area called a compluvium (cf. pluvia, “rain”) is so named because water gathers (convenire) in it from the surrounding areas. Tiles (tessella) are what domiciles are paved with, named as the diminutive from ‘paving stones’ (tessera), that is, ‘square little stones.’
13. Pedestals (basis) are the supports of columns, which rise up from this foundation and sustain the weight of the material placed above. Further, bases is the name of a very strong stone in the Syrian language. 14. Columns (columna) are named according to their length and roundness (see XIX.xxix.2); the weight of the wholestructureiscarriedbythem.Theancientratioheld that their thickness was a third of their height. There are four kinds of round columns: Doric, Ionic, Tuscan, and Corinthian, differing among themselves in the ratio of thickness to height. A fifth kind is that called Attic, with four angles or more, and sides of equal width. 15. Capitals(capitolium,i.e.capitulum)aresocalledbecausethey are the heads (caput, gen. capitis) of columns (columna), just as there is a head on a neck (collum). Architraves (epistolium, i.e. epistylium) are the beams placed above the capitals of columns, and the word is Greek, [that is, ‘placed above.’]
Roof-tiles (tegulae), because they cover (tegere) buildings; and ‘curved roof-tiles’ (imbrex), because they fend off the rain (imber). 16. Bricks (later) and tiles (laterculus),becausetheyaremadeinawide(latus)moldby means of four wooden forms placed around their sides. A conduit (canalis) is so called because it is hollowed out like a reed (canna). We usually cite canalis as having feminine rather than masculine gender. 17. Water pipes (fistula) are so called because they pour (fundere, ppl. fusus) and ‘send’ water, for    in Greek means “to send” (cf.  B, “equip, bring”). They are shaped according to the quantity of water and the measure of their capacity.
ix.	Fortifications (De munitionibus) 1. A munitum or munimentum (“fortification”) is so called because it is madebyhand(manus).A‘militaryenclosure’(cohors)is
 
so called either because it ‘presses together’ (coartare) all thatiswithinit,thatis,itencloses,orbecauseitrestrains (coercere) those outside by creating an obstacle and prevents them from approaching. 2. A rampart (vallum) is what is raised up with a mass of earth so that protectionmaybeafforded.Itiscalledrampartfrom‘palisades’ (vallus),forpalisadesarethestakeswithwhicharampart is protected. And palisades are so named because they are driven in and ‘pulled out’ (vellere). The intervallum is the space between the tops of the ramparts, that is, the tops of the posts with which the rampart is furnished – hence other things are also called ‘spaces’ (spatium), the term evidently derived from ‘posts’ (stipes, gen. stipitis). 3. A mound (agger) is a heap of any sort of material, with which the trenches and palisades can be reinforced. A mound properly means heaped-up (aggerare) earth that is placed nearby after the rampart is constructed, but loosely speaking we call the walls and all the fortifications the mound.
4.Fences(maceria)arethelongwallswithwhichsome vineyards are enclosed, for the Greeks say  for ‘long.’ 5. In Africa and Spain walls of earth are called formatum or formaceum (lit. “molded”) because they are pressed into a form (forma) made from planks enclosing them on both sides rather than built up from the ground. They last for ages, undamaged by wind and fire, and stronger than any concrete. 6. Hedges (sepes) are protective barriers for what has been planted (satus), whence they take their name. Sheepfolds (caulae) are sheep’s pens or the hedges (saepimentum) of sheepfolds. Moreover, with [the letter] c removed, it is a Greekterm,fortheGreekscallholding-pensforanimals L.
x.	Tents (De tentoriis) 1. A tabernaculum is a soldier’s tent, with which they avoid the heat of the sun, the onslaughts of rainstorms, and the injury of cold while on the march. They are called tabernacula because their sides are stretched out and suspended by ropes from the boards (tabula) standing between them which hold up the tents. 2. A tent (tentorium) is so called because it is stretched (tendere, ppl. tentus) with ropes and stakes; hence today people are said to ‘stretch the truth’ (praetendere). 3. Pavilions (papilio, lit. “butterfly, moth”) are
11 Ifhighenoughinthesky,thesunwouldcastnoshadowextending beyond the base of a pyramid because of its sloping sides.
XV.ix.2–xii.2
so called from their resemblance to the little flying animals that teem especially when the mallows are flowering. These are the little winged creatures that gather to a kindled light and, flitting around it, are forced to die from being too close to the fire.
xi. Sepulchers (De sepulchris) 1. A sepulcher (sepulchrum) is so called from ‘buried’ (sepelire, ppl. sepultus). Originally people were buried in their own homes. Later this was prohibited by law, so that the bodies of the living would not be infected by contact with the stench. A monument (monumentum) is so named because it ‘admonishes the mind’ (mentem monere) to remember the deceased person. Indeed, when you don’t see a monument, it is as what is written (Psalm 30:13 Vulgate): “I have slipped from the heart as one who is dead.” But when you see it, it admonishes the mind and brings you backtomindfulnesssothatyourememberthedeadperson. Thus both ‘monument’ and ‘memory’ (memoria) are so called from ‘the admonition of the mind’ (mentis admonitio).2.A‘burialmound’(tumulus)issonamedas ifitwere‘swellingground’(tumenstellus).‘Sarcophagus’ (sarcophagus) is a Greek term, because bodies are consumed there, for ? in Greek means “flesh,” @, “to eat.”
3. Mausoleums (mausoleum) are the sepulchers or monuments of kings, named after Mausolus, king of the Egyptians. When he was dead his wife built for him a sepulcher of wondrous size and beauty, so that even today any precious monument is called a mausoleum after his name. 4. Pyramids (pyramis) are a type of sepulcher that are square and raised to a point beyond any height that can be constructed by hand, whence also, having surpassed the measure of shadows, they are said to have no shadow.11 They rise with such a construction that they begin wide and finish narrow, like a flame – for !N means “flame.” Egypt is the site of these pyramids. Among the ancients, powerful people would be buried either under mountains or within mountains; hence it was determined that either pyramids would be constructed above their corpses or huge columns would be erected.
xii.	Ruralbuildings(Deaedificiisrusticis) 1.Acottage (casa) is a rustic little dwelling of wattles and woven with reeds and twigs, in which people can be protected from [the force] of cold or the injury of heat. 2. A shed
 
XV.xii.3–xiii.17
(tugurium) is a little house that vineyard-keepers make for themselves as a covering (tegimen), as if the word weretegurium,eitherforavoidingtheheatofthesunand deflecting its rays, or so that from there the keeper may driveawayeitherthepeopleortheanimalsthatwouldlie in wait for the immature fruit. Country people call this a ‘hut’ (capanna), because it ‘holds one’ (capiat unum) person only. 3. Some think a tescuum (i.e. tesquum) is a tugurium;othersthinkitisruggedandharshterrain.4.A magalium is an elongated structure, made by Numidian peasants, covered with sides that curve in like the hulls of ships, or round in the shape of ovens. They are called magalia as if magaria, because Phoenicians call a new farm a magar – with one letter changed, l for r, magalia from magaria.
xiii.	Fields (De agris) 1. Field (ager) in Latin is said to get its name because in it something ‘is done’ (agere). Others believe that ‘field’ is more obviously named from the Greek, whence a farm in Greek is called a coragros.12 2. A farm (villa) is named from ‘rampart’ (vallum), that is the heap of earth that they use to establish the boundary-lines. 3. ‘Holdings’ (possessio) are vast public and private fields that originally someone occupied and owned (possidere) not by property transfer but insofar as he ‘had power’ (posse) – whence also they are named. 4. An ‘estate’ (fundus) is so called because the family’s patrimony is founded (fundare) and established on it. Further, an estate should be taken as both one’s urban and rural property. 5. A ‘manor’ (praedium) is so called because, of all the possessions of the head of the family, it is the most ‘seen before’ (praevidere), that is, it is most visible, as if the word were praevidium – or because the ancients referred to the fields which they had seized in war as ‘booty’ (praeda).
6. Now every field, as Varro teaches us, falls into one of four types. There is the arable (arvus) field, that is, for sowing; or the plantable (consitus), that is, suitable for trees; or pasture (pascuus), set apart for grass and herds only;orthefloral(florus),becausethesearegardenspots fit for bees and flowers. Vergil followed this division in the four books of his Georgics. 7. The ancients called uncultivated fields – that is, forests and pasturelands – ‘opencountry’(rus),butthepartthatwascultivated,the ‘field’(ager).Theopencountryiswherehoney,milk,and cattle can be obtained, and from it the ‘country person’ (rusticus) is named. These things make up the supreme toil-freehappinessofpeasants.8.A‘fieldofgrain’(seges) is where grain is sown, whence Vergil (Geo. 1.47):
That field of grain (seges) only then answers the prayers of the eager farmer.
9. A field is called ‘common pasture’ (compascuus) when it is left out of the division of the fields in order to ‘providepasturageincommon’(pascerecommuniter)among neighbors. 10. An alluvial (alluvius) field is that which a watercourse (fluvius) gradually turns into a field. 11. A field is called ‘naturally enclosed’ (arcifinius) when it is not bounded by fixed measures of boundary-lines, but its ‘boundaries are enclosed’ (arcentur fines) by a barrier ofrivers,mountains,ortrees–whereforealsonoleftover patches of land interrupt these fields.
12. A fallow (novalis) field is one plowed for the first time, or one that in alternate years is left empty in order to renew (novare) its strength, for fallow lands sometimeswillbefruitfulandsometimesempty.13.Adesolate (squalidus) field is as it were ‘ex-cultivated’ (excolidus), because now it has passed out of cultivation, just as the term exconsul comes from one’s having departed from the consulate. 14. A marshy (uliginosus) field is always wet (uvidus), whereas a field that sometimes dries up is called moist (humidus). Swampiness (uligo) is a natural liquid quality of earth, never leaving it. 15. ‘Remainders’ (subseciva) are, properly speaking, what a tailor cuts off from the material and throws away as superfluous.Hence‘remaindersofland’(subsiciva)areplotsthat, because they are sterile or swampy, people reject when the fields are divided into parcels. Further, ‘remainders’ are those areas that in the division of a field do not make up a hundred-measure, that is, two hundred jugers. 16. A ‘threshing floor’ (area) is named for the levelness of its floor, and it is called area because of its flatness and evenness – hence also altar (ara).13 Others say a threshing floor is so called because it is smoothed off (eradere) for threshing grain, or because only what is dry (arida) is threshed on it. 17. A meadow (pratum) is where herds are kept because of the abundance of its hay. The ancient Romans gave it this name because it was ‘immediately
12	The text is defective here. In question may be the Greek 9A or 9W , both meaning “countryside, landed estate.”
13	Thewordarealittleresemblesaequalitas,“levelness,evenness,” but Isidore may simply allude to a synonym: aequor, like area, can mean “a level place.” Otherwise on ara see iv.13 above.
 
The Etymologies	XV.xiii.18–xvi.1
 
ready’(protinusparatus)anddidnotneedthegreatlabor of tilling. Meadows are what can be mown. 18. Swamps (palus) are named for the pastoral goddess Pales because they furnish straw (palea), that is, fodder, for beasts of burden.
xiv. The boundaries of fields (De finibus agrorum) 1. Boundaries (finis) are so called because fields are divided by cords (funiculus), for lines of measuring are stretched out when land is partitioned in order to maintain uniformity of dimension. 2. ‘Limits’ (limes) are named after the old word for ‘crosswise,’ because the ancients referred to anything crosswise as limus. From this term are derived both the ‘thresholds’ (limen) of entryways, across which one goes in or out, and ‘boundary-limits’ (limes), because one goes across these intothefields.Hencealsowegetthewordlimus,anapron withslantwisepurpletrimthatpublicslaveswouldwear. 3. ‘Boundary-lines’ (terminus) are the name for what mark out and display the measurement of the land, for through these proof (testimonium) of boundaries is recognized,andlawsuitsandsquabblesaboutfieldsarethus avoided.
4. The largest boundary dimensions of fields are two: thecardoandthedecumanus.Thecardo,thenorth–south dimension, is named from the ‘hinge’ (cardo), the pole of the heavens, for surely the heavens rotate about the North Pole. The decumanus is the crosswise dimension, drawn from east to west, and because it makes the shape of an X, it is called decumanus – a field twice divided in this way makes the figure X of the number ten (decem). 5. An arca (i.e. a quadrangular landmark) is so named fromtheterm‘wardoff’(arcere),foritguardstheboundaries of a field and prohibits anyone from approaching. A trifinium, (i.e. a ‘place where three boundaries meet’) is so called because it delimits the ‘boundaries of three’ (trium fines) holdings. Likewise quadrifinium, because it bounds four (quattuor). The other boundary dimensions are shorter and stand at unequal intervals apart from one another, and have their appointed names.
xv. The measures of fields (De mensuris agrorum) 1. A measure (mensura) is whatever is delimited by weight, capacity, length, height, breadth, and spirit. Thus our ancestors divided the earth into parts, parts into provinces, provinces into regions, regions into locales, locales into territories, territories into fields, fields into hundred-measures, hundred-measures into jugers, jugers into lots sixty feet square, and then these lots into furrow-measures, Roman rods, paces, steps, cubits,feet,palms,inches,andfingers.Sogreatwastheir ingenuity. 2. The finger is the least part of field measuring. An inch has three fingers, a palm has four fingers, a foot sixteen, a pace five feet, and a Roman rod two paces – that is, ten feet. 3. A ‘Roman rod’ (pertica) is so called from‘carrying’(portare),asifitwereportica.Nowallthe foregoing measures are based on the body, as palm, foot, pace, and the rest; only the rod is something carried. It is ten feet long and is the equivalent of the measuringrod (calamus) that measures the Temple in the Book of Ezechiel (40:3).
4. The furrow-measure (actus) is the smallest measure of area, four feet wide and 120 long. Climata have sixty feet on a side, so: (a figure follows). A ‘square furrow-measure’ (actus quadratus) is bounded on each side by 120 feet, so: (a figure follows). The Baeticans call this measure a ‘half-juger’ (arapennis), from the term ‘plowing’ (arare). 5. This square furrow-measure doubled makes a juger (iugerum); because it thus consists of a ‘joining’ (iunctum) it takes the name ‘juger.’ Now a juger has a length of 240 feet and a breadth of 120, so: (a figure follows). The country people of the province of Baetica call a square furrow-measure an acnua. 6. Likewise the Baeticans define a porca as an area thirty feet wide and eighty feet long. (A figure follows.) But a balk (porca) is the raised ridge in plowing, and what is dug out is the furrow (lira).
The Gauls call a lot of one hundred (centum) feet square in urban areas a candetum, as if the word were centetum.Butinthecountrytheycallapropercandetum an area of 150 feet square. Now a field containing a stade (stadialis) is 125 paces, that is, 625 feet long. Computing its measure times eight makes a Roman mile (miliarium), which consists of five thousand feet. 7. Further, a hundred-measure (centuria) is a field of two hundred jugers.Amongtheancientsittookitsnamefrom‘ahundred (centum) jugers,’ but afterwards it was doubled but retained its original name. Although hundred-measures were enlarged in measure, they were not able to change the name.
xvi. Roads (De itineribus) 1. We call our road measures ‘miles’ (miliarum), the Greeks ‘stades’ (stadium), the Gauls ‘leagues’ (leuga), the Egyptians schoeni, the
 
XV.xvi.2–xvi.13
Persians ‘parasangs’ (parasanga). Each has its own distance. 2. A mile is completed in a thousand paces, and is called “mile” (milliarium) as if it were ‘a thousandlength’ (mille-adium) having five thousand feet. 3. A league runs 1,500 paces. A stade is an eighth of a mile, taking 125 paces. They say Hercules first established the stade, and fixed it as that distance that he himself could completeinonebreath,andaccordinglynamedit‘stade’ (stadium) because at its end he caught his breath and at the same time ‘stood still’ (stare). 4. A road (via) is the place where a vehicle can go, and it is named road from the vehicles (vehiculum) riding on it. It holds two lanes (actus), to allow for the meeting of vehicles going and coming. 5. Further, every road is either public or private. A public road is one that is on public ground, where a pathway, a lane, is accessible to the people. This pertains either to the sea or to towns. A private road is one that has been given to the neighboring municipality.
6. A street (strata) is so called as if ‘worn away’ (terere, ppl. tritus) by the feet of the crowd. Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 1.315):
And the street now worn away by the feet of the crowd.
Anditispaved,thatis‘strewn’(sternere,ppl.stratus)with stones. The Phoenicians are said to be first to have paved roads with stones; afterwards the Romans spread them through almost the whole world, to make travel direct and to keep the common people from being idle. 7. The crown (agger) is the raised middle part of a street paved with stones heaped together (coaggerare), and named from‘mound’(agger),thatis,a‘heapingtogether’(coacervatio). Historians call this a military highway (via militaris), as (Vergil, Aen. 5.273):
Just as often a snake, when caught on the crown of the road (agger viae).
8. A ‘passageway’ (iter or itus) is a road on which people can go (ire, ppl. itus) in any direction. Now iter and itiner mean different things. An iter is a place easy for ‘passing along’ (trans-itus), whence we also name it itus. But an itiner is the passage (itus) of a long road, as well as the effort of walking to reach where you wish to go. 9. A path (semita) is half a passage (iter), so called from ‘half-road’ (semi-itus). A path is for humans, but a track isforwildbeastsandcattle.10.Atrack(callis)isanarrow and beaten passageway for cattle among the mountains, named from calluses (callum) on the feet, or because it is hardened by the hooves (callum) of cattle. Crossways (trames) are passageways cutting across (transversus) fields, or a straight road so named because it ‘passes across’ (transmittere). 11. Forks (divortium) are turnings of roads, that is, roads extending in diverse (diversus) directions. Likewise there are side-paths (diverticulum), that is, diverging (diversus) and dividing (divisae) roads, or crossing paths that lead from the side of the main road.
12. A ‘junction’ (bivium) is so named because two roads meet there. A ‘crossroads’ (competum) is so called because several roads meet (competere) there, for exampleathree-way(trivia)andafour-way(quadrivia)junction.Asidewalk(ambitus)isatwo-and-a-half-footspace between the buildings of neighbors, left as an easement for the purpose of walking around the building, and so calledfrom‘walking’(ambulare).13.A‘rut’(orbita)isthe track of a cart, named for the circle (orbis) of its wheel. Likewise a ‘cart-way’ (actus) is where cattle are usually driven (agere, ppl. actus). A ‘mountain path’ (clivosum) is a winding road. ‘Footprints’ (vestigium) are the traces of the feet imprinted by the soles of those who went first, so called because by means of them the paths of those who have gone before are traced (investigare), that is, recognized.
 
Book XVI Stones and metals (De lapidibus et metallis)
 
 
i. Dust and dirt clods (De pulveribus et glebis terrae) 1. Dust (pulvis) is so named because it is driven (pellere) by the force (vis) of the wind, for it is carried on the breath of the wind, neither resisting nor able to stay put, as the Prophet says (Psalm 1:4): “Like the dust, which the wind driveth from the face of the earth.” 2. Mud (limus) is so named because it is soft (lenis). Mire (caenum) is a pit of filth. Cinders (cinis) are named from burning (incendium), for that is how they are made.1 Ashes (favilla), because they are made as a result of fire, for fire is W. 3. A clod (gleba) because it is a ball (globus), for it is compacted as a clump of dust, and unified into a single ball. Earth, then, that is joined together is a clod, and earth that is separated is dust. 4. Labina is named by derivation from ‘falling’ (labes) because it causes people to fall as they are walking. Some think that filth (lutum) is named using antiphrasis, because it is not clean, for everything that has been washed (lavare, ppl. lotus) is clean. 5. Wallowingplaces (volutabrum) are named because swine wallow (volutare) there. ‘Marshy ground’ (uligo) is a muck consisting of mud and water. Sabulum (i.e. a small coarse sand) is the lightest type of earth.
6. ‘White clay’ (argilla) is named from the Argives, who were the first to make vases from it. ‘Cretan earth’ (Creta, i.e. white potter’s clay) is named from Crete, where the better sort is found. Cimolia is white Cretan earth, named after the Italian island Cimea; one kind softens the precious colors of clothing and brightens cloth that has been darkened by sulfur, and another kind gives brightness to gemstones. ‘Silver’ Cretan earth (Creta argentaria, “silversmith’s whiting”), actually white, is so named because it restores the luster of silver. 7. ‘Samian earth’ (terra Samia) is named after
1	Throughout this book Isidore makes note of the various earthy minerals’ relationship to the four elements, especially fire and water.
2	Fumesofsulphurwereusedtobleachwool,partoftheprocessof preparing it, according to R. J. Forbes, Studies in Ancient Technology (Leiden, 1964).
317
the island of Samos; it is glutinous and white and soft on the tongue, indispensable for medicines and for making containers. 8. ‘Puteolan dust’ (pulvis Puteolanus, i.e. “pozzolana”) is collected in the hills near Puteoli in Italy and is positioned so as to restrain the sea and break the waves. When it is submerged in water, it immediately turns into stone and, made stronger by the daily waves, is turned into rock, just as white clay is turned to stone by fire.
9. Sulfur (sulphur) is so named because it is kindled with fire, for !N is “fire.” Thus its force can be felt even in boiling water, and no other material is ignited more easily.ItoriginatesbetweenSicilyandItalyintheAeolian islands, which people say are on fire. It is also found by excavation in other places. 10. There are four kinds of sulfur. The ‘living’ kind, which is dug up, is translucent and green; physicians use it alone of all the kinds of sulfur. The second kind, which people call ‘lump sulfur’ (i.e. fuller’s earth), is used only by fullers. The third kind is ‘liquid’; it is used for fumigating wool because it gives whiteness and softness.2 The fourth kind is particularly suitableforpreparinglamp-wicks.Thepowerofsulfuris so great that it cures the ‘comitial sickness’ (see IV.vii.7) through its vapor when it is set on the fire and burns. Whenapersonputssulfurinagobletofwineandcarries it around with hot coals beneath he glows with the eerie pallor of a corpse from the reflection of the blaze.
ii. Earthy materials derived from water (De glebis ex aqua) 1. Bitumen (bitumen) comes forth in the lake Asphaltites (i.e. the Dead Sea) in Judea; sailors in skiffs collect floating clumps of it as they draw near. In Syria it is a mud that boils up from the earth in various places. Both kinds are compacted and combine into a dense mass, and the Greeks call both !   (i.e. a compound of asphalt and pitch). Its nature is burning andrelatedtofire,anditcannotbesplitbywateroriron, but only by female impurities (i.e. menses; see XI.i.141). Itisusefulforcaulkingships.2.Alum(alumen)isnamed from ‘light’ (lumen), because it furnishes brightness to
 
XVI.ii.3–iii.2
cloth being dyed. It is a salt-like substance of the earth, and is made during the winter from water and mud, and matured by the summer sun. There are two forms of alum: liquid and condensed.
3.Somepeoplethinkthatsalt(sal)issonamedbecause it springs out (exsilire) when cast into fire, for it flees the fire whenever it is set alight, but this is according to its nature, since fire and water are always hostile to each other. Others think that salt is named from the ocean (salum) and the sun (sol), since it is generated spontaneously by seawater as foam deposited on the edges of the seashore or cliffs and evaporated by the sun. There arealsolakesandriversandwellsfromwhichitisdrawn. From there it is heaped up in salt pits, and dried by the sun; but rivers are also thickened into salt, when the rest of the water flows under the ice.3 Elsewhere it is collected by removing sand on nights when the moon is waxing; for in Cyrene, rock salt ([h]ammoniacus) is found beneath the sand. There are even mountains of natural salt, where it may be mined with tools, like minerals, and reappears in still greater quantity. In some places it is so hard that people make walls and houses out of masses of salt, as in Arabia. 4. Various salts also differ in their natural properties, for in one place it is mild, in another excessively salty. Common salt crackles in fire; Tragasean salt does not crackle in fire or leap out; Agrigentian salt from Sicily, although enduring flame, leaps out of water, and, contrary to nature, flows when it is in the fire. 5. There are also differences in color. Memphis salt is red; in the part of Sicily near Etna it is purple, while in that same Sicily, in Pachynum, it is so bright and glistening that it casts reflections; in Cappadocia saffron-colored salt is mined. 6. Salt (sal) by its nature is necessary for all food. It gives savor to relishes, it excites hunger, and it arouses an appetite for all foods. Indeed all enjoyment of food and the greatest cheerfulness comes from salt. Hence health (salus) is thought to take its name, for nothing is better for us than salt (sal) and sun – in fact, we see that the bodies of sailors are well-hardened. And even livestock, flocks, and beasts of burden are called to pasture particularly with salt, and are more productive of milk and more obliging at giving cheese. Salt tightens bodies; it dries and binds them. It preserves corpses from falling into putrefaction so that they last.
7. Natron (nitrum) takes its name from a place, for it is found in Nitria, a town or region of Egypt; from this material medicines are made and dirty clothes and bodies are washed. Its nature is not so different from salt, for it has the strength of salt and similarly occurs at shorelines that grow white as they dry out. 8. The Greek term aphronitrum is ‘foam of natron,’ spuma nitri in Latin. Concerning this a certain poet says (Martial, Epigrams 14.58):
Are you a bumpkin? You don’t know what my Greek name is. I am called ‘foam of natron.’ Are you Greek? It is aphronitrum.
It is gathered in Asia where it distills in caves; from there it is dried in the sun. It is thought to be best if it has as little weight and is as easily crumbled as possible, and is almost purple in color. 9. Chalcantum is named because it is the thyme (thymum, cf. O , “bloom”), that is, the ‘bloom,’ of ‘copper pyrites’ (chalcitis), whence among Latin speakers it is called ‘copper bloom.’ It is made now in many regions: at one time, in Spain, it was made in wells or pools having that kind of water, which they boileddownandpouredintowoodenvats,hangingover them cords kept taut with stones. A mud-like substance would adhere to the cords in the form of glassy berries, and thus precipitated it would be dried for thirty days. 10. But it is now produced elsewhere in caves, because, having collected as a liquid, it drips down there and solidifies into ‘grape clusters.’ It also occurs in hollow trenches, from whose sides the hanging drops coalesce; it is also made, like salt, under the most blazing sun. Its power is so concentrated that, when sprinkled into the mouths of lions and bears, they are unable to bite because of its astringent force.
iii. Common stones (De lapidus vulgaribus) 1. A
‘stone’ is generally differentiated from an ‘earth’ inasmuch as it is denser. And it is called stone (lapis) because it hurts (laedere) the foot (pes). Stones are smooth and dispersed; while rocks (saxum) cling together and are split from the mountains. Petra (i.e. another word for ‘rock’) is a Greek word. Flint (silex) is a hard stone, so named because fire is said to leap out (exsilire) from it. 2. A crag (scopulus) of projecting rock is so called as if from
‘looking out’ (speculari), or from the sheltering of ships,
3 Isidore’ssource,Pliny,NaturalHistory31.75,saysthatthesurface of the river condenses into salt, with the rest of the river flowing “as if under ice.”
 
The Etymologies	XVI.iii.3–iv.3
 
from the term B! (“to shelter”). The Greek word !  is ‘cave,’ spelunca in Latin. It is a hollow place in a cliff. 3. Crepido (i.e. a projection, promontory) is a broken-off extremity of rock, whence a height of sheer rock is called crepido, as in (Vergil, Aen. 10.361):
Foot (pes) presses close against foot.4
Cautes are sharp rocks in the sea, named from the need tobewaryofthem,asiftheywere‘watchedoutfor’(cautus). A murex (i.e. a pointed rock, lit. a prickly shellfish) isarockontheshoresimilartothelivingmurex;theyare extremely sharp and dangerous for ships. 4. An icon is a rock that, by capturing the sound of the human voice, imitates the words of someone speaking.5 It is icon in Greek and ‘image’ (imago) in Latin, because an image of someone else’s speech is produced in response to one’s voice. However, this may also be the effect of the nature of some locales, especially valleys.
5. A pebble is a small stone mingled with the earth, round and very hard, and very smooth due to its complete purity. And it is called ‘pebble’ (calculus) because it is‘trodon’(calcare)withoutgivinganytroubleduetoits small size. Its opposite is the scrupus, a small sharp stone that causes injury and troubles the mind if it should fall into one’s shoe. For this reason we call something that is a trouble to the mind a ‘scruple’ (scrupulus); hence also ‘pointed’ (scrupeus) stones, that is, sharp ones. 6. The whetstone (cos, gen. cotis; lit. “sharp rock” a variant form of cautes above) takes its name because it sharpens (acuere) a blade for cutting, for in the Greek language ‘cutting’ is called cotis.6 Some whetstones require water for sharpening and others oil, but oil makes the edge smooth, while water renders it extremely sharp. 7. Pumice (pumex) is so named because it has solidified with the density of foam (spuma), and it is dry, with little luster, and possessing so great a quality of cooling that when it is placed in a vat new wine stops bubbling.
8. Workmen call stones that are crushed and mixed with limestone rudus (lit. “rubble”). These stones are
4	Isidore’s definition of crepido is drawn from Servius’s comment on Aen. 10.653, which contains the words crepidine saxi. In his comment Servius also discusses, in another connection, Aen. 10.361. Isidore by mistake quotes the latter verse instead of the former.
5	Pliny, the source of much of Isidore’s discussion of minerals, speaks of this rock as echo, not icon.
6	The word cotis appears to be a scribal corruption, probably of  !, cutting.
poured out in making pavement, whence they are called rudus(cf.rudis,“coarse”).9.Gypsum(gypsum)isrelated to limestone; it is a Greek term (i.e. 4 ). There are many varieties, and the best of all is from specularis lapis (i.e. a kind of transparent stone). It is most pleasing for the molded figures and cornices of buildings. 10. Limestone (calx) is said to be alive, because even when it has become cold to the touch it still retains some fire concealed inside, so that when water is poured on it the hiddenfireburstsforth.Ithasthismarvelouscharacteristic: once it has been set on fire, it burns in water, which usually extinguishes fire, and it is extinguished in oil, which usually kindles fire. Its use is essential in the practice of architecture, for one stone does not cling firmly to another unless they are joined by limestone. Limestone from hard white stone is better for construction; from soft stone it is better for plastering. 11. Sand (arena, i.e. harena) is named from ‘dryness’ (ariditas), not from ‘cementing’(adhaerere)buildingmaterials,assomepeople would have it. The test of its quality is if it grates when squeezed in one’s hand, or if it leaves behind no stain when sprinkled on white cloth.
iv. More important stones (De lapidus insignioribus) 1. The magnet (magnes) is a stone of India, named after its discoverer, for it was first found in India, clinging to the nails of his sandals and the point of his staff, when a certain Magnes was grazing his herds. Afterwards it was found in various places. Its color is like iron, but it is identified by test when, set next to iron, it grabs the iron.Itclingstoironsofirmlythatitwillmakeachainof finger-rings;forthisreasoncommonpeoplecallit‘living iron.’2.Itisalsobelievedtoattractmoltenglassasitdoes iron. Its force is so great that the most blessed Augustine reports (City of God 21.4) that someone held this magnetic stone beneath a silver dish, and then placed a piece of iron on the silver, and then, by moving the magnetic stoneunderneathwithhishand,immediatelymovedthe iron above. Hence it happens that in a certain temple an ironcult-statueseemstohangintheair.Thereisanother magnet stone in Ethiopia that repels and rejects all iron. The deeper blue a magnet stone, the better it is.
3. Jet (gagates) is a stone first discovered in Sicily, cast out from the waters of the river Gagatis, whence it is named,althoughitismoreplentifulinBritain.Itisblack, flat,andsmooth,andburnswhenmovedneartoaflame. The inscriptions it makes on earthenware are indelible.
 
XVI.iv.4–iv.22
It drives away snakes when it is burned. It reveals those whoarepossessedbydemons,anditsignalsthepresence of virginity, and, amazingly, it is set alight by water and extinguished by oil. 4. Asbestos7 is a stone from Arcadia, the color of iron; it was assigned its name from ‘fire’ because once set alight it is never extinguished. From this stone human art constructed a certain device that pagans, deceived by sacrilege, would marvel at. In short, there was a shrine of Venus in a certain temple precinct, and there was a candelabrum there with a lamp upon it burning in the open air in such a way that no storm or tempest could extinguish it. 5. Pyrite (pyrites) is a yellow Persian stone that mimics the qualities of bronze; it has a great deal of fire in it inasmuch as it gives off sparks easily. It burns the hand of anyone holding it if he squeezes it tightly. For this reason it takes its name from ‘fire’ (cf. !N). There is another, common, pyrite, which people call ‘living stone.’ It gives off sparks when struck by iron or by stone. These sparks may be caught by sulfur or various fungi or leaves, and it starts a fire quicker than one can speak. Common people call this the ‘hearth rock.’
6. Selenite (selenites) is translated into Latin as ‘lunar stone,’ because people say its interior glow waxes and wanes with the moon (cf. , ‘moon’). It comes fromPersia.7.Dionysiusisadarkstonespeckledwithred spots. It is named thus because if it is ground and mixed with water it smells like wine, and, what is marvelous aboutit,itfightsoffdrunkenness.8.Thraciusisblackand resonant;itoriginatesintheriverinEquitiawhosename is Pontus. 9. The stone Phrygius takes its name from the place, for it originates in Phrygia. It has a pale color and is moderately heavy. It has a porous composition. After havingfirstbeendrenchedwithwineandblownonwith bellows,itisburneduntilitturnsredandisextinguished again with sweet wine three times in succession, so that it is useful for dying cloth. 10. Syrius stone is named after Syria, where it is found. It is said to be buoyant when it is whole, and to sink when it is broken up.
11. Arabicus is similar to ivory without any marks. When rubbed on a whetstone it gives off a liquid of a saffron color. 12. The Iudaicus stone is white and shaped like an acorn; it has evenly-spaced lines, one under the next, that the Greeks call  (“line”). 13. The stone Samius is named after the island Samos where it is found; it is heavy and white, and useful for polishing gold. 14. Memphitis is named from a place in Egypt (i.e.
Memphis); it has the nature of a gem. When ground and mixed with vinegar and smeared on those parts of the body that have to be burned or cut it makes them so numb that they do not feel pain. 15. Sarcophagus stone is so named because within forty days it consumes the body of a deceased person placed in it, for   in Greek means “funerary ark” and @ is “to eat” (see VIII.xi.85 and cf. XV.xi.2). It originates in the region of Troy, and is easily split along a line of cleavage. In the East there are rocks of the same kind, which eat away the body when bound even to living people. 16. Haematite (haematites), gentler in that it preserves rather than corrodes the body, is so named because when ground by a whetstone it turns the color of blood (cf. T, ‘blood’). It is otherwise a dark bluish color; also purplish. It comes from the far reaches of Egypt, from Babylonia, and from Spain.
17.Androdamantusisblackincolor,notedforitsheaviness and hardness, whence it takes its name (cf. O" ";, “subdue men”; ", “adamant”). It is chiefly found in Africa. It is said to attract silver and bronze to itself, and, like haematite, it turns the color of blood when ground up. 18. Schistos is found in the far reaches of Spain; it is similar to saffron in color, with a light gleam, and is easily broken. 19. Amiantos (i.e. asbestos) was so named by the ancients because, if cloth was made from it, the cloth resisted fire, and even when placed in the fire did not burn, but acquired a radiant glow. It is similar to split alum, resistant to all poisons, especially those of magicians. 20. Batrachites is easily split into layers, like a potsherd. Galactites is ashy in color and pleasant to the taste; it is so named because when it is ground up it emits a milky substance (cf. , gen.   , “milk”). 21. Obsidian (opsius) is a black translucent stone with a resemblance to glass. It is used as mirrors on walls, to reflect shadowy images. Many people make gems from it. It originates in India and in Samnium in Italy. Mithridax is a stone from the Euphrates that sparkles with various colors when struck by the sun.
22. Aetites are stones found in the nests of eagles (cf.  , ‘eagle’). People say that they are found in pairs, male and female, and that eagles do not reproduce without them. The masculine is hard, like the gall-nut, and
7 Asbestos here is not the mineral we call asbestos (see section 19 below). The Greek term O   means “unquenchable.”
 
The Etymologies	XVI.iv.23–v.12
 
ruddy, while the feminine is small and soft. When these stones are joined together they speed the birth process, and even on some occasions remove part of the womb, unless they are quickly taken away from those giving birth. 23. Phengites is a Cappadocian stone, hard like marble, white and translucent. A temple was once built out of it by a certain king; it had golden doors and when they were closed it was as bright as day inside. 24. Chemites is similar to ivory. They say Darius was buried in it; it is like Parian marble in whiteness and hardness, but much less heavy. It is termed ‘porous.’ 25. Ostracitesissocalledbecauseitresemblesapotsherd(cf. d  , “potsherd”); it is used in place of pumice. 26. The stone melanites is so called because it exudes a sweet honeyed (melleus) fluid. 27. The stone emery (smyris) is rough and imperviousand abrades everything; gems are ground with this stone. 28. Chrysites, similar to ocher in color, is found in Egypt. 29. Hammites is similar to natron, but harder; it originates in Egypt and in Arabia.
30. Thyites comes from Ethiopia; it is greenish, but milky when ground, and extremely biting. 31. Coranus is white and harder than Parian marble. 32. Molotius, greenish and heavy, is found in Egypt. 33. Tusculanus, named for the place in Italy, is said to be shattered by fire. 34. Sabinus, which is dark, becomes bright when oil is added to it, according to report. There is also a certaingreenSabinusstoneextremelyresistanttofire.35. Siphnius is soft and white. When heated with oil it turns black and grows hard. 36. Stones may also be suitable for physicians’ mortars and for pigments; etesius especially, andthenchalazius,butthebaicusandbasanitesarestones that yield nothing of themselves. 37. Transparent stone (specularis, i.e. used for windows) is so named because it is translucent like glass. It was first discovered in the nearer part of Spain, around the city of Segorbe. It is found underground and is cut once it is dug out, and split into as fine a sheet as you like.
v. Marble(Demarmoribus) 1.Afterthetypesofstones we shall come to marble. There is a difference between stone and marble; exceptional stones that are prized for their markings and colors are called ‘marble.’ Marble (marmor) is a Greek word (i.e.  , and cf. 7 , “gleam, sparkle”) so named from ‘greenness,’ and although the other colors were discovered later,
8 Alabastrites is not the more common modern alabaster, a form of gypsum (calcium sulfate), but a carbonate of lime.
people continued to use the original name from the idea of greenness. 2. The colors and kinds of marble are beyond counting. Not all are quarried from rock, but many are scattered beneath the ground, including the most precious kinds, such as green Lacedaemonian, the most delightful of all, first discovered by the Lacedaemonians;henceitsname.3.Ophite (ophites)has markings similar to a snake’s, whence it takes its name (cf. d, “snake”). Two kinds occur: a soft white kind andahardblackkind.4.AugusteanandTiberianmarble were first found in Egypt during the reigns of Augustus and of Tiberius. They are different from ophite in that ophite, as we said above, has markings like a snake, whilethesehavemarkingscombinedinadifferentway– for Augustean markings are undulating and curled into whorls, while Tiberian are of gray that is spotty and not swirled.
5.Porphyry(porphyrites)inEgyptisreddishwithscatteredwhitespots.Thereasonforitsnameisthatitisred, like the color of shell-fish dye (purpura; cf. !  , “purple”).6.Basaniteshasthecolorandhardnessofiron, whence this name is given to it (cf.  , “touchstone”). It is found in Egypt and Ethiopia. 7. Alabastrites is a white stone, tinted here and there with various colors.8 The ointment box spoken of by the Evangelist himselfwasmadeoutofalabastrites(Luke7:37),forpeople hollow out this stone for ointment vessels because it is said to be the best material for preserving ointments unspoiled. Particularly white alabaster originates around Thebes in Egypt and Damascus in Syria, but the highest quality comes from India. 8. Parian marble, also called lygdinus, is exceptionally white. It originates on the island Paros, whence it is called Parian. Its size is no larger than that of plates and wine bowls, and it is well suited for unguents. 9. Coralliticus is found in Asia, measuring not more than two cubits, close to ivory in its whiteness and a certain similar appearance. On the other hand, alabandicus is black, and is called by the name of its land. It is purplish in appearance. In the East this stone is melted by fire and cast to function like glass.
10. Thebaicus marble, spotted with golden drops, is found in a region assigned to Egypt. It is suited by a kind of natural utility to be used for small mortars for the grinding of eye-salves. 11. Syenites originates around Syene or Thebes. Kings made building beams from it. 12. There are also marbles that originate in quarries and cliffs. Among these, Thasian is distinguished by its spots
 
XVI.v.13–vii.8
ofvariouscolors;itwasfirstusedontheCycladesislands. 13. Lesbian marble is slightly more bluish than Thasian, butalsohasspotsofvariouscolors.14.Corinthianissimilartodropsofammoniacgumwithavarietyofdifferent colors. It was first found in Corinth. Huge columns and lintels and beams are made from it. 15. Caristean marble is green, and excellent. It takes its name from its appearance, because it is soothing (gratus; perhaps cf. 9, “grace”) to gem-carvers since its color refreshes the eye.
16. Numidia exports Numidian marble. At its surface it releases a moisture colored like saffron, whence it takes its name (perhaps cf. , “yellow water-lily”; , “water”). It is fit for use as blocks and lintels, but not for inlaid panels. 17. Lucullean marble comes from the island of Melos. The consul Lucullus, who was delighted with it and first brought it to Rome, provided it its name. It is almost the only marble to take its name from an admirer. 18. There is also a marble called Lunensis. (i.e. Carrara marble). Tephrias is named from the color of ashes (cf.  B, “ashes”). This stone is praised as a protection against serpents when it is worn bound on. 19. Ivory (ebur) is named after the barrus, that is, the elephant. Horace (Epodes 12.1) says:
Woman most deserving of black elephants (barrus), what do you mean?
vi.	Gems (De gemmis) 1. After the types of marble, we proceedtogems.Theyaddgreatbeautytogoldwiththeir loveliness of color. Their origins are in the Caucasian cliffs. Legend claims that Prometheus first enclosed a pieceofgemstoneinironandencircledhisfingerwithit; fromthesebeginningsringsandgemstonesoriginated.2. Therearesaidtobeinnumerablekindsofgems.Ofthese we have noted only the principal or most famous ones. Gems (gemma) are so called because they are translucent like resin (gummi). They are called precious stones because they are valued dearly, or because they can be distinguishedfrombasestones,orbecausetheyarerare– for everything that is rare is called great and precious, as may be read in the book of Samuel (cf. I Kings 3:1 Vulgate): “And the word of the Lord was precious in
Israel”; that is, it was rare.
vii.	Green gems (De viridioribus gemmis) 1. Of all greengems,thesmaragdus(i.e.emeralds,etc.)holdspreeminence. The ancients assigned it third place in value after the pearl and the unio (i.e. a type of pearl, see x.1 below).Thesmaragdusisnamedfromitsextremegreenness, for everything that is very green is called ‘bitter’ (amarus). No gem or plant possesses greater intensity than the smaragdus; it exceeds green plants and leaves and imbues the reflected air around it with greenness. Nothing is more soothing to the eyes of gem cutters than this refreshing green. If its surface is broad, it reflects images like a mirror. Indeed the Emperor Nero used to watch gladiator matches using a smaragdus. 2. There are twelve kinds of smaragdus: the Scythian smaragdus, found among the Scythian people, is the noblest. The Bactrian smaragdus holds second place; they are gathered in seams of rock when the north wind blows, for at that time they glitter in the ground, which is uncovered because the sands are shifted a great deal by these winds. Egyptian smaragdi hold third place. The rest are foundincoppermines,buttheyareflawed,fortheyhave markings like bronze or lead or hair-line streaks or salt. Smaragdi improve with undiluted wine and green oil, however much they have been naturally stained.
3. Chalcosmaragdos is so named because it is green and mottled with copper veins (cf. 9, “copper”). It originates in Egypt and the island of Cyprus. 4. Prasius is named for its green color (cf. !E", “leekgreen”), but it is a base stone. Another variety of it is marred by blood-like spots. A third variety is distinguished by its three white lines. 5. Beryl (beryllus) originates in India, deriving its name from the language of the people of India. It is similar to a smaragdus in its greenness, but with a pale color. The Indians cut it into hexagonal shapes, so that its dull color is enhanced by the reflections of the faces; if cut in another way, it has nogleam.Thereareninevarieties.6.Chrysoberyllusisso named because its pale greenness glitters with a golden gleam (cf. 9 , “golden”). India is also the source for this gem. 7. Chrysoprase (Chrysoprasus) is an Indian stone, with a color . . . recalling that of the sap of a leek, with intervening gold spots, whence it took its name (cf. 9,“gold”; ! ,“leek”).9 Somepeoplehave considered it as a type of beryl.
8. Jasper (iaspis) is translated from the Greek into Latin as “green gem,” for ias means “green” and pinasin
9 A lacuna here in the early manuscripts may be filled with the reading of the source in Pliny: “with a rather yellow-green color,
recalling that of the sap of a leek.”
 
means“gem.”10 Itissomewhatlikeasmaragdus,butwith a dull color. There are seventeen varieties. Some people think the gemstone jasper provides good fortune and protection to pregnant women – but this belief belongs not to faith but to superstition. 9. Topazion is one of the green kinds of gem, and glitters with all colors. It was first found in an island of Arabia, where Troglodyte bandits, worn out by hunger and storms, unearthed it when they dug out the roots of plants. When it was sought afterward, this island was covered with clouds, but was finallyfoundbysailors.Itisfromthisthatbothplace(i.e. the island Topazus in the Red Sea) and gem took their name; for in the Troglodyte language   !; has the meaning “seek” (cf. Greek   !;, “seek”). This is the most abundant gemstone; it alone of the precious stones is subjected to the polishing file. There are two kinds. 10. Callaica is green in color, but pale and exceedingly cloudy. Nothing more pleasantly beautifies (cf.  , “beauty”)gold,whenceitisnamed.ItoriginatesinIndia and Germany in icy cliffs, and it sticks out like eyes.
11. Malachite (molochites), more densely green and duller than a smaragdus, takes its name from the color of themallow(malva),andisvaluedforthesealsitmakes.It originates in Arabia. 12. Heliotrope (heliotropia) is green in color and cloudy; it is strewn with reddish stars and hasblood-coloredveins.Thereasonforthisstone’sname is from its effect, for when it is thrown into a bronze basin it changes the rays of the sun with a blood-colored reflection (cf. a , “sun”;   !, “change”), but when out of the water it receives sunlight like a mirror, and reveals an eclipse of the sun by showing the advancing moon.Thisstonealsoprovidesamostblatantexampleof the shamelessness of magicians, because they claim that someone carrying an herb blended with a heliotrope, once certain spells have been cast, cannot be seen. It originatesinCyprusandAfrica,butthebetterheliotrope is from Ethiopia.
13. Sagda is a gem with a leek-green color, found among the Chaldeans. It has such power that from the ocean depths it seeks passing ships, and clings so tenaciouslytothehullsthatitcanhardlyberemovedwithout scrapingawaypartofthewood.14.Myrrhitesissonamed because it has the color of myrrh. When it is compressed until it becomes warm it exudes the sweet smell of nard.
10 InfacttheGreekwordforthestone,:!,isitselfaborrowing from a Semitic language and not a compound.
XVI.vii.9–viii.6
Aromatitis is found in Arabia and Egypt; it has the color and scent of myrrh, whence it takes its name (cf. aroma, “spice”). 15. Melichros is two-colored; one part being green and the other like honey (mel). 16. Choaspitis is named from a Persian river (i.e. the Choaspes, presentday Karkheh) and has a greenish-gold gleam.
viii. Red gems (De rubris gemmis) 1. Coral is formed in the sea and has a branching shape. It has a greenish color, but is mostly red. Its ‘berries’ are white and soft while underwater; once they are taken out they immediatelyhardenandturnred,andquicklybecomestone-like to the touch. Coral is usually caught and pulled out in nets, or cut out with a sharp (acer) knife, whence it is called ‘coral’ (corallius; cf.  N , “loppings”). Coral is as priceless in India as Indian pearls are among us here. Magiciansclaimthatcoralcanrepellightning,ifthismay be believed. 2. Carnelian (sardius) is so named because it was first found by the Sardinians. It has a red color superior to marble, but among gems it is quite base. There are five kinds of carnelian. 3. Onyx (onyx) is so named because it possesses a white layer mixed in it that is similar to the human nail. For the Greeks call the nail d?. India and Arabia produce these gems, but the two types are distinct from each other, for Indian onyx has sparkles in white encircling bands, while Arabian onyx is black with white bands. There are five kinds of onyx.
4. Sardonyx is so called from a combination of two names, from the luster of onyx and from carnelian (sardius). It consists of three colors; the base is black, the middle is white and the upper layer is cinnabar-red. Only this stone removes none of the wax when making a seal. It is found in India and Arabia when it is uncovered by rushing water. There are five kinds of sardonyx. 5. Haematite (haematites) is blood-red, and is so called for that reason, since the word T means “blood.” The chief type occurs in Ethiopia, but is also found in Arabia and in Africa. In regard to haematite magicians make some promise about its revealing any ambushes of the barbarians.
6. Amber (sucinus), which the Greeks call e  , has the color of tawny wax, and is said to be the sap (sucus) of trees, and for the reason is called ‘amber.’ An explanation taken from myth has led it to being called electrum, for the story goes that when Phaethon was killed by a bolt of lightning, his sisters, in their grief, were turned into poplar trees, and they exude amber
 
XVI.viii.7–x.7
(electrum) as tears, year in and out, by the river Eridanus (i.e. the Po); and it is called electrum because many poets saidthesunusedtobecalledElector(the‘ShiningOne’). But in fact amber is not the sap of the poplar tree but of the pine tree, for when it is burned it gives off the fragrance of pine pitch. 7. It is formed in the islands of the northern Ocean as pine gum, and is solidified like crystal by the cold or by the passage of time. It is used to make beautiful necklaces that are popular with rural women. But some people call it harpaga (lit. “hook”) because,onceithasreceivedthespiritofheatfrombeing rubbed with the fingers, it attracts leaves and chaff and the fringes of clothing just as a magnet attracts iron. It may be colored in whatever manner you like, for it may be dyed by ox-tongue root and by purple shell-fish dye. 8. The lyncurius is so named because it is formed from lynx urine that has hardened with time. Like amber, it is yellow, and it attracts nearby leaves with its spirit.
ix. Purple gems (De purpureis) 1. Among the purple gems Indian amethyst holds the place of honor. Amethyst (amethystus) is purple with a violet color mixed in; its brilliance is like that of a rose, and it gently gives out a sort of little flame. Another type of amethyst holds a lower place, down to that of the hyacinth-stone. People assert that the reason for its name is that there is something not entirely fire-like in its purple, but that it possesses rather the color of wine (cf. B, “wine”). Amethyst is easily carved. There are five kinds. 2. The sapphire(sapphirus)isbluewithpurple,possessingscattered gold flecks; the finest sapphires are found among the Medes, although sapphires are nowhere truly clear. 3. The hyacinth-stone (iacinthus, probably a sapphire) is named after the flower called hyacinth. It is found in Ethiopia and has a blue color. The finest hyacinth-stone is neither clear nor dulled with opacity but glows and shines purple from both qualities, although this stone is not consistent in its color. In fair weather it is clear and pleasing, while in cloudy weather it loses its strength and fades before one’s eyes. When put into the mouth, it is freezing cold. It is very hard to carve, although it is not completely unworkable for it can be incised and engraved with a diamond.
4.	Iacinthizonta is from India, and closely resembles the hyacinth-stone. Certain crystals of these, similar to iacinthus, are discolored by crisscrossing veins, and from this flaw comes their name (cf. ;E, “stripe”).
5.	Amethystizontas is so named because the sparkle on its surface ranges towards the violet color of amethyst. 6. Chelidonia is named after the color of a swallow (cf. 9"E,“swallow”).Therearetwokinds:oneofthemis purple on one side, and the other purple with scattered black spots. 7. Cyanea (i.e. a type of lapus lazuli) is a gem from Scythia glittering with a blue sheen, either pure blue, or sometimes varied with flecks of flickering gold. 8. Rhoditis is rosy, and takes its name from this quality (cf. G" , “rose”).
x. White gems (De candidis) 1. The pearl is the most excellent of the white gems. People say it is called a pearl (margarita) because this kind of stone is found in shellfishfromthesea(mare),foritconsistsofapebbleformed in the flesh of a shellfish, like the little stone in the brain of a fish (see section 8 below). It is made from celestial dew, which shellfish absorb at a certain season of the year. A certain pearl is called a unio, an apt name because only one (unus) is found at a time, never two or more. White pearls are preferable to those that are yellow. Youth, or the reception of morning dew, makes pearls white; old age, or evening air, produces dark ones. 2. The opal (paederos) holds second place among the white gems, after the pearl. One may ask of this gem under what color it should be classified, given that its name is applied to other sorts of beauty so frequently that it has become merely a term that promises beauty. 3. Asterites is white and contains a light enclosed within it like a star floating about inside. It reflects white rays of sunlight, whence it finds its name (cf.  , “star, flame”).
4. Galactitis is milky (cf. , gen.   , “milk”); when rubbed it gives off a white fluid tasting of milk. When tied onto nursing women it makes their breasts productive. It is also said to make an infant’s mouthwaterwhenitishungarounditsneck.Itbecomes liquid in the mouth and obliterates memory. The rivers Nile and Achelous yield this stone. Some people call a smaragdus banded with white veins a galactitis. 5. Chalazias has the shape and whiteness of a hailstone (cf. 9;, “hail”); it is also invincibly hard, like a diamond. Even when placed on the fire it retains its coldness. 6. Solis is a white gem, and has this name because it casts its rays in the form of the sun (sol) shining on the world. 7. Selenite (selenitis) is translucent with a whitish honey-like gleam; it contains the image of the moon (cf.
 
, “moon”). People claim that it wanes and waxes on particular days, according to the course of that celestial body. It originates in Persia.
8.Cinaediaisfoundinthebrainofafishwiththesame name; it is white and oblong. People say that with it they predict calm or storm at sea. 9. Cat’s-eye (beli oculus) is whitesurroundingablackpupillitfromthemiddlewith a golden gleam. Because of its beauty it was dedicated to Belus, king of Assyria, and thus it is named. 10. A white gem is called epimelas when it turns black on the surface, whence it takes its name (cf. !, “upon”; B, “black”). 11. Exebenus is brilliant and white; goldsmiths use it to polish gold.
xi.	Black gems (De nigris) 1. Agate (achates) was first found in Sicily, near the river of the same name, and afterwardsinmanylands.Itisblackandhasinitsmiddle black and white circles, joined together and variegated, like haemitite. With the fumes of agates magicians, if it may be credited, ward off storms and halt the flow of rivers. 2. Apsyctos is black and heavy, and marked with red veins. When heated by fire, this stone retains the warmth for seven days. 3. Aegyptilla, which is black at the base and blue on the surface, is named after Egypt, where it is found. 4. Media is black, and was discovered by the legendary Medea. It has veins the color of bronze. It gives off saffron-colored moisture and has the flavor of wine.
5.VeientanaisanItaliangemstone,foundinVeii(i.e.a city in Etruria). It is black on the surface with glittering white spots mingled in it. Bariptos (i.e. baroptenus) is black with blood red and white spots. 6. Mesomelas is black with a vein of any other color streaking through its middle (cf. B , “in the middle”; B, “black”). The Veneriscrinis(lit.“hairofVenus”)hastheblackestsheen, and has the appearance of red hairs in it. 7. Trichrus, from Africa, is black, but gives off three liquids; black from the base, blood red from the middle, and yellow from the surface. 8. Dionysia is black with mingled red spots. When rubbed with water it smells of wine, and its fragrance is thought to ward off drunkenness. Pyritis, indeed, is black, but it scorches the fingers when it is rubbed against them.
xii.	Varicolored gems (De variis) 1. Panchrus is a variegated stone exhibiting almost all the colors, hence its name (cf. !Y, “all”; 9E, “color”). Olca (i.e. oica),
XVI.x.8–xiii.2
which has a barbarian name, is yellow, black, green and white. 2. Mithridax (i.e. mithrax) glitters in various colors when it is struck by sunlight. It comes from Persia. Drosolithus is a variegated gem. The reason for its name is that if it is placed near the fire it emits something like sweat (cf. " , “sweat”;  , “stone”). 3. The opal (opalus) is embellished by the colors of various gemstones, for it has the rather pale fire of a carbuncle, the sparkling purple of an amethyst, and the glittering green of a smaragdus, all glowing together with a certain variegation. It takes its name from the language of its native land (cf. Sanskrit upala, “gem”), for only India produces it. 4. Pontica stones are named after the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), and come in different varieties, at one time glittering with blood red spots, at another with gold spots. Some have stars and some are streaked with long lines of color. 5. Hexecontalithos is a multicolored stone of a small size, whence it has taken this name for itself, for it is sprinkled with such a variety of spots that the colors of sixty gemstones are contained in its small orb (cf. K? , “sixty”;  , “stone”). It occurs in Libya among the Troglodytes. 6. Murra (murrina) is found in Parthia, but especially in Carmania. People think that it is a liquid that has been compressed by the heat under the earth, whence it takes its name. Its varieties occur in purple and white, and it has a fiery look, with reflections of colors such as are seen in a rainbow. Crystal is created by the opposite principle, when there is an extremely strong freezing of ice.
xiii.	Crystallinegems(Decrystallinis) 1.Crystal(crystallus) is glittering and watery in color. It is said to be snow that has hardened to ice over a period of years, whence the Greeks gave it its name (cf.   , “ice”). It occurs in Asia and Cyprus, and particularly in the northern part of the Alps, where the sun never has its most burning heat, not even in summer. Hence the lengthy and enduring hardness itself produces the specific form that is called ‘crystal.’ When crystal is placed facing the sun’s rays it seizes the flame so that it sets fire to dried fungus or leaves. It is used for cups, although it can handle only cold liquids.
2. The diamond (adamans, i.e. adamas) is a small unsightly stone from India, possessing a rust-like color and the clarity of crystal. It is never found any larger than a hazelnut. It yields to no substance, neither to iron nor to fire, nor does it ever grow warm, whence it takes
 
XVI.xii.3–xiv.10
its name, which is translated from Greek as ‘unconquerable force’ (cf. - privative + ";, “conquer”). But although it is invulnerable to iron and disdainful of fire, it may be split after it has been soaked in warm fresh goat’s blood, and thus shattered by many blows from an iron tool. Gem carvers use fragments of diamond for engraving and perforating gemstones. 3. It is so opposed to the magnet that when it is placed near iron it does not allow the iron to be drawn off by the magnet, and if the magnet is moved and grabs the iron, then the diamond seizes it back and carries it off. Like amber, it is said to ward off poison, drive away vain fears, and resist malicious witchery. 4. There are six kinds of diamond.
Chalazias (i.e. chalazius) possesses the whiteness and shapeofahailstone(cf. 9;,“hail”)andadiamondlike hardness. Even when placed in the fire it retains its coldness.5.Cerauniumhastwokinds.One,whichcomes from Germania, is like a crystal but is transparent blue, and if placed below the open sky it catches the gleam of the stars. The second ceraunium occurs in Hispania on the Lusitanian shore. It has the color of reddish bronze, andaqualitylikefire.Itissaidtobegoodagainsttheforce of lightning, if we may believe it. It is named ceraunium because it is not found anywhere but in a place very close to where a lightning-bolt has struck – for in Greek a lightning-bolt is called . 6. The iris crystal is found in Arabia in the Red Sea. It is the color of crystal, with six sides. It is called iris (lit. “rainbow”) by analogy, for if it is struck by sunlight while indoors it recreates on the walls nearby the shape and colors of the rainbow.
7. Astrion, quite close to crystal, is from India, and in its center a star shines with the gleam of a full moon. It takes its name because when held facing the stars it catches their gleam and casts it back (cf.  , “star”). 8. Electria, as if the word were alectoria, for it is found in the stomachs of poultry (cf. B A, “cock”). It has the appearance of a crystal and the size of a bean. Magicians would have it that this stone makes people invulnerable in battle, if we may believe it. 9. Enhydros is named from water (cf. X"A, “water”), for it exudes so much water that you might think there is a gushing fountain closed up in it.
xiv. Fierygems(Deignitis) 1. Of all the fiery gems, the carbuncle (carbunculus) holds the principal rank. It is called ‘carbuncle’ because it is fiery, like a coal (carbo), and its gleam is not overcome by the night, for it gives so much light in the darkness that it casts its flames up to theeye.Therearetwelvekinds,butthemostoutstanding are those that seem to glow, as if giving off fire. The carbuncle is called O? (“charcoal, carbuncle”) in Greek. It occurs in Libya where the Troglodytes live. 2. Anthracitisissonamedbecauseithasafierycolor,likethe carbuncle,butiscircledwithwhiteveins.Acharacteristic of anthracitis is that when thrown into the fire it loses its luster as if it were lifeless, while, on the contrary, it begins to glow when doused in water. 3. Sandasirus occurs in India, at a place with the same name. Gold drops appear to sparkle inside it as if in a transparent flame. It is generally agreed that the greater number of starts, the higher the value. 4. Lychnis belongs to this class of fiery gems, and is so named from the glowing of lamps (cf. 9 , “lamp”). It occurs in many places, but the most admired variety is found in India. Some peoplehavecalleditaweakercarbuncle.Ithastwoforms: one that glows purple and another that glows with the redness of scarlet. When heated by the sun or rubbed with the fingers, it is said to draw chaff and scraps of paper to itself. It is resistant to carving, and if it ever is carved, when it is pressed into the seal, it retains part of the wax, like the bite of an animal. It comes in four kinds.
5. Carchedonia is said to behave as lychnis does, although it is much more base than lychnis. It originates among the Nasamones in a divine rain, as they report; it is found by the reflected light of a full moon. Every kind of carchedonia is resistant to carving. 6. Alabandina is named after the Alabanda region of Asia. Its color approaches that of the carchedonia, but is less intense. 7. Dracontites (i.e. dracontis) is extracted from the brain of the dragon (draco, gen. draconis). This does not become a gemstone unless it is cut out of living dragons; hence magicians remove it from sleeping dragons – for bold men search out the caves of dragons, and sprinkle drugged herbs there to put the dragons to sleep, and when the dragons have been lulled to sleep, they cut off their heads and extract the gemstones. The stonesaretranslucentwhite.ThekingsoftheEastinparticular glory in the use of these stones. 8. Chrysoprase (chrysoprasus) is an Ethiopian stone; light conceals it, but darkness reveals it, for at night it is fiery, and golden duringtheday.9.PhlogitescomesfromPersia.Itdisplays something in it like burning flames that do not go out (cf. ?, gen.   “flame”). 10. Syrtitis is so named
 
becauseitwasfirstdiscoveredontheshoresoftheSyrtes. In the region of Lucania it has a saffron color, and contains faint stars inside it that shine in cloudy weather. 11. Hormiscion is considered among the most pleasing gems, glowing with a fiery gold color that carries a white light with it on the edges.
xv. Goldengems(Deaureis) 1. Some kinds of gems are named because they look like metals or like stones. 2. Chrysopis appears to be simply gold (cf. 9, “gold”; >!, “appearance”). Chrysolite (chrysolithus, i.e. topaz; cf.   “stone”)issimilartogold,witharesemblanceto the color of the sea. Ethiopia produces this gem. 3. Chryselectrus is similar to gold, but tending towards amber (electrum) in color. It is pleasing, but only when seen in the morning, and is very greedy for fire; if it should be near a fire it quickly begins to glow. 4. Chrysolampis is namedfromgoldandfire(cf. !,“torch”),forduring the day it is golden, and at night it is fiery. Ethiopia produces this gem. 5. Ammochrysus is sand mixed with gold, having tiny cubes partly of gold leaf and partly of dust. It occurs in Persia. 6. Leucochrysus has white veins with a golden color coming between. Melichrysus is so named because this gem allows light to pass through it as if it were pure honey (mel) seen through gold.
7.ChrysocollaoccursinIndia,whereantsdigoutgold. Itissimilartogoldandhasthenatureofamagnet,except that it is also reported to increase (i.e. coagulate) gold, whence also it is named (cf.  Y, “bond together”). Argyritis is similar to silver (cf. O , “silver”), with golden spots. 8. Androdamas has the gleam of silver and is nearly a diamond. It always occurs squared off into cubes. Magicians think that its name was assigned because it is said to calm and restrain passions and rages of the soul, if we may believe it (cf. " ", “mantaming,” and iv.17 above). It is found by the Red Sea. 9. Chalcitis is the color of bronze (cf. 9, “copper, bronze”). Chalcophonos is black, but when struck with a stone it rings like bronze (cf. A, “sound”). 10. Balanites comes in two kinds; one greenish, and one similar to Corinthian bronze, divided in the middle by a vein of flame.
11. Sideritis does not differ in appearance from iron. However it is introduced into magical practices, it arousesdisagreement.12.The‘dactylusofIda’isfromthe islandofCrete.Itisiron-colored.Thereasonforitsname is because it resembles a human thumb (cf. "  ,
XVI.xiv.11–xv.24
“finger”). 13. Aethiopicus is the color of iron, and when it is rubbed it exudes a black liquid. 14. Zmilanthus (i.e. zmilampis) is collected in the channel of the Euphrates and is similar to Proconnesian marble, with a gray color in the middle shining like the pupil of the eye. Arabica, namedafteritsnativecountry,islikeivoryinappearance. 15. Hephaestitis has the property of a mirror in reflecting images, although it makes them reddish. The test of this gem is if, when added to boiling water, it immediately chills it or if, when placed in the sun, it ignites dry material. It originates in Corycus. 16. Ostracites is stone-like in color, and harder than a shell (cf. ostrea, “oyster”). Another type is similar to agate, except that polishing makes agate shiny. It has such strength of hardness that other gems are carved using its fragments. 17. Glossopetra is like the human tongue and took its name for this reason(cf. W,“tongue”; !B  ,“rock”).Itissaid to drop from the sky when the moon is waning. Magicians attribute no small amount of power to it, for they suppose that by means of it the moon can be made to move.
18. There are also certain kinds of gemstones that are named from animals: echites (cf. echidna ‘adder’) exhibits viperish spots; carcinias is the color of a sea crab (cancer; cf.  , “crab”). 19. Scorpitis resembles a scorpion (scorpio) in both color and appearance. Myrmecitis imitates the appearance of a crawling ant (cf. ?, “ant”). Taos is similar to a peacock (cf.  E,
“peacock”); hieracitis has the color of a hawk (cf. B?, “hawk”);aetitis,thecolorofaneagle(cf.  ,“eagle”); aegophthalmos looks like a goat’s eye (cf. V?, gen. :, “goat,” C, “eye”). 20. Lycopthalmos has four colors – it is orange-red and blood-red, and in the middle it surrounds black with white, like the eyes of wolves (cf.  , “wolf”). Meconites resembles a poppy (cf. A, “poppy”).
21. There are also some gemstones that the pagans use in certain superstitions. 22. They maintain that when liparea is burned it is capable of calling all animals. They say that anancitis calls out the images of demons during the practice of hydromancy. They claim that with synochitis spirits summoned up from below may be controlled. 23. Chelonitis is the eye of an Indian turtle. It is a varicolored purple. Magicians imagine that with this placed on the tongue, one may predict the future. 24. Brontea, from the head of the turtle, is thought to fall fromthunder(cf.  ,“thunder”)andtocounteract
 
XVI.xv.25–xvii
the lightning-bolt. 25. The hyena-stone (hyaenia) is found in the eye of that beast, the hyena (hyaena). If this stone is placed under a person’s tongue, they say he predicts the future. But coral (corallius) is also said to guard against storms and hail. 26. Pontica is a certain gemstone that is transparently blue. It has reddish stars, and sometimes golden ones as well. People say that they can question demons and drive them away by means of this stone.
27. For certain kinds of gemstone it is very difficult to distinguish the genuine from the false, especially once someone has discovered how to transmute a genuine specimen of one gem into a false specimen of other gems – for example, sardonyx, which is made from three gemstones joined together so that they cannot be taken apart. People artificially construct these from various kinds: black, white, and cinnabar-colored. As a substitute for that most precious stone, the smaragdus, some peopledyeglasswithskill,anditsfalsegreennessdeceives the eyes with a certain subtlety, to the point that there is no one who may test it and demonstrate that it is false. It is the same with other matters in one way or another, for there is no mortal life free from deception. 28. All of the gems that are not translucent are called ‘blind,’ because they are made opaque by their density.
xvi. Glass (De vitro) 1. Glass (vitrum) is so called because with its transparency it transmits light to one’s sight (visus). Anything contained inside other minerals ishidden,butanysortofliquidorvisiblethingcontained in glass is displayed to the outside; although closed up, in a certain way the contents are revealed.
This was the origin of glass: in the part of Syria called Phoenicia there is a swamp bordering on Judea around the base of Mt. Carmel; the river Belus rises from this place and flows over a distance of five miles into the sea nearthecityPtolemais,anditssandsarecleansedoftheir impurities by this rushing flood. 2. Report has it that a ship belonging to natron merchants was driven there, and when these merchants went to prepare their meals here and there along the shore, they brought out clumps ofnatronfromtheship,sincethereweren’tanystonesto support the cooking vessels. When the sand of the shore mixed with these burning natron clumps, translucent streams of a strange liquid began to flow, and this was the origin of glass. 3. Since invention is ingenious, it did not long remain content with natron alone, but was eager [to embellish] this craft with other mixtures. Thus glass is heated by pieces of light dry wood, and when copper and natron are added with continuous firing so that the copper is melted, lumps of glass are produced. Afterwards,inworkshops,thelumpismeltedagain,and onesortofglassisformedbyblowing,anotherturnedon a lathe, and another is engraved like silver. Glass is also colored in many ways so that it may imitate hyacinthstones, sapphires, green stones, and onyx, and the colors of other gems. There is no other material more fit for mirrors or more suitable for painting.
4. The highest esteem is granted to clear glass with its close similarity to crystal, whence glass has replaced the metals silver and gold for drinking vessels. It used to be made in Italy. Throughout Gaul and Spain the softest white sand would be ground with a mortar and pestle, and then mixed with three parts, by weight or measure, of natron, and after being melted it would be poured into another furnace. This lump would be called ammonitrum (i.e. hammonitrum). When heated again it would become pure, clear glass. 5. The stone obsidian (obsianus) is counted as a type of glass. Sometimes it is greenandsometimesblack,anditistranslucent.Itlooks rather dull and when used as a wall mirror it reflects shadows instead of images. Many people make gems out of it. People say that this stone occurs in India and Italy and in Spain near the Ocean.
6. They claim that under Tiberius Caesar a certain craftsman devised a formula for glass so that it would be flexible and pliable. And when he was brought before Caesar he presented a drinking bowl to him, and Caesar indignantly threw it to the floor. The craftsman picked the drinking bowl up from the floor, where it had been dented as a bronze vessel would be. Then he took a small hammer from his pocket and reshaped the drinking bowl. When he had done this, Caesar said to him, “Does anyone else know this method of making glass?” After the craftsman swore that no one else knew, Caesar ordered him beheaded, lest, if this skill became known, gold would be regarded as mud and the value of all metals would be reduced – and it is true that if glass vessels becameunbreakable,theywouldbebetterthangoldand silver.
xvii.	Metals (De metallis) Metal (metallum) is named from the Greek word  Y (“search,” “seek after otherthings,”seenasderivedfrom   “after”and m
 
The Etymologies	XVI.xviii.1–xviii.13
 
“other things”) because its nature is such that wherever one vein has appeared, there is hope for seeking out another in that place. There are seven kinds of metals: gold, silver, copper, electrum, tin, lead, and, what dominates everything, iron.
xviii.	Gold (De auro) 1. Gold (aurum) is named from ‘gleam’ (aura), that is, from its luster, because it gleams more when the air reflects it. Whence Vergil says (Aen.
6.204):
From which the contrasting gleam (aura) of gold (aurum) shone through the branches, that is, the luster of gold, for it is natural for the luster of metal to gleam more when it is reflected with another light. Hence also patrons (aurarius) are named; their glitteringrenownmakesothersresplendent.2.Obryzum gold (i.e. pure gold) is so called because it shines forth (obradiare) lustrously. It has the best color, which the Hebrews call ophaz and the Greeks  (“orangetawny”). The thinnest sheets of gold are called gold leaf (brattea, i.e. bractea), from the term   ,11 which is onomatopoeic for ‘clanging,’ or from   sheets (perhaps cf. 9@, “clash”).
3. Money (pecunia) first had its name and actual characterfromlivestock(pecus),forcoinsusedtobecutfrom hides and then embossed. After this, bronze coinage was invented by Saturn, for it was he who devised the stamping and marking of coins. 4. For this reason the public treasury was dedicated to Saturn by the pagans. Others, as mentioned above, named money after livestock, just as beasts of burden (iumentum) are named after ‘helping’ (iuvare), for among the ancients every inheritance was called peculium from the livestock (pecus) of which their entire property consisted. Whence also someone who was rich would be called a pecuarius (lit. “cattleman”), but now, pecuniosus (“moneyed”). 5. The most ancient people made use of bronze, since gold and silver had not yet been discovered. Bronze (aes, gen. aeris) money came into use first, then silver, and finally gold followed, but money still retained its name from the metal with which it began (i.e. aes continued to mean ‘money’ as well as ‘bronze’). Hence also the public treasury (aerarium) was named, because at first only bronze
11 The word    is unattested elsewhere. $  is a scribal corruption.
was used, and it alone was hoarded, since gold and silver were not yet coined. Afterwards money might be made of whatever of these metals you chose, but the term aerarium remained, from that metal whence money had its origin.
6. ‘Treasury’ (thesaurus) is named after the Greek term B, “positing,” that is, “deposit.” Thus B means “positing,” and the term has combined a Greek with a Latin word, for the element  means “deposit” in Greek, and Latin supplies aurum (“gold”), so that the word thesaurus sounds like the combination ‘gold deposit.’ An auraria (i.e. a kind of tax; also a gold mine) takesitsnamefromgold(aurum).7.Buttribute(tributa) is named because earlier it used to be exacted from each of the tribes (tribus), just as now it is exacted from each of the territories. The Roman people were divided into three groups so that those who were preeminent in each groupwerecalled‘tribunes’(tribunus),whencetheyalso named the payments that the people gave ‘tributes.’ 8. A vectigal (i.e. a type of tax) is a tribute, named from ‘conveying’ (vehere, ppl. vectus). A stipend (stipendium) is named from ‘payment that is to be weighed’ (stips pendenda), for the ancients were accustomed to weigh money out instead of counting it.
Coinage (moneta) is so called because it ‘gives warning’ (monere, 3rd person monet) lest some fraud be committed with either the metal or the weight. 9. A nomisma isagold,silver,orbronzesolidus,anditiscallednomisma becauseitisstampedwiththenames(nomen,gen.nominis) and images of rulers. The coin was first called by the word O  (“silver”), because it was struck mostly from silver (argentum). 10. But coins (nummus) are now named after Numa, a king of the Romans, who was first amongtheLatinstoembossthemwithimagesandmark them with his own name. 11. Change (follis, lit. “leather bellows, money bag”) is named from the small sack in which it is kept, that which is contained being named by its container. 12. Three things are necessary in coinage: a metal, a shape, and a weight. If something lacks any of these, it is not coinage.
13. There are three kinds of silver, gold, and bronze: stamped, worked, and unworked. Stamped is the kind found in coins; worked, the kind found in vessels and signets; unworked, the kind found in nuggets – a nugget isalsocalled‘aheavything’(grave,i.e.aweight).Theidea offormingmetalsinmoldscameaboutinthisway,when by some chance a forest fire scorched the earth, which
 
XVI.xviii.14–xx.8
poured out streams of melted ore in some form. 14. This was either bronze or gold. When the metal flowed into the depressions in the ground, it took on the shape in which either the flowing stream or the collecting hollow had formed it. Captivated by the splendor of these objects, people picked up these lumps that had been held fast and saw in them the imprints molded from the ground,andfromthisrealizedthatmetals,whenmelted, could be made into any shape.
xix.	Silver(Deargento) 1. The word ‘silver’ (argentum) is not very different from its Greek name, for the Greeks call it  . It possesses this marvelous quality, that, although it is white, when it is rubbed against a body it leaves black lines. 2. Quicksilver (argentum vivum) is so called because it etches out the materials onto which it is thrown. This is also classified as a liquid because it flows. It is particularly found in mines or in silver-working furnaces, clinging to the roof in condensed drops, and often even in the oldest excrement of sewers or the slime of wells. It is also made from cinnabar placed on an iron crucible covered with an earthenware lid. When the vessel is sealed, coals are placed around it and thus quicksilver is distilled from cinnabar. Without it neither silvernorbronzecanbegilded.3.Ithassuchgreatpower that if you place a one hundred pound rock on top of a sextarium (i.e. about a pint) of quicksilver, it steadfastly sustains the rock. But if, on the other hand, you place a mere gram of gold on top of it, it quickly yields to the gold’s light weight by forming a hollow. From this we may understand that it is not the weight of a substance, butratheritsnature,towhichquicksilveryields.Itisbest kept in glass vessels, for it eats through other materials. When given in a drink, it causes death due to its weight. 4. The dross of silver is called  , and we call it the ‘froth of silver’ (i.e. lead monoxide or litharge). It is made in this way from silver and lead.
xx.	Bronze(Deaere) 1.Bronze(aes,gen.aeris)isnamed from its gleaming in the ‘air’ (aer, gen. aeris), just as gold (aurum) and silver (argentum) are.12 The ancients used bronze before they used iron. Indeed, at first they would plow the earth with bronze; with bronze weapons they wouldwagewar;andbronzewasmoreprized,whilegold and silver were rejected as useless. Now it is the opposite (Lucretius, On the Nature of Things 5.1275):
Bronze is despised and gold has attained the highest honor: thus time in its turning changes the positions of things, and what was prized becomes finally without value.
The use of bronze later spread to statues, vessels, and the construction of buildings. Public proclamations in particular were written on bronze plaques for a permanent record.
2. Cyprian bronze (i.e. copper) was first found on the island of Cyprus, whence it was named. It is made from a bronze-like stone that they call cadmia, and it is malleable. If lead is added to it, it turns purple. 3. Aurichalcum is so called because it possesses the splendor of gold (aurum) and the hardness of bronze. Its name is composed from both the Latin and Greek languages, for the Greeks call bronze 9. Moreover it is made from bronze and a great deal of fire, and it is brought to a gold color by means of additives. 4. Corinthian bronze is a mixture of all metals, which was first mixed accidentally when Corinth was burned after being captured. When Hannibal had captured this city, he gathered all the bronze and gold and silver statues into a single pyre andburnedthem.Workmencarriedthismixtureoffand made plates. Thus Corinthian vessels were created from all the metals (i.e. gold, silver, and bronze) combined to make a single alloy that was neither one particular metal nor another. Hence even up to the present day things made either of this substance or of an imitation of it are called ‘Corinthian bronze’ or ‘Corinthian vessels.” There are three kinds: the first is white and approaches the luster of silver; the second has by nature the yellow of gold itself; the third has an equal mixture of all.
5. Coronarium is drawn out from malleable bronze into sheets. Tinted by the bile of bulls, it looks like gold in the garlands (corona) of stage-actors, whence it is named. 6. Pyropus is named from its fiery color (cf. !N, “fire”). When six grams of gold are added to each ounce of bronze, the thin metal leaf becomes fiery and gives an imitationofflame;forthisreasonalsoitiscalledpyropus. 7. Bronze that is called regularis (lit. “in ingots”) is called ‘ductile’(ductilis)byotherpeople–allCyprianbronzeis of this kind. 8. Bronze that is drawn out with a hammer is called ‘ductile’ (ductilis) just as, on the other hand, bronze that can only be poured out (fundere, ppl. fusus)
12 The word aes means either “bronze” or “copper.”
 
The Etymologies	XVI.xx.9–xxi.7
 
is called ‘cast’ (fusilis). That which can only be poured out is also called caldarius (lit. “suitable for heating”), for it would be broken by a hammer. All bronze that has its flaws diligently purged and heated out by fire is made intoregularis.9.Amongthetypesofbronze,Campanian bronzeissonamedfromCampania,thatis,theprovince that is in Italian territory. It is best for all utensils and vessels.
10.Anybronzeiscastbetterwhengreatcoldisapplied. Bronzerapidlydevelopsapatinaunlessitissmearedwith oil. People say that it is best preserved in liquid pitch. 11. Of all the metals, bronze is the most resounding and has the greatest strength. For this reason, thresholds are bronze, whence in Vergil (Aen. 1.449):
The hinge on the bronze doors screeched.
Bronze comes from cadmia (i.e. zinc oxide) and chalcitis (i.e. copper pyrites). The drosses of bronze are cadmia and verdigris, and the ‘bloom’ of bronze (i.e. cuprous oxide).12.Cadmiaoriginatesinfurnacesfromthemetals ofbronzeandsilverasaresultofthefumessettlingabove them. Indeed, just as the ore from which bronze is made is called cadmia, so it reappears in furnaces and receives its original name. 13. Bronze ‘bloom’ is made or originates in the casting process, when bronze is remelted and reliquefied, and cold water is poured on top, for the ‘bloom’ is produced from a sudden condensation, as from spittle. 14. Bronze also generates verdigris: when shreds of sheet bronze are placed over a vessel of very sharp vinegar so that they start dripping, what falls from this into the vinegar is pulverized and passed through a sieve.
xxi. Iron (De ferro) 1. Iron (ferrum) is so named because it buries the grain (far) of the earth, that is, the seeds of crops. It is also called chalybs (“sword,” lit. “steel”) from the river Chalybs where iron is tempered to have the best edge. Whence the material itself is also loosely called chalybs as in (Vergil, Aen. 8.446):
And the wound-inflicting steel (chalybs).
2.	The use of iron was discovered after that of the othermetals. Later this kind of metal was turned into a symbol of opprobrium, for long ago by iron the earth was plowed,butnowbyironbloodisshed.Thereisnomaterial whose elements are so intertwined or adhere to each othersodenselyasiron,whenceithasahardnesswhenit is cold. Iron mines are found almost everywhere, but of all the kinds of iron, the prize is given to Seric (i.e. Chinese) iron. The Seres export this iron along with their cloth and animal skins. Second place goes to Parthian iron – none of the other kinds of iron are tempered to an edge from the pure metal, for a softer alloy is mixed in the others.
3.	There are many differences in iron according to thetype of its earthy element. The one type is soft, close to lead, and suitable for use in wheels and nails, while anothertypeisbreakableandbronze-like,wellsuitedfor tilling the earth. Another type is good in short lengths only and for the nails in soldiers’ boots, and another is quickly vulnerable to rust. These are all called strictura (lit. “a mass of wrought iron,” or “an iron bar”), a word not used for other metals, from ‘compressing’ (stringere, ppl. strictus), a term aptly applied. There is a great difference in the types of water in which the glowing iron is plunged when it is tempered, such as the waters of Bilbilis and Tirassona in Spain, and Como in Italy. 4. In sharpening iron, the edge is made finer by using oil, whence it is also customary for the more delicate iron implements to be tempered in oil, lest they be hardened by water to the point of fragility. Human blood avenges itself on iron, for it very quickly forms rust on contact.
Magneticstonehasanaffinitywithiron,forironalone takes on the power of that stone and retains it for a long time. A certain architect in Alexandria built a temple vault from magnets, so that in it a statue made of iron might seem to hang in the air. Iron that has been in the fire is ruined unless it is hardened by hammering. When it has become red it is not suitable for hammering – not until it begins to get white. Iron smeared with vinegar or alum becomes similar to bronze. 5. The drosses of iron are rust and slag. Rust (robigo) is a corroding (rodere) flaw of iron, or of crops, as if the word were rodigo, with one letter changed. Also the word verdigris (aerugo) is from ‘eroding’ (erodere) – for verdigris is a flaw in iron socalledfromeroding–notfromaerumentum(“bronze object”). 6. But slag is the residue and impurity that is heatedoutinthefire,anditiscalledslag(scoria)because it is ‘cast out’ (excutere) of iron. 7. Iron will be free of rust if it is rubbed with white lead and gypsum and liquid pitch. Also, rust does not damage iron implements if they are smeared with deer marrow or white lead mixed with oil of roses.
 
XVI.xxii.1–xxv.4
xxii. Lead (De plumbo) 1. Lead (plumbum) is so called because the depth of the sea was first tested with a ball (pila) made of lead. There are two kinds of lead, black leadandwhitelead(i.e.tin),butwhiteisthebetterone.It was first discovered in the islands of the Atlantic Ocean. Indeed,italsooccursinLusitaniaandGallicia,wherethe ground is very sandy and black in color, and heavy. Tiny pebbles (of lead) are mingled with the sand, especially in dried-out river beds: people wash these sands and whatever sinks down they heat in furnaces. Dark heavy pebbles are also found in goldmines when they have been sluiced, and while the gold is being collected these pebblesremainwithit.Afterwards,whentheyhavebeen separated, the pebbles are melted together and resolved into white lead. Hence the weight of lead is the same as that of gold.
2. Black lead is abundant around Cantabria. It originates in two ways: either it comes forth alone from its ownvein,oritisproducedwithsilverandissmeltedfrom these mixed veins of ore. The first one to liquefy in furnaces is tin, the second, silver. Whatever remains, when ore is added and smelted again, becomes black lead. 3. India has neither bronze nor lead; it can only trade gemstones and pearls for these metals. We use black lead for pipes and sheet metal. Lead is mined laboriously in Spain and Gaul, while in Britain it is found in the upper crust of the ground.
xxiii.	Tin(Destagno) 1.Theetymologyofstagnum(i.e. either tin or a silver–lead alloy) is ! 9A; (“to separate”), that is, what separates and divides.13 It separates metals that have become mixed up and mutually adulterated by fire, and distinguishes bronze and lead from gold and silver. Tin also protects other metals from fire, and even though the nature of bronze and of iron is very hard, if they were without tin they would be burned and consumed. 2. A coating of tin on bronze vessels makes the taste more pleasing and discourages the contamination of verdigris. Mirrors are also tempered with tin. White lead may be made from it as from lead.
xxiv.	Electrum (De electro) 1. Electrum (electrum) is so named because it reflects in the sun’s ray more clearly than silver or gold; for the sun is called Elector (“the Shining One”) by poets. This metal is more refined than all the other metals. 2. There are three kinds. The first kind, which flows from pine branches (i.e. amber, the primarymeaningofelectrum),iscalled‘liquidelectrum.’ Thesecond,whichisfoundnaturallyandheldinesteem, is ‘metallic electrum.’ The third kind is made from three parts gold and one part silver. You will find these same proportions if you melt natural electrum, for there is no difference between natural electrum and manufactured; both have the same nature. 3. Electrum that is natural has a character such that at a banquet it gleams even more brightly by lamplight than all the other metals. It also reveals poison, for if you pour some poison into a vessel made from it, it makes a harsh noise and gives off a variety of colors like a rainbow.
xxv.	Weights (De ponderibus) 1. It is helpful to know about weights and measures, for all bodies, as has been written,aredisposedandformedfromthehighesttothe lowest with measure and number and weight (see Wisdom 11:21). Nature gives weight to all corporeal objects, and“eachobjectisruledbyitsownweight”(Poemabout Weights and Measures [anon.], 3). 2. First Moses, [who preceded all of the pagan philosophers chronologically, recorded for us numbers and measures and weights in diverse places in his writing]. The Argive Phidon first establishedthesystemofweightsinGreece,andalthough there were others more ancient than he, he was more activeinthisart.3.Aweight(pondus)issocalledbecause it hangs (pendere) balanced in the scales, hence also the term pensum (“something weighed”).14 The term pondus is loosely used for one pound (libra).15 Hence also the dipondius (i.e. dupondius) is named, as if it were duo pondera (“two pounds”); this term has been retained in usage up to today.
4. A trutina (i.e. a kind of scale) is an instrument that suspends two weighted plates from a balance-tongue. It is made for weighing talents and hundred-pound
13	TheetymologyisthatprovidedbyJeromefortheHebrewword for tin.
14	The following are the relationships of the weights discussed here: 1 calcus obolceratin siliquaecalci; 1 scripulus drachmascripulisiliquae; solidus
(sextula) = 33tremissessextulae ==324aureisiliquae;= 2 sicli1 duella=quadrantes;4 drachmas;= 2 sextulae;1 ounce1 stater=
(semissis) =
2 stateres
12 ounces;drachmas
tremisses = 1,800 librasiliquae.is about three-fourths of the modern pound
15 The Roman
avoirdupois. The dupondius is literally the sum of two asses, coins originally of one Roman pound.
 
The Etymologies	XVI.xxv.5–xxv.22
 
weights,justasamomentana(i.e.asmallerscale)ismade for small trifling coins. This is also called a moneta. It also has the name statera from its number, because it stands (stare+ter, “thrice”) evenly balanced with two plates and a single pointer in the middle. 5. The balancetongue (examen) is the cord in the middle by which the balance of the scales is regulated and the plates made even. From this (i.e. examen) the strap (amentum) on lances is named. 6. The steelyard (campana) takes its name from the region in Italy (i.e. Campania) where its use was first invented. This does not have two plates, but is a rod graduated with pounds and ounces, and it measures using a sliding weight.
7. For every weight a fixed measure has been designated with specific terms. 8. A calcus (lit. “pebble”), the smallest unit of weight, is one fourth of an obol, and is equivalent to two lentils. It is called a calcus because it is so tiny, like the stone calculus, which is so small that it may be ‘trodden upon’ (calcare) without discomfort. 9. The siliqua (lit. “carob pod”) is a twenty-fourth of a solidus, and takes its name from the tree whose seed it is. 10. A ceratin (i.e. ceratium) is half an obol, containing one and a half siliquae. In Latin usage this is a ‘semiobol.’ Moreover, ceratin is a Greek word (cf.   , “small horn”). [A siliqua] is translated as “small horn” in Latin.16 11. An obol (obolus) weighs three siliquae, or two ceratin, or four calci. At one time it was made of bronze in the shape of an arrow. From this the Greeks took its name, that is, ‘arrow’ (cf. B , “arrow”). 12. A scripulus weighs six siliquae. This is called a gramma (“scruple”) by the Greeks. The scripulus is so named by forming a diminutive from the small stone called a scrupus.
13. A drachma (dragma) is an eighth of an ounce and theweightofasilverdenarius,equaltothreescripuli,that is, eighteen siliquae. The denarius is so named because it is reckoned as ten coins (decem numma). 14. The solidus (solidus) is so named because nothing appears to be lacking in it, for the ancients called something whole and entire a ‘solid’ (solidus). It is also called a nomisma becauseitismarkedwiththenames(nomen)andimages ofrulers.Originallyonenomismawasoneargenteus,and thiscoinoriginatedwiththeAssyrians.TheJewssaythat
16 Thetextmakesbettersensebyomittingthewordsiliqua,bracketedinLindsay’stext.Henceread,“Moreover,ceratinisaGreekword, translated as “small horn” in Latin.
Abrahamwasfirsttobringthistypeofcoinintotheland of Canaan. Among Latin speakers, the solidus is called by another name, the sextula, because it consists of six (sex) ounces. Common people, as we have mentioned, call this a ‘golden solidus,’ and they have named a third partofitatremis,because‘takenthreetimes’(termissus) they make up a solidus. 15. Two sextulae make a duella, and three of them make a stater.
16. A stater is half an ounce, weighing three aurei. It is called a stater because it may stand for three solidi (stare + ter, “stand three times”). This is also the semiounce, because it consists of half an ounce. It is also the semissis (i.e. semis) because it is half a weight, as if it were ‘semi assis’ (i.e. half a unit). 17. The Hebrews name the quarterweight(quadrans)withthesimilarwordcodrans, and it is called quadrans because it weighs one fourth (quartus) of an ounce. 18. ‘Shekel’ (sicel), which has been corruptedtosiclusinLatin,isaHebrewterm,andamong the Hebrews it has the weight of an ounce, but for Greek and Latin speakers it is one quarter of an ounce, and half a stater, weighing two drachmas. Hence, when the word ‘shekel’ is read in divine Scripture, it is an ounce, but in pagan writings it is a quarter of an ounce.
19.Anounce(uncia)issocalledbecausewithitsunity (unitas) it encircles (vincire) the entirety (universitas) of lesser weights, that is, it embraces them. It consists of eight drachmas, that is, twenty-four scripuli. Accordingly, this is held to be the legally recognized weight, because the number of scripuli it contains equals the hours of the day and night, or because twelve ounces counted together make a pound. 20. A pound is made of twelve ounces, and thus it is considered as a type of perfect weight because it consists of as many ounces as there are months in the year. It is called a ‘pound’ (libra) because it is independent (liber) and contains all the aforementioned weights within it.
21.Theminaweighsahundreddrachmas;itisaGreek term (i.e. Y) [and it equals 1,800 siliquae, 225 tremisses, 75 solidi, and 25 stateres]. 22. Among the Greeks the talent (talentum) is said to be the greatest weight, for there is nothing smaller then a calcus or greater than a talent. Its weight varies among different peoples. Among theRomans,atalentisseventy[-two]pounds,asPlautus shows(TheHauntedHouse644),becausehesaystwotalents are 140 pounds. But there are three kinds: the lesser, the medium, and the greater. The lesser is fifty pounds, the medium seventy-two pounds, and the greater 120
 
XVI.xxv.23–xxvi.10	Isidore of Seville
 
pounds. 23. The centenarium has the name of a number because it weighs one hundred (centum) pounds. The Romans established this weight because of the perfection of the number one hundred.
xxvi. Measures (De mensuris) 1. A ‘measure’ is some object that is limited in its amount or in time; a measure is either of body or of time. A measure of body is, for instance, the length or shortness of humans or pieces of wood or columns. Geometers even dare to investigate the idea that the orb of the sun itself has its specific measurement. A measure of time is, for instance, the measureofhoursanddaysandyears;whencewespeakof the‘feet’ofthehoursas‘pacingout’(metiri,lit.“measure out”), that is, they measure (mensurare). 2. But strictly speaking a measure (mensura) is so named because with it fruits and grains are measured (metiri) – that is, by wet measures and dry ones, such as the modius (i.e. a Roman measure of corn), [the artaba (i.e. an Egyptian measure)], the urn, and the amphora.
3. The smallest unit of measure is the spoonful (coclear), which is half a drachma and weighs nine siliquae. Three of them make a concula. A concula consists of one and a half drachmas. 4. A cyathus weighs ten drachmas; by some people it is also called a cuatus. An oxifalus is made when five drachmas are added to ten. 5. An acitabulus is one quarter of an hemina, and weighs twelve drachmas. A cotyla (i.e. cotula) is an hemina possessingsixcyathi.ItiscalledacotylabecauseintheGreek language a cutting is called cote, and a hemina is cut into the two equal halves of a sextarius [and makes a cotyla]. But an hemina weighs one pound, and when doubled makes a sextarius. 6. A sextarius is two pounds. Two of them together are a bilibris; four of them “make a cenix (i.e. 9 @?, a dry measure), a Greek term” (Poem about Weights and Measures 69), five of them together make a quinaroragomor.Addasixthanditmakesacongius,for a congius is six (sex) sextarii, and from this the sextarius takes its name. 7. It is called a congius from congire (perhaps cf. congerere, “accumulate”), that is, “grow by an addition.” Whence afterwards money that began to be given as thanks for a favor was called a congiarium. Thus each emperor, during his reign, would give out congiaria, thereby capturing the favor of the populace, so that he would seem rather generous in his gifts. 8. But the congiarium is particularly a measure of liquids, and we find that the concept and its name were established by the Romans at the same time.
9.	A metrum is a measure for liquids. It takes its name from ‘measure,’ for the Greeks call a measure a B  . Hence also the metreta (i.e. another liquid measure) is named. Although ‘urn’ and ‘amphora’ and others of this type are also terms of measures, still, the metreta took its name due to the perfection of the number ten that it contains. The word metrum applies to every measure, for what is called metrum from the Greek is a measure (mensura) in Latin. Thus the cyatum is also a measure, and the amphora is a measure, and whatever contains more or less than these is a measure. But it has assumed this particular name (i.e. metreta) for itself because it is the measure of a perfect number, that is, of ten.
10.	The modius is so named because it is perfect in its own measure (modus). It is a measure of forty-four pounds, that is, twenty-two sextarii. The reason for its number is derived from the fact that in the beginning God created twenty-two works. Thus on the first day he created seven works, that is, the formless matter, angels, light, the upper heavens, earth, water, and air. On the second day, only the firmament. On the third day, four works: the seas, seeds, sowing, and gardens. On the fourth day, three works: the sun, the moon and the stars. On the fifth day, three works: fish, reptiles of the waters, and flying creatures. On the sixth day, four things: beasts, livestock, reptiles of the land, and the human being. And all twenty-two kinds of things were created in six days. And there are twenty-two generations from Adam to Jacob, from whose seed all the peopleofIsraelwerebegotten.Andtherearetwenty-two books of the Old Testament up to Esther, and the alphabet in which the teachings of divine law are composed consists of twenty-two letters. From these examples, then, the modius was established by Moses as twentytwo sextarii, following the measuring system of sacred law. And although different peoples in their ignorance might add or subtract weight from this measure, among theHebrewsithasbeenpreservedinitsdivinedefinition using this sort of reasoning. The modius is named from ‘measure’ (modus). Hence also the word ‘modest’ (modicus), that is, moderate (moderatus). The term ‘proper measure’ (modus) may be applied to modest things, for weincorrectlyusemodicusforsmallthings,notspeaking properly.
 
The Etymologies	XVI.xxvi.11–xxvii.6
 
11.	The satum is a kind of measure according to the custom of the province of Palestine, holding one and a half modii. Its name is taken from the Hebrew language, for they refer to a ‘taking’ or a ‘lifting’ as satum, because whoever makes a measurement takes and lifts this very measure. There is also another satum, a measure containingtwenty-twosextarii,likethemodius.12.Thebatus is named in Hebrew from ‘olive press,’ which they call either beth or bata. It holds fifty sextarii. This measure is crushed out in a single pressing. 13. An amphora (amphora)issonamedbecauseitisliftedonthissideand that (cf. , “on both sides”; B, “carry”;  @, “carryalong”).ItissaidtohavebeennamedinGreekfor its shape because its two handles look like ears (i.e.  +auris,“ear”).Itholdsacubicfootofwineorwater,but three Italian modii of grain. A cadus is a Greek amphora containing three urns.
14.Theurn(urna)isameasurethatsomepeoplecalla quart (quartarium). Properly speaking, an urn is a vessel thatisnormallyusedforpreservingtheashesofthedead. Concerning this the poet says (Lucan, Civil War 7.819): He who has no urn is covered by the sky.
15. The medimna (i.e. medimnum) is a measure containing five modii. The medimna is named from the Latin language, that is, half (dimidia), because it measures five modii, which is half the number of a perfect ten. 16. The artaba is a measure used by the Egyptians, consisting of seventy-two sextarii, composed of that number because oftheseventy-twopeoplesandlanguagesthathavefilled the globe (see IX.ii.2). 17. A gomor has the weight of fifteen modii. The corus is filled by the measure of thirty modii. This derives from the Hebrew language and is called cor from its similarity to a mound, for Hebrew speakers call mounds corea – for thirty modii heaped up together look like a mound, and equal the weight that a camel carries.
xxvii. Symbols(Designis) 1.Manysymbolsforweights are unknown and they cause errors for readers. For this reason we append their forms and characters, as they were used as symbols by the ancients.
2.TheletterZsignifieshalfanobol.–Asinglestraight horizontal line signifies an obol. = Two such lines are two obols. The Latin letter T means three obols. The Latin F means four obols. Latin E stands for five obols.
3.	However, there is no symbol for six obols, becausetherearesixoftheminonedrachma,whichistheweight of a silver denarius. H, the letter eta, stands for eight siliquae, that is, a tremis. The Latin N signifies the Greek nomisma, that is, the solidus. IB, an iota next to a beta, means half a solidus.
4.	< Two lines dividing themselves from left to right out of a single angle stand for a drachma, which people also call an olce. NΓ, a Latin N next to a Greek gamma, means a semi-ounce. Γ  , a Greek gamma followed by a Latin O superscript, stands for an ounce.  , a Greek lambda with a Latin I placed through its center, means a pound.
5.Kv,aGreekkappafollowedbyaLatinVsuperscript, means a cyatum. But if it should have a Latin O next to it, i.e. KO, it means an (h)emina, which the Greeks call a cotyle. e If a Greek xi receives an adjoining Latin E, it signifies a sextarium.
6. o If the xi has a Latin O joining it, it indicates an
N acitabulus, which the Greeks call an oxifalus.   A Greek mu with a Latin N directly above it stands for a mina. T A Latin T followed by a Greek lambda means a talent. X  , a Greek chi with the superscript letter O to its right, is a cenix.
 

 
Book XVII Rural matters (De rebus rusticis)
 
 
i.	Authorsonruralmatters(Deauctoribusrerumrus-ticarum) 1. Among the Greeks, Hesiod of Boeotia was thefirsttomakeskillinwritingonruralmattersapartof a liberal education; then Democritus. Mago of Carthage also wrote a study of agriculture in twenty-eight volumes. Among the Romans Cato was first to treat of agriculture, then Marcus Terence (i.e. Varro) refined its study, and then Vergil exalted it with the commendation of his poems. No lesser inquiry was made later by Cornelius Celsus, Julius Atticus, Aemilianus (i.e. Palladius), and the distinguished orator Columella who embraced the whole corpus of that discipline.
2.Theysaythatthefirstpersonwhoyokedoxentothe plow was a certain private citizen, who had been struck by lightning, named Homogirus – but some say Osiris was the inventor of this craft, and some say Triptolemus. HerethequestionisinwhatmannerCeresinGreecefirst established the turning of the soil with iron – with whatever kind of iron implement, not specifically with the plowshare or plow.1 3. A certain man named Stercutus first brought the technique of dunging (stercorare) fields to Italy, and his altar in Rome was dedicated by Picus. He invented many agricultural tools, and was the first to enrich fields. Some have thought that this man was Saturn, in order to do him greater honor by that name under which he would sound magnificent and would procure dignity from the title.
ii.	The cultivation of fields (De cultura agrorum)1. Cultivation (cultura) is the means by which crops or wines are procured with great labor, so called from
‘inhabiting’ (incolere; cf. colere, ppl. cultus, “cultivate”). The wealth of the ancients inhered in two things: good pasturing and good tilling. The cultivation of fields involves ashes, plowing, lying fallow, burning of stubble, dunging, hoeing, and weeding. 2. Ashes (cinis) is the burning (incendium) by which a field exudes useless moisture. Plowing (aratio) is so called because people first carried out the cultivation of land with bronze (aes, gen. aeris) before the use of iron was discovered. There
337
are two kinds of plowing: spring and fall. ‘Lying fallow’ (intermissio) is the means by which a field, empty in alternate years, renews its vigor.
3.	Dunging (stercoratio) is the spreading of fertilizer. Dung (stercus) is so called either because it is spread (sternere) on fields, or because that which overflows as filth in the city needs to be “washed off” (extergere, as if ec-stergere), [or, what is more likely, from the name Sterce, also called Sterculus]. Dung is also called droppings(fimus),whichisdroppedonfields.Anditiscalled fimus [because “a mouse is made” (fiat mus)],2 that is, dung, which commonly is called fertilizer (laetamen) because with its nourishment it makes seeds fertile (laetus) and renders fields rich and fecund.
4.	Hoeing is done after the planting, when farmersafter unyoking the oxen split the large clods and break them apart with hoes, and it is called hoeing (occatio) as if it were ‘blinding’ (occaecatio), because it covers the seeds. To hoe therefore is to cover seeds, vines, or trees with earth. 5. Weeding (runcatio) is to pluck weedgrasses from the land, for the land is rus (“farmland”). A furrow (sulcus) is so named from ‘sun’ (sol), because when plowed it receives the sun. ‘Newly plowed fallow’ (vervactum) is so called as if it were ‘done in springtime’ (vere actum), that is, land plowed in spring. Groundbreaking (proscissio) is the first plowing, when the field is still hard. 6. Sowing (satio) is so called as if it were ‘the action of the seed’ (seminis actio), as if it were ‘the actionofthesowers’(satorumactio).Moreoveritiscalled sowing (serere), because it ought to be done when the sky is clear (serenus), not in rain. Hence is derived that Vergilian phrase (Geo. 1.299):
Naked plow, naked sow (serere).
1	Isidore’s source here, Servius’s commentary on Vergil’s Georgics 1.147, is making the point that though others may have invented the plow, Ceres taught the whole art of agriculture.
2	For the idea that the earth’s moisture begets mice see XII.iii.1. A more likely reading, preserved in some manuscripts, is fiat imus, “it is made the lowest thing.”
 
XVII.ii.7–iii.19
Harvest (messis) is named from ‘reaping’ (metere), that is, cutting back. 7. A grain-field (seges) is [so called] from the seed (semen) that we cast, or from ‘cutting’ (sectio).
iii. Fruitsoftheearth(Defrumentis) 1. Ceres was first in Greece to make use of grain and to raise crops from seeds brought from another place. Ovid records this, saying (Met. 5.341):
Ceres first broke up the earth with her curved plow, she first brought grains and kindly food to the lands.
2. Grains (frumentum) are properly those that have ears, and crops (frux) are the other fruits of the earth. Grain or crops are named from enjoying (frui), that is, from eating, for the top part of the throat is called the frumen. 3. First-fruits (primitiae) are properly those which are first gathered from the crops. 4. Wheat (triticum) is so calledeitherfromthreshing(tritura),bymeansofwhich it may be stored in a barn after being thoroughly sifted, or because its grain is milled and ‘ground up’ (terere, ppl. tritum).
5. Spelt (far) is so called because at first it would be crushed (frangere), for among the ancients the use of mills did not yet exist, but they would place grain in a mortar and crush it, and this was a kind of milling. 6. ‘Emmer wheat’ (adoreum) is a species of wheat that is commonly called seed (semen). It was formerly called ador from ‘eating’ (edere), because it was what people first used, or because in a sacrifice bread of that kind was offered ‘at altars’ (ad aras) – whence furthermore sacrificesarecalledadorea(i.e.anhonorarygiftofgrain). 7. ‘Winter wheat’ (siligo), a type of wheat, is named from ‘choice’(selectus,ppl.ofseligere),forthistypeisexcellent for bread.
8. ‘Three-month spring’ (trimestris) wheat is so named because it is gathered three months after sowing, for where a seasonable sowing is skipped because of water or some other reason, people look to it as a safeguard. 9. Alica (“emmer groats”) is a Greek word. Alicastrum is similar to alica, outstanding for weight and quality. 10. Barley (hordeum) is so called because it becomes dry (aridum) before other types of grain, or because its ear has rows (ordo) of grain. There are three kinds of barley. The first is called hexaticum (i.e. hexastichus; cf. U?, “six”;  9 , “row”) because its ear has six rows. Some call this type horse-barley (canterinum) because it feeds animals better than wheat, and feeds humans more nutritiously than poor wheat. The second is distichon barley, because it has two rows; many callthisGalaticum.Thethirdisthree-month(trimestris) because,whennecessary,itissowninspringandquickly gathered.
11. ‘Gallic spelt’ (scandula) is named from ‘division,’ forithastwoformsanditissplit(scandere,i.e.scindere)– that is, it is divided. 12. Centenum (probably “rye”) is so calledbecauseinmostplaceswhereitiscastitgrowswith a hundredfold (centesimus) increase over its seed. Millet (milium) likewise is named from the multiplicity of its crop(cf.milia,“thousands”).13.‘Panicgrass’(panicium) issocalledbecauseinmanyregionspeoplearesustained by it ‘in place of bread’ (panis vice), as if the word were panivicium. Meal (pistum) is from ‘something fed’ (pastus). Sesame (sisamum) is a Greek term (i.e.  ). 14. ‘Mixed grain’ (farrago) is named from spelt (far); it is a barley-type grass, still green, with its grain not yet swollen to ripeness.
15. We speak improperly of the ‘ear’ (spica) of ripe fruit, for properly the ear exists when the beards, still thin like spear-tips (spiculum), project through the husk of the stalk, that is the swelling tip. 16. The beard (arista) is so called because it is the first to dry up (arescere). The stalk (culmus) is the stem (calamus) of the ear as it rises from the roots, and it is called culmus as if the word were calamus. 17. The husk (folliculum) is the sheath of the ear inside of which the grain is protected. Furnished with a rampart, it stretches its defense over the ear so that the ear may not be stripped of its fruit by the pecking of the smaller birds, or trampled by footsteps. 18. Blades are the leaves or sheaths with which the stalk is surrounded and propped so that it is not bent over by the weight of the grain, and they surround the stalk. The blade (stipula, also meaning “stubble”) is so called from ‘burnt’ (ustus, ppl. of urere) as if the word were ustipula. Stubble is named from burning, because when the harvest is gathered, the stubble is burned for the cultivation of the field. Or again, it is called stipula because part of it is burned while part of it is mown for straw
(palea).
19. Some say chaff (palea) is so called because it is winnowed with a spade (pala) to separate out the grain. Pagans however derive the name chaff from a certain Pales, the discoverer of grain crops, whom they would
 
The Etymologies	XVII.iv.1–v.8
 
identify with Ceres. Concerning her Vergil writes (cf. Geo. 3.1):
You also, great Pales, in your memory we will sing.
Still others say chaff took its name from ‘fodder’ (pabulum), because at first it alone was offered for the feeding of animals. Chaff’s property is to be contrary: so cold that it does not permit snow blanketed with it to melt, yet so warm that it forces fruits to ripen.
iv. Legumes (De leguminibus) 1. Legumes (legumen) are so called from picking (legere), as if they were ‘picked out’ (eligere, ppl. electus), for the ancients would pick all the better ones – or because they are picked by hand and do not need cutting. 2. There are several species of legumes,ofwhichthefavabean,lentil,pea,Frenchbean, chickpea, and lupine seed seem most favored for human consumption. 3. The ‘fava bean’ (faba) derived its name in a Greek etymology from ‘eating,’ as if it were faga, for in Greek @ means “to eat.” Indeed humans consumed this legume first. It has two types, one common andtheotherEgyptian.4.‘Groundfava’(fabafresa)isso calledbecausepeoplegrind(frendere,ppl.fresum)it,that iscrushit,andpulverizeitbymilling.5.Thelentil(lentis, i.e. lens) is so named because it is moist and soft (lentus), or because it adheres to the soil (cf. lentus, “sticky”). 6. ‘French bean’ (faselum; cf.  ) and chickpea
(cicer; cf. ) are Greek names. But faselum . . . 7. Lupine(lupinus)isalsoaGreekterm,aboutwhichVergil wrote (Geo. 1.75):
And the sad lupines (lupinus),
because with their bitterness they make the taster’s face look sad (cf. !, “causing sorrow”) – hence on account of their bitterness neither worms nor any other animal eats them.
8. Lucerne clover, vetch, and bitter vetch are the best fodders. Lucerne (medica) is so called because it was brought into Greece from the Medes when Xerxes, king ofthePersians,invadedit.Oncesown,thislaststenyears, andcanbereapedfourorsixtimesayear.9.Vetch(vicia) is so named because it scarcely (vix) bears a triple yield, while other legumes have a fertile produce. Hence Vergil (Geo. 1.75):
Or the scanty yield of the vetch (vicia).
10. The pea (pisum) is so called because by it a minute quantity of gold would be ‘weighed out’ (pensare) – for pis means “gold.”3 11. ‘Bitter vetch’ (ervum) derives its name from Greek, for they call it d  , because while it is dangerous for some livestock it nevertheless makes bulls (cf.  N, “bull”) plump.
v. Vines(Devitibus) 1.Noahfirstestablishedtheplanting of vines in an age still without cultivation. However, the Greeks call the discoverer of the vine Liber, whence the pagans after his death would have it that he was a god. 2. It is called a vine (vitis) because it has the capacity (vis) for taking root easily. Others think that they are called vines because they entwine themselves about one another with ‘ribbon-like stems’ (vitta, “fillet,” a strip of cloth) and fasten themselves to neighboring (vicinus) trees with their creeping growth. They are flexible in nature, and whatever they embrace they bind tight as if with a kind of arms. 3. The labrusca is a wild vine that growsinmarginalland,whenceitiscalledlabrusca,from the margins (labrum) and extremities of the land.
4.Atrunk(codex)issocalledasifitwerecaudex.4 Likewise the ancients would say clodus for claudus (“lame”). 5. Vine-shoots (sarmentum) are from ‘sowing’ (serere), [asifthewordwereserimentum].Amallet-shoot(malleolus) is a sweet young vine-shoot sprung from a young branch of the prior year, and named for its likeness to the thing, because at the section where it is cut from the old shoot the protuberance on both sides looks like a hammer (malleus). 6. Eunuchs (spado) are shoots lacking fruit, so named because they are unable to bear fruit and are afflicted with sterility. 7. Country people call the newest part of the shoot an ‘arrow’ (sagitta), either because it has gone off quite far from the mother-stem and as it were shoots forth, or because it has the look of a dart with the thinness of its point. 8. The top parts of vines and bushes are called switches (flagellum), because they are stirred by the breeze (flatus).
3	We translate Lindsay’s text, but the reading pis (an unknown word) aurum dicitur, “pis means gold,” derives from a misreading, by Isidore or an intermediary, of Servius’s commentary on Aeneid 6.825. There Servius wrote Pisaurum dicitur, “(the city of) Pesaro is so called”: Pesaro is so called because there ‘gold is weighed’ (aurum pensatum est).
4	Codex and caudex are variants of the same word, meaning “trunk” or “book.”
 
XVII.v.9–v.28
9. The shoot (palmes) of a vine is the soft material that,extendingastenderyoungbranches,bearsthefruit. Country people call that part of the vine the palmes for this reason: palmes is a diminutive noun, which is called a ‘noun with a changed ending’ (nomen paragogum; see I.xxxv.3), because it is derived from palma (palm tree). Palma presents the prototype name, which is called the ‘principal,’ because it can form a derivative from itself. 10. Vine-foliage (pampinus) consists of the leaves by whose aid the vine defends itself from cold or heat and is protected from every injury. Therefore it is pruned in some places so that it both lets in sun for the ripening of the fruit and also makes shade. It is called pampinus because it ‘hangs from the shoot’ (de palmite pendeat). 11. Tendrils (capreolus) are so called because they seize (capere) trees, for they are the curls or little hooks by which vines will interlace themselves and hang from trees.Thankstotheirsupporttheshootscanscornwinds and turbulence, hold up their fruit without any danger of falling, and defend themselves along their rambling length.12.Corymbiarethecurlingtendrilsthatbindand hold fast to whatever is nearest, so that shoots are not loosed too far out and torn away by blasts of wind.
13. Grapes (uva) are so called because they are full of liquidinside,ofjuiceandsucculence,forwhathasmoistureontheoutsideishumidus,andontheinside,uvidus. 14. Berry (acinus) . . . Cluster (botrus) . . . A cluster-stalk (racemus, i.e. the stem of a cluster) is a part of a botryo, and botryo (i.e. ‘cluster’) is a Greek word (i.e.  ). 15. Some grapes are called ‘suburban’ because their produce is sold in cities as fresh fruit, because both their appearance and the agreeableness of their taste commend them. Types of these are the early-ripening, the hard, the purple, the finger-long, the Rhodian, the Libyan, the thunderbolt, the crown, the three-foot, the inch-long, and the Cydonian. Those that last through the whole winter are the vennuculan and the Numisian. 16. The early-ripening (praecox) are so called because they come to maturity early and are warmed by the sun before all the others. The Greeks call these lagean grapes, because they rush to ripeness as quickly as a hare (cf. E, “hare”).
17. Purple (purpureus) grapes are named for their color; inch-long (unciarius) for their size; finger-long (dactylus) for their length; crown (stephanitus) for their roundness. Rhodian and Libyan are named from regions,butthunderboltgrapesbecausetheyglowredas fire. 18. Moreover, there are very many species of grapes that are used for wine. Of these, Aminean is so called as if it were ‘without redness’ (sine minium), that is, lacking redness, for it makes a white wine. Although it has onename,itproducesmorethanonetype;theAminean ‘twin’ (duae geminae) so called because it yields double grapes, and the Aminean ‘woolly’ (lanatus), because it has a woolly down, more so than others. The rubellian grape is so called because its woody part is red (cf. ruber, “red”).
19. Faecinian grapes have tiny berries and tough skin; they trail Aminean grapes in quality and surpass them in fecundity. They call it the faecinian grape because it produces more wine-lees (faex, gen. faecis) than other grapes.20.Muscatel(apianus)grapesmakeasweetwine. Unless you pick them quickly they will be injured by rain and wind and especially bees (apis); they are named apian because of the bees’ depredations. 21. Balanite grapesreceivethatnamebecauseoftheirsize,becausein Greekanacorniscalled  .22.TheBituricangrape is allotted its name from its region. It withstands whirlwinds, rain, and heat very hardily, and it does not wither in poor land. The basilisk grape also has this advantage. 23. The argitis is a Greek vine of the white type (cf. , “white”), fecund, producing a huge woody stock and a short, wide leaf; its fruit, unless you gather it at the beginning of the season, either falls to the earth or rots from the damp. 24. The inerticula grape, which the Greeks call amaricion, is black. It makes a good, light wine – whence it takes its name, because it is considered weak (iners) with regard to debilitating one’s strength, although it is not feeble in taste. 25. Mareotic grapes are named from the region of Egypt, Mareotis, from which they first came. They are both white and black. 26. Helvola grapes, which some call ‘variegated,’ are so called from their color, neither purple nor black but dun (helvus), although their must is whitish – for dun has dark and light in its color: it is neither light nor dark as such.
27. In third place are the vines notable for their fecundity only, abundant in their yield and productive of a good quantity of wine. 28. The viticionia vine has large rather than numerous grapes, and thence receives its name because it produces a great deal of wine.5 The Syriac grape is so called either because it was brought
5 The reading viticionia is uncertain.
 
from Syria or because it is black. 29. Moreover there are many species of vines that, with a change of locality, lose both their character and their name.
30. Among others, these activities are most appropriate for vines: loosening the soil, pruning, propagation, and digging. 31. To ‘loosen the soil’ (oblaqueare) is to lay open the soil around the stock and to form hollows to holdwater;somecallthis‘clearingtheroot’(excodicare). 32.Toprune(putare)istocutbacksuperfluousbranches from the vine where the top growth is luxuriant, for to prune is to cleanse, that is to cut off (amputare). 33. To train (traducere) a vine is to ‘lead it across’ (transducere). To propagate (propaginare) is to stretch a shoot of the vine to be buried in the soil, and then as it were to ‘fasten it at a distance’ (porro pangere). Hence the term ‘progeny’ (propago), so called from propagate and ‘stretch out’ (protendere). To dig (fodere) is to make a pit (fovea), as if the term were fovere.
vi. Trees (De arboribus) 1. The term ‘tree’ (arbor), as well as ‘small plant’ (herba), is thought to be modified from the word ‘field’ (arvum), because they cling to the earth with fixed roots. The terms resemble one another because the one grows from the other. When you have cast the seeds on the ground first the small plant springs up, and when it is tended it grows into a tree, and within a short time what you had seen as a small plant you gaze up to as a sapling. 2. A sapling (arbustum) is a new and pliant tree, in which a graft can be made, and it is called arbustum as if it were ‘the spear of a tree’ (arboris hasta). Others would take arbustum as the place where trees grow, like the term for ‘willow thicket’ (salictum); and likewise(i.e.withasimilarderivationalending)virectum (“greensward”), where there are new and green (virere) bushes.
3.Thewordarborfor‘tree’referstobothfruit-bearing and sterile trees, but arbos only to fruit-bearing. We declinewordsfortreesinthefemininegender,butwords for their fruits in the neuter. 4. A shrub (frutex) is a short growth, so called because by its foliage it covers (fronde tegit) the ground; the plural of this word is ‘shrubbery’ (frutectum). But a tree (arbor) is tall. 5. A thicket (silva) is a dense and small grove. Silva is so called as if the word were xylva, because there wood is felled, for the Greeks call wood ?  – for many Latin terms commonly have a Greek etymology. 6. A grove (nemus) is namedfordivinity(numen),becausepaganssetuptheir
XVII.v.29–vi.18
idols there, for groves are sites with larger trees, shady with foliage. 7. A ‘sacred grove’ (lucus) is a dense thicket of trees that lets no light come to the ground, named by wayofantiphrasisbecauseit‘shedsnolight’(nonlucere). Or it is named from ‘light’ (lux, gen. lucis) because in it torches or candles used to give off light against the darkness of the grove.
8. A glade (saltus) is a high thicket of trees, called by this name because it ‘springs up’ (exsilire) on high and rises aloft. 9. An aviaria is a hidden grove so called becauseitisthehauntofbirds(avis).10.‘Secondgrowth’ (recidivum) with regard to trees consists of what sprouts again after other parts have been cut. Some say that recidivum is from ‘falling’ (cadere), because they make new growth after being felled. Others have said that it is from ‘cutting back’ (recidere) and sprouting again. Therefore something may be recidivus (i.e. “restored”) where there has been death or falling.
11. We speak of grafting (insitio) when, after the stem is split, a scion from a fertile tree is grafted (inserere, ppl. insitus) onto a sterile tree; or, it is the implanting of buds when, after the bark is sliced open, the bud of a foreign tree is set into the inner bark. 12. Cuttings (planta) are fromtrees,butseedlings(plantaria)aregrownfromseed and are transplanted with their roots from their original soil. 13. Turf (caespes) is a low growth, as if the term were ‘spears’ (cuspis) or ‘around the feet’ (circa pedes). Branches (frons) are so called because they ‘produce’ (ferre) shoots or shade, for they are the cause of shade. Eyes (oculus) are the nodes from which branches grow. 14. The root (radix) is so called because fixed in the ground in the manner of ‘radiating spokes’ (radius), as it were, it goes down deep, for natural philosophers say that the depth of the roots is equal to the height of the trees. Others say roots are named for their similarity to rays (radius), or because, if they are cut away (eradere), they do not grow back.
15. The trunk (truncus) is the standing part of a tree, and it rests on the root. The ancients called bark (cortex) the corux; it is named cortex because it covers the wood withaskin(corium).16.Liberistheinnerpartofthebark, so called from the bark’s being ‘released’ (liberare), that is, set apart, for it is a kind of medium between bark and wood. 17. Branches (ramus) are what extend from the trunk, just as from little branches (ramusculus) yet othersgrow.Shoots(serculus)aresonamedbecausetheyare cut with a saw (serra). 18. A sucker (virgultum) is what
 
XVII.vi.19–vii.3
springsupfromaroot;abranch,fromthewoodypartof a tree; a twig (virga), from a branch. Properly, however, what grows up at the root of a tree and is lopped off as useless by farmers is called a sucker. It is called virgultum because it is ‘removed from a twig’ (ex virga tollere). A twig (virga) is so named [moreover from ‘vigor’ (vis)] or from ‘strength’ (virtus) because it contains a great deal of vigor, or from ‘greenness’ (viriditas), or because it is a symbolofpeace(i.e.asalictor’srod),becauseitcontrols force (vis). For this reason magicians use wands (virga) to make serpents calm towards each other, and therefore they hold them up tied to a wand (cf. the caduceus; see VIII.xi.47 and the footnote there). Indeed, philosophers, kings, teachers, messengers, and envoys use wands.
19. Switches (flagellum), as I said above (v.8 above), are the highest parts of trees, because they sustain the repeated blasts (flatus) of wind. 20. A cyme (cyma) is so called as if the word were ‘hair’ (coma). A leaf (folium) is called   in Greek, and this name was carried over to our language by borrowing. 21. Flowers (flos, pl. flores) are so called because they quickly drop (defluere) fromtrees,asifthewordwerefluores,fortheyarequickly released.Thesearedoublypleasing:incolorandinscent. They are wilted by the south wind, produced by the west wind. 22. We call a fertile, swelling growth a bud (germen), from ‘bearing’ (gerere); whence also the term ‘germination’ (germinatio). 23. Produce (fructus) takes its name from frumen, that is, the higher part of the throat, through which we ingest. Whence also ‘crops’ (frux). Properly speaking, produce is what comes from fields and trees, especially what we make use of, but we speakof‘produce’withregardtoanimalsincorrectlyand metaphorically.
24. Fruit (pomum) is named from ‘abundant’ (opimus), that is from the abundance of its fruitful growth. Fruits are called ripe (maturus) because they are ready for eating (mandere); likewise, unripe (immaturus), because before they become ripe they are too hard for eating. 25. Firewood (lignum) is so called because when kindled it is converted into light (lumen). Whence likewise the lamp (lichnium) is so called, because it gives light (see vii.65 below). 26. A splinter (astula) is named from‘raising’(tollere)[asifitwere‘splitaway’(abstula)]. Tinder (fomes) is composed of splinters that are cast off fromtreesbylopping,orcharredshavings,orhollowedout firewood. It takes its name from ‘dried fungus’ (fungus), because they catch fire in the same way. Of these, Vergil says (Aen. 1.176):
And he struck flame in the tinder (fomes).
27. A fire-brand (torris) is a burnt piece of wood, commonly called titio, taken from the hearth half-burnt and with the fire out. 28. Sweepings (quisquiliae) are stubble mixedwithbranchesanddryleaves;theyaretherubbish of the land. Rot (caries) is the decayed matter of wood, called this because it occurs in wood that lacks (carere) solidity.
vii. Specific names of trees (De propriis nominibus arborum) 1. The palm (palma) is so called because it adorns the hand of a conqueror, or because it has branches spread out in the manner of a human palm (palma). This tree is the symbol of victory, with high and handsome growth, clothed in long-lasting fronds, andretainingitsleaveswithoutanysuccessionoffoliage. TheGreekscallitthe phoenix(i.e.  @?)becauseitlasts for a long time, after the name of that bird of Arabia that is thought to live for many years. Although it grows in many places, its fruit does not ripen in them all, but it often does in Egypt and Syria. Its fruits are called ‘dates’ (dactylus; cf. "  , “finger”) from their similarity to fingers. The names of the dates vary: some are called palmulae, similar to the ben-nut (myrobalanus); some Theban, which are also called Nicolaian; some nucales, which the Greeks call A  (cf. A R, “date-palm”).
2.	Laurel (laurus) is so called from the word ‘praise’ (laus, gen. laudis), because with it the heads of conquerorswerecrownedwithpraises.Amongtheancients, moreover, it was named laudea; afterwards, with the letter d removed and r substituted it was calledlaurus – just like auricula (“ear”), which originally was pronounced audicula, and medidies, which is now pronounced meridies(“midday”).TheGreekscallthistree ",because it never loses its verdure; for this reason conquerors are aptly crowned with it. It is commonly believed that only this tree is never struck by lightning.
3.	The apple-tree (malum)6 is so called by the Greeks because its fruit is the roundest of all fruits (cf. H ,
6 Latin classes several fleshy tree-fruits under the term malum, including quince, pomegranate, peach, citron, etc. See section 22 below.
 
“apple, any fleshy tree-fruit,” hence “round thing”); whence also those are true apples that are strikingly round. Matian apples (i.e. the apple proper) are named for the place from which they were first brought, for many trees have taken their names from the provinces or cities from which they were brought. Vergil shows lovers what is customarily sought with an apple.7 4. The quince (malum Cydonium) takes its name from a town on the island of Crete – in this regard, the Greeks would call Cydonia the mother of the Cretan cities – and from this fruit cydonitum (i.e. a preserve or medicinal ointment of quince) is made. From it also is made a wine that deceives the appetite of those who are enfeebled, for in appearance, taste, and smell it presents the sensation of any kind of old wine.
5.	The malomellum type of apple is so named for its sweetness, because its fruit has the taste of honey (mel), orbecauseitispreservedinhoney,whenceacertainpoet says (Martial, Epigrams 13.24):
If quinces steeped in Cecropian honey are placed before you, you would say, “I like these honey-apples
(melimelum)!”
6.	The pomegranate (malum Punicum) is so called because that species was brought from the Punic region. Italsohasthenamemalogranatum,becauseitcontainsa great multitude of seeds (granus) within the sphere of its rind.Thetree-namemalusgranataisoffemininegender, but its fruit is of neuter gender. The flower of this tree is called    by the Greeks; Latin speakers call it caducum.ButtheGreekscalltheflowerofwildpomegranates   . Some of these are white, some purple, and somepink,likepomegranateflowers.Physicianssaythat our bodies are not nourished by eating pomegranates, but they consider them better for medicinal use than for eating.
7.	The peach (malum Persicum), which is granted a very brief life, is said to have three types: hard-fruited, Armenian, and Persian. The hard-fruited (duracenus) is so named because its fruit has a ‘sour taste’ (acor;
7	To toss an apple at someone was to flirt, as in Eclogues 3.64, in which Damoetas says Malo me Galatea petit, lasciva puella: “Galatea, the wanton girl, tosses an apple at me.”
8	TheGreekA isanettle-treeorjujube,Zizyphuslotus.Isidore associates the Latin name with the sweetness of honey (mel).
9	Perhaps a corruption of the word hypomelis, gen. hypomelidis, mentioned by Palladius and unidentified – a medlar?
XVII.vii.4–vii.14
cf. durus, “harsh”). The Armenian peach (Armeniacus) is so called because that type was first brought over from Armenia. The Persian peach (Persicus) is so called because Perseus – from whom the Ptolemies claimed that they sprang – first planted that tree in Egypt. In Persia this tree produced a deadly fruit, but in our region the fruit is pleasant and sweet. One kind of peach tree is called ‘early’ (praecox, perhaps the apricot), another ‘summer.’
8.	The ‘citron tree’ (Medica arbor), whose name became famous in the Mantuan’s (i.e. Vergil’s) poems, was first brought from Media, whence it took its name. The Greeks call it " , and Latin speakers citria (cf.citrea,“citrus-tree”)becauseitsfruitandleavesbring to mind the smell of cedar (cedrus). Its fruit is an antidoteforpoison,anditisthispropertythatthesamepoet wishes to be understood when he tells us that the life’s breathisnourishedbyit(Vergil,Geo.2.126–35).Thistree is laden with fruit in almost every season; some of it is ripe, some unripe, some still only in flower – which is a rare thing in other trees.
9.	The mella, which the Greeks call lotos (i.e. A ), is commonly called the ‘Syrian fava bean’ (faba Syrica) because of its shape and color. It is a large tree, bearing an edible fruit, larger than a pepper, with a sweet taste, whence it is called mella.8 10. The plum tree (coccymela), which Latin speakers call prunus for its color (cf. pruna, “red-hot coal”), others call nixa from the multitude of fruit ‘produced’ (eniti, ppl. enixus) by it. The best of this type is the Damascene (i.e. damson) plum, named for the city of Damascus from which it was first imported. The fruit of this species alone is known to be curative for the stomach, for the others are held to be noxious. Only this tree drips with a glutinous and thick gum, which both physicians and scribes use.
11. The oleomela tree grows in Palmyra, a city in Syria, so called because from its trunk an oil (oleum) flows as thick as honey, with a sweet taste. 12. The pomelida9 is similar to serviceberry, a middle-sized tree with a white flower,socalledbecausethesweetnessofitsfruitismixed withasharptaste.Thistreelivesforashortwhile.13.The melopos tree of Africa was named in the Punic language; from it flows a sticky sap named Hammonian after its region (i.e. a region in Libya). 14. The medlar (mespila) tree is thorny, with fruit like apples but a little smaller, and so called because its fruit has the shape of a ‘little ball’ (pilula).
 
XVII.vii.15–vii.25
15. The pear (pirus) seems to be called that because its fruit is oddly shaped in the likeness of fire (cf. !N, “fire”), for this kind of fruit is wide at the base and narrows at the top, like a tongue of fire. The tree is pirus, but thefruitispira.Therearemanyspeciesofpears,ofwhich Crustumian are partly red, named for the town Crustumium. Pears are said to be extremely burdensome when carried by pack-animals, even if there are only a few. 16. The cherry (cerasus) is named from the city Cerasum in Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), for when Lucullus destroyed the Pontic city Cerasum he imported this kind of fruit from there and named it cerasium from the city’s name. Thetreeiscalledcerasus,thefruitcerasium.BeforeLucullus these were in Italy, but only a hard variety, and hence it was also called the cornel-cherry (cornus; cf. cornu, “(hard) horn”). The wood of the tree is good for spears; hence Vergil (Geo. 2.448):
The cornel-cherry (cornus) good for war.
17.	The fig (ficus) is so-named in Latin for its fecundity (fecunditas), for it is more fruitful than the other trees. It produces fruit three and four times in a single year, and while one crop ripens another begins to grow. Likewise the carica (i.e. a dry fig) is also named fromitsabundance.10 TheEgyptianfigissaidtobemore fecund. When wood from it is placed in water it immediately sinks, and after it has lain for some time in the mud it rises to the surface, contrary to what is natural – when soaked it ought to stay down with the weight of the moisture. Formerly athletes would be fed figs, before the trainer Pythagoras switched them to the use of meat, whichisamoresubstantialfood.Itissaidthatfigs,eaten bytheelderlyfairlyoftenintheirdiet,smoothawaytheir wrinkles.Theyalsosaythatveryferociousbulls,tethered to a fig tree, suddenly become tame.
18.	The wild fig (caprificus) is so called because it tears at (carpere; cf. also !, “fruit”) the walls in which it grows up, for it bursts forth and grows out from the hidden spots in which it is germinated. Others think this tree is called caprificus because with its assistance the fig (ficus) tree is made fruitful.11 19. The mulberry tree (morus, also meaning “blackberry”) is so named by the Greeks (i.e.  , “mulberry, blackberry”), and Latin speakers call it the rubus (lit. “blackberry bush”) because its fruit or foliage is red (rubere). There is also a woodland mulberry (mora), bearing fruit that relieves the hunger and need of shepherds in the wilderness.
It is said that its leaves, when thrown onto a serpent, destroy it.
20. The ‘sycamore fig’ (sycomorus), along with the mulberry (morus), have Greek names (i.e.  ,  ). It is called sycomorus (cf. N , “fig”) because its leaves are like the morus. Latin speakers call this the ‘lofty’ (celsus) fig because of its height, for it is not short like the mulberry. 21. The walnut (nux) is so called because its shade or drippings from its leaves harm(nocere)neighboringtrees.Latinspeakerscallitby another name, iuglans, as if it were ‘Jupiter’s nut’ (Iovis glans), for this tree was consecrated to Jupiter. Its fruit has so much virtue that, when it is mingled with suspicious food containing herbs or mushrooms, it drives out, seizes, and destroys whatever is poisonous in it. 22. All fruits covered with a rather hard shell are generically called ‘nuts’ (nux), as pine nuts (pinea), filberts, acorns (glans), chestnuts, almonds. The kernel (nucleus) is also named from nux, because it is covered with a hard shell. On the other hand every soft fruit is called malum, but this term is modified by the names of the regions in which they originated, as Persian, Punic, Matian, Cydonian, and so forth.
23. Almond (amygdala) is a Greek name (i.e. "), which in Latin is called ‘long nut.’ Others call it nucicla, as if it were “the little nut.” Concerning it, Vergil (Geo. 1.187):
When many a nut tree (nux) in the woods clothes itself in flowers.
For among all the trees it first clothes itself in flower, and bears fruit before the other trees. 24. Filberts (abellana) are given their name from Abella, a town in Campania, where they are abundant. These are called Pontic nuts by the Greeks, because they are abundant around the Pontic (i.e. Black) Sea. 25. Latin speakers name the chestnut (castanea) from a Greek term, for the Greeks call it  , because its paired fruits are hidden in a small sack like testicles, and when they are ejected from it, it is as if they were castrated (castrare). As soon as this tree is cut down, it commonly sprouts again like a forest.
10	That is, the Carica fig is abundant in the province of Caria in Asia Minor, whence its name.
11	Pliny explains that “caprification” is the attachment to cultivated fig trees of wild figs, from which gall insects emerge and pollinate the flowers.
 
26. The ‘holm oak’ (ilex) is so called from ‘chosen’ (eligere, ppl. electus), for people first chose the fruit of this tree for their sustenance. Whence also the poet (unidentified):
The first mortals belched the acorn from their throats.
Forbeforetherewasanyuseofgrain,ancientpeoplelived on acorns. 27. The cork tree (suberies) has bark that people harvest; it is very useful because it floats. It is called suberiesbecausepigseatitsfruit.Thatfruitisnourishing for swine, not humans, and it is called suberies as if the term were subedies (cf. sus, “pig”; edere, “eat”). 28. The beech tree and the esculus (i.e. another type of oak tree) are nut-bearing trees thought to be so named because people once sustained themselves from their fruit, eating it for food and taking it as nourishment. Thus esculus is named for food (esca), but the beech (fagus) derives its name from Greek, as @ in Greek means “to eat.”
29. Xyliglycon, which Latin speakers incorrectly call the ‘carob tree’ (siliqua), took its name from the Greeks, becausethefruitofthistreeissweet; ?  indeedmeans “wood,” and  means “a sweet thing.” The juice pressed from the fruit of this tree is called acacia (gum Arabic; cf. , “shittah tree”) by the Greeks. 30. Pistachio (pistacia) is so called because the shell of its fruit emits an odor of pure (pisticus) spikenard.12
31.	The pine (pinus), a resinous tree, is named from the sharpness of its needles, for the ancients would call a sharp thing pinnum. The Greeks call one type of pine ! , another !, which we call resinous (piceus) becauseitexudespitch(pix).Thesealsodifferinappearance. Moreover, on the islands of Germania the ‘tears’ of this tree produce amber (electrum), for the flowing sap hardens, from cold or warmth, into solidity and makes a gem taking its name from its character, namely amber (sucinum), because it consists of the sap (sucus) of the tree. The pine tree is believed to be good for everything that grows under it, just as the fig is harmful to all.
32.	The fir (abies) is so called because it goes (ire; cf. abire, “go away”) further than the other trees and towers aloft. It is naturally lacking in the earthy humor,
12 PisticusinLateLatincametomean“pure,authentic”fromassociation with Greek ! , “faith.” The term was further assimilated to pisticus, a corruption of spicatus, “spiky,” as of spikenard.
XVII.vii.26–vii.36
and accordingly is considered easily handled and light. About it, Vergil (cf. Geo. 2.68):
And (the fir, abies) that will see disasters at sea;
for ships are made of fir. Some call fir Gallicus for its whiteness (cf. , “milk”). Further, fir has no knots. 33. Cedar (cedrus) is called by the Greeks B" , as if it were  B "R I (i.e. cedrus from - +
" ), that is, “moisture of the burning tree.” Its leaves bear a resemblance to those of the cypress. It is a tree of very pleasant odor and long-lasting, and it is never harmed by worms. About it, Persius (Satires 1.42):
And having said things worthy of cedar (cedrus);
that is, because of its lasting perpetuity. The paneled ceilingsoftemplesarealsomadefromthiswoodbecause of its durability. The resin of cedar is called cedar-oil (cedria), which is so useful for preserving books that once they are smeared with it they are not damaged by worms, nor do they grow old with time. Cedars grow in Crete, Africa, and Syria.
34.	The cypress (cyparissus) is so named in Greek (i.e. ! )becauseitshead(caput)risesfromaspherical shape into a point. Whence it is also called W  (“pine cone, pine tree, cone”), that is, “lofty rotundity.” Henceitsfruitisa‘cone’(conus),becauseinitsrotundity itimitatesaconicshape.Thustheyarealsocalled(Vergil, Aen. 3.680) “coniferous cypresses (coniferae cyparissi).” The wood of cypress is closest in character to cedar – it also is suitable for the timbers of temples; its impenetrablesoliditynevergiveswayunderaburden,butitretains its initial strength. The ancients used to pile cypress branches near their funeral pyres so that the pleasant quality of the cypress scent would mask the odor of the corpses when they were burned.
35.	The juniper (iuniperus) is so called in Greek either because it peaks into a narrow tip from a wide base, like fire, or because once kindled it stays on fire a long time – somuchsothatifalivecoalofitswoodweretobecovered with ash it would last up to a year. In Greek, !N means “fire.” Further, one kind of juniper is small, and the other large. 36. The ebony tree (ebenus) grows in India and Ethiopia. When cut it hardens into stone. Its wood is black and its bark smooth, like laurel. The Indian type is spotted with little white and tawny markings, but the Ethiopian, which is considered superior, is not spotted at all but is black, smooth, and hard as horn. In India
 
XVII.vii.37–vii.51
lies the Mareotian marsh, whence ebony comes. Lucan
(Civil War 10.117) speaks of
Mareotic ebony (ebenus).
Ebony is tied onto rattles so that the sight of black things will not frighten an infant.
37. The plane tree (platanus) is so called from the breadth of its leaves, or because the tree itself spreads wide (patulus) and is large, for Greeks call a broad thing ! . Scripture refers to the name and shape of this tree, saying (cf. Ecclesiasticus 24:19): “As a plane tree (platanus) in the streets (platea) I was spread out.” Further, its leaves are very tender and soft, and like those of vines.38.Thequercus,orquernus(“oaktree”),issocalled because the pagan gods would use it to make poetic predictions for those seeking (quaerere) their responses. It is a very long-lived tree – as one reads concerning the oak of Mambre, under which Abraham dwelt, which is said to have lasted for many centuries, up to the reign of the emperor Constans. Its fruit is called the gallnut (galla). A wild type of gallnut is called C ; it is of small size, but with a firm and knotty body, which is used for medicines and purple inks. Another type is  ; it is mild and smooth and very porous, used only for lamps.
39.	The ash (fraxinus) is said to be so called because it prefers to grow in harsh places and mountainous breaks (fragum). Fraxinus is derived from fragum, as montanus from mons. About it, Ovid (Met. 10.93):
And the ash, good for spears.
40.	The yew (taxus) is a poisonous tree, and from it the poison toxicum (cf.  ? , “bow”) is pressed out. The Parthians and other nations make bows from yew, whence the poet (Vergil, Geo. 2.448):
Yews are bent into Iturean bows.
So he calls the Parthians ‘Itureans.’ 41. The maple (acer) is unequaled for its colors (cf. Ovid, Met. 10.95). Hardwood (robur) generally means whateverisverytoughofanywood.42.Thealder(alnus) is so called because it is ‘nourished by a river’ (alatur amne), for it grows very close to water, and survives away from water with difficulty. Because it is nourished in a damp place it is tender and soft. 43. The elm (ulmus) takes this name because it does better in swampy (uliginosus)anddamp(humidus)places,foritislessluxuriant in mountainous and harsh places. 44. The larch (larex, i.e. larix) was given this name from the fort Laricinum. Boards made from it, attached to tiles, repel fire, and do not char when burned.
45. The poplar (populus) is so called because a multitude grows from the base of its trunk.13 There are two kinds of poplar, one white, one black. The white poplar is so called because its leaves are white on one side and green on the other. Hence this type is bicolored, having as it were the marks of night and day, the periods established by sunrise and sunset. It also produces resin when it grows by the river Po or, as others record, in the territoryofSyria.46.Theysaythelinden(tilium)issonamed because it is suitable to use for spears (telum) because of its smoothness and lightness for throwing, for it is a type of the lightest wood. 47. The willow (salix) is so called because it swiftly ‘springs up’ (salire), that is, quickly grows: a pliant tree, suitable for binding grapevines. They say that its seed has this property, that if anyone should consume it in a drink, he will not have children, and it also makes women infertile. The poplar, willow, and linden are all soft woods and good for carving.
48. The osier (vimen) is so called because it has great intensity (vis, accusative vim) of greenness. Its nature is such that, even when it has dried up, as soon as it is watered it becomes green, and then when it is cut and fixedinthegrounditputsdownrootsonitsown.49.The tamarisk (myrice), which Latin speakers call tamaricus, is named for its bitterness (amaritudo), for its taste is very bitter. This tree grows in desolate places in stony soil. From this tree  , that is “hatred” (actually “ahate-charm”),issaidtobestirredupbywitchcraft.50. Myrtle (myrtus) is named from ‘sea’ (mare), because it is by preference a shore tree. Whence Vergil (Geo. 2.112):
Shores are happiest with myrtle (myrtetum), and (Geo. 4.124)
Shore-loving myrtles (myrta).
Henceitisalsocalled  (i.e. )bytheGreeks. Moreover medical texts prescribe this tree as good for many female complaints.
51.Themastic(lentiscus)issocalledbecauseitsspikeis pliant (lentus) and soft, since we call whatever is flexible
13 Isidore says multitudo but implies the homograph populus, “people, multitude.”
 
lentus – whence osiers and vines are also lentus. Vergil (cf. Geo. 4.558, Ecl. 3.38):
And the supple (lentus) vines, for‘flexible.’Mastic’sfruitexudesoil,anditsbarkaresin that is called mastix. It grows abundantly on the island of Chios and is of better quality there. 52. The turpentine tree (terebinthus), its name Greek (i.e.  B ,
 B ),producesaresinexcellentbeyondallresins. 53. The box tree (buxum) has a Greek name partly corrupted in Latin, for in Greek it is called !? . It is an evergreen tree and useful for receiving the shapes of letters because of the smoothness of its wood. Whence also Scripture (cf. Isaiah 30:8): “Write upon box (buxum).” 54. The oleander (rhododendron), which commonly and incorrectly is called lorandrum because its leaves are like laurel (laurus), has a flower like a rose (cf. G" , “rose”). It is a poisonous tree, for it kills animals and heals snakebites. 55. Shepherds call one tree herbitum because they give it to livestock in place of grass where pasturage is lacking.
56. Turbiscus (perhaps , “spurge-flax”) is so named because from one clump of it many shoots rise, as if it were a ‘crowd’ (turba). Straw (stipa) is so named because roofs are thatched (stipare) with it. Its diminutive form is stipula. 57. The reed (arundo) is so calledbecauseitquicklydriesup(arescere).Theancients calledit‘cane’(canna);afterwardsVarrocalleditarundo. It should be understood that the Latin canna derives from Hebrew: in Hebrew canna means “reed” (calamus). Cicuta is the part between the nodes of cane, so called because it is concealed.14 58. It is said that in Indian marshes grow reeds and canes from whose roots is pressed a very sweet juice that people drink. Hence Varro (i.e. Varro Atacinus, not Marcus Terentius Varro) says (fr. 20):
The Indian reed does not grow into a great tree; its sap is squeezed from its supple roots, and no sweet honey can vie with its juice.
59. The elder (sabucus) is a soft and porous tree. The rhamnus is a kind of bramble-bush that commonly is
14	Cicuta is elsewhere the bush ‘hemlock’; see ix.71 below.
15	VergilspeaksoftheCrustumianpear,namedafterthecityCrustumium, and another type of pear, the volemis (Geo. 2.88). Isidore takes them as olives from a misreading of Servius’s commentary on
Vergil.
XVII.vii.52–vii.68
calledbear-briar(sentixursina),averyroughandthorny bush. 60. The briar-bush (sentix) is named from ‘wasteland’ (situs), which is uncultivated land in which briars and thorns grow. Our ancestors would call every prickly tree a thornbush (vepris), because it ‘clings forcefully’ (vi prendere).
61. The wild olive (oleaster) is so called because it has leaves like the olive’s (oliva; cf. the pejorative suffix -aster) but broader. It is an uncultivated and wild tree, bitter and unfruitful. A branch of olive grafted on a wild olivechangesthepotencyofitsrootandconvertsthetree into its proper character as an olive. The sap of the wild olive is of two kinds. One is like gum without any biting quality, the other is ammoniac pitch collected from the drippings, and is biting. 62. The olive (oliva) in Greek is called	  (“olive oil”; cf.	, “olive-tree, olive”), whence it has been taken into Latin as oliva. But the tree itself is olea, the fruit oliva, and the oil oleum. The tree is a symbol of peace, and its fruits are called by diverse names.63.TheorchasolivehasaGreeketymology,andis so called from its likeness to a testicle, which the Greeks call d9. 64. The radiola olive is so named because it is elongated like a ray (radius). The Paphian olive is named fortheislandofPaphosfromwhichitwasfirstimported. 65.Thelyciniaolive,becauseitsoilgivesthebestlight,for 9 means“light”(cf. 9 ,“lamp”).Fromthisthe word ‘firewood’ (lignum) also receives its name, because it is good for burning and light.
66.Thepausiaolive,whichcountrypeopleincorrectly call pusia (i.e. posia), is good for its sweet and green oil. It is called pausia because it is ‘pounded down’ (pavire), that is, crushed – from this word also comes ‘pavement’ (pavimentum). 67. The Syrian olive is so called because it was brought over from Syria, or because it is darkskinned. The crustumia olive is also called the volemis,15 so called because it fills the palm (vola), that is, the middle of the hand, with its large size; from this root we also have the word ‘seize’ (involare). However, some understand the word volemus to mean “good” and “large” in the Gallic language. Pickled olives (colymbas) are so called . . .
68. ‘Olive oil’ (oleum) is named from the olive tree (olea), for as I have already said, olea is the tree, from which is derived the word oleum. But what is pressed from white olives is called ‘Spanish oil,’ and C  in Greek. What is pressed from tawny, immature olives is called ‘green oil,’ but what comes from overly mature
 
XVII.vii.69–viii.6
olives is called ‘common.’ Of these, the one primarily used for human consumption is the Spanish, second the green, third the common. 69. The amurca of olive oil is the watery part, so called from ‘emerging’ (emergere), that is, because it sinks (mergere) below the oil, and it is the oil’s dregs. The Greeks call this , borrowing the word from Latin.
70.Gum(gummi)isaGreekterm;theycallit .71. The Greeks call resin (resina) G , for G@ (“flow”) in Greek means whatever flows. It is the ‘tears’ given off from the ‘sweat’ of wood from such trees as cherry, mastic, balsam, or other trees or bushes that are said to ‘sweat,’ like the odoriferous woods of the orient, such as the sap of balsam and of fennel or of amber, whose ‘tears’ harden into a gem. The chief resin is turpentine (terebinthina), the best of all; it is imported from Arabia Petraea, Judea, and Syria, from Cyprus and Africa, and from the Cycladean islands. Second best is the resin of the mastic tree, which is called mastix; this is imported from the island of Chios. Third pine resin, of which one is ! , the other ! , the one liquid, the other dry. These are imported from Tyrrhenian Colophonia, whence it has taken the name Colophonian resin. 72. Pitch (pix) is a Greek word, which they call !. Others would have it that pitch is named from ‘pine’ (pinus). It is called A (cf. E, “twig”) by the Greeks; we can call it ramalis (lit. “branch-like”). The preferred type of this is clear, smooth, and clean.
73. There are three methods of natural creation of trees: either they grow spontaneously, or they spring from seeds that happen to be lying on the ground, or theysproutfromroots.Humanskillcameupontheother methods with the aid of nature. 74. All fruits16 in Latin are as a rule of feminine gender, with a few exceptions, such as the masculine oleaster (“wild olive”) and neuter siler (“osier”); so Vergil (Geo. 2.12):
The soft osier (Molle siler).
Likewise buxum (“box tree”) is neuter, although it may also be treated as feminine. Some would make a superfluousdistinction,sothatwewouldspeakoftheboxtree in the feminine, but of boxwood in the neuter.
viii. Aromatic trees (De aromaticis arboribus) 1. SpicesarewhateverIndiaorArabiaorotherregionsproducethathaveafragrantscent.Theyseemtohavegotten the name ‘spice’ (aroma) either because they are proper for putting on altars (ara) for invocations to the gods, or because they are known to blend and mingle themselves with air (aer). Indeed, what is scent if not air that has been tinctured by something? 2. Frankincense (tus) is a huge and well-branched tree of Arabia, with very smooth bark and branches like the maple’s, dripping a white, aromatic sap, like an almond tree, that is turned into a powder by chewing. When it is broken it is oily on the inside, and when set on fire it burns easily. Also we call it masculum because it is spherical in its nature like testicles (cf. masculus, “male”). Another type is flat and almost scaly, of lesser quality. It may be adulterated, mixed with resin or gum, but it can be distinguished by its properties, for frankincense, set on fire, burns, while resin fumes, but gum liquefies when heated. 3. Frankincense(tus)issocalledfrom‘crushing’(tundere).Itisalso called libanum after the mountain of Arabia where the Sabaeans dwell, for their mountain, where frankincense is gathered, is called Libanus.
4. Myrrh (myrra) is a tree of Arabia, five cubits high, and is like the thorn that they call O  (“acanthus”). Its sap is green and bitter (amarus), whence it takes the name myrra. The sap that flows spontaneously is more precious, while that drawn out by slashing the bark is considered poorer. From myrrh’s prunings the Arabs feed their fires, and unless they counteract it with the odor of storax, they contract many incurable diseases from its highly noxious smoke. Troglodyte myrrh is so called from an Arabian island where a better and purer form is gathered. 5. The storax (storax) is a tree of Arabia, similar to the quince, whose shoots exude sap from their crevices during the rising of the dog star. When its distillate falls to the ground it is unclean, but when it is preserved in its own bark, it is clean. The distillate clinging to rods and reeds is clean and whitish, but then becomes yellowed because of the sun. The storax itself is reedy, oily, resinous, of pleasant odor, and moist, and it emits a sort of honey-like liquid. Moreover, storax is so called because the sap of this tree flows and is solidified, for the Greeks call a drop of sap an ‘icicle’ (stiria). In Greek the tree is called  ?, in Latin, storax.
6.BdelliumisatreeofIndiaandArabia,andthesapof the Arabic type is better. It is clear, whitish, smooth, oily,
16 A scribal error of omission, preserved in Lindsay’s edition; rather read, “In Latin, people speak of all fruits as of neuter gender, but of trees for the most part as of feminine, with a few . . .”
 
uniformly waxy, easily softened, unmixed with wood or soil, bitter, good-smelling. The kind from India is dirty, black, and comes in larger lumps. It is adulterated with gummixedin,whichmakesitstastenotsobitter.7.Mastix is the sap of the mastic tree (lentiscus). It is also called granomastix because it looks like grains (granum). The better kind grows on the island of Chios, and is goodsmelling, with the whiteness of Punic wax – hence it beautifies the glow of one’s skin. Sometimes it is adulterated with resin or frankincense.
8. The pepper tree (piper) grows in India, on the side of the Caucasian range that faces the sun. Its leaves are likethejuniper’s.Serpentsprotectthepeppergroves,but the inhabitants of that region, when the peppers ripen, burn them, and the serpents are put to flight by the fire – and from this flame the pepper, which is naturally white, is made black. In fact there are several kinds of pepper fruits. The unripe kind is called ‘long pepper’; that unaffected by fire, ‘white pepper’; but that which has a wrinkled and bristly skin takes both its color (i.e. ‘black’) and its name (cf. !N, “fire”) from the heat of thefire.Ifapepperislightinweightitisold;ifheavy,itis fresh. But the fraud of the merchants should be guarded against,fortheyarewonttosprinklelithargeorleadover very old, moistened pepper to make it heavy. 9. The aloa (i.e. ‘aloes,’ Aquilaria agallocha, not ‘aloe,’ Aloe vera; cf. section 28 below) grows in India and Arabia, a tree of very sweet and noble scent. Indeed, its wood is heaped onaltars(altare)inplaceofincense,whenceitisbelieved to have derived its name.
10. Cinnamon (cinnamomum) is so called because its bark is round and slender ‘in the manner of a reed’s’ (in cannae modum). It grows in Indian and Ethiopian lands, and it is a short shrub, only two cubits tall. It is of nearly black or ashy color, and its shoots are very thin. Cinnamon that becomes thick is looked down on, but that which grows fairly thin is choice. When it is broken it emits a visible puff resembling a cloud or dust. 11. Amomum is so called because it produces an odor like that of cinnamon. It grows in Syria and Armenia as a shrub producing seeds in clusters like grapes, with a white flower that looks like a violet’s, leaves like bryony, and a good scent; it induces sweet sleep.
17 The etymology of this plant may refer to the usual meaning of folium, “leaf”; an all-leaf plant would be rootless. Or Isidore may have in mind oleum, “oil,” remarkable for its floating on water.
XVII.viii.7–ix.3
12. ‘Cassia cinnamon’ (casia) grows in Arabia; its stalk has tough bark, and it has purple leaves like pepper. It has a similar character to cinnamon, but less potency, so a double weight of it is mixed into medicines in place of cinnamon. 13. The ‘aromatic calamus’ is named for its resemblance to the common reed (calamus). Grown in India, it is jointed with many nodes, of tan color, and fragrant with a sweetness of aroma. When it is broken it fractures into many pieces, resembling casia in taste with a slightly biting sharpness.
14. The balsam tree (balsamum) existed in Judea within a space of only about sixteen acres. Afterwards, when the Romans took control over that region, it was planted over the widespread hills. Its trunk is like that of a vine, its leaves like those of rue, but whiter and perennial. The tree is called balsam, but its wood is called xylobalsamum, its fruit or seed carpobalsamum, its sap opobalsamum. This last prefix lends its meaning because when it is struck with iron claws the bark of the wood exudes a sap of excellent scent through its cavities – for in Greek a cavity is called C!. People adulterate its sap with oil of the henna tree or honey mixed in, but it can beprovedtobeunmixedwithhoneyifitcoagulateswith milk, and unmixed with oil if, when instilled or mixed in with water, it easily dissolves, and further if woolen clothingsoiledwithitisnotstained.Butadulteratedbalsamdoesnotcoagulatewithmilk,andlikeoilitfloatson top of water and stains clothing. When balsam is pure it has so much strength that if the sun heats it up, it cannot be held in one’s hand.
ix. Aromaticorcommonplants(Deherbisaromaticis sive communibus) 1. The names of certain plants echo their own originating principles and contain the explanation of their naming. Still, you will not discover the etymology of every plant, for their names change with their locale. 2. Folium is so called because floating without any (ullus) root it is gathered on the Indian littoral.17 TheIndianspierceitwiththread,thendryandstoreit.It issaidtobetheherbofParadise,resemblingspikenardin itstaste.3.Spikenard(nardus)isapricklyherb,whenceit is called " 9 by the Greeks (cf.  9, “spike (of grain)”). One type is called Indian, another Syrian – not because it grows in Syria but because the mountain on which it is found faces India on one side and Syria on the other. The Indian takes many forms, but the Syrian is better: light in weight, golden, hairy, small
 
XVII.ix.4–ix.16
of ear, very fragrant, resembling galingale. If it stays long in one’s mouth it dries out the tongue. Celtic spikenard takes its name from a territory in Gaul, yet it grows more abundantly in the Ligurian Alps as well as in Syria; it is a small bush whose roots are gathered into handfuls with cords. Its flower is only good for its scent; its stalks and little roots are considered good for human uses.
4. Costum is the root of an herb growing in India, Arabia, and Syria, but the best is Arabian. It is white and light in weight, sweet, of pleasant scent; the Indian type is black and light like a hollow stalk, whereas the Syrian is heavy, colored like boxwood, bitter in odor – but the best is white, light in weight, dry, and fiery in taste. 5. The ‘saffron crocus’ (crocum) is named from the Cilician town called Corycium, although it also is found in other places, but not as much or of such quality as in Cilicia – whence it takes its name from the more important region. Indeed, many things have taken their names from places where they are more prevalent or are better in some way. The best saffron is that which is fresh, good-smelling, not pale, of extended length, whole and not crumbled into pieces, good to breathe, and when it is grasped staining one’s hands, and stinging slightly. If it is not found in this condition you may know that it is old or diluted. It is adulterated by mixing with the dregs of saffron oil. Also in order to augmentsaffron’sweightground-uplithargeisadded.These things are revealed if the saffron is found to be covered with dust and if, when boiled down, it has lost its properscent.6.Crocomagma(‘saffrondregs’;cf.magma, “dregs of an unguent”) is made when aromatic fluids are pressed out from saffron (crocinus) ointment and the sediment is shaped into little cakes, and therefore it is so called.
7. Hazelwort (asarum) grows on shady mountains, with flowers like those of casia (see viii.12 above). They have a purple flower next to the root, in which a seed like a grape-seed is contained. It has many very slender and good-smelling roots, and its character is like nard’s. Valerian (phu) grows along the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), with leaves like wild olive. 8. Galingale (cyperum) is so called by the Greeks because of its hot quality (cf. !N, “fire”). Its root is like that of a triangular rush, its leaves like a leek’s, its roots black or close to the color of olive roots, and it is very odoriferous and sharp. It grows in swamps and empty places. There is said to be another species of galingale that grows in India and is called zinziber (“ginger”) in their language.
9. The Illyrian iris (iris) took its name from its likenesstotheheavenlyIris(i.e.therainbow).Forthisreason Latin speakers call it arcumen, because its flower, in its variety of color, imitates that heavenly bow (arcus). It is called Illyrian because it is most abundant and fragrant in Illyria. In appearance it has leaves like the gladiolus, andithasanaromaticrootthatisgood-smelling.10.Acorum (perhaps ‘sweet flag’) has leaves similar to the iris, and roots of a very sharp but pleasant scent, for which reason it is also a spice. Meu . . . Cardamom (Cardamomum) . . . 11. The squinum (i.e. schoenum, a kind of rush) that grows at the Euphrates is better than that in Arabia, tan-colored, abounding in flowers, purple, slender; it smells like a rose when it is crumbled in one’s hands, and when tasted it is fiery and biting on the tongue. Its flower is called 9   O  (“flower of rush”), for ‘flower’ is O  in Greek (cf. 9 @ , “rush”). 12. Thyme (thymum) is so called because its flower gives off a fragrance (cf. , “offer by burning”; Y “to burn incense”). About this, Vergil (Geo. 4.169):
The fragrant honey smells of thyme (thymum).
13.	Epithymum (i.e. a parasitic plant growing on thyme) is a Greek name, which in Latin is called ‘flower of the thyme’ (flos thymi), for the thyme flower in Greek is   (and cf. !, “upon”). It is a flower resembling ‘Cretan thyme’ (thymbra).
14.	Marjoram (sampsuchus), which Latin speakers call amaracus, a name that Vergil uses to refer to Venus (cf. Aen. 1.693):
Where the soft marjoram (amaracus), embraces him with shade.
This herb is good for perfumes. It took its name from the page of a certain king who, having accidentally fallen when he was carrying perfumes, created a new and very pleasant scent from their mixing together. 15. Hyacinth (hyacinthus) is a plant that has a purple flower. It took its name from a certain noble boy who was found killed in a glade among purple flowers; the misfortune of this child’sdeathgaveitsnametotheplant.Inrootandflower it resembles an onion, and it delays puberty in boys. 16. The plant narcissus (narcissus) has a name given in the myth of a certain boy whose limbs were transformed into this flower. The flower both keeps Narcissus’s name
 
for its own and retains the glory of his beauty in the splendor of its petals.
17. The rose (rosa) is so called from the appearance of its flower, which blushes (rubere) with a red (rutilans) color. 18. The lily (lilia) is a plant with a milk-white (lacteus) flower, whence it is named, as if it were liclia. Although its petals are white, a glitter of gold appears within it. 19. The violet (viola) gets its name from the strength (vis) of its scent (cf. olere, “be fragrant”). There are three kinds of violet: purple, white, and quinceyellow.20.Acanthus(acanthus)isanevergreenEgyptian plant, full of thorns and with supple shoots. 21. Clothing artfully decorated with an acanthus pattern is called acanthinus. It is also called acanthis.
22. Ivy (hedera) is so called because with its creeping it clings (adhaerere) to trees. About it, Vergil (Ecl. 8.13):
To twine the ivy (hedera) (about your temples) among the victorious laurels.
Others say ivy is so called because the ancients would offer it, in addition to a good deal of milk, as food for kids (haedus). 23. Ivy is naturally a sign of cold land. It is an antidote to drunkenness if someone who is drunk is crowned with ivy. 24. They record that much hellebore (elleborum) grows in Greece near the river Elleborum, and thence it is so called by the Greeks. The Romans call it by another name, veratrum, because when eaten it brings a disturbed mind back to health.18 There are two kindsofhellebore,whiteandblack.25.Aconeisaharbor in Bithynia that is so famous for its crop of harmful herbs that we call noxious herbs ‘aconite’ (aconitum) from its name. The poison called toxicus takes its name because it is pressed from yew (taxeus) trees, especially in Cantabria.
26. Spurge (euphorbium) is so called because its juice sharpensthevisionofone’seyes.19 Itissopowerfulthatit makes tough meat cook more quickly. It grows in many places, but mostly in Mauritania. 27. The plant laser (in classical Latin, “asafoetida”) grows on the mountain Oscobagum where the river Ganges rises. Its juice was first called lacsir because it flows like milk (lac), and then it was named laser in derivative usage. It is called
18	Isidore may think of ‘true,’ verus, as it were ‘sane,’ as involved in the etymology of veratrum.
19	Isidore thinks of the Greek prefix -, “good,” and the Latin orbis, “eye,” though here he uses the common word oculus for “eye.”
XVII.ix.17–ix.34
Cyrenian opium (opium) by some because it grows in Cyrene. 28. Aloe (aloe) is an herb of very bitter juice. Panaces (cf. !, “all-heal, Ferulago galbanifera”) is aplantoffragrantsmell;ithasastemlikethegiantfennel from which flows the juice called opopanax. It is yellow and oily, with a heavy and very bitter smell. Galbanum (galbanum) . . .
29. Dicte (Dicta) is a mountain in Crete from which the plant dittany (dictamnum) took its name. For its sake, in Vergil (Aen. 4.73), a wounded doe scours the Dictaean groves, for it is of such potency that it drives iron from one’s body, and rids it of arrows, whence wild beasts, hit by arrows, cast them from their bodies by feeding on it. Some Latin speakers call it ‘pennyroyal of Mars’ (puleium Martis) because it shakes off the missiles of war. 30. Mandrake (mandragora) is so called because it has a sweet-smelling fruit the size of a Matian apple; hence Latin speakers call it ‘apple of the earth.’ Poets name it A!   (“human-formed”), because it has a root that resembles the human form. Its bark, mixed with wine, is given for drinking to those whose bodies need to undergo surgery, so that they are sedated and feel no pain. There are two kinds of mandrake: the female, with leaves like lettuce’s, producing fruit similar to plums, and the male, with leaves like the beet’s.
31. The poppy (papavera) is a sleep-inducing herb, about which Vergil (Geo. 1.78):
The poppy (papaver) suffused with Lethean sleep –
for it brings sleep to sick people. One type of poppy is cultivated, the other wild, from which flows the juice called opium (opion). 32. The colocynth (colocynthis) is a wild cucumber that is ferociously bitter. It stretches its vines over the earth as the cucumber plant does. It is called ‘colocynth’ because it has a spherical fruit (cf.   ,“roundgourd”),andleaveslikethecommon cucumber’s.33.TheGreeksnamethe‘centaury’(centaurea) thus (i.e.   ) because it is reported to have been discovered by the centaur Chiron. It is also called   because it grows in moist places (cf. , “marsh”). It is also called ‘gall of the earth’ because of its bitterness. 34. Licorice (glycyriza) is so called from the Greek because it has a sweet root, for  in Greek means “sweet” (and cf. ?, “root”). The same plant is called O"4  (cf. "4, “thirst”) because it allays thirst for thirsty people.
 
XVII.ix.35–ix.51
35.Dracontea(i.e.aplantresemblingarum)issocalled because its spike is varicolored like a snake, and it bears the likeness of a dragon (draco), or because a viper fears that plant. 36. The celandine (chelidonia) is so called either because it seems to sprout with the coming of swallows (cf. 9"E, “swallow”) or because if the eyes of young swallows are plucked out, their mothers are said to heal them with this herb. 37. The heliotrope (heliotropium) got its name at first because it flowers at the summer solstice, or because it revolves and turns its petals with the sun’s movements (cf. a , “sun”;  ! ,“turn”),whenceitiscalled‘sun-follower’(solsequia) by Latin speakers. It opens its flowers at sunrise and closes at sunset. Latin speakers also call one species of heliotrope ‘wild chicory’ (intubum silvaticum). This is also verrucaria, so called because it gets rid of warts (verruca) when its juice is drunk, or removes them when applied as a poultice.
38. Pentaphyllon is so called from the number of its petals (cf. !B , “five”, 1  “leaf, petal”), whence Latinspeakerscallitcinquefoil(quinquefolium,lit.“fivepetal”). This plant is so clean that it was customarily employedbythepagansforpurificationintheirtemples. 39. Hyssop (hyssopum) is an herb good for purging the lungs.WhenceintheOldTestamenttheywouldsprinkle anyone who wished to be ritually cleansed with lamb’s blood on bunches of hyssop. It grows on crags, clinging to the rock by its roots. 40. Rhubarb (reubarbara), or reuponticum, takes these names because the former is gathered across the Danube on barbarian (barbaricus) soil, the latter is gathered around the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea). It has further the prefix reu, because that is “root” (radix), as if the terms were radix barbara and radix Pontica.
41. The herb called henbane (hyoscyamos) by the Greeks is called the ‘chalice-like’ (calicularis) herb by Latin speakers, because its calyxes (caliculus) grow in the shape of goblets like those of pomegranates. Their edgesaresaw-toothedandtheyhaveseedsinsidelikethe poppy’s. This herb is also called insana because using it is dangerous; indeed if it is eaten or drunk it causes insanity or hallucinations. It is commonly called milimindrum because it induces aberration of mind (mens). 42. Saxifrage (saxifraga) is so called because its seeds crack and break up stones in the bladder (cf. saxum, “rock”; frangere, “break”). Gentian (gentiana) takes its name, as physicians record, from its discoverer;20 its rootsresemblethoseofbirthwort(aristolochia).Itgrows at the foot of the Alps and in Asian Galatia.
Savory (satureia) is hot and almost aflame. People think its name was given it, because it inclines people to lust. 43. Satyrion is so called from satyrs (Satyrus) because of its incitement to lasciviousness; it is commonly called stincus because it arouses lust.21 This is the same as the orchid (orchis), because its root is shaped like testicles, which the Greeks call d9. It is also called ‘hare-like’(leporinus)becauseitsendsoutasupplestalk. 44. The nettle (urtica) is so called because contact with it scorches (adurere) one’s body, for it is of an entirely fiery nature and it inflames (perurere) at the touch, whence it also causes an itch (prurigo).
45.Theherbwormwood(artemesia)wasdedicatedby the pagans to Diana, whence it was named, for in Greek Diana is called l . 46. Chamomile (chamaemelos) is so called in Greek because it has the aroma of Matian apples(malum)anditisshortandclosetotheground(cf. 9, “on the ground”). 47. Germander (chamaedrys; cf. "N, “oak”) is so called by the Greeks because it is short,spreadingoutovertheground,andtiny,withvery small leaves. 48. Paeon was a certain physician by whom theherbpeony(paeonia)isthoughttohavebeendiscovered, as Homer says. Some call it glyciside because it has a sweet taste (cf. , “sweet”; ", a plant), or pentorobina(i.e.pentorobos;cf. !B ,“five”; d  ,“vetch seed”) from the number of its seeds, or as others say, dactylos from its resemblance to fingers (cf. "  , “finger”). It grows in the woods. 49. Bugloss (buglossos) issocalledbytheGreeksbecauseithasveryroughleaves like an ox’s tongue (cf.  N, “ox”; W, “tongue”). The ancients recorded that it should be infused in wine to nourish wisdom in a wonderful way. It is also said to give joy to banquets. It is eaten as a green vegetable.
50. Arnoglossos, that is, ‘lamb’s tongue’ (cf. , “lamb”), is called plantain (plantago) by the Romans, because its cutting (planta) quickly roots in the ground. Many eat it as a vegetable. 51. Herpyllos, which we call ‘wild thyme’ (serpillus), because its roots snake (serpere) a long way. The same herb is called ‘mother’s heart’
20	Pliny says this discoverer was Gentius, king of the Illyrians.
21	Isidore may refer to the scincus, a kind of lizard whose dried skin was supposed to be an aphrodisiac.
 
(animula matris) because it stimulates menstrual flow. 52. Birthwort (aristolochia; cf. O  , “best”;  9, “childbirth”) is so called because it is best for women who have just given birth, for applied post partum it purges the womb with the benefit of its vapor. There are two kinds of this herb: one is called ‘round birthwort’ because it has a round root; the other is ‘long birthwort’ because it has a long root and also longer branches and leaves. They also call it dactylitis (cf. "  , “finger”) because its root has a finger’s strength and length. 53. Groundsel (erigeron) is so named by the Greeks (cf. n, “early, in spring”; BA, “old” (the plant is so named for its hoary down)) because it first ‘becomes old’ (senescere) in spring, whence Latin speakers call it senicio. It grows along garden walls.
54.Psylliosissocalledbecauseithasaseedresembling a flea (pulex), whence Latin speakers call it ‘fleawort’ (herba pulicaris). 55. Hierobotane gets this name from the Greeks (cf. 8  , “sacred herb”) because the pagans pronounced it good for people’s medicines and bandages and for priests’ purification rituals. Whence the high priests called it sagmen, as if the word were sancimen (cf. sancire, “make sacred”); it is also called verbena, because it is pure (cf. verus, “true”). 56. The herb Christ’s-thorn (paliurus) is very rough and thorny. Some call soapwort (struthios) the ‘woolworker’s plant’ (herba lanaria) because many of them wash wool with it. It grows in cultivated land. [The fern splenos (cf. asplenos, section 87 below) is so called because it takes away ill-temper (splen).] 57. Cimicia is so called from its resemblance to the bed-bug (cimex), whence the Greeks also called it   (“coriander”; cf. , “bedbug”). It grows in both harsh and cultivated land.
58. Horehound (marrubium), which the Greeks call ! , is so called because of its bitterness (amaritudo). It grows in fields. 59. Pennyroyal (puleium) [is more precious than pepper among the Indians]. 60. Wormwood(absinthium)isaGreekterm(i.e. 4 ). The more approved type of it grows in the region of the Pontus (i.e. the Black Sea), whence it is also called absinthium Ponticum. 61. Comfrey (symphytos) is so called in Greek (i.e.   ) because it has so much potencyinitsrootthatitdrawstogetherscatteredchunks of meat in the pot (cf.  , “causing to draw together”).62.Thepolypodion(i.eafern)isaplantwhose rootisshaggyandlong-hairedlikeanoctopus(polypus),
XVII.ix.52–ix.72
whence is derived the name polypodion. It grows in friable, stony soil, or near oaks. 63. The herb named poleygermander(polios)bytheGreeks(cf. ! ,“hulwort”) iscalledomnimorbiabyLatinspeakersbecauseitrelieves many diseases (morbus; cf. omnis, “all”). It grows in mountains and places with harsh soil.
64. Scammony (scammonia), which Latin speakers call acridium, is an herb full of juice that is collected by digging around its root. To be precise, they dig a round pit in the earth and then, with snail-shells or the leaves of a nut-tree placed below, the juice is collected and taken away once it has dried. The preferred variety quite often comes from Mysia in Asia; a false kind, of opposite quality, is from Syria or Judea. 65. Daucos (i.e. a kind of parsnip or carrot) has leaves like fennel and a stalk two palms long. Citocacia (perhaps the dwarf olive) is so calledbecauseitquickly(cito)purgesthebelly(cf.cacare, “defecate”);commonlyandincorrectlyitiscalledcitococia. 66. Burdock (lappa) is so called because it has a huge stalk extending across the ground. This herb is called A!  (“man-loving”) by the Greeks because it sticks to people’s clothing due to its rough surface. It grows by walls.
67.‘Venus’shair’(capillumVeneris)issocalledbecause it reestablishes hair (capillum) lost from alopecia, or becauseitdiscourageshairloss,orbecauseithassmooth, black shoots that shine like hair. It grows in wet places. 68. Madder (rubia) is so called because its root is red (rubra),whenceitissaidtodyewool.69.‘Dyer’sbugloss’ (anchusa)stainsone’sfingerswhenitsrootisrubbed;itis blood-colored,andthereforeisusedbypaintersformaking crimson. 70. Pine-thistle (chamaeleon) is called viscarago in Latin because it produces bird-lime (viscum); birds stick to it when they voluntarily come down to eat. 71. Hemlock (cicuta) is so called because on its jointed stalk it has hidden nodes, like a reed – in the same way that we call a hidden ditch ‘blind’ (caecus). When given to someone to drink this herb kills; Socrates drank it in prison and died. Persius (Satires 4.2):
(Believe him) to say, whom the dire draught of hemlock snatches away.
Although it is poisonous for humans, it makes she-goats fat.
72. Clover (trifolion; cf. folium, “leaf”), which the Greeks call   , is so called because it has three
 
XVII.ix.73–ix.93
leaves on each stem-juncture. 73. Mullein (phlomos) – which Latin speakers call ‘lamp-herb’ (herba lucernaris) because it is used to make lamp-wicks – is also called lucubros because it gives light (lux) in shade (umbra).22 74. Chamomile (pyrethron; cf. section 46 above) is so called in Greek because it has a fiery and clumped root (cf. !N, “fire,” and  , “crowded together”). 75. The marsh mallow (althaea) is the wild mallow (malva), or malvaviscus; called althaea because it rises on high (altum), and viscus (“birdlime”; cf. viscosus, “sticky”) because it is sticky. 76. Wild marjoram (origanum), which is translated colena in Latin, because infused in wine it colors (colorare) it.
77.Spurge(titimallum,i.e.tithymalus)takesthisname because its ‘hair’ of foliage, twisting around, turns toward the sunbeams, for the Greeks call the sun    and hair ; from the compound of these the term titimallum was derived. There are seven species of it growing in diverse places. 78. Nightshade (strychnos) is called the ‘healing herb’ (herba salutaris) in Latin, because it eases headache and acid stomach. It is also called ‘wolf-grape’ (uva lupina) because its seed looks like a grape. 79. Knot-grass (polygonos) is called by Latin speakers ‘bloody herb’ (herba sanguinaria) because it causes bleeding when applied to one’s nose.23 80.House-leek(ambrosia)iscalled‘wildparsley’(apium silvaticum) by Latin speakers. About it, Vergil (Aen.
1.403):
And from her head her ambrosial (ambrosius) locks breathed a divine fragrance.
81. Apiago is so called because bees (apis) eagerly seek out its flowers. Purslane (portulaca) . . .
Rosemary (rosmarinum), which Latin speakers call the ‘healing herb’ (herba salutaris) for its powers, has leaves like fennel’s, rough and spread over the ground in whorls. The Egyptian bean (colocasia) [is the name of a plant]. 82. ‘Wild mint’ (menta agrestis), which the Greeks called , and we commonly call nepeta (“calamint”), is quite potent and strong in heat. 83. The plant genicularis is spread on the ground to repel scorpions.Thegladiolus(gladiolus)hasleaveslikeswords(gladius),astalkacubitlong,andpurpleflowers.84.Mullein (verbascum; see sections 73 above and 94 below) . . . Agaric (agaricum), root of a white vine. Calamites (cf.  , “reed-like”) . . . Lappa [a kind of herb (see section 66 above)]. Lappago . . . Lapella . . .
Beneola . . . Orcibeta . . . [Satyrion, (see section 43 above)] . . . The ben-nut (myrobalanum) . . .
85. The asphodel (asphodelus), which Latin speakers call albucium for its color (cf. albus, “white”). Squill (scilla) is so called because it is harmful (cf. the monster Scylla); a pagan superstition about it says that if it is hung whole in a doorway it chases away anything bad. 86. St. John’s wort (chamaepitys) is so called by the Greeks because it clings to the earth and smells like pine (cf. 9,“ontheground”; ! ,“pine”).Latinspeakers call it cucurbitularis because it partly recalls the scent of a gourd (cucurbita). Staphysagria grows in pleasant places (cf.  M , “stavesacre”). 87. Spleenwort (asplenos) is so called because it takes away ill-temper (splen; cf. section 56 above). It is also called scolopendrios because its leaves resemble a centipede (scolopendrum). It grows on damp rocks. 88. The vulvus (i.e. bulbus, “edible bulb, onion”) is so called because its root is rounded (volubilis) and spherical.
‘French lavender’ (stoechas) grows on the Stoachades islands, whence it is named. 89. Cyclamen (cyclaminos) is so called in Greek after a certain person named Cyclos who first discovered the virtues of this herb – or, because it has a rounded root, for the Greeks call a “roundedthing”  .Itsrootoritsjuice,ifmixedwith wine, makes people drunk. It grows in wooded places or in fields. 90. l!  , or bryony (bryonia), is called ‘white vine’ (vitis alba) by Latin speakers, either because of its color or because its root, when pulverized and rubbed on one’s body, makes the skin softer and whiter. Also the juice of its berry causes dry breasts to produce milk. 91. l!  B (i.e. black bryony), that is ‘black vine’ (vitis nigra), is also called ‘wild vine’ (labrusca); its leaves are like ivy’s, and it is larger than white vine in every respect, with similar berries that grow black as they ripen, whence it took its name. 92. The plant viticella is so called by Latin speakers because like a grapevine (vitis) it grasps whatever is nearbywithitstendrils,whichwecall‘ringlets’(anulus).
93. A chrysanthemum (bupthalmus) has a yellow flower like an eye, whence it got its name in Greek (cf.  N, “ox”; Co, “eye”). It has a pliant stalk and
22	TheGreek is‘phlome,’ofwhichlamp-wicksweremade, and   is “mullein.”
23	In Natural History 27.113 Pliny says the polygonos staunches nose-bleed.
 
leaves like the coriander’s, and it grows by city walls. 94. Mullein (phlomos), which Latin speakers call verbascum, has a masculine species, with whiter and narrower leaves, and a feminine, with broader and dark leaves (see section 73 above). 95. Fennel (ferula) is so called from its pith, for Varro records that the pith of fennel is what the Greeks call " . Some say ferula (also meaning “rod”) is from the verb ‘strike’ (ferire), for boys and girls would be flogged with it. Its juice is galbanum (galbanum). 96. Papyrus (papyrum) is so called because it is good for fires and candles, for the Greeks call ‘fire’ !N.
The rush (iuncus) [is so called because it clings with joined (iungere, ppl. iunctus) roots]. 97. The bulrush (scirpus), with which fields of grain are covered, has no knots, whence Ennius (Satires 27):
They look for a knot, as people say, in a bulrush (scirpus).
And in the proverb, “A hostile person looks for a knot eveninabulrush.”98.Theorchella-weed(fucus)isakind of plant with which clothing is dyed, so called because it counterfeitsanothercolor(cf.fucatus,“sham”).Whence Vergil (Ecl. 4.42):
Wool will (no longer) learn to counterfeit colors.
99. Seaweed (alga) grows in water, and is like a crop of grain. Thus it received its name, from the coldness (algor) of water – or, because it binds (alligare) one’s feet, because it is thick, with its leaves partly rising above the water. 100. Sedge (ulva) and typhus (cf.  , “reedmace”) are plants that grow by springs and bogs and in swamps. Sedge is a pliant seaweed and in a way a fungus, and derives its name from “marsh” (uligo). 101. But typhus becomes inflated with water – whence the ‘inflated self-opinion’ (tumor) of ambitious and selfsatisfied people is called typhus.
102.Reed-grass(carex)isasharpandverytoughplant, resembling Spanish broom. Whence Vergil (Geo. 3.231): Feeding on sharp reed-grass (carex).
103. ‘Spanish broom’ (spartus) is a reedy brush without leaves, named for roughness (asperitas), for the coils of rope that are made from it are rough. 104. Grass (gramen) is rather named for its location, because it grows in most fields (ager, gen. agri), whence the Greeks call it OA . However, any plant may be called gramen, from the fact that it sprouts (germinare), just as robur (“oak,” or more generally “wood”) is the term for
XVII.ix.94–x.8
every kind of wood, as well as for the particular species, because oak is the strongest. 105. A fern (filix) is so called from the singleness of its leaf (folium, cf. filum, “a single strand”), for from one stalk a cubit high grows one divided leaf, with an intricate structure like a feather’s. Oats (avena) . . . Darnel (lolium) . . . 106. Tares (zizania), which poets always refer to as the ‘unhappy darnel’ because it is useless and unfruitful. Hay (faenum) is so called because flame is fed by it, for W means “flame.” We call a handful of hay a ‘sheaf’ (manipulum), and it is called manipulum because it “fills the hand” (manum implere).
x. Garden vegetables (De oleribus) 1. A garden (hortus) is so called because something always ‘springs up’ (oriri) there, for in other land something will grow once a year, but a garden is never without produce. 2. The word ‘vegetable’ (olus, i.e. holus) is so called from ‘nourishing’ (alere), because humans were first nourished by vegetables, before they ate grain and meat. Indeed, they only fed on the fruits of trees and vegetables, as animals feed on herbage. 3. The stalk (caulis) is generically the term for the middle stem of herbs and vegetables, and is commonly called a thyrsus, because it rises from the ‘ground upwards’ (terra sursum). From caulis is derived more particularly a certain species of vegetable called ‘cabbage’(caulis),becauseitsstalk‘makesstronggrowth’ (coalescere), that is, grows, fuller than that of other vegetables. It is, moreover, a general term, for any stem (frutex) [is called] a stalk (caulis). 4. The cyme (cyma) is so called as if the word were coma (“hair”), for this term means the crown of vegetable plants or trees, in which is located the natural power to make plant life.
5.Themallow-plant(malva)isnamedpartlyfromthe Greek term  (“soften”) because its nature is to soften and loosen the bowels. Its juice, if one mixes it with oil and anoints oneself with it, is said to protect against being stung by bees. Its leaves, ground up with oil and applied, are thought to make scorpions sluggish. 6. The carrot (pastinaca) is so called because its root is an excellent nourishment (pastus) for humans, for it has a pleasant aroma and is delectable as a food. 7. The turnip (rapa) is so named from ‘seizing’ (rapere), that is, ‘taking root’ (comprehendere, also meaning “seize”). It has a root wider than a navew, sweeter in taste, and has a slender leaf. 8. The navew (napus) is so called from its similarity to the turnip, except that it has broader leaves
 
XVII.x.9–xi.2
and the taste of its root is sharper. The two vegetables have linked names that are almost identical because the seed of one changes into that of the other by turns. As Aemilianus (i.e. Palladius) says (Treatise on Agriculture 8.2.2), a turnip in one soil turns into a navew after two years,whileinanothersoilthenavewturnsintoaturnip.
9. The ‘turnip cabbage’ (napocaulis) has a name composed of the names of two vegetables, because while in taste it resembles the navew (napus), it grows up not as a root vegetable but as a stalk in the manner of cabbage (caulis). Mustard (sinapis) is so called because its leaves are ‘like navews’ (similis napis). 10. What we call a radish (radix,alsomeaning“root”)theGreekscallraphanus(cf. G,“radish”),becauseitpressesentirelydownward whereas the other vegetables rather spring upwards. If one has stained one’s hands with the crushed seeds of radishes, one will handle snakes with impunity. Further, even ivory may be whitened by use of a radish. Mixed with food it also resists poison, for radishes, nuts, lupines, citron, and celery are good against poison, but against poison taken afterwards, not against poison already ingested. Hence, among the ancients, the custom was to put these foods on the tables before the other foods.
11.	Lettuce (lactuca) is so called because it flows with an abundance of milk (lac, gen. lactis), or because it replenishesnursingwomenwithmilk.Inmenitrestrains sexual activity. Wild lettuce is what we call serralia (i.e. sarracia) because its back looks like a saw (serra).
12.	Chicory (intubus) is a Greek term (cf. V  , “endive”), and is called intubus because it is ‘a tube within’ (intus tubus). The onion (cepa) is so called because it is only a head (caput). 13. The shallot (ascalonia) is named after one of the cities of Palestine called Ascalon, from where it was first imported. 14. Garlic (alium)issocalledbecauseitstinks(olere).Ulpicum(i.e. atypeofleek)issonamedbecauseithasthesmellofgarlic. They say that phaselus (i.e. a bean) was named after theGreekislandPhaselos,notfarfromMountOlympus. 15. The leek (porrum) has two types, one having a head (capitatus), the other able to be cut (sectilis, i.e. chives). The latter is smaller, the former larger. For us the beet (beta) is a kind of vegetable; for the Greeks it is a letter of the alphabet. Blite (blitum) is a kind of vegetable with a bland taste, as if it were a ‘poor beet’ (vilis beta).
16. Cucumbers (cucumis, gen. cucumeris) are so called because they are sometimes bitter (amarus); they are thought to grow sweet if their seeds are steeped in honeyed milk. Gourd (cucurbita) . . . Apoperes . . . Watermelon (pepo), melipepo (cf. B, “honey”), and basil (ocimum) are obviously Greek names, and their origin is uncertain to Latin speakers. Olus molle (lit. “soft vegetable”) . . . Orach (atriplex) . . . Brassica (i.e. a kind of cabbage) . . . Olisatrum (i.e. holusatrum, a seashore plant resembling cabbage) . . . 17. Cress (nasturcium) is named for its savor, because its bitterness ‘wrenches one’s nose’ (nasum torquere). 18. Mushrooms (fungus) are so named because when dried they catch fire at contact, for W means “fire.” Whence mushrooms are also commonly called esca (lit., “food”) because they are both food for fire and a nutriment. Others say mushrooms are so called because certain kinds of them are killers, whence comes the term ‘the defunct’
(defunctus).
19. A swelling (tumor) of the earth brings forth the truffle (tuber), and hence gave it its name. The volvus (i.e. a type of edible bulb) is so called because it is rounded (volubilis) and spherical. Asparagus (asparagus) is so called because the stalk from which it grows is prickly and rough (asper). 20. The ‘caper plant’ (capparis) seems to have taken its name from the Greeks (i.e. !!), because it has a rounded seed-capsule (capitulum) at its tip. The ‘wild radish’ (armoracia), that is, lapsana . . . Lapistrus . . . Sorrel (lapathium) taken with food comforts one’s stomach and suppresses sexual desire. 21. The thistle (carduus) . . . Rocket (eruca), formed as if it were uruca (cf. urere, “burn”), because it is of fiery potency and if taken often with food it incites the flame of lust. There are two kinds of rocket, one cultivated and the other wild, of sharper potency; both arouse sexual activity.
xi. Aromatic garden plants (De odoratis oleribus) 1. Parsley (apium) is so called because in antiquity the top (apex, gen. apicis), that is the head, of those making a triumph would be garlanded with it. Hercules was the first to gird his head with this plant – sometimeshewouldwearpoplaronhishead,sometimeswild olive, sometimes parsley. Parsley’s roots effectively fight against lurking poisons. These are its types: petroselinon, hipposelinon, and oleoselinon. 2. Rock-parsley (petroselinon) is so called because it resembles parsley and grows in rocks (cf. !B  , “rock”) and craggy mountains. We can call it petrapium, for B  in Greek
 
means parsley (apium). The best and most preferred kind is the Macedonian, of sweet taste and spicy aroma. 3. ‘Horse-parsley’ (hipposelinon; cf. j!! , “horse”) is so called because it is tough and sour. ‘Oil-parsley’ (oleoselinon; cf. oleum, “oil”) is so called because it has a softer leaf and a tender stalk.
4. Latin speakers name one plant ‘fennel’ (feniculum) because the juice of its root or stalk ‘sharpens one’s vision’ (acuere visum; cf. oculus, “eye”). Concerning its power they say that snakes shed their skins each year after tasting it. The Greeks call this vegetable  . 5. Lovage (ligusticum) takes its name from a region, for it grows mainly in Liguria; it has a spicy aroma and a sharp taste. 6. The Greeks name an herb O , or as Latin speakers call it, ‘anise’ (anesum), which is known to all, very sharply burning, and diuretic. Dill (anethum) . . . Cummin (cyminum) . . . 7. Corian-
XVII.xi.3–xi.9
der (coriandrum) took its name from the Greek, and they call it  . Its seed, when given in sweet wine, makes people very prone to sexual activity. If you give more than a proper measure of it, it fosters madness. Also it is reported that gray hair may be dyed by coriander. Southernwood (abrotanum) . . . Chervil (caerefolium) . . .
8. Rue (ruta) is so called because it produces a sensation of intense heat (perhaps cf. urere, “burn,” or ruere, ppl. rutus, “rush”). Another type is wild rue, of sharper power, but both are known to be very hot. Weasels show that rue fends off poisons, because they protect themselves by eating it when they fight with snakes. 9. Sage (salvia) . . . Elecampane (inula) is called ala by country people, and has an aromatic root of very strong smell with a slight bitterness. Mint (menta): there are six types of it.
 

 
Book XVIII War and games (De bello et ludis)
 
 
i. War (De bellis) 1. Ninus, king of the Assyrians, was the first to wage war. Not at all content with his own boundaries, this Ninus, breaking the compact of human society, began to lead armies, to destroy other lands, and to massacre or subject free peoples. He completely subjugated the whole of Asia up to the borders of Libya in an unprecedented slavery. From this point on the world strove to grow fat in reciprocal bloodshed with one slaughter after another.
2. Now there are four kinds of war: just, unjust, civil, and more than civil. A just war is that which is waged in accordance with a formal declaration and is waged for the sake of recovering property seized or of driving off theenemy.Anunjustwarisonethatisbegunoutofrage, and not for a lawful reason. Cicero speaks of this in the Republic (3.35): “Those wars are unjust that are taken up without due cause, for except for the cause of avenging or of driving off the enemy no just war can be waged.” 3. And he adds this a little further on: “No war is considered just unless it is officially announced or declared, and unless it is fought to recover property seized.” Civil (civilis) war occurs when factions arise among fellowcitizens (civis) and hostilities are stirred up, as between SullaandMarius,whowagedcivilwaragainsteachother within one nation. 4. A ‘more than civil’ war is where not only fellow-citizens, but also kinfolk fight – this was done by Caesar and Pompey, when father-in-law and son-and-law fought each other. Indeed, in that battle brother struggled against brother, and father bore arms against son. Lucan (Civil War 2.151):
Brothers fell as the battle-prize of their brothers.
Again (2.150):
To whom the slashed neck of a parent would yield.
5. Wars are also defined as internal, external, of slaves, of allies, and of pirates. Pirate (piraticus) wars are sporadic wars on the sea against brigands, when light, swift
1 Both “war” and “lovely” are bellum in Latin.
359
pirate ships plunder not only shipping routes but also islands and provinces. With wonderful speed Gnaeus Pompey first checked and then defeated such pirates after they had wrought great destruction for a long time on land and sea. 6. As what is waged against external enemies is called ‘war,’ so ‘insurrection’ (tumultus) is what is stirred up by civil sedition. Sedition (seditio) is a dissension (dissensio) of citizens, so called because they separate (seorsum ire) into different factions. Others think sedition is named from ‘dissension of minds,’ which the Greeks call " . 7. Cicero explains how the two differ (Philippics 8.3): “There can be,” he says, “a war such that an insurrection will not happen, but there cannot be an insurrection without war. Indeed, what other is an insurrection than a disturbance so great that a greater fear (timor) arises?” Whence an insurrection (tumultus) is so called as if it were ‘great fear’ (timor multus). “An insurrection is more severe than a war, for in a war exemptions from service can take place, in an insurrection they cannot.”
8. Moreover war, battles, and skirmishes (bellum, pugna,proelium)differfromeachother.Thus,thewhole affair is called a war, as ‘the Punic war.’ Its segments are battles, as the battle of Cannae, or of Thermae. Again, in one battle there are many skirmishes – for different skirmishes take place in the wings, in the middle, and at the ends of the battle line. A war is the whole conflict, a battle is of one day, and a skirmish is part of a battle. 9. Formerly a war was called a duel (duellum), because there are two (duo) factions in combat, or because war makes one the victor, the other the defeated. Later, with one letter changed and another deleted, it becomes the word bellum. Others think it is so called by antiphrasis – because it is horrid, whence the verse (Vergil, Aen. 6.86):
Wars (bellum), horrid wars –
for “lovely” (bellum) is the contrary of a very bad thing.1
10.	Skirmishes (proelium) are named from ‘pressing down’ (imprimere), as an enemy presses down the enemy. From this also is the press-beam (prela
 
XVIII.i.11–ii.8
ligna) with which grapes are pressed. A battle (pugna) is so called because originally people used to fight wars with their fists (pugnus), or because a war would first begin with fistfights (pugna). Whence a pugna is sometimes between two people and without iron weapons.
11.	Four activities occur in war: battle, flight, victory,and peace. The word ‘peace’ (pax, gen. pacis) seems to be drawn from ‘pact’ (pactum). A peace is agreed upon afterwards; first a treaty is initiated. A treaty (foedus) is a peace that is made between contenders, named either from‘trust’(fides)orfromfetiales(i.e.theRomanpriests charged with confirming peace or war), that is, priests. Throughthefetialestreatiesweremade,justaswarswere made by lay people. Others think that treaties are so called from a sow foully (foede) and cruelly slaughtered, the kind of death desired for anyone who may withdraw from a peace treaty. Vergil (Aen. 8.641):
And they would join in treaties with the slaughter of a sow.
The parts of a treaty are truces (indutiae), and they are called indutiae as if they were ‘breaks in the fighting for a day’ (in dies otia).
ii. Triumphs (De triumphis) 1. Every realm in this world is procured in wars and extended by victories. A victory (victoria) is so called because it is attained by ‘force’ (vis), that is, ‘strength’ (virtus). This is the law of nations, to expel ‘force by force’ (vim vi), for a victory acquired by guile is wicked. A sure victory is either the killing or the complete despoiling of the enemy, or both. But the victory attained at huge cost is not happy, and this is why Sallust (Histories 3.29) praises generals who win victory with an unbloodied army. 2. A ‘solemn procession’(pompa)isatermthattakesitsmeaningfromthe Greek word ! ! (“lead in a procession”), that is, to be publicly displayed. But a victory precedes a procession, because the first thing for those going into combat is a votive offering for victory.
3.A‘victorytrophy’(tropeum)takesitsnamefromthe term   ! (“turning”), that is, from the turning and rout of the enemy. This is because anyone who routed theenemywouldmeritatrophy,andanywhokilledhim, a ‘triumphal procession’ (triumphus), so called from the word  (i.e.  , “triumphal hymn”), that is, from exultation. A triumph is due to someone who attains a complete victory, and a trophy for a half-complete one, because he has not yet attained a complete victory, for he has not captured, but routed the enemy. But writers confuse these terms. Tranquillus (i.e. Suetonius, Prata 109), however, says that triumphus is the preferred term in Latin, because he who entered the city in a triumph would be honored by a threefold judgment:ingrantingatriumphforageneralitwascustomaryforthearmytojudgefirst,thesenatesecond,and the people third. 4. It was moreover the custom of the Romans that those making their triumph would ride in chariots, because the early generals would go into battle thus equipped.
Further, whoever conquered in combat would be crowned with a gilded palm-wreath, because the palm hasthorns,butwhoeverlaidthefleeingenemylowwithout combat would get a laurel wreath, because that tree is without thorns. 5. Moreover, those triumphing were clothed in the purple toga embroidered with palms, and would carry a staff (scipio) with a scepter in their hand in imitation of the victory of Scipio, although a scipio is a staff by which people support themselves. Whence that first Cornelius was called Scipio, because his blind father would walk in the forum leaning on a staff. On this scipio would sit an eagle, to signify that by victory the triumphant ones approached celestial greatness. 6. Hencethevictorswouldbesmearedalloverwithredpigment, as if in imitation of the appearance of divine fire. However, they would be accompanied by a hangman, to signify that, even though they were lifted up to such an exalted state, they might still be forcibly reminded of their human mediocrity.
7.Anarmymaybewipedoutintwoways,bywholesale slaughter or by dispersal. Sallust (fr. 6): “The enemy,” he says, “would be crushed, or dispersed.” And Vergil speaks thus of both ways. By slaughter (Aen. 1.69):
And sink the swamped ships.
By dispersal (Aen. 1.70):
Or drive them apart and scatter their bodies in the sea.
8. Pillage from the enemy consists of booty, plunder, spoils,andbooty-shares.Booty(praeda)issocalledfrom plundering(praedari).Plunder(manubiae),becauseitis takenawaybyhand(manus).Alsospoils(exuviae)areso
 
The Etymologies	XVIII.iii.1–iv.5
 
namedfrom‘stripoff’(exuere),becausetheyarestripped from bodies. And booty-shares (pars) are so called from the equitable (par) division of spoils according to the rank of the person and a fair judgment of their efforts. The word ‘spoils’ (spolia) itself is from ‘garments’ (pallium), as if the word were expallia (i.e. “unclothings”), for they are stripped away from the vanquished.
iii. Militarystandards(Designis) 1.Militarystandards (signum) are so called because an army receives from them its signal for retreat both in the course of fighting and in the case of victory, for an army is ordered either by the sound of a trumpet or by a signal flag. The major standards of the legions are eagles, dragons, and orbs. 2. Eagles, because that bird was auspicious in Jupiter’s combats, for when Jupiter set out against the Titans, people say an eagle appeared as a good omen for him. Fortunate in its protection, and taking it as a sign of victory, Jupiter made the eagle the emblem for a legion. Hence it came about that it was afterwards employed in military standards. Lucan recalls this, saying (Civil War
1.7):
Standards (against standards), eagles matching eagles, and javelins threatening javelins.
3. The standard of dragons originated in the killing of the serpent Python by Apollo. Hence they began to be carried in battle by Greeks and Romans. 4. Augustus is said to have established the orb (pila) as a standard – because the nations of the whole globe (orbis) were subjected to him – so that he might the more display the figure of the globe (orbis).
5. A banner (vexillum) is also a battle-sign, having its name drawn from the diminutive of ‘sail’ (velum), as if it were velxillum. Under Romulus, soldiers had small bundles of hay for their banners; hence their companies were called manipuli, for we give this name to bundles of hay that ‘fill the hand’ (manum implere). According to militarycustomthereareothersignsthatdisplaydiverse images by which an army recognizes itself in the tumult of battle.
iv. War-trumpets (De bucinis) 1. A war-trumpet (bucina) is the means by which a signal is given to go against an enemy, so called from its ‘sound’ (vox, gen. vocis), as if it were vocina – for villagers and country people on every occasion used to be called together to theirmeetingplacebyawar-trumpet;properlytherefore thissignalwasforcountrypeople.Aboutthis,Propertius (cf. Elegies 4.1.13):
The war-trumpet (bucina) drove the ancient Quirites to arms.
Its clangor is called a ‘blare’ (bucinum). 2. The Tyrrhenians first invented the trumpet (tuba), whence [also] Vergil (Aen. 8.526):
The Tyrrhenian clangor of the trumpet (tuba) blasted through the air.
This trumpet was conceived of by Tyrrhenian pirates, when, scattered along the seashore, they were not easily called together by voice or bucina to each opportunity for booty, especially with the wind roaring. 3. Hence afterwardsinbattlesitwasusedforannouncingmilitary signals so that, where a herald could not be heard amid the tumult, the sound of a blaring trumpet (tuba) would reach. It is called tuba as if it were tofa, that is, hollow. Again, tuba, as if it were tibia (“flute”).
4.Theancientsdistinguishedbetweentrumpet(tuba) and war-trumpet (bucina), for a sounding war-trumpet would announce alarm about approaching war – Vergil
(Aen. 7.519):
With which the dire war-trumpet gave its signal.
But they would signal a battle under way with the trumpet, as (Vergil, Aen. 9.503):
But the trumpet (sounded) its terrible sound.
Thesoundingofthetrumpetvaries:sometimesitsounds for battle to be joined, sometimes to chase the fleeing enemy, sometimes for retreat. A retreat (receptus) is the name of the maneuver by which an army regroups (recipere), whence the expression ‘to sound the signal for retreat.’ 5. Classica are horns made in order to call people together, and they were called classica from ‘call together’ (calare). About these, Vergil (Aen. 7.637):
And now the classica sound.
However, among the Amazons the army is not called by a trumpet, as armies that are called by kings, but their army of women is called together by the queen with a sistrum.
 
XVIII.v.1–vii.4
v.	Arms (De armis) 1. Arms (arma) generally are instruments of all kinds; hence the places where they are stored are called storage-chests (armaria). Again, arms and weapons (telum) are of all kinds, but arms are instruments by which we are protected, and weapons are what we throw. Thus there are two kinds of arms, that is, either for striking or for shielding. 2. Arms properly are so called because they cover the shoulders, for arms (arma) are named from ‘shoulders’ (armus), that is, from upper arms (umerus), as (Vergil, Aen. 11.644):
The spear driven through his broad shoulders (armus) quivers.
Or arma derives from the name l, that is, from
‘Mars.’
vi.	Swords(Degladiis) 1. A sword (gladius) is generally called a ‘blade’ (ensis) in military use, but the blade is the iron part only, whereas a sword is the whole thing. Properly it is called gladius because it ‘divides the throat’ (gulam dividere), that is, cuts the neck. It was made for this purpose first, for other limbs are more efficiently cut by battle-axes, but the neck only by the sword. 2. The edge (acies) of a sword is so called from its sharpness (acumen). The hilt (capulus) is so named either because itisthehead(caput)ofthesword,orbecauseitisgrasped (capere) there so that it may be held, for the edge does notallowtheswordtobeheldinanyotherway.Theterm ‘point’ (mucro) pertains not only to a sword, but also to thecuttingedgeofanykindofweapon.Itissocalledfrom itsextendedlength,fortheGreekssay  for‘long’– and hence also another term for sword, machaera. A machaera is a long sword that is sharp on one side.
3.Aframeaisaswordsharpenedonbothedges,which is commonly called a spata (i.e. spatha). It is also called a rhomphaea. The framea is so called because it is of iron (ferreus) – for it is called framea as if the word were ferramentum (i.e. an iron implement), and thus every swordmaybecalledaframea.4.Thewordspatha(“broad sword”) is from ‘suffering,’ from the Greek term, for the Greek !@ means “to suffer,” whence we say patior (“I suffer”) and patitur (“he suffers”). Others assert that spatha was so named in Latin, because it is ‘spacious’ (spatiosus), that is, broad and large – whence also comes the term spatula (i.e. “broad piece (of meat)”) with regard to livestock. 5. A semispathium is a sword named for its length of half a spatha and not, as the ignorant masses say, from ‘without a space of time’ (sine spatio), seeing that it is swifter than an arrow.
6. The dagger (pugio) is so called from piercing (pungere) and transfixing. It is a small sword, double-edged, and worn at the side. It is also called a clunabulum, because it is girded at the hip (clunis). 7. The swallowtailed (chelidoniacus) sword is a broad weapon with a double tip that is bifurcated like a swallow’s tail, whence it is called swallow-tailed (cf. 9"E, “swallow”). 8. A poniard (sica) is so called from ‘cutting’ (secare). It is a short sword mainly used among the Italians by those who engage in highway robbery, whence also highway robbersarecalledsicarii.Moreover,Tranquillus(i.e.Suetonius, History of Games 195) says: “When the sword of a certain gladiator who had been sent into the games was bent, losing its straight edge, someone ran up to fix it. Then the fighter responded, ‘Thus, ha! (Sic ha), will I fight.’ Thence it was given the name sica.” 9. Axes (securis) are symbols that were carried in front of consuls.TheSpanishcallthemfranciscaebyderivationfrom theirusebytheFranks(Franci).Theyhadthosesymbols thus carried so that they would not lose the habit of war, or forget the look of weapons during peacetime.
vii. Spears(Dehastis) 1. A spear (hasta) is a shaft (contus) with an iron head; its diminutive is ‘dart’ (hastilia). The name hasta comes from ‘craft’ (astus), whence also is the term ‘cunning’ (astutia). 2. A pike (contum) has no iron, but only a sharpened tip. Vergil (Aen. 5.208):
The iron-pointed javelins and the pikes (contus) with their sharpened tip.
And contum is as if the word were conitum (“coneshaped”), for a cone (conum) is a cylinder brought to a point. 3. Javelins (trudis) are poles with a crescentshaped iron piece that the Greeks call aplustria. They are rightly called trudes because they shove (trudere) and thrust down (detrudere). Vergil (Aen. 5.208):
The iron-pointed javelins (trudis).
4.	Hunting-spears (venabulum) are so called as if the term were venatui (h)abilis (“apt for hunting”), or because they ‘intercept the oncomer’ (venientem excipere),asiftheywereexcipiabula.Indeed,“Theyintercept (excipere) boars, lie in wait for lions, and penetrate bears, if only one’s hand is steady” (cf. Martial, Epigrams 14.50).
 
The Etymologies	XVIII.vii.5–ix.4
 
5.	A lance (lancea) is a spear with a strap attached to the middle of its shaft; it is called lancea because it is thrown weighed equally in the ‘scales’ (lanx, ablative lance), that is, with the strap evenly balanced. 6. A strap (amentum)isthethongofthrowingspearswhichisfitted tomid-shaft,andhenceamentumbecauseitistiedtothe middle (medius) of the spear so that it can be thrown. 7. A club (clava) is of the kind that belonged to Hercules, so called because it is bound with rows of iron nails (clavus). It is made one and a half cubits long. There is a javelin called cateia, which Horace calls caia. It is a type of Gaulish projectile made of the toughest possible wood, which certainly does not fly far when thrown, because of its weight, but where it reaches it smashes with very great force. If it is thrown by a skillful man it comes back to the thrower. Vergil records it, saying (Aen. 7.741):
Used to hurling cateiae in the Teutonic (Teutonicus) manner.
Whence the Spanish and Gauls call them tautani.
8. A falarica is a huge missile made on a lathe, having an iron piece a cubit long and a ball of lead in the shape of a sphere. It is also said to have fire attached to its head. One fights with these missiles from towers, which makes clear why they are so called. Juvenal (cf. Satires 6.590):
You take counsel before the siege-towers (fala) and the columns supporting the dolphins.
Therefore falarica is named from fala, just as muralis (“mural”) is from murus (“wall”). Lucan rightly says it is hurled with twisted thongs by a certain siege-engine (Civil War 6.198):
So that now the falarica hurled by twisted thongs.
But Vergil says that Turnus cast a falarica with his hand (Aen. 9.705). 9. Weapons that are spears and missiles employedbyhurlingorcastingarecalled‘heavyjavelins’ (pila). Of these, Lucan (Civil War 1.7):
Standards (against standards), eagles matching eagles, and javelins (pila) threatening javelins.
The singular is pilum.
2	As cuspis is regularly used of a spear tip it seems likely that posterior is an error, and that Isidore intended to write “the fore part of a spear.”
3	In classical use a scorpio is a kind of catapult.
10. A missile (telum) is so called after a Greek etymology, from the word   (“from afar”); it is anything that can be thrown a long distance. Metaphorically, a sword is also called a telum, as in this verse (Vergil, Aen.
9.747):
But (you will not avoid) this telum that my right hand wields with force.
Properly speaking, however, a telum is named for its length – just as we call a weasel mustela because it is longer than a mouse (mus). 11. A cuspis is a thonged spear,namedfromcaespes(“earth”)becauseitisashoot. Vergil (Aen. 7.817):
And the pastoral myrtle with a spear-point (cuspis) at its head.
Properly speaking, however, the cuspis is the rear part of a spear.2
viii.	Arrows (De sagittis) 1. The arrow (sagitta) is named for its ‘keen striking’ (sagax ictus), that is, its swift striking. It is borne on feathers like a bird so that death might swiftly hasten for a person. The people of Crete first used arrows, on which feathers, as we have said, were glued so that they would be light and fly. 2. Scaptus...(perhapscf.scapus,“shaft”).Darts(spiculum) are short arrows or lances, named for their resemblance to ‘spikes of wheat’ (spica). 3. A ‘scorpion’ (scorpio) is a poisonedarrow,shotbyaboworacatapult,thatreleases a poison at the spot where it pierces the person whom it strikes – whence it receives its name scorpio.3
ix.	Quivers(Defaretris) 1. A quiver (faretra, i.e. pharetra)isacaseforarrows,sonamedforits‘carrying’(ferre) darts, just as ‘bier’ (feretrum), where a corpse ‘is carried off’(deferre).Forthisreasonthesetwowordshaveacommon etymology, because ‘a quiver carries death, and a bier carries a dead person’ (pharetra mortem, feretrum mortuum portat). 2. Coriti are properly cases for bows, as quivers are for arrows. A sheath (vagina) is so called because in it a foil or sword is carried. 3. A case (teca, i.e. theca), so named because it covers (tegere) whatever is held in it, with the letter c put for g. Others claim that theca is from a Greek word (cf. , “chest”), because something is stored there – whence a storage place for books is called a bibliotheca. 4. Sword-canes (dolon) are wooden sheaths in which a knife is concealed with
 
XVIII.ix.5–xiv.1
the appearance of a cane. Sword-canes are named from ‘guile’ (dolus), because they trick and deceive by hiding an iron blade under the guise of wood. Commonly people call them by the Greek name oxus, that is, “sharp” (acutus). Whence among physicians an ‘acute’ illness is called C?@.5.Abow(arcus)issocalledbecauseitwards off (arcere) the adversary. Hence also those places that ward off the enemy are called ‘citadels’ (arx, gen. arcis). Again, ‘bow’ from its appearance, because they are bent ‘rather tightly’ (artius).
x.	Slings (De fundis) 1. The sling (fundum) is so called becausefromitstones‘arepoured’(fundere),thatis,cast. 2.Abalista(i.e.ballista)isakindofengineofwarnamed fromthrowingstones,forinGreek @ means‘throw.’ It is wound up with a thong of sinew and hurls either spears or stones with great force. Hence it is also called a fundibalus, for its ‘pouring forth’ (fundere) and casting. A testudo (“siege shed,” lit. “tortoise”) is an effective defense against the ballista; it is an armored wall made by interlocked shields.
xi.	The battering ram (De ariete) 1. The battering ram (aries) gets its name from its appearance, because like a fighting ram (aries) it batters a wall with its impetus. A head of iron is fashioned on a strong and knotty treetrunk,and,suspendedbyropes,theramisdrivenagainst a wall by many hands, and then drawn back it is aimed again with a greater force. Finally, beaten with frequent blows, the side of the wall gives way, and the battering ram breaks through where it has caved in, and makes a breach. 2. Against the thrust of a battering ram the remedy is a sack filled with straw and set in the place where the battering ram strikes, for the impact of the thrust of the battering ram is softened in the yielding hollow of the sack. Thus harder things give way rather easily to softer. 3. Plutei are hurdles woven from rawhide that are set up as protection from the enemy when constructing siege-works. 4. A musculus is made like a tunnel, and with it a wall (murus) is undermined; from this it takes its name, as if it were murusculus.
xii.	Shields(Declypeis) 1. A ‘bronze shield’ (clipeus) is a rather large buckler, so called because it shields (clipeare), that is, it covers, the body and removes it from danger, after the term B!  (i.e. “steal, disguise”). When it is held opposed to the enemy, by its defense it guards the body from spears and darts. A clipeus is for foot soldiers, and a buckler (scutum) for horsemen. 2. The buckler (scutum) is so called because with it one ‘shakes off’ (excutere) the force of missiles. To resist missiles, the shield is carried in front. The boss (umbo) of a buckler is the middle part, as if it were the navel (umbilicus). 3. A short, round shield is called an ancile, of which Vergil (Aen. 7.188):
He carried an ancile with his left hand.
And ancile is so called from ‘cutting around’ (ancisio), becauseitisroundedandasifitwere‘cutaway’(ancisus) on all sides. Ovid (Fasti 3.377):
They call it ancile because it is ‘lopped off’ (recisus) on all sides; wherever you look, no angle is present on it.
4. A peltum (i.e. pelta) is a very short buckler shaped like a half moon. The book of Kings records it (cf. III Kings 10.16–17 Vulgate): “King Solomon made two hundred bucklers of pure gold and three hundred peltae of fine gold.” 5. A [s]cetra (i.e. caetra) is a shield of woven leather without wood, which the Africans and Moors use. About it, the poet (Vergil, Aen. 7.732):
A cetra covers their left arms.
6. A parma is a light shield, as if it were ‘small’ (parva), and not a clipeus. It is also called a testudo, because this shield is built in the shape of a tortoise-shell (testudo). A testudo is also an interlinking of shields curved in the shape of a tortoise-shell, for soldiers take the names of various types of arms from animals, as ‘battering ram’ (aries, “ram”). And Sallust (Histories 3.36): “In the shape,” he says, “of a military ‘hedgehog’ (iricius, i.e. ericius, ‘spiked barrier’).”
xiii.	Cuirasses (De loricis) 1. The cuirass (lorica) is so called because it ‘lacks thongs’ (lorum carere), for it is made only of iron rings. 2. ‘Scale-armor’ (squama) is an iron cuirass made from iron or bronze plates linked together in the manner of fish scales (squama), and namedfortheirglitteringlikenesstofishscales.Cuirasses arebothpolishedandprotectedby‘goat-haircloth’(cilicium).
xiv.	Helmets (De galeis) 1. The helmet called cassis is made of metal plates, and the galea of leather, for a leather cap is called a galerus. The cassis was named by
 
The Etymologies	XVIII.xiv.2–xvi.2
 
the Etruscans, and I think they named that helmet cassis from the word ‘head’ (caput). 2. The apex is what stands at a helmet’s top, where the crest (crista) is attached, and the Greeks call it W  – for the conus is the curved peak of a helmet on top of which is the crest.
xv.	The Forum (De foro) 1. A forum (forus/forum) is a place for holding trials, so called from ‘speaking’ (fari, 1st person singular for), [or from King Foroneus, who first gave laws to the Greeks]. This place is also called the Prorostra because the beaks (rostrum) of Carthaginian ships, seized in the Punic wars, were removed and set up in the Roman Forum, to be a sign of this victory. The ‘legalforum’(forus)moreoverconsistsofthecomplaint, the law, and the judge. 2. A complaint (causa) takes its name from the ‘event’ (casus) from which it arises. The complaint is the basis and origin of a proceeding, not yet opened up for trial and examination. When it is put forward it is a complaint, when it is examined it is a trial, when it is finished, it is the judgment. A trial (iudicium) is so called as if the word were iuris dictio (“a statement of the law”), and judgment (iustitia) as if the word were iuris status (“establishment of the law”). Formerly a trial was called an inquisitio, whence we call the plaintiffs and overseers of trials quaestores or quaesitores.
3.Theword‘business’(negotium)meansmanythings: sometimes the ‘transaction’ of some matter, as opposed to ‘leisure’; sometimes the bringing of a complaint, which is a legal dispute. And it is called negotium as if it were ‘not leisure’ (nec otium), that is, ‘an absence of leisure’.Wespeakofnegotiuminlawsuitsandnegotiation (negotiatio) in commerce, where something is traded so that more can be gained. 4. A ‘dispute’ (iurgium) is so called as if it were ‘the chatter of law’ (iuris garrium), because those who plead a case debate over the law. Litigation (lis) formerly took its name from disputes about boundaries (limes, gen. limitis). About this, Vergil (Aen.
12.898):
A boundary-stone (limes) was laid, to settle litigation (lis) about the field.
5.	A lawsuit consists either of argumentation or ofevidence. Argumentation never arrives at a proof by means of witnesses or written documents, but it discovers (invenire) the truth by investigation alone. Hence it is called argumentation (argumentum), that is, a ‘clear discovery’ (argutum inventum). Evidence (probatio), however, involves witnesses and the authority of documents.
6.	For every trial six persons are needed: a judge, aplaintiff, a defendant, and three witnesses. The word ‘judge’ (iudex) is so called as if the word were ‘telling the law’ (ius dicere) to the people, or because he ‘decides lawfully’ (iure disceptare). But to decide lawfully is to judge justly; he is not a judge if justice is not in him. 7. The plaintiff (accusator) is so called as if the word were adcausator, because he summons ‘to a lawsuit’ (ad causam)thepersonwhomhecites.Thedefendant(reus) is named from ‘the matter’ (res) about which he is prosecuted, because even if he is not guilty of the crime, he is nevertheless called the defendant as long as he is being prosecuted in a trial about some matter. 8. In antiquity the witnesses (testes) were called ‘those standing over’ (superstes, plural superstites), because they were brought forward ‘over the status’ (super statum) of the lawsuit. Now, with part of the word taken away, they are called testes.
9. A witness is evaluated with regard to condition, nature, and conduct. Condition: whether one is a free person, not a slave – for often a slave, out of fear of the master, suppresses testimony of the truth. Nature: whether one is a man, not a woman. For (Vergil, Aen.
4.569)
Always a changeable and fickle thing is a woman.
Conduct: whether one is upright and untainted in behavior. If good conduct is missing, a person is not trustworthy, for justice cannot keep company with a criminal. 10. There are two kinds of witnesses, either those telling what they have seen, or those revealing what they have heard. Witnesses also are delinquent in two ways: when they utter falsehoods, or cover up true things by their silence.
xvi. Spectacles (De spectaculis) 1. A ‘spectacle’ in my view is in general the name for a pleasure that corrupts notinitself,butthroughthosethingsthataredonethere. Spectacles (spectaculum) are so called because there a public viewing (inspectio) is offered to people. They are also called shows (ludicrum) because they take place at games (ludus) or at feasts.4 2. The origin of games is said
4 Some manuscripts read “on stages” (in scenis) for “at feasts” (in cenis).
 
XVIII.xvi.3–xxvi	Isidore of Seville
 
to be thus: Lydians from Asia settled as immigrants in Etruria with their leader Tyrrhenus, who had yielded to his brother in a dispute over the kingdom. Therefore, among the other rituals of their superstitions, they also establishedspectaclesinthenameoftheirreligion.From there the Romans borrowed the performers who had been brought in, and hence games (ludus) are named from Lydians (Lydius).
Varro, however, says that games were so called from ‘amusement’ (lusus), because youths on festival days would entertain the populace with the excitement of games. Hence people think of it as the amusement of young people in connection with festival days, temples, and religious ceremonies. 3. There is nothing more to be said now concerning the origin of the word, since the origin of the thing itself is idolatry. Hence games are also called, indiscriminately, Liberalia, in honor of Father Liber. For this reason you should take note of the stain of the origin of spectacles, so that you may not consider as good what took its origin from evil. A game may be gymnastic, or of the circus, or gladiatorial, or theatrical.
xvii.	Gymnastic games (De ludo gymnico) 1. A gymnastic game is the pinnacle of speed and strength. Its place is in the gymnasium, where athletes exercise and the speed of runners is put to the test. Hence it happens thattheexercisesofnearlyalltheartsarecalledgymnasia. 2. Formerly, those competing in such places would gird up their garments, rather than go naked. Then a certain runnertookafallanddiedwhenhisbeltcameloose.For thisreasoninaccordancewithadecreeofthecouncilthe magistrate Hippomenes then permitted everyone thereafter to exercise naked. Hence it is called a gymnasium (cf. , “naked”), because youths exercise naked in the arena, where they cover only their privates.
xviii.	Types of gymnastics (De generibus gymnico-rum) There are five types of gymnastics: jumping, running, throwing, feats of strength, and wrestling. Hence they say that a certain king, who had that same number of adolescent sons, ordered them to compete for the kingdom in that many types of gymnastics.
xix.	Thejump(Desaltu) A jump (saltus) is so called as if it were ‘to leap on high’ (exsilire in altum), for jumping concerns leaping higher or farther.
xx.	The race (De cursu) A race (cursus) is named for swiftness of legs (crus, gen. cruris), for running concerns swiftness of foot.
xxi.	Thethrow(Deiactu) The throw (iactus) is named from throwing (iacere). Hence a fisherman’s cast-net is called a iaculum. The exercise of this skill involves taking up stones and hurling them a long way, balancing spears and throwing them, and shooting arrows from a bow.
xxii.	Feats of strength (De virtute) Feats of strength (virtus) involve high levels of physical strength (vis, plural vires) deployed in exertion and in weight-lifting.
xxiii.	Wrestling (De luctatione) Wrestling (luctatio) is so called from the gripping of flanks (latus) by which the fighters bear down in hand-to-hand struggle. Wrestlers are referred to by the Greek term ‘athlete’ (athleta).
xxiv.	The palestra (De palaestra) A wrestling place is called a palestra (palaestra). The term, they say, derives either from the term !, that is, ‘wrestling,’ or from !, that is, ‘a movement of a powerful overthrow’ – doubtless because in wrestling, when they grasp one another’s middles, they almost crush them, and that is called ! in Greek. Some suppose that the art of wrestlingwasrevealedbythefightingofbears,foramong all the beasts they alone stand erect in their grappling, and quickly crouch and turn back, and by turns sometimes attack with their paws and sometimes avoid grappling, in the manner of wrestlers.
xxv.	Competitions(Deagone) WhatinLatinare‘competitions’ (certamen) are called in Greek W, from the crowds in which they were celebrated: indeed, any gathering or convening is called an agon. Others think theyarecalledagonsbecausetheyareproducedinarenas that are ring-shaped – as if the word were agonia, that is, ‘without corners’ (sine angulo; cf. A, “angle”).
xxvi.	Types of competitions (De generibus agonum)The types of competitions were: greatness of strength, swiftnessinrunning,skillatarchery,enduranceinstandingstill,movementinmarchingtolyreorpipes,andalso competitions over good character, beauty, singing, and further, over skill in land war and naval battle, and contests about withstanding torments.
 
The Etymologies	XVIII.xxvii.1–xxxiii.1
 
xxvii.	Circus games (De ludis circensibus) 1. The circus games were established for the sake of sacred rites and celebrations of the pagan gods; hence, those who watch them are seen to be devoted to demons’ cults. Formerly,simpleequestrianeventswereperformed,and the common custom was not at all deserving of censure, but when this natural practice developed into public games it was converted into the worship of demons. 2. And so this kind of competition was dedicated to Castor and Pollux, to whom, the stories teach us, horses were granted by Mercury. Neptune also is a god of the equestrian game, and the Greeks call him j!!  (cf. j!! , “horse”); horses in the games are also consecrated to both Mars and Jupiter, and it is they who preside over the four-horse chariots.
3. The circus (circensis) games are so called either from ‘going in a circle’ (circumire), or because, where the turning-posts are now, formerly swords were set up which the chariots would go around – and hence they were called circenses games after the ‘swords around’ (ensis + circa) which they would run. And indeed, those driving chariots on the shore along the banks of rivers would set up swords in a row at the riverbank, and part of the art of horsemanship was to wheel around these dangerous obstacles. From this the circenses games are thought to have been named, as if the term were ‘around swords’ (circum enses).
xxviii.	The circus (De circo) 1. The circus was chiefly dedicatedbythepaganstothesungod,whoseshrinewas inthemiddleoftheracetrackandwhoseeffigyshoneout from the gable of the shrine, because they did not think that he, whom they believed was in the open, ought to be worshipped under a roof. A circus is the whole space that horses would race around. 2. The Romans think that it was called circus from the ‘circuit’ (circuitus) of horses, because there the horses race around (circum) the turning-posts. But the Greeks say it was named after Circe,daughterofthesungod,whofoundedthiskindof competition in honor of her father, and from her name they argue that the term circus derived. Moreover, she was a sorceress and a witch and a priestess of demons; in her conduct we may recognize both the working of the magical arts and the cult of idolatry.
xxix.	The apparatus (De ornamentis) 1. The apparatus of the circus comprises the ‘eggs,’ the turning posts, the obelisk, and the starting-gate. Some people say the ‘eggs’ (i.e. objects used to mark the number of circuits of the chariots) are in honor of Pollux and Castor; these same people do not blush to believe that these two were begotten from an egg sired by Jupiter as a swan. 2. The Romans claim that the circus games represent the first principles of the world, so that under this pretext they may excuse the superstitions of their own empty beliefs.
xxx.	The turning-posts (De metis) Properly by the term ‘turning-posts’ (meta) people mean to designate the end-point and boundary of the world, from the fact that the end is ‘measured out’ (emetiri) in some way, or as a token of the rising and setting of the sun.
xxxi.	The obelisk (De obelisco) 1. Mesfres, king of Egypt, is said to have been the first to make an obelisk, forthefollowingreason.BecausetheNileoncehaddamaged Egypt with a violent flood, the indignant king, as if to exact a penalty from the river, shot an arrow into the water. Not long afterwards, seized by a serious illness, he lost his sight, and once his vision was restored after thisblindnessheconsecratedtwoobeliskstothesungod. ‘Obelisk’(obeliscus)isthenameofthearrowthatissetup in the middle of the circus because the sun runs through the middle of the world. 2. Moreover, the obelisk, set up in the midpoint of the space of the racetrack equidistantfromthetwoturning-posts,representsthepeakand summit of heaven, since the sun moves across it at the midpoint of the hours, equidistant from either end of its course. Set on top of the obelisk is a gilded object shaped like a flame, for the sun has an abundance of heat and fire within it.
xxxii.	Thestarting-gates(Decarceribus) In the circus the places from which the horses are loosed are called starting-gates (carcer), for the same reason that prisons (carcer) in a city are so named – because, just as humans arecondemnedandimprisonedthere,sohorsesare‘confined’(coercere)heresothattheymaynotstartoffbefore the signal is given.
xxxiii.	Charioteers(Deaurigis) 1. The art of the circus comprises the charioteer and the race, people on horseback or on foot. The charioteer (auriga) is properly so called because he ‘drives and guides’ (agere et regere), or because he ‘beats’ (ferire) the yoked horses, for one who
 
XVIII.xxxiii.2–xl	Isidore of Seville
 
‘gouges’ (aurire) is one who ‘beats’ (ferire), as (Vergil, Aen. 10.314):
He gouges (aurire, i.e. haurire, lit. “drink”) the open side.
2. A charioteer is also a driver (agitator), that is, a whipper, so called from ‘driving’ (agere). Further, charioteers wear two colors, with which they make a display of their idolatry, for the pagans dedicated the green to the earth and the blue to the sky and sea.
xxxiv. The team of four (De quadrigis) 1. Ericthonius, who ruled Athens, is said to have been the first to yoke together four horses, for which Vergil is the authority, saying (Geo. 3.113):
Ericthonius first dared to yoke a chariot and four horses, and to stand as victor on swift wheels.
2. He was, as the legends say, the son of Minerva and Vulcan, born from the evidence of Vulcan’s lust spilled on the earth, as a demonic portent, or rather as a devil himself. He first dedicated the chariot to Juno. From such a founder were ‘four-horse chariots’ (quadriga) invented.
xxxv.	The chariot (De curru) 1. The chariot (currus) takes its name from ‘racing’ (cursus), or because it is seen to have [many] wheels – thence also a ‘two-wheeled wagon’ (carrus), as if it were currus. The quadriga (i.e. a chariot with a team of four) formerly had a double and unbroken tongue, which linked all the horses with a single yoke. 2. Cleisthenes of Sicyon was first to yoke only the middle pair of horses, and to connect to them the other two on each side with a single band. These outer two the Greeks call   and the Latins call ‘trace-horses’(funarius),fromthekindofband(cf.funis, “rope”) with which they were formely linked.
xxxvi.	The horses with which we race (De equis qui-bus currimus) 1. The quadriga, biga, triga, and seiuga (i.e. four-, two-, three-, and six-horse chariots) are named from the number of horses and the word ‘yoke’ (iugum). The quadriga is dedicated to the sun, the biga to the moon, the triga to the underworld, the seiuga to Jupiter, and the horse-vaulters (desultor) to Lucifer and Hesperus. They associate the quadriga with the sun becausetheyearrollsthroughfourseasons:spring,summer, autumn, and winter. 2. The biga with the moon, because it travels on a twin course with the sun, or because it is visible both by day and by night – for they yoke together one black horse and one white. The triga is consecrated to the infernal gods because they draw people to themselves in each of three ages – that is, infancy, youth, and old age. The seiuga, the largest chariot, races for Jupiter, because they think him the greatest of their gods. 3. Furthermore, they say that chariots race on wheels (rota) either because the world whirls by with the speed of its circle, or because of the sun, which wheels (rotare) in a circular orbit, as Ennius says (Annals 558):
Thence the shining wheel (rota) cleared the sky with its rays.
xxxvii.	The seven laps (De septem spatiis) Chariots run seven laps (spatium), with reference to the courses of the seven planets by which they say the world is controlled, or to the course of the seven stages of life; when these stages have been completed, the end of life is reached.Theendoftheselapsisthegoalline(creta),that is, judgment (cf. cernere, ppl. cretus, “decide, judge”).
xxxviii.	The riders (De equitibus) They say the riders (eques) race alone because each person traverses and completes the course of this life alone, one following another at different times, but through one path of mortality up to its own turning-post of death.
xxxix.	Horse-vaulters (De desultoribus) Horsevaulters (desultores) are so called because formerly as each one came to the end of the course he would ‘leap down’ (desilire) and run, or because he would ‘vault across’ (transilire) from one horse to another.
xl.	Foot racers (De peditibus) People speak of ‘foot racers’ (pedes) since they run on foot (pes, gen. pedis), because one makes a footrace toward one’s death. Because of this they run from the higher side to the lower, that is, from the direction of sunrise to sunset, because mortals rise up and then fall. They race naked because in a similar way no remains survive for a person in this world. They run a straight course because there is no distance between life and death. But they contrive these explanations in their effort to excuse their empty beliefs and sacrilege.
 
The Etymologies	XVIII.xli.1–xlviii
 
xli.	The colors worn by horses (De coloribus equo-rum) 1. The pagans also associate, in a similar way, the colors decking the horses with the first principles of the elements,linkingredwiththesun,thatis,withfire,white withair,greenwithearth,andbluewithwater.According to them, the reds race for summer, because it is the fiery color, and everything turns gold then. The whites for winter,becauseitisicy,andeverythingturnswhiteinthe cold. The greens for spring, from its green color, because then the young shoots grow thick. 2. Again, they dedicatethoseracinginredtoMars,fromwhomtheRomans descend, and because the standards of the Romans are embellished with scarlet, or because Mars delights in blood. Those in white are dedicated to the zephyrs and mild weather; the greens to flowers and the earth; the blues to water or air, because they are of sky-blue color; the saffrons or yellows to fire and the sun; the purples to Iris, whom we call the rainbow, because it has many colors.
3. Thus, since in this spectacle they pollute themselves with the cult of their gods and with the cosmic elements, they are most certainly known to worship those same gods and elements. Hence, Christian, you should pay attention to the fact that unclean divinities possess the circus. For this reason that place, which many of Satan’s spirits have haunted, will be alien to you, for the devil and his angels have entirely filled it.
xlii.	The theater (De theatro) 1. A theater is the enclosure for a stage, having a semi-circular shape, in which all those watching stand. Its shape was originally round, like an amphitheater, but afterwards, from half an amphitheater, it became a theater. The word ‘theater’ (theatrum) derives from ‘a spectacle,’ from the word A, because the people standing in it observe the plays, watching from above. 2. But indeed a theater is the same as a brothel (prostibulum), because when the plays are finished prostitutes ‘stretch themselves out’ (prostrari) there. It is likewise called a whorehouse (lupanar, plural lupanaria) because of those same prostitutes who are called she-wolves (lupa) from the loose conduct of their widely-shared bodies. Prostitutes are called she-wolves for their rapaciousness, because they seize upon wretches and ensnare them. Lupanaria were established by the pagans in order to make public the shame of fallen women, and so that the men who engage prostitutes might be held up to the same ridicule as the women who make themselves available.
xliii.	Thestagebuilding(Descena) The stage building (scena) was a place in the lower part of a theater built like a house, with a platform (pulpitus) which was called the orchestra, where the comic and tragic performers would sing and where the actors and mimes would perform. The scena is named after a Greek word (i.e. , “tent”) because it was built to look like a house. Hence also in Hebrew the Feast of the Tabernacles was called  ! from their similarity to domiciles.
xliv.	The orchestra (De orchestra) The orchestra was the platform part of the stage setting, where a dancer could perform, or two actors could engage in dialogue. The comic and tragic poets would mount there in their contests,andalongwiththeirchantingotherswouldperform the movements. Occupations connected with the stage include tragedians, writers of comedy, musicians, actors, mimes, and dancers.
xlv.	Tragedians (De tragoedis) Tragedians (tragoedus) are those who would sing for the audience in poetry abouttheancientdeedsandlamentablecrimesofwicked kings.
xlvi.	Writers of comedy (De comoedis) Writers of comedy (comoedus) are those who would recount in word and gesture the deeds of common people, and in their plots would represent the defiling of virgins and the love affairs of courtesans.
xlvii.	Stage musicians (De thymelicis) Thymelici were the stage musicians who would begin with music on pipes, lyres, and lutes. They are called thymelici because formerly they would perform standing in the orchestra on a raised platform that was called a thymele.
xlviii.	Actors (De histrionibus) Actors (histrio) are thosewho,dressedaswomen,wouldrepresentthedeeds of shameless women. They also would show stories and events by dancing. They are called histriones either becausethatkindofactingwasimportedfromthecountry Histria (i.e. Istria), or because they would present legends entwined with history (historia), as if they were historiones.
 
XVIII.xlix–lix	Isidore of Seville
 
xlix.	Mimes (De mimis) Mimes (mimus) are named from a Greek word (i.e. @ ) because they are imitators (imitatores) of human activity. They had their own narrator, who would tell the plot before they performed their mime. For dramatic tales were composed by poets in such a way that they would be very suitable for movements of the body.
l.	Dancers(Desaltatoribus) Varro says dancers (saltator)werenamedaftertheArcadianSalius,whomAeneas brought with him into Italy, and who first taught noble Roman youths to dance.
li.	What should be performed under which patron(Quidquopatronoagatur) The patronage of Liber and Venus is evident in the theater arts, those arts, peculiar to and characteristics of the stage, that involve gesture and sinuous bodily movement. Indeed, dissolute people would offer up their depravity to Liber and Venus – to the latter through their sexuality, to the former through their extravagance. But what is performed there by voice andrhythm,pipeandlyre,hasasitspatronsApollos,the Muses, Minervas, and Mercuries. Christian, you should hate any spectacle whose patrons you hate.
lii.	Theamphitheater(Deamphitheatro) 1. The amphitheater is the arena for spectacles where gladiators fight. And a school of gladiators (gladiator) is so called because in it youths learn the use of arms with various moves, at one time competing among themselves with swords (gladius) or fists, at another going out against wild animals. There, enticed not by hatred but by pay, they undergo deadly combat. 2. The amphitheater (amphitheatrum) is so called because it is composed of two theaters, for an amphitheater is round, whereas a theater, having a semicircular shape, is half an amphitheater.
liii.	Theequestriangame(Deludoequestri) Thereare several kinds of gladiatorial games, of which the first is the equestrian game. In it, after military standards had first entered, two horsemen would come out, one from the east side and the other from the west, on white horses, bearing small gilded helmets and light weapons. In this way, with fierce perseverance, they would bravely enter combat, fighting until one of them should spring forward upon the death of the other, so that the one who fell would have defeat, the one who slew, glory. People armedlikethisusedtofightforthesakeofMarsDuellius. liv. Net-fighters (De retiariis) The net-fighter (retiarius) is named for his type of weapon. In a gladiatorial game he would carry hidden from view a net (rete) against the other fighter; it is called a ‘casting-net’ (iaculum), so that he might enclose the adversary armed with a spear, and overcome him by force when he is tangled in it. These fighters were fighting for Neptune, because of the trident.
lv.	Pursuers (De secutoribus) The pursuer (secutor) is named because he pursues (insequi, ppl. insecutus) netfighters, for he would wield a spear and a lead ball that would impede the casting-net of his adversary so that he might overwhelm him before he could strike with the net.ThesecombatantswerededicatedtoVulcan,because fire always pursues. And the pursuer was matched with thenet-fighterbecausefireandwaterarealwaysenemies.
lvi.	Ensnarers (De laqueariis) The combat strategy of ensnarers (laquearius) was to throw a noose (laqueus) over opponents protected by leather shields as they were fleeing in the game, and after disabling them pursue them and bring them to the ground.
lvii.	Skirmishers (De velitibus) The fighting done by skirmishers was to hurl missiles on this side and that. Theirs was a varied form of combat, and more pleasing to the spectators than the others. The skirmishers (veles, plural velites) were named either from ‘flying through the air’ (volitatio) or from the Etruscan city that was called Veles.
lviii.	Combattothedeath(Deferalicertamine) Combatwithwildanimals(fera)involvedyouthsconfronting beastsaftertheywerereleasedandbattlingagainstthem, voluntarily courting death, not because they were condemned to do so, but because of their own passion.
lix.	The performance of these games (De horumexercitatione ludorum) Surely these spectacles of cruelty and the attendance at vain shows were established not only by the vices of humans, but also at the behest of demons. Therefore Christians should have nothing to do with the madness of the circus, the immodesty of the theater, the cruelty of the amphitheater, the atrocity of thearena,thedebaucheryofthegames.Indeed,aperson who takes up such things denies God, having become an apostate from the Christian faith, and seeks anew what
 
The Etymologies	XVIII.lx–lxix.2
 
he renounced in baptism long before – namely, the devil and his pomps and works.
lx.	The gaming-board (De tabula) Dicing (alea), that is, the game played at the gaming-board (tabula), was invented by the Greeks during lulls of the Trojan War by a certain soldier named Alea, from whom the practice took its name. The board game is played with a dicetumbler, counters, and dice.
lxi.	Dice-tumblers(Depyrgis) Thedice-tumbler(pyrgus) is so called because dice ‘pass through’ (pergere) it, or because it is shaped like a tower – for the Greeks call a tower ! .
lxii.	Gaming counters (De calculis) Counters (calculus) are so called because they are smooth and round. Hence a pebble is also called a calculus, which because of its small size may be ‘walked on’ (calcare) harmlessly. Again, calculi, because they are moved along the tracks laid out on the board, as if along ‘paths’ (callis).
lxiii.	Dice (De tesseris) Dice (tessera) are so called because they are squared off (cf.  B, “four”) on all sides. Others call them ‘young hares’ (lepusculus), because they scatter with a bound. Formerly dice were called ‘throwing pieces’ (iaculum), from ‘throwing’ (iacere).
lxiv.	The figurative senses of dicing (De figuris aleae)Furthermore, certain dice-players think that they perform their art by way of an allegory of natural science, and conceive of it as bearing a certain likeness to natural phenomena. They maintain that they play with three dice because of the three tenses of the world – present, past,andfuture–becausetheydonotstandstillbuttumble down. They also hold that the paths on the board are divided into six regions, for the ages of a human, and in three lines, for the three tenses. Hence they say that a gaming-board is marked off in three lines.
lxv.	Dicingterms(Devocabulistesserarum) Theplayers of antiquity would call each throw by a number, as a one, [a two,] a three, a four, [a five,] a six.5 Later the
5	Some early manuscripts omit the two- and five-spots, and one early type of die also omitted these, leaving two rounded faces.
6	The couplet recommends stuffing a ball with deer hair to the weight of two pounds, one ounce.
terms for several were changed, and the one was called the ‘dog’ (canis), the three the ‘face-down’ (suppus), and the four the ‘flat’ (planus).
lxvi.	The casting of dice (De iactu tesserarum) The casting of dice is so managed by experienced dicethrowers that the throw comes out as intended – for example it comes out as a six, which is a good throw for them. But they avoid the canis because it is a bad throw, for it means the one-spot.
lxvii.	The moving of counters (De calculorum motu)Counters (calculus) are moved partly in a fixed order (ordo, gen. ordinis) and partly at random (vage). Hence they call some counters ordinarius, and others vagus. But those that are entirely unable to be moved they call ‘the unmoved’ (incitus). Hence people in need are also called inciti – those for whom there remains no hope of advancing farther.
lxviii.	The banning of dicing (De interdictione aleae)Fraudandlyingandperjuryareneverabsentfromgames of chance, and finally both hatred and ruin. Hence at certain times, because of these crimes, they have been banned by the laws.
lxix.	Ball games (De pila) 1. A ball (pila) is properly so called because it is stuffed with hair (pilus). It is also a ‘sphere’ (sfera, i.e. sphera), so called from ‘carrying’ (ferre) or ‘striking’ (ferire). Concerning the type and weight of these, Dorcatius thus reports (fr. 1):
Nor spare to stuff in the hair of the lively deer until an ounce has been added over two pounds.6
2. Among the types of ball games are ‘trigon-ball’ (trigonaria) and ‘arena-ball’ (arenata). Trigonaria is so named because it is played by three (tres; cf. E, “contest”) players. Arena-ball, which is played in a group, when, as the ball is thrown in from the circle of bystanders and spectators, they would catch it beyond a set distance and begin the game. They call it the ‘elbow-game’ (cubitalis) when two people at close quarters and with their elbows (cubitum) almost joined strike the ball. Those who pass the ball to their fellow players by striking it with the outstretched lower leg are said to ‘give it the calf’ (suram dare).
 

 
Book XIX Ships, buildings, and clothing (De navibus aedificiis et vestibus)
 
 
i. Ships(Denavibus) 1.Inturn,Ihaveappliedmyselfto the terms for specific skills by which something is made, termsforthetoolsoftheartisansorwhateverprovesusefultothem,andanythingelseofthissortworthpointing out. 2. The general term ‘craftsman’ (artifex) is so given because he practices (facere) an art (ars, gen. artis), just as a goldsmith (aurifex) is someone who works (facere) gold (aurum), for the ancients used to say faxere instead of facere.
3. A ‘ship captain’ (nauclerus) is the master of the ship, and is named thus because the ship is under his assignment, for ‘assignment’ is called H  in Greek. But the others on the ship have their share as well. 4. The helmsman (gubernio), also known as the gubernator,asifthewordwerecoibernator,becausehisprudence restrains (coibere, i.e. cohibere) the winters (ibernum, i.e. hibernum), that is, the storms of the sea. 5. The word ‘sailor’(nauta)isderivedfrom‘ship’(navis).Sometimes navita is used poetically for nauta, just as Mavors is used for Mars, but the correct term is nauta. 6. An oarsman (remex) is so named because he wields an oar (remus). Thewordisremexinthenominativecaseinthesameway as tubex. 7. An epibata is named with a Greek term (i.e. ! , “one who embarks”); in Latin he is called a ‘passenger’ (superveniens). He has no duties on the ship, but, once his passage has been paid, arranges to cross over to foreign lands. 8. Some people maintain that a ship (navis) is so named because it needs a vigorous (navus) guide, that is, experienced, wise, and energetic – someone who knows how to control and take charge in the face of maritime dangers and accidents. Whence Solomon said (Proverbs 1:5): “He that understandeth, shall possess governments (gubernaculum).” The Lydians were the first to construct ships, and in seeking out the uncertainties of the ocean, they made the sea into a thoroughfare for human use.
9. Rafts (ratis) were the first and most ancient type of watercraft; they are made from rough timber and beams fastened together. Ships built similarly to these are called rataria. Nowadays ships are metaphorically
373
calledrafts,butproperlyspeaking,raftsarebeamsjoined to each other. 10. The trireme (trieris) is a large ship that the Greeks call a durco. Concerning it Isaiah says (cf. 33:21) “The great galley (trieris) shall not go across it.” 11. The Carpasia is a ship named from the island of Carpathus,justastheRhodiaisnamedfromRhodesand the Alexandrina from Alexandria. 12. The Liburnae are named from Libya; these are merchant ships. Concerning them Horace (Epodes 1.1) says:
You will travel in Liburnian vessels amid the high (bulwarks of) warships.
13. Beaked (rostratus) ships are so named because they haveabrassbeakattheprow,onaccountofrocks,sothat theywon’tbestruckandcrushed.14.Long(longus)ships are the ones we call dromo, so named because they are longer than the others. Their opposite is the musculus, a short vessel. The dromo is so named from ‘coursing,’ for the Greeks call a course a " .
15. The fleet (classis) is named from a Greek term, Y , that is, “wood.” Whence also a calo is a little boat thatcarrieswoodtothesoldiers.16.Theancyromachusis so named because with its speed it is suited for carrying the anchors (ancora) and other ship’s instruments. 17. Thephaselus(i.e.alightvesselshapedlikeakidneybean) is a boat that we incorrectly call a baselus. Of it Vergil says (cf. Geo. 4.289):
In painted barges (phaselus).
18. A skiff (scapha), also called   !  (i.e. ‘scout’), is a vessel known in Latin as a ‘spyboat’ (speculatorium), for  ! (lit. “spy”) is translated into Latin as “to observe.” 19. A barge (barca) is the vessel that carries all the freight of a ship to shore. On the open seas the ship carries this boat in its hold because of the high waves, but whenever it is near to port, the barge repays to the ship the service it accepted at sea. 20. The paro (plural parones) is a vessel suited for pirates (pirata), and is so named from them. Cicero (Poems, fr. 8) says:
 
XIX.i.21–ii.8
Then he gave himself to and trusted the wave-borne paro.
And elsewhere (Roman comedy fr. 21 (Ribbeck)):
He frolicked near the shore in swift parunculi (i.e. little parones).
21. A mioparo is named as if the term were minimus paro (i.e. ‘smallest paro’), for it is a skiff built of wicker that provides a kind of vessel when it has been covered with a rough hide. German pirates use boats of this type on the shores of the Ocean and in marshes, because of their maneuverability. The History (i.e. Hegesippus’s version of Josephus’s History 5.15.1) speaks of these, saying: “The Saxon people, prepared for flight rather than for war, depend on their mioparones, not their strength.” 22. The celox,whichtheGreekscall B,thatis,afastbiremeor trireme, is maneuverable and well suited for the service of a fleet. Ennius says (Annals 478):
The greased keel of a celox glides through the white waves.
23. Biremes (biremis) are ships having a double bank of oars (remus). Triremes (triremis) and quadriremes (quadriremis) have three and four banks. The penteris and hexeris have five and six banks respectively. 24. The actuaria is a ship that is driven (agere, ppl. actus) by both sail and oars at the same time. The hippagogus is a ship in which horses are usually transported (cf. j!! , “horse”; O, “carry”). The pontonium is a slow, heavy river vessel, which can only move by being rowed. The termisalsousedforatrajectus(lit.“sentacross”),thatis, ‘swung on a rope’ (extentus), because it is carried along; whence transenna is a name for stretched-out rope. 25. The lembus is a short little boat that is otherwise known as the cumba or the caupulus, and also the lintris, that is, carabus, which is used on the Po River and in marshes. 26. The carabus is a small skiff made from wicker that provides a kind of boat when it has been covered with rough hide (cf. 21 above). The portemia is a broad little boat of the Syrian type, without a keel, namedfrom‘carrying’(portare).PeopleinPannoniause them. 27. The trabaria (i.e. traberia) is a river-boat that is hollowed out from a single tree trunk (trabs). It is also known as the litoraria, and as the caudica, made from a single hollowed piece of wood (cf. caudex, gen. caudicis, “trunk”). It is called a caudica because it carries (capere) from four to ten (decem) people.
ii. Parts of the ship and its equipment (De partibus naviumetarmamentis) 1. The stern (puppis) is the rear part of a ship, as if the term were post (lit. “after”). The prow (prora) is the front, as if it were priora (lit. “earlier”). The hull (cumba; cf. , “the hollow of a vessel”) is the lowest part of the ship, so named because it ‘sinks down’ (incumbere) in the water. The keel (carina) is named from ‘coursing along’ (currere), as if the word were currina. 2. The forus is the concave side (i.e. the hold) of the ship, named from carrying (ferre) a burden. Or it is the deck-planking of the ship that is spread out, so named because it supports (ferre) walking or because it sticks out on the outside (foris). Vergil says of it (Aen.
6.412):
[And he clears the gangways (forus).]
3. The oarlocks (columbaria) are the hollow places in the upper part of a ship’s sides, through which the oars stick out. They are so named, I believe, because they are similar to the little holes in which doves (columba) make their nests.
4.Gangways(agea)arepassageways,placesintheship through which the boatswain approaches the rowers. Concerning this Ennius says (Annals 492):
He places many things in the hold (forus), and the long gangway (agea) is filled.
5. The thwarts (transtrum) are planks where the rowers sit; they are so named because they are ‘athwart’ (in transverso). Vergil calls them ‘yokes’ (iugum; Aen. 6.411). 6. Oars (remus) are named from ‘moving back’ (removere) and tonsae (i.e. another word for ‘oar’) from clipping (tondere, ppl. tonsus) and shearing off the waves, just as barbers (tonsor) are named from clipping and shearing off hair. 7. The blade (palmula) is the wide end of the oar, named from the palm (palma). By the blade, the ‘sea is pushed’ (mare impellitur).
The yardarms (antemna) are so called because they are set ‘before the current’ (ante amnem), for the current flows past them.1 The cornua (lit. “horns”) are the ends of the yardarm, so named using a trope. 8. The mast is the pole on a ship that holds up the sail. It is called a mast (malus) because it has the shape of an apple (malum) at the top, or because it is circled by
1 This etymology results from a confusion of Varro’s etymology of the city Antemna, which sits on a tributary ‘before the river’ (ante amnem) Tiber.
 
certain wooden handles (malleolus), as it were, by whose revolution the sail is raised more easily. 9. The maststep (modius, also meaning “a measure of volume”) is that in which the mast stands, named on account of its resemblance to a measuring vessel. Mast-heads (carchesium) are pulleys at the tip of the mast, shaped like the letter F, through which ropes are pulled. Cinna says
(fr. 2):
The shining mast-heads (carchesium) of the tall mast glitter.
10. Pulleys (trochlea) are so named because they have little wheels, for a wheel is called   9 in Greek. 11. Parastatae (lit. “by-standers”) are posts ‘standing at equal height’ (pares stantes) by which the mast is supported. Cato says (fr. 18): “The mast bound fast, the parastatae fastened.” 12. The tiller (clavus) is that by which the rudder is steered. Concerning it Ennius says (Annals 483):
That I may hold the tiller (clavus) straight and steer the ship.
13.Aporticulusisahammercarried(portare)inthehand, by means of which the timing-signals are given to the rowers. Concerning it Plautus says (The Ass-Dealer 518):
You yourself hold the porticulus (i.e. the control) for speaking and keeping silent.
14.	The grapple (tonsilla) is an iron or wooden hook to which, when it is fixed on the shore, ropes from the ship are fastened. Concerning it Ennius says (Annals 499):
They fasten the hooked tonsillae, they grip the shore.
15.	The anchor (anchora) is an iron spike taking its name viaaGreeketymology,becauseitgraspstherocksorsand like a person’s hand, for the Greeks call the hand  (i.e. 9,withanaspiratedksound),but‘anchor’hasno aspiration among Greek speakers, for it is pronounced O. Whence also among the ancients it was renderedwithoutaspiration(i.e.asancora,notanchora).16. Pulvini (in classical Latin, harbor platforms or breakwaters)aredevicesbymeansofwhichshipsarelaunchedor drawn up into a berth. The pons (i.e. gangway to shore) is the ladder of a ship.
2 The last part of the text is corrupt, loosely translated here.
XIX.ii.9–iv.5
iii. Sails (De velis) 1. The Greeks call sails O because they are moved by the air (aer); among Latin speakers a sail is called velum, from ‘flight’ (volatus). Whence also this passage (Vergil, Aen. 3.520):
We spread the wings of the sails (velum).
2. The kinds of sails are the acation, the epidromus, the dolo, the artemo, the siparum, and the mendicum. The acation is the largest sail of these, and is raised in the middle of the ship. 3. The epidromos is the next widest, and raised in the stern. The dolo is the smallest sail and is fixed to the prow. The artemo is considered to be more for directing the ship than for speed. 4. The siparum (i.e. a topsail) is a type of sail having a single ‘foot’ (pes, i.e. ‘clew’). With this sail, craft are aided in sailing whenever the force of the wind weakens. Concerning it Lucan says (Civil War 5.428):
And spreading the highest sipara of the sails he collects the dying winds.
People assume that this sail is named from ‘separation’ (separatio). The ‘foot’ (pes) is the lowest corner of a sail, as sailors speak of it.
iv. Ropes (De funibus) 1. Ropes (funis) are so named because in earlier times they were covered with wax to be used as torches, whence also ‘rope torches’ (funale). Cords (restis), either because they hold rafts (ratis) together, or because with them nets (rete) are stretched out. The rudens is a ship’s rope, so named from excessive creaking (cf. rudere, “creak loudly”). 2. Spirae (lit. “coils”) are ropes that are used during storms; sailors are also in the habit of calling them cucurbae. Spirae are namedfromspartum(i.e.aplantusedformakingrope). 3. The propes is a rope with which the foot (pes, i.e. clew) of a sail is fastened, as if it were ‘for the feet’ (pro pedes). Concerning this Turpilius says (fr. 216):
As when the favorable wind bears the ship out to sea if someone has released the propes, the left side of the sail.2
4. The tormentum is a long rope used on ships, which stretches from the prow to the stern. With this rope the ship’s timbers are joined more tightly. Tormenta, so called from ‘twisting’ (tortus), are cords and ropes. 5. The scaphon is a rope attached to the prow. Concerning it Caecilius says (fr. 243):
 
XIX.iv.6–vi.5
I have come on an amorous voyage, with the sail’s foot reaching up to the scaphon.
6.	The opisphora are ropes stretched back from the endsoftheyardarmontherightandleft.Theprosnesium is the hawser with which a ship at the shore is fastened to a post. The mitra is a rope that binds the ship in the middle.
7.	The anquina is the rope by which the yardarm is bound to the mast. Concerning it Cinna says (fr. 3):
And the mighty anquina regulates a stable course.
8.Thetow-rope(remulcum)istheropewithwhichaship is tied and towed instead of relying on oars. Concerning this Valgius says (fr. 4):
Here my boat, swinging from a long tow-rope (remulcum), sets me, rejoicing, in these delightful lodgings.
9.	Straps (struppus) are bindings made of leather thongs or flax by which the oars are attached to the thole-pin (scalmus). Concerning these (Andronicus) Livius says (Odyssey 10):
And then he gave the order to fasten the oars with the straps (struppus).
10.	The sounding-lead (catapirates) is a line with a lead weight, with which the depth of the sea is tested. Lucilius (Satires 1191) says:
The boy would swallow down this sounding-lead (catapirates) in the same way, this little oiled chunk of lead and flaxen string.
v. Nets (De retibus) 1. Nets (rete) are so named either from ‘holding’ (retinere) fish, or from the cords (restis) by which they are stretched. A smaller net is called a synplagium, from ‘snare’ (plagae), for strictly speaking plagae is the name for those ropes by which nets are stretched at the bottom and at the top. 2. The drag-net (funda)isatypeoffishingnet,sonamedbecauseitissent to the bottom (fundus). It is also called the casting-net (iaculum), from casting (iacere). Plautus says (fr. 175):
Before, you were an excellent caster (iaculator) indeed.
3. The tragum is a type of net so named because it is drawn (trahere). It is also called the ‘seine’ (verriculum) because verrere means “drag.” 4. A basket net (nassa) . . . The hunting-net (cassis, i.e. casses) is a type of net used by hunters, so named because it captures (capere). Hence we have the term ‘in vain’ (incassum), that is, without purpose, as if the term were sine cassibus (“without hunting-nets”), since without them hunting is pointless. 5. Mosquito-netting (conopium; cf. AA7 ! , from EA4, “gnat”) is a net like a tent, by which gnats are kept out. They are especially used in Alexandria, because gnats are copiously produced there by the Nile.Whenceitiscalledconopeum,forEgyptisknownas Canopea.
vi. The metalworkers’ forge (De fabrorum fornace) 1. The metalworker (faber) has this name assigned to him from ‘working iron’ (facere ferrum). From this, the term was extended to the craftsmen of other industrial materials, and to their workshops (fabrica), but with a modifier, as in the ‘wood craftsman’ and the rest, because of the solidity (firmitas), as it were, of their products.
2. The pagans say that it is Vulcan who has authoring over the metalworkers’ forge, by Vulcan figuratively meaning “fire,” as no kind of metal can be poured or stretched without fire. There is almost nothing that cannot be accomplished with fire, for here it prepares glass, theresilver,herelead,therecinnabar,herepigment,there medicines. With fire stones are melted into bronze, with fire iron is produced and tamed, with fire gold is fashioned, and concrete and walls are bonded by stone that has been burned with fire. 3. Fire whitens black stones when it heats them, and darkens white woods by burning them. It makes black charcoal from glowing coals, and fragile objects from hard pieces of wood. It creates incorruptible objects from those that are corruptible. It loosens what is bound, it binds back what has been loosened. It softens what is hard and renders hard what is soft.Ithasamedicinaluseaswell,foritisoftenbeneficial to be burnt (i.e. cauterized). It is also a sure aid against the plague that is contracted when the sun is obscured. In any sort of work, one substance is produced with the first firing, another with the second, and another with the third. 4. Fire also has another variation, for there is onefirethatisforhumanuseandanotherwhichappears as a part of divine judgment, whether contracting as a lightning-bolt from the sky or bursting forth from the earth through the mountain peaks. 5. Fire (ignis) is so named because nothing can be born (gignere) from it,
 
for it is an inviolable element, consuming everything that it seizes.
A smithy (fabrica) contains two things: winds and flames. 6. Strictly speaking the flame (flamma) of a forge is so named because it is stirred up by the blasts (flatus) of the bellows. But the forge (fornax) is named from fire, for W means “fire.” Kaminus is the word for forge in Greek (i.e.  ), derived from N (“burning heat”). Ash (favilla) results when fire is gone from a spark. 7. Something is an ember as long as it is hot, but once it has gone out it is charcoal. An ember (pruna) is named from ‘burning up’ (perurere), but the charcoal (carbo) is so named because it lacks (carere) flames. Charcoal becomes even stronger when it is thought to have perished, for, when it has been relit, it burns with an even stronger light. Even without fire, it also possesses such hardness that it is corrupted by no moisture, andnotovercomebyaging.Onceextinguisheditlastsso incorruptibly that the people who fix boundaries spread charcoals below the surface and place stones on top, so as to prove the boundary to a litigant however many generations later, and they recognize a stone fixed in this way to be a boundary.
vii. Metalworkers’ tools (De instrumentis fabrorum) 1. The anvil (incus) is that tool on which iron is beaten out. It is named from striking, because we ‘pound’ (cudere, ppl. cusus) something there – that is, we stretch it by beating it – for to pound is to beat and to strike. But the ancients did not call it incus, but rather intus, because metal is beaten (tundere, ppl. tussus) on it, that is, stretched out. Whence also a mallet (tudis, i.e. tudes) is a hammer named from beating, that is, stretching. 2. The hammer (malleus) is so named because it strikes and stretches out anything when it is hot and soft (mollis). The marcus is a rather large hammer, called marcus becauseitislarger(maior)andstrongerforstriking.The martellus is medium-sized. The marculus is a very small hammer. Lucilius says (Satires 1165):
And just as when in the smithy the marculus beats the hot iron with the great blows of many workmen.
3. Tongs (forceps, plural forcipes), as if the word were ferricipes,becausetheyseize(capere)andholdthewhite-
3 For “of the . . . seat” (solii) the common manuscript variant soli, “of the ground, of the foundation,” seems preferable.
XIX.vi.6–x.2
hot iron (ferrum), or because we seize and hold something forvus with them, as if the word were forvicapes, for forvus means “hot” – whence also the word ‘fiery’ (fervidus). Hence also we call those people ‘beautiful’ (formosus) whose blood produces an attractive blush with its heat. 4. The file (lima) is so named because it makes things smooth (lenis), for mud (limus) is smooth. The chisel (cilium, i.e. caelum or cilio; see XX.iv.7 below) is the tool with which silversmiths work, and from this engraved (caelare) vessels are named.
viii.	The craft of building (De fabricis parietum)1. The Greeks claim that Daedalus was the inventor of the craft of building, for he is said to have been the first to have learned this craft from Minerva. The Greeks call a craftsman or artisan  B A, that is, a builder. But the master-builders (architectus) are the builders (caementarius) who lay out the foundations. Whence the apostle Paul, speaking of himself, said (I Corinthians 3:10): “As a wise architect (architectus) I have laid the foundation.” 2. Masons (macio, i.e. machio) are named from the scaffolding (machina) on which they stand due to the height of the walls.
ix.	Siting (De dispositione) There are three stages in building: siting, construction, and decoration. Siting (dispositio) is the marking out of the building site or seat and of the foundations.3
x.	Construction(Deconstructione) 1. Construction is thebuildingofthesidesandthetop.Itiscalledconstruction (constructio) or constructing (instructio) because it ‘binds together’ (instringere, ppl. instrictus) and makes something hold together, as stones held together with mud, and wood and stones held to each other. Dipping (intinctio) iron in water is also a way of binding; unless iron is dipped while it is white-hot, case-hardening and binding cannot take place. Construction is also named from the large amount of stones and wood, whence also ‘heap’ (strues). Building (aedificatio) is one kind of construction and renovation (instauratio) is another: building is new construction, but renovation is what restores something to its previous likeness (instar), for the ancients used to use the word instar for ‘likeness’; hence they would say ‘renovate’ (instaurare). 2. Construction consists of the foundation, stones, lime, sand, and wood. The foundation (fundamentum) is so named
 
XIX.x.3–x.22
because it is the bottom (fundus) of the building. It is also called caementum from ‘cutting’ (caedere), because it rises from thick cut stone.
3. Stones that are suitable for building: white stone, Tiburtine, columbinus, river stone, porous, red, and the others. 4. As for white stone, some is hard and some is soft. Soft stone is cut by saw teeth and is so manageable to work with that letters may be carved in it as though in wood. 5. Tiburtine stone is named from the place in Italy (i.e. Tibur, present-day Tivoli). Although it is strong enough for building, nevertheless it is easily split by heat. 6. Tufa (tophus) cannot be used for a building due to its perishability and softness, but it is appropriate for the foundation. It is crumbled by heat and sea air, and weathered by rain. 7. Arenacian stone is conglomerated from sea sand (arena). It is also called ‘thirsty’ because it stores the liquid it soaks up. This is also called Gaditanus (i.e. ‘of Cadiz’) in Baetica, from the island in the Ocean where a large quantity is hewn. 8. Piperinus (lit. “peppery”) stone is whitish with black specks. It is hard and very strong. Cochleacius stone is conglomerated from shells (cochlea), pebbles, and sand. It is very rough and sometimes porous. 9. Columbinus stone is named from the color of the bird (cf. columba, “dove”). It is close in its character to gypsum and is very similar in its softness.
10. Molaris stone is useful for walls because it has a rather dense nature. It is hard and rough. Millstones (mola) are made from it, whence it has derived its name. There are four kinds; white, black, composite and porous. 11. Pumice (spongia) is a stone made from water, light and porous and suited for ceilings. 12. Silex (i.e. a flinty stone) is a hard stone. Of this kind of stone, black silex is the best, and also red silex in some places. White silex is undamaged by aging; when carved into monuments it remains undamaged and even fire does not harm it. Molds into which bronze is poured are made from this. Green silex is itself stubbornly resistant to fire, butthereisnowherewhereitisabundant,anditisfound only as a stone and not as a rocky outcrop. Pale silex is rarely useful for foundations. 13. Round silex is strong against damage, but untrustworthy in a structure unless it is bound by a large amount of cement. 14. River silex always appears to be wet. It should be gathered in the summer and not set into the structure of a house for two years.
As far as building with clay is concerned, baked bricks are suited for walls and foundations, while curved and flat tiles are suitable for roofs. 15. ‘Flat roof-tiles’ (tegula) are so named because they cover (tegere) a building, and ‘curved tiles’ (imbrex) because they receive the rain (imber). Tegula is the primary term, and tigillum (lit. “small plank”) is the diminutive. 16. Small bricks (laterculus) are so called because their stretched-out (latus) shapeisformedbyfourboardsplacedallthewayaround. Bricks (later) are unfired, and they also are so named because when ‘stretched out’ (latus) they are shaped with wooden forms. 17. Some of these forms are called cratis, the wicker forms in which people are accustomed to carry the clay for these unfired bricks. They are interwoven from reeds, and named after the term  @ (“hold”), that is, because they hold on to each other.
18. Some people claim that mud (lutum) is named by antiphrasis, because it is not clean, for every thing that has been washed (lavare, ppl. lotus), is clean. 19. Quicklime (calcis viva; i.e. calx viva)4 is so called because although it may be cold to the touch, it contains fire hidden inside, and for this reason, when water is poured onit,thehiddenfireimmediatelyburstsforth.Itsnature produces something amazing, for after it has caught fire it burns in water, which usually extinguishes fire, and it is extinguished by oil, which usually ignites fire. Its use is essential in constructing a building, for one stone cannot adhere strongly enough to another unless they arejoinedwithlime.20.Gypsum(gypsum)isarelativeof lime, and it is a Greek term (i.e. 4 ). There are many kinds. The best of all is good as ‘translucent stone’ (lapis specularis; see XVI.iv.37 above), and it is most pleasing in the images on buildings and in cornices. 21. Sand (arena, i.e. harena) is named from dryness (areditas, i.e. ariditas), not from clinging (adhaerere) in construction, as somepeople claim. Itpasses the testif itsqueaks when pressed in the hand or if no stain remains when it is spread out on a white cloth.
22. Columns (columna) are named for their length and roundness (cf. colus, “distaff”; see xxix.2 below); the weight of the entire building rests on them. The ancientratiowasthatathirdoftheheightofthecolumns
4 The ‘quick’ of English ‘quicklime’ also means “living,” that is, unslaked, chemically more active.
 
should equal their width. There are four kinds of round columns: Doric, Ionic, Tuscan, and Corinthian. They differ among themselves as to breadth and height. There is also a fifth type which is called Attic; it has four angles or more, and sides of equal size. Bases (basis) are the props of columns. They rise up from the foundations and bear the weight of the construction above. 23. Basis is also the term for a very strong rock in the Syrian language. 24. Capitals (capitolium, i.e. capitulum or capitella) are named thus because they are the heads (caput, gen. capitis) of columns (columna), just like a head on a neck (collum). The architrave (epistolium, i.e. epistylium)isplacedontopofthecapitalsofthecolumns, and it is a Greek word (i.e. !  , lit. “placed above”).
25. The construction of pavement originated with the Greeks,anditiscalled‘pavement’(pavimentum)because itis‘rammeddown’(pavire),thatis,itisstruck.Whence also ‘fear’ (pavor) is named, because it strikes the heart. 26. An ostracus is a pavement made of tiles, so named becauseitispoundedfrombrokentilesmixedwithlime, for the Greeks call pulverized tile d .5 27. Workmen call broken stones mixed with lime rudus; they set this underneath when they make pavements. From this also comesthewordrudera(infactthepluralofrudusabove). 28. A channel (canalis) is so named because it is hollow like a reed (canna – a feminine noun). For good reason it is better for us to use the word canalis with feminine gender rather than masculine. 29. Water pipes (fistula) are so named because they pour out and supply water, for    in Greek means “supply” (cf.  B, “send,bring”).Theyareshapedaccordingtotheamount of the water and their capacity; the water is divided through them in specific measures. Of these measures, there is the inch, the ‘five quarter-digits’ (quinaria), the square-digit, the round-digit, and whatever other measures there may be.6
5	The Latin and Greek are ambiguous. Greek d   means “shell,” and Isidore could be speaking of pavements made from crushed shells, but it seems more likely that he is referring to ‘potsherd’ (Greek d  ).
6	A‘digit’(digitus)isaboutthree-quartersofaninch.The‘squaredigit’ pipe would have four sides of one digit each; the ‘round-digit’ pipe would have a diameter of one digit. For these measurements Isidore follows, perhaps at second hand, Frontinus, The WaterSystem of Rome.
XIX.x.23–xv
xi.	Decoration(Devenustate) Uptothispointwehave spoken of the elements of construction; what follows concerns thedecorationof buildings. Decorationis anything added to buildings for the sake of ornament and embellishment, such as ceiling panels set off in gold and wall panels of rich marbles and colorful paintings.
xii.	Paneled ceilings (De laqueariis) ‘Paneled ceilings’ (laquearium)arewhatcovertheundersideofavaultand adorn it. They are also called lacunaria (i.e. the plural of lacunar) because they have certain square or round panels (lacus) of wood or gesso, painted in colors with glitteringfigures.Theprimarytermislacus,asinLucilius (Satires 1290):
The house and lacus resound.
Its diminutive is lacunar, as in Horace (Odes 2.18):
Nor does a gilded lacunar glitter in my house.
From this term, lacunarium, another diminutive is made, and by   9  (i.e. antistoechum, “substitution of letters”) one forms laquearium.
xiii.	Wall panels (De crustis) Wall panels (crusta) are tablets of marble, whence also marble-paneled walls are called crustatus. It is not known who invented cutting marble into panels. They are made with sand and iron: by a saw pressing sand down along a very fine line, and bythecuttingofthesawitselfasitisdragged.Butcoarser sand erodes the marble more, so thin sand is suited for fine work and polishing.
xiv.	Mosaics (De lithostrotis) Mosaics (lithostrotum) arecraftedbytheartofmakingpictureswithsmallchips and cubes tinted in various colors. Cubes (tessella) are named from blocks (tessera), that is, from square stones, by forming a diminutive.
xv.	Molding (De plastis) Molding for walls is representing images and figures out of gesso and tinting them with colors. Molding (plastice) is the Greek name (cf. ! , adj. from !, “to mold”) for what in Latin is ‘forming likenesses from earth or gesso.’ Thus, making some shape by pressing into clay is molding
(plastis,i.e.plastes).Whencealsoprotoplastusisthename
 
XIX.xvi.1–xvii.12
for the human being who was first made from mud
(see Genesis 2:7).
xvi.	Pictures(Depicturis) 1. A picture is an image representing the appearance of some object, which, when viewed, leads the mind to remember. It is called ‘picture’ (pictura) as if the word were fictura, for it is a made-up (fictus) image, and not the truth. Hence also the term ‘painted’ (fucatus), that is, daubed with some artificial color and possessing no credibility or truth. Thus some pictures go beyond the substance of truth in their attention to color, and in their efforts to increase credibility move into falsehood, just as someone who paints a three-headedChimera,oraScyllaashumanintheupper halfandgirdedwithdogs’headsbelow.2.TheEgyptians firstdiscoveredthepicturewhentheyoutlinedaperson’s shadowwithaline.Itbeganlikethis,andwasfollowedby the use of single colors, and afterwards by assortments of colors, so that gradually this art defined itself, and devised light and shadow and the differences in color. For this reason even now painters (pictor) first draw certain shadows and the outlines of the images to come, and then fill in the colors, following the order in which the art was discovered.
xvii.	Colorings (De coloribus) 1. Colorings (color) are so named because they are perfected by the heat (calor) of fire or of the sun, or because in the beginning they used to be filtered (colere) so that they would be as fine as possible. 2. Colorings either occur naturally or are manufactured. They occur naturally, as for example, red ochre, red earth, Paraetonium, Melinum, Eretria, and gold-coloring. The others are manufactured either by artifice or by mixture.
3. Red ochre (sinopis) was found first along the Black Sea,whenceittakesitsnamefromthecitySinope.There are three kinds: red, less-red, and something between these two. 4. Red earth (rubrica) is so named because it is red (ruber) and similar to blood in color. It occurs in many places, but the best is from the Black Sea (Pontus), whence it is also called ‘Pontic.’ 5. Syrian (Syricum) is a pigment with a red color, with which the chapter-heads in books are written. It is also known as Phoenician, so called because it is collected in Syria on the shores of the Red Sea, where the Phoenicians live. 6. Now, ‘silk’ (sericum) is one thing, and ‘Syrian’ (Syricum) is another, for silk is a fiber that the Chinese (Seres; East Asians generally) export, while Syrian is a pigment that the Syrian Phoenicians gather at the shores of the Red Sea. It mayalsobecountedamongthemanufacturedpigments, for it is often made by being mixed either with red ocher or with vermilion (sandix).
7.TheGreeksarereportedtohavebeenthefirsttodiscover‘redlead’(minium),inthesoilofEphesus.Spainis more abundant in this pigment than other regions, and for this reason it has given its name to a particular river (i.e. the Minius, present-day Mino). When distilled, it˜ produces liquid silver (i.e. quicksilver). Some people say that this red lead is cinnabar. 8. Cinnabar (cinnabaris) is named from draco (gen. draconis, “dragon”) and barrus, that is, ‘elephant,’ for they say that it is the blood of dragons, shed when they entwine themselves around elephants.7 The elephants charge, and the dragons are overpowered, and the gore they shed dyes the earth, and a pigment is produced from what has stained the soil. It isared-coloredpowder.9.Althoughprasin,thatis,green clay,isproducedinmixedforminsomelands,nevertheless the best is the Cyrenian, in Libya. 10. Chrysocolla is grass-green in color, so named because its veins are said to contain gold (cf. 9, “gold”; , “glue”). This occursinArmenia,butthepreferredvarietycomesfrom Macedonia. It is mined along with the metal copper, and where it is discovered, silver and indigo are also found, for veins of chrysocolla have a natural association with these substances.
The pigment cypria is named from the island of Cyprus, where it is found in quantity. 11. Sandarach (sandaraca) occurs on the island Topazus in the Red Sea. It has the color of cinnabar and the odor of sulfur. It is found in gold and silver mines, and the redder it is and the worse it smells the better its quality. However, ‘white lead’ (cerussa), if it is baked in a furnace, produces sandarach, which as a result has a flamelike color. But if it is baked mixed with an equal part of red earth, it yields vermilion (sandix). 12. Arsenic (arsenicum), which Latin speakers call auripigmentum (“orpiment,” lit. “gold-pigment”) because of its color, is collected at the Black Sea from goldmine material, where sandarach is also found. The best arsenic takes on a golden color. It is pure and easily broken along the course of its veins. That which is paler or like sandarach
7 Cinnabar (mercury sulfide) is also called ‘dragon’s blood’; vermilion is made from it.
 
is rated to be a lesser quality. There is also a third, scaly kind that is mixed with a golden color. These arsenics have the same stench as sandarach, but sharper.8
13. Ochre (ochra) itself is produced on the island Topazus in the Red Sea, where sandarach is also produced. Ochre is also made when red earth is heated in new pots that have been smeared around with clay. The longer it is heated in the furnace, the better it becomes.Venetum(i.e.‘sky-color’;seeXVIII.xxxiii.2)... 14. In Alexandria they first discovered how to prepare caeruleum (i.e. a blue pigment). In Italy people make it from a powder of sand and the powdery form of natron, but if you add Cyprium that has been heated in the furnace to this mixture, it will be similar to Vestorianum (i.e. a blue pigment).
15. The ‘purple pigment’ (purpurissum) is made from silversmiths’ chalk; this chalk is dyed with murex and soaks up the color in the same way that wool does but more quickly. Nevertheless, the superior pigment is something else that has been soaked in a vat with raw dye-stuffs, and the next best is when silversmiths’ chalk is added to the dye liquid once the first batch has been removed. The quality diminishes each time this is done. The origin of the most precious purple (purpura) is what is colored with hysginum (i.e. the dark red pigment from the plant called X in Greek) and with rubea (i.e. rubia, the red dye from madder root). 16. Indigo (indicum) is found in India in the reeds, as a foam mixed with mud. It is dark blue in color, producing a wonderful mixture of purple and blue. There is another type of pigment in the purple-dye workshops, a foam, floating in bronze cauldrons, that the dye-makers skim off and dry.
17. Ink (atramentum) is so named because it is black (ater, feminine atra). Its color is necessary both for pictures and for everyday use. It is one of the manufactured pigments, for it is made from soot in various ways, when resin is added on top of heated pitch. The resin, which retains the smoke, is built up in a little vessel. Painters mix a glue into this, with water, so that it gleams more lustrously.18.Foraspeediereffectthecharredremainsof
8	Both ‘arsenic,’ in its compounded form orpiment, and sandarach would stink of sulfur.
9	Isidore omits the explanation of the etymology from Pliny: the cheap gems are made from the rings (anulus) of common people.
10	These measurements very nearly produce a right-angle isosceles triangle: 242 + 242 = 1152; 342 = 1156.
XIX.xvii.13–xviii.2
old brushwood, crushed and mixed with glue, produce the appearance of atramentum for applying to walls. Somepeoplealsoroastthedrieddregsofwineandclaim that, if the dregs are from a good wine, this atramentum has the appearance of indigo. But twigs of black grapevine, steeped in the best wine, produce the gleam of indigo after they dry out if you roast them dry and grind them up with added glue. 19. Usta (i.e. a red pigment), which is especially indispensable, is produced with no trouble, for if you heat a clump of good flinty stone in the fire, and quench it with very sour vinegar, a sponge drenched in it produces a purple color. When you grind this up it will be usta. 20. All atramentum is perfectedinthesun,butallcolorswithamixtureoflime deteriorate.
21.MelinumissonamedbecauseoneoftheCycladean islands, Melos by name, abounds in this mineral. It is white, and painters do not use it because it is very thick. 22. The white pigment anulare is so named because with it women’s cosmetics are made bright. It is made from clay mixed with glass gems.9 23. ‘White lead’ (cerussa, i.e. the cosmetic ceruse) is made in this way: fill a vessel with very sour vinegar; add vine twigs to this same vessel, and on top of the twigs place very thin sheets of lead, and then close the vessel carefully and seal it so that none of the fumes can escape. After thirty days the vessel can be opened, and you will find white lead, produced from the distillation of the lead sheets. This is removed, dried, and ground up and, with vinegar mixed inagain,separatedintolozengesthataredriedinthesun. With this procedure, if you put copper sheets on top of the twigs they make verdigris (aerugo). Chalcanthus (i.e. copperas-water) . . .
xviii. Tools for building (De instrumentis aedificiorum) 1. It is important for the construction of walls to be carried out according to the carpenter’s square and in agreement with the plumb-line. The carpenter’s square (norma)isnamedfromaGreekterm(i.e. EA),and without it nothing can be made straight. It is made up of three rulers, such that there are two rulers of two feet while the third has two feet ten inches.10 When they have been smoothed to an equal thickness, the carpenter’s square connects these rulers at the tips so that they make a triangular shape. This will be the carpenter’s square. 2. The ruler (regula) is so named because it is straight (rectus), as if the term were rectula, and smooth. The
 
XIX.xviii.3–xix.11
plumb-line (perpendiculum) is so named because it is always set to hang down (adpendere). In short, unless everything in the construction is made according to the plumb-line and a sure ruler, it is inevitable that everything will be built awry, so that some things will be crooked,otherssloping,someleaningforwardandsome leaning back – and so all building must be constructed with these tools.
3. A string (linea) is named from its material, for it is made from flax (linum). The name of the trowel (trulla) wasgivenbecauseitpushes(trudere)backandforth,that is, it covers stones with lime or clay. Hammer (martellus) . . . Scaffolding (machina) . . . 4. Ladders (scalae) are named from climbing (scandere), that is, ascending, for they cling to the walls. They are called scalae (i.e. a plural form) whether there is one or there are more, because the term exists only in the plural, just as the word litterae
(lit. “letters”) means “correspondence.”
xix. Woodworkers (De lignariis) 1. Someone who works with wood (lignum) is called by the general term ‘woodworker’ (lignarius). ‘Wagon-maker’ (carpentarius) is a specialized term, for he only makes wagons (carpentum), just as a shipbuilder (navicularius) is a builder and constructer of ships (navis) only. 2. A sarcitector is so called because out of many planks joined together on this side and that he repairs (sarcire) one structure of a building. The same person is called a tignarius because he applies plaster to the wood (cf. tignum, “piece of timber, beam”).
3. Wood (lignum) is named using a Greek etymology (cf. 9 , “lamp”) because when ignited it is turned to light (lumen) and flame. Whence [also] the lamp (lychnium) is so called, because it gives light. 4. All wood, moreover, is called ‘material’ (materia, also meaning “timber”) because something can be made from it; the term will be materia whether you apply it to a door or to a statue. For material is always necessary for the production of an object, just as we say that the elements are the materia of things, because we see that it is from them that actual things are made. It is called material (materia) as if the word were ‘mother’ (mater).
5. Beams (trabs) are so named because they are set crossways(intransverso)tokeeptwowallstogether.Timber(tignum)isonethingandbeamsareanother,fortimbersjoinedtogethermakeabeam.Theyarebeamswhen they have been hewn into shape. 6. A boss (tholus, cf. Greek  , “dome”), strictly speaking, is like a small shield. It is in the center of the roof, and the beams come together in it. The tie-beams (coplae, i.e. copulae, lit. “joinings”) are so named because they join (copulare) the cross-beams to each other. Cross-beams (luctans) are so called because when set up they hold themselves against each other in the manner of wrestlers (luctans). Agrantes . . . 7. Posts (asser) are named from ‘singleness’ (as) because they are set up by themselves and not joined.
Shingles (scindula), because they are split (scindere), that is, divided. Pegs (epigrus) and nails are items with which wood is joined to wood. Nails (clavus) are so namedasifthewordwerecalibus,becausetheyaremade from calibs (i.e. chalybs), that is, iron, for chalyps is iron. 8. Boards (tabula) were called tagulae by the ancients, as if from ‘covering’ (tegere), whence also ‘roof-tiles’ (tegulae). A joining of boards is called a joint (commissura). The ‘action of cutting’ (sectio) is named from ‘following’ (sequi, ppl. secutus) those things it has begun, for ‘to cut’ (secare) is to ‘pursue’ (sectare) and ‘follow’ (sequi). 9. The name for saw (serra) was formed from a sound, thatis,fromits‘scrapingnoise’(stridor).Theuseofsaws and compasses was invented by Perdix, a certain youth whom Daedalus, his mother’s brother, had taken in as a boy to instruct in his studies. It is reported that this boy had such genius that, when he sought a quick way to divide wood, he copied the spine of a fish, sharpening a stripofironandarmingitwiththebitingpowerofteeth. Workmen name this the saw. The invention of this art drovehisteacherDaedalusgreenwithenvy,andhethrew the boy headlong from the citadel. Thereupon Daedalus went to Crete as an exile and was there for some time, as stories relate. From Crete he flew, using wings, and came to Cilicia. 10. The compass (circinus) is named because it makesacircle(circulus)whenitisturned.Thistechnique is carried out with a doubled string, which when single (i.e. undoubled) had been stretched across the width (i.e. the diameter desired). The point in the middle of the compass (i.e. of the circle) is called the center (centrum, i.e. B  ) by the Greeks – everything converges on this middle point.
11. The ax (securis) is so named because trees are cut down (succidere) with it, as if the word were succuris. Again, it is called securis as if it were semicuris, for it is sharp on one side and suited for digging on the other.11
11 The allusion may be to curis, a kind of spear: a semi-curis might be a blade sharpened on only one of its two edges.
 
This was called a penna (lit. ‘wing’) by the ancients; if bothsidesweresharptheycalleditbipennis.Itwascalled bipennis because it had a sharp edge on either side, like twowings(pinna),fortheancientswouldcallsomething sharppennus,whencethewings(pinna)ofbirds,because they are sharp. See how this term penna has preserved its antiquity, because the ancients used to say penna, not pinna. This also pertains to the pick-ax (dolabra), because it has two prongs (duo labra, lit. “two lips”), for the ax has one. The hatchet (dextralis) is suited for the right hand (dextera). 12. The adze (ascia) is named from the shavings (astula, i.e. assula) that it removes from wood. Its diminutive is asciola. There is also an adze with a short handle and on the opposite side either a plain hammer or a hollowed one or a two-horned drag-hoe.
13. The chisel (scalprus, i.e. scalprum) is so named because it is suited for carvings (scalptura) and making holes(foramen),asifthewordwerescalforus.Itsdiminutive is scalpellus. 14. The gimlet (terebra) is named from the wood-worm called terebra, which the Greeks call  "E. Hence it is called terebra because, like the worm, it ‘bores a hole by abrasion’ (terendo forare), as if the word were terefora, or as if it were transforans (i.e. “boring through”). 15. The auger (taratrum), as if the wordwereteratrum(i.e.fromterere,“abrade”).Therasp (scobina) is so named because it produces filings (scobis) by abrasion. The rafter (cantherium) . . . The gouge (guvia) . . .
xx. The invention of clothmaking (De inventione lanificii) 1. The pagans praise a certain Minerva for many clever inventions, for they claim that she was the first to have demonstrated the practice of clothmaking – to have set up the loom and dyed wool. 2. They also say that she was the discoverer of the olive and of craftsmanship, the inventor of many arts, and for this reason craftsmen commonly pray to her. But this is merely a poetic fiction, for Minerva is not the originator of these arts, but, because intelligence is said to be in a person’s head – and Minerva was imagined to have been born from Jupiter’s head – this is native ingenuity. And thus anintelligentperson’ssense,whichdiscoverseverything,
12 There is some controversy among textile historians as to whether byssus referred to cotton or linen. See xxii.15 below. It is probably safest to assume that its meaning could extend to either fiber depending on the context.
XIX.xix.12–xxii.2
is in the head. Hence Minerva is said to be the goddess of the arts because nothing is more excellent than the native ingenuity by which all things are regulated.
xxi. Priestly vestments according to the Law (De veste sacerdotali in lege) 1. There are eight kinds of priestly vestments according to the Law (i.e. the Hebrew Scriptures;seeExodus28and39).Thepoderisisapriestly garment of linen, close-fitting and reaching to the feet (pes, gen. pedis), whence it is named. Common people call it a camisia. 2. The abanet is a rounded priestly belt, woven like damask out of scarlet, purple, and hyacinth, such that flowers and gems seem to be set out on it. 3. The pilleum is made from linen (byssus),12 rounded like a hemisphere, covering the priestly head and held tightly around the skull with a headband. The Greeks call this a tiara (i.e.  ) or galerum, and so do we. 4. The mahil, which is an ankle-length tunic entirely of hyacinth color, has seventy-two bells at the feet, and the same number of pomegranate-figures hanging between them (see Exodus 28:33).
5. The ephod, which can be translated into Latin as superindumentum (lit. “overclothing”), was a cloak over the shoulder, woven from four colors and gold. Over each shoulder an emerald was set in gold and the names of the patriarchs were carved on them. 6. The logium (cf.  , “high priest’s breastplate”), which is called the rationale (i.e. “breastplate”) in Latin, was a doubled cloth, woven with gold and four colors, the size of a square as wide as a palm; there were twelve very precious stones woven into it. This garment was tied over the shoulder across the chest of the high priest. 7. The petalum is a golden plate worn against the high priest’s forehead; it would have the Tetragrammaton, the name of God, written on it in Hebrew characters. 8. The batin, or feminalia, were knee-length linen breeches with which the private parts of the priest would be hidden.
xxii. The different kinds of clothing and their names (De diversitate et nominibus vestimentorum) 1. The different kinds of clothing are coverings, garments, clothes and so on. 2. A covering (tegmen) is so named because it covers (tegere) the limbs, just as a tegumen (i.e. a variant of the same word) is a shelter (tectum) that covers the body. More precisely, clothing (vestimentum) is that which extends to the footprints (vestigium), as if the word were vestigimentum, such as an ankle-length
 
XIX.xxii.3–xxii.21
tunic. But the usage of authors has confused this term. A garment (indumentum) is so called because on the inside (intus) it is put onto (induere) the body, as if the word were intumentum. Amictus (i.e. a wrapping) . . . 3. ‘Clothed’ (vestitus) can be distinguished from ‘adorned’ (cultus), because ‘adorned’ is understood in a broader sense. Cultus (“adornment, cultivation”) may alsobedistinguishedfromhabitus(“habit,disposition”), becausehabitushastodowithwhatisinborn,and cultus with what is cultivated by humans.
4. Most articles of clothing are named from the time when they are most often worn, or from the place where they were first made or are most often sold, or from their type of color, or from the name of their inventor. 5. Humankind’s most ancient article of clothing was the loincloth (perizoma), that is, the subcinctorium, with which only the genitals are hidden. The first mortals made these for themselves, at first from tree leaves, because they were blushing after their disobedience and hidtheirprivateparts.Somebarbarianpeoplesstillwear them up to the present day, since they are unclothed. These are also called campestria, because young men, exercisingunclothedonafield(campus),covertheirprivate parts with these same loincloths.
6.Thetunic(tonica,i.e.tunica),thatveryancientarticle of clothing, is so called because it makes a sound when the person wearing it walks, for a sound is a ‘tone’ (tonus). Tunics of hide were made first; Adam and Eve were clothed with these after they sinned and wereexpelledfromParadise.7.Theankle-length(talaris) tunic is so named because it reaches to the ankles (talus) and falls to the feet. Likewise the pectoralis tunic because theancientsworeitshortsothatitonlycoveredthechest (pectus,gen.pectoris),althoughnowadaysitextendsfurther. 8. The sleeved (manicleatus) tunic, that is, the manicata, because it has sleeves (manica). The Greeks call it 9 "  (lit. “hand-covering”).
9. The dalmatic (dalmatica) garment was first woven in Dalmatia, a province of Greece. It is a white priestly tunic with purple stripes. 10. The reddened (russata) garment, which the Greeks call Phoenician and we call scarlet, was invented by the Lacedaemonians so as to conceal the blood with a similar color whenever someone was wounded in battle, lest their opponents’ spirits rise at the sight. Roman soldiers under the consuls wore this, whence they used to be called russati. On the day before a battle it would be displayed in front of the general’squartersasawarningandindicationofthefight to come.
11. Laculatus cloth is cloth that has square panels (lacus) with pictures woven in or embroidered. Iacinthina (i.e. jacinth or hyacinth) cloth is resplendent with the color of the sky. 12. Molochinius (cf.  9 , “of mallow-fiber”) cloth is made using fibers of mallow (malva); some people call this molocina and others malvella. 13. Silk (bombycinus) cloth is named from the silkworm (bombyx), which produces extremely long threads from itself; something woven of these threads is called ‘silken’ (bombycinus). It is manufactured on the islandofCos.Apocalamus...14.Serica(i.e.anotherword forsilk)clothisnamedfrom‘silken’(sericus),orbecause the Seres (i.e. the Chinese, or East Asians generally; see XIV.iii.29) first made it available. Holosericus cloth is entirely of silk, for S  means ‘entire.’ Tramosericus has a linen warp and a weft of silk. Holoporphyrus is entirely of purple, for S  means ‘entire.’ 15. Byssinus is white and made of a type of thicker linen. There are some people who consider byssum to be a certain type of linen (see xxi.3 above).
16. Fibrinus [has a weft made of beaver (fiber) hair]. Goathair (caprinus) . . . Masticinus . . . and menus . . . Linen (lineus) cloth, because it is made only of flax (linum). 17. Linostemus is woven of wool and linen and is calledlinostemusbecauseithaslinen(linum)inthewarp (stamen) and wool in the weft. 18. Upright (rectus) cloth is woven upwards by someone standing. Segmentatus cloth is decorated with certain bands and separately cut pieces,sotospeak(cf.xxxi.12below).Peoplealsoreferto theseparatelycutpiecesofanymaterialaspraesegminae. 19. Lightweight (levidensis) cloth is so named because it is open-textured and loosely woven (leviter densatus). Heavyweight (pavitensis) is named as the opposite to lightweight, because it is closely woven and felted (cf. pavire, “ram down”).
20.Citrosus,socalledasifitwerecrimpedlikeacitrontree (citrus). Naevius writes (Punic War 22):
Beautiful in her gold and her citrosus garment.13
21. A velenensis tunic is one that was brought from the islands. An imported (exoticus) garment is a foreign
13 In antiquity a garment was citrosus either because it resembled a citron (was lemon-colored), or because it absorbed the good smell of the citrus with which it would be stored.
 
one coming from the outside, such as a garment from Greece in Spain. A polymitus garment is multicolored, for polymitus is woven of many colors (cf. !  , “damask”). 22. An embroidered (acupictus) garment is wovenordecoratedwithaneedle(acus;cf.pictus,“decorated”). This is also called ‘Phrygian’ (Phrygius) because all the Phrygians are said to be skilled in this art, or becauseitwasinventedinPhrygia.Whencealsotheartisans who practice this are called ‘embroiderers’ (Phrygio). Vergil writes (cf. Aen. 3.484):
A Phrygian (Phrygius) cloak.
23.	Trilix cloth is named from three threads (licium), because there are also simplex and bilex cloths.14 Rallus, which is commonly called ‘polished’ (rasilis). Cloth that has been restored to look like new, although it is old, is called ‘refurbished’ (interpolus).
24.	‘Patchwork’ (pannucius) is so named because it is covered with various patches (pannus). A colobium is so named because it is long and sleeveless (cf.   , “cut off”); the ancients wore this often. A levitonarium is a linen colobium without sleeves, of the sort worn by Egyptian monks. 25. A loincloth (lumbare) is so named because it is fastened over the loins (lumbus) or because it clings to them. In Egypt and Syria they are worn not only by women but also by men. Whence Jeremiah took his lumbare across the Euphrates, and hid it there in an opening in the rocks, and afterwards discovered that it had been torn (Jeremiah 13.1–7). This is also called a renale by some people, because it is tied over the loins (renes). 26. A limus is a garment that reaches from the navel to the feet. This garment has a purple band at its lower edge that is ‘aslant,’ that is, ‘undulating,’ whence it takes its name, for we call something that is aslant limus.
27. Lint (licinum, i.e. licinium) is so named because its texture is completely bound together (ligare), as if the term were liginum, but with the g changed to a c.15 28. An armilausaispopularlysonamedbecauseitisdividedand openinthefrontandtheback,andisclosed(clausus,ppl. of claudere) only at the shoulders (armus), as if the term
14	The sense may be that a simplex web is a plain weave; a bilex, where the warp thread floats over a group of two weft threads; and a trilix, where the warp thread floats over three.
15	‘Lint’ here means a downy mass of fluff like cotton wool.
16	Some early manuscripts read “Sardinian”; see section 1 above.
XIX.xxii.22–xxiii.5
were armiclausa, but with the c removed. 29. A nightshirt (camisia) is so named because we sleep in these in our cots (cama), that is, in our beds. Undergarments (femoralia) are so called because they clothe the thighs (femur). These are also known as ‘breeches’ (bracae), because they are short (cf. 9, “short”), and the ‘shameful parts’ (verecunda) of the body are concealed with these. 30. The tubrucus is so named because it covers the shins (tibia) and breeches (bracae). The tibracus, becauseitreachesfromthearms(bracium,i.e.brachium) to the shins (tibia).
xxiii. Thetypicalcostumesofcertainpeoples(Deproprio quarundam gentium habitu) 1. Each nationality has its own costume belonging just to it, such as the Parthians and their sarabara (i.e. wide trousers), the Gauls and their linna, the Germans and their reno, the Spaniards and their stringes, the Sardinians and their mastruca. 2. Sarabarae are flowing, sinuous garments, concerning which one may read in Daniel (cf. 3:94): “And their sarabarae were not altered.” And in Publilius (Maxims, fr. 19):
As, why therefore have the Parthians draped sarabarae over your stomach?
But some people call certain head-coverings sarabarae, the sort that we see pictured on the heads of the Magi. 3. Linnaearesoftsquaremantles.ConcerningthemPlautus says (fr. 176):
He was covered by a linna of Gaulish weave.
4. The reno is a covering from the shoulders and chest to the navel, made so shaggy with twisted nap that it repels rain. Common people call it a reptus because it is as if its long fibers are ‘creeping like a snake’ (reptare). Concerning them Sallust says (Histories 3.104): “The Germans clothe their naked bodies with renones.” They are called renonesfromtheRhine(Renus)riverofGermania,where they are often worn. 5. The mastruca is a Germanic16 garment made from the hides of wild animals, about which Cicero speaks in On Behalf of Scaurus (45): “He whom the royal purple did not disturb, was he moved by the mastruca of the Sardinians?” Mastruca is as if the word were monstruosus (“monstrous”), because those who wear them are transformed as if in the garb of wild animals.
 
XIX.xxiii.6–xxiv.9
6.	Nationalities are distinguished by their costumejust as they differ in their languages. The Persians cover their arms and legs with drawings17 and their heads with a turban. The Alani are distinguished by their pointed hats. The Scotti raise the hackles with their ugly dress, as well as with their barking tongues. The Alemanni are clothed in their woolen cloaks (sagum), the Indians in linen. The Persians wear jewels, the Chinese wear silk, and the Armenians wear quivers.
7.	It is not simply in clothing but in physical appear-ancealsothatsomegroupsofpeoplelayclaimtofeatures peculiar to themselves as marks to distinguish them, so that we see the curls (cirrus, perhaps “topknot”) of the Germans, the mustaches and goatees of the Goths, the tattoos of the Britons. The Jews circumcise the foreskin, the Arabs pierce their ears, the Getae with their uncovered heads are blond, the Albanians shine with their white hair. The Moors have bodies black as night, while the skin of the Gauls is white. Without their horses, the Alani are idle. Nor should we omit the Picts (Pictus), whose name is taken from their bodies, because an artisan, with the tiny point of a pin and the juice squeezed fromanativeplant,tricksthemoutwithscarstoserveas identifying marks, and their nobility are distinguished by their tattooed (pictus) limbs.
8.Thesexesalsohaveacceptedcustomsofappearance, such as short hair for men and flowing locks for women, long hair being the mark of virgins in particular. For women the hair is properly arranged when it is gathered uponthetopoftheheadandprotectsthecitadeloftheir head with a circle of hair.
xxiv. Men’s outer garments (De palliis virorum) 1. A cloak(pallium)isthatwithwhichtheshouldersofattendants are covered so that, while they are providing service, they may hurry about unencumbered. Plautus says
(fr. 177):
If you are to amount to anything, hang a pallium on your shoulders and let your feet go as fast as they can.
It is called pallium from skins (pellis), because in earlier times the ancients used to wear skins over their clothing, asifthewordwerepelleum.Oritisnamedfrompalla(i.e. another type of robe, related etymologically to pallium) by derivation. 2. The mantle (chlamys) is a garment that is put on from one side, and not sewn together, but fastened with a brooch. Hence it also takes its name in Greek (i.e. 9).
3. The toga (toga) is so named because with its wrapping it covers (tegere) and conceals the body. It is a plain cloak with a round, rather flowing shape, and with rippling folds, as it were: it is drawn under the right arm and arranged over the left shoulder. We see its likeness in the clothing used for statues and pictures, and we call these statues togatus (lit. “wearing a toga”). 4. Romans wore togas during peacetime, but in time of war they wore military cloaks (paludamentum). The proper measurement for a toga is six ells. 5. A toga earned by those who brought back the palm (palma) of victory from an enemy was called palmatus. These were also called decorated togas because they had the victories woven into them with a display of palm leaves. 6. The white (candidus)toga,alsothe‘chalked’toga,isonethatcandidates (candidatus) seeking public office wore when they went round canvassing; chalk was added so that it would be whiter and more noticeable. Cicero, in an oration that he delivered against his rivals for office, wrote On the White Toga.
7.AGabinegirdingarrangementoccurswhenthetoga is put on so that the edge which is flung back over the shoulder is drawn up to the chest in such a way that the decorationshangoneithersidefromtheshoulder,asthe pagan priests used to wear them, or as the praetors used to be girded. 8. The trabea (i.e. a robe of state) was a type of toga out of purple and scarlet cloth. In the beginning, thekingsoftheRomansusedtomakeprocessiondressed inthese.PeopleclaimthatRomuluswasthefirsttodevise this garment to distinguish the king. The trabea is so named because it may elevate (transbeare) a person into greaterglory,thatis,itmaymakeapersonfurtherblessed for the future with a greater rank of honor.
9.Thepaludamentumwasaspecialcloakofemperors, distinguished by its scarlet and purple, and its gold. Sallust speaks of it (Histories 1.87) saying: “He has changed his toga for a paludamentum.” This was also the ‘war cloak’ (bellicum pallium), so named, it seems to some people, because by wearing it the emperor made it
17 Isidore’s ultimate source here, Justinus, says that the Persians wore robes (velamenta) over their arms and legs. As Rodr´ıguezPantoja points out in his note ad loc. (ed. 1995), Isidore may have writtenlinamentis(“withlinencloth”)ratherthanlineamentis(“with drawings,?tattoos”),orthetraditionthatcametohimmayhavebeen corrupt.
 
public (palam) that war (bellum) was approaching. 10. A bordered-around (circumtextus) garment is what is called  (“encircled by a border all around”) in Greek. Concerning it Vergil says (Aen. 1.649):
And a mantle bordered around (circumtextus) with saffron acanthus.
Itiscalled‘bordered-around’becauseitisaroundcloak. 11. Diplois is a Greek term (cf. "! , “double cloak”), used because it is a double-folded (duplex) garment. Horace says (Epistles 1.17.25):
On the other hand, he whom Patience covers with a doubled (duplex) cloak.
12. There is also military clothing, which first began to be used from enemy booty in the campaigns in Gaul. Concerning which this was said in the Senate: “With their togas put aside the Quirites took up the sagum (i.e. the military cloak).” 13. Sagum (i.e. a coarse woolen mantle) is a Gallic term. It is called the sagum quadrum because at first among the Gauls it used to be ‘square or fourfold’ (quadratus vel quadruplex). 14. The paenula is a cloak with long fringes. The lacerna is a fringed cloak that at one time was worn only by soldiers. For this reason people used to distinguish the city crowd from those belonging to military camps by calling the former ‘toga-wearing’ and the latter ‘lacerna-wearing.’ Whence also the word is lacerna, as if with the ends of the fringes trimmed (cf. lacer, “mutilated, torn”), so that their fringes are not as long as those in a paenula. 15. The Spaniards called the mantum thus because it covers the ‘hands only’ (manus tantum), for it is a short cloak. 16. The praetexta is a child’s cloak, which noble boys used to wear while they were being educated until they were sixteen, whence they were called ‘praetextawearing’ boys. It is called a praetexta because it would be bordered (praetexere) with a wide purple band.
17. The casula is a hooded garment, named as a diminutive of ‘hut’ (casa), because it covers the whole person, like a small hut. Whence also the ‘hood’ (cuculla), as if it were a smaller chamber (cella). Thus it is also called a planetas in Greek, because they sway with ‘wandering’ (cf. ! , “wanderer”) borders. Whence also the astral ‘planets,’ that is, the roving ones,
18 IsidorealludestoICorinthians11:3–7,andtakesthetermmavors for‘veil’asthefigureofthemartialmale(mas,gen.maris)orhusband (maritus) as head (or over the head) of his wife.
XIX.xxiv.10–xxv.7
because they course about in their own erratic straying and motion. 18. Birrus (i.e. a rain cloak) is taken from a Greek word, for they say a birrus as bibrus (cf. 7  , “cloak”). 19. The melotes, which is also called a pera (lit. “bag”), is the skin of a goat which hangs from the neck and covers as far as the loins. Strictly speaking, this is the outfit needed for laboring. It was first made, as some people think, from the skins of martens (melo, i.e. meles), whence they are called melotes. 20. The fringes of garments, that is, the edges, are called the border (ora), derived from a Greek word, for the Greeks call a border S .
xxv. Women’soutergarments(Depalliisfeminarum) 1. The regillum is the mantle of state for queens (regina), whence it is named. The peplum is a matron’s garment marked with purple, whose hem glitters at the edge with gold threads. 2. The palla is a woman’s garment that is a square cloak (pallium). It hangs down to the feet and has gemstones fixed in a row. And it is called palla from the word ! (“sway”), that is, from the movement that occurs around the edge of such clothing, or because as it sways it ripples in fluttering folds. 3. The stola is a matron’sgarmentthat,coveringtheheadandshoulders, is ‘sent’ from the right side over the left shoulder. Furthermore,itiscalledstola,withaGreekword(i.e.   , “robe”; cf.  B, “send”), because it is ‘sent out on top.’ 4. This is also called by the Latin term ricinium (i.e. ‘veil’) because half of it is flung back (reicere). People commonly call it a mavors (lit. the archaic name for Mars;cf.  ,“veil,headdress”).Itiscalledmavors asifthetermwereMars,foritpossessesthemarkofmarital(maritalis)dignityandauthority,formanisthehead of woman, whence this garment is worn over a woman’s
head.18
5. The amiculum is the linen cloak of prostitutes. In ancient times, married women caught in adultery were clothed in these so they might sully their virtue in this amiculumratherthaninastola.Thusamongtheancients thisgarmentwasamarkofprostitution,butnowadaysin Spain it is a mark of respectability. 6. The theristrum is a veil with which the women of Arabia and Mesopotamia are covered even today; in the heat they are very well protected by its shade. Isaiah (3:23) speaks concerning it. 7. The anaboladium is a linen cloak for women that covers their shoulders. Greek (cf. "E, “linen veil”) and Latin speakers call it a sindon.
 
XIX.xxvi.1–xxvii.5
xxvi. Bedspreads and other cloths that we use (De stratuetreliquisvestibusquaeinusuhabentur) 1.The stragulum is a multicolored cloth that the craftsman’s hand adorns with a rich variety of colors. It is so named because it can be used as a spread (stratus) and as a cloak (amictus). Solomon said of it (cf. Prov. 31:22): “She hath made for herself clothing of tapestry (stragulum).” 2. Some people think the ludix (i.e. lodix, “coverlet”) is named from public games (ludus), that is, the theater, for when young men used to leave the brothel at the public games, they would conceal their heads and faces with these coverings, because someone who has entered awhorehouseisusuallyashamed.Galnapes...3.Couchbacks (fulcrum) are couch ornaments, so called because we are propped up (fulcire) by them, that is, we are supported, or because they prop up the torso and head. Common people call them backrests (reclinatorium).
4.Bolsters(cervicalium)aresonamedbecausetheyare placedundertheneck(cervix)orelbow.Thepillow(pulvillus) is named from the pulvinar, which is a rich person’s couch. Mattresses (culcita) are so named because they are packed (calcare), that is, filled with feathers or stuffing, so that they may be softer and warmer. 5. Rugs (tapete) are so named because they were first spread out for the feet (pes, gen. pedis), as if the word were tapedia. Sipla (i.e. psila) rugs have their pile on one side, as if the word were simpla (cf. simplus, ‘single’). The amphitapa is a rug with pile on both sides. Lucilius says (cf.
Satires 13):
Siplae and amphitapae soft with thick pile.
6. Tablecloths (mantelium) are used today for covering tables. However, as their name indicates, they were once offered for wiping one’s hands (manus; cf. tela, “cloth”). Napkins (mappa) belong to the banquet and the ‘serving’ (apponere) of feasts, as if the word were manupa, and they are named on this account. The diminutive is mapella. Toral (“couch coverlet”) is a long, continuous cloth, named from ‘couch’ (torus). 7. Sabanum is a Greek word (cf.   and  , “linen cloth or towel”). The face towel (facietergium) and hand towel (manitergium) are named from wiping (tergere) the face (facies) or hands (manus).
Curtains (velum) are so named because they conceal (velare)theinteriorofahomewhentheyaredrawnshut. 8. Tapestries (aulaeum) are large decorated curtains; they are called aulaea because they were first invented in the palace (aula) of Attalus, king of Asia, to whom the Roman people were the successors.19 9. Cortinae are hangings (aulaeum), that is, curtains, made out of skins. Such hangings can be read about in Exodus (26:14); the exterior of the tabernacle was covered by them. They are called cortinae from leather (coreum, i.e. corium), because they had been made earlier from skins. Whence also in that same tabernacle of the Law it is commanded that cortinae be made from the red hides of rams and from violet hides. 10. The Arabs call a covering woven fromgoathairacilicium,andfromthesetheymaketents for themselves.
xxvii. Wool (De lanis) 1. Wool (lana) is named from tearing (laniare), that is, plucking (vellere). Fleece (vellus)isalsonamedfromthis,forinearliertimeswoolwas plucked and not sheared. Flax (linum) originates from the earth, and its name is derived from Greek, for the Greeks call flax   (lit. “thread”; cf.  , “flax”). Orelseitissonamedbecauseitissmoothandsoft(lenis). 2. Tow (stuppa) may be from hemp or from flax. This is called stuppa according to the ancient spelling, because cracks in ships are packed (stipare) with it. Whence also comes the name of the stipatores (lit. “attendants, stevedores”), who pack stuppa in hollows. 3. Stuffing (tomentum) is so named because it is ‘fluffed up’ (tumere) either in the thread or in the warp, and has no thinness. Hemp (cannabum) is named from its similarity to reeds (canna), or else from a Greek etymology, for they call hemp .
4. Byssum is a certain kind of flax that is especially white and soft. The Greeks call it papaten. Beaver (fibrinus) wool comes from those animals that people call beavers (fiber). People claim that these are the same as those beavers (castor, another word for ‘beaver’) that, when hunters pursue them, bite off their own testicles (cf. XII.ii.21 above). The cobweb (aranea) is so named because it is fed by the flow of air (aer) in foliage. 5. Silk (sericum)issonamedbecausetheSeres(Chinese,orEast Asians generally) were the first to provide it. It is there that the worms that spin silk threads around trees are thought to originate. The Greek name for these worms is ?. Placium is a stuppa (see section 2 above), a kind of thick silk, and it is a Greek term.
19 Attalus III, king of Pergamum in Asia Minor, discovered the art of weaving cloth from gold, and made the Roman people his heir.
 
xxviii. Colorings for cloth (De coloribus vestium) 1. Dying (tinctura) is so named because cloth is ‘soaked in color’ (tinguere), tinted to another appearance, and colored for the sake of beauty. What we call red or vermilion (vermiculus), the Greeks call  ; it is a small grub(vermiculus)fromthefoliageoftheforest.2.Purple (conchylium)isnamedbecauseitscoloriscollectedfrom themarineconchula(“smallmollusc”).Thisisalsocalled ostrum(lit.thebloodofaseamollusc).3.Ostrum,which is prepared for purple dye, is found in many places, but thebestisontheislandofCyprusorinthoseplaceswhere thesun’spathshinesclosertotheearth.4.Conchylia(i.e. purple shellfish) are from the sea, and when they are cut all the way around with a blade, they exude tears of a purple color. Once these tears have been collected, purple dye is prepared. Furthermore, ostrum is so named because it is drawn forth from the liquid of the shell (cf. d  , “bivalve shell, purple pigment”).
5. Purple (purpura) was so named by Latin speakers from the purity (puritas) of its bright color. Among the Greeksitiscalled ! ,withanaspiratedp,whilewe say purpura with no aspiration. 6. Ferrugo is a blackishpurple dye that is made in Spain, as in (Vergil, Aen.
9.582):
Distinguished with Iberian ferrugo.
It is called ferrugo because all purple at the first dyeing has this color (i.e. that of the rust of iron, ferrum). 7. Glaucus dye is a blackish ferrugo. Elbidus (i.e. helvacea; cf. helvus, “yellowish,” and XVII.v.26) is named from the color elbus, for elbus is the middle color between black and white, and the term elbus is taken from ‘white’ (albus). 8. Luteus is a reddish color that is saffron, for saffron is luteus of hue, as in (cf. Vergil, Eclogues
4.44):
He changed his fleece to a saffron yellow (lutum).
20	Alternatively, insubulare may be a Late Latin word meaning “roll on a warp.” Here infra and supra mean “below and above the surface” of the web in a loom, hence “behind and in front” of the web in an upright loom. Isidore surely speaks here of heddles; the earliest evidence of treadle looms in Europe appears in the twelfth century ce, and these are horizontal looms. Based on his etymology for stamen (section 7 below), Isidore has an upright loom in mind. Uprighttreadleloomscameintouseseveralcenturiesafterhorizontal ones.
21	The alibrum seems to be a wooden frame on which newly twisted thread is loosely wound to make a skein.
XIX.xxviii.1–xxix.7
Menum [so called because it is a black color, for the Greeks call black B]. Masticinum [so called because it has the color of mastic (mastix)]. Blatteum (i.e. purple) . . . Blavum . . . Mesticium . . . 9. Osticium, because it comesfromusta(i.e.atypeofredcolor;burntcinnabar), for it is made from the soot, hanging from a ceiling, that is deposited by constant fire. For this reason the color of this dye is flame-like.
xxix.	Tools for clothmaking (De instrumentis vestium) 1. Cloth (tela) is named for the length of its threads (cf.   N, “afar”). The word ‘loom’ (telaria) is derived from it. Heddles (insubulus, cf. insilium) are so namedbecausetheyarebelow(infra)andabove(supra), or because they ‘make a swishing sound’ (insubulare, i.e. insibilare).20 Shuttles (radius) are so named because they are shaped by smoothing (radere). Combs (pecten) are so named because they comb out (pectere) the fibers and press them down. 2. The distaff (colus) because it is long and round like a column (columna). The spindle (fusus), because what has been spun is ‘streamed out’ (fundere, ppl. fusus) onto it. The alibrum is so called because on it threads are unwound (liberare), that is, loosened.21
3.Thebasket(calathus)isalightcarriermadeofflaxor wicker or rushes. In it a day’s weight (pensum, weighedoutwooltobespun)isplacedorflowersarecollected.In Greek ‘wood’ is Y (i.e. Y ; cf.  , “reed”), from which calathus is derived. It is called quasillum in Latin. Cicero says in the Philippics (3.10): “But in fact gold may be weighed out amid the baskets (quasillum).” 4. A ‘measure of wool’ (pensum) for women is named from weighing (pendere, ppl. pensus), whence also the words ‘rations’ (pensa) and ‘expense’ (impensa). Yarn (netum) . . . 5. Thread (filum) is so called either because it is from the hair (pilus) of animals or because clothmaking takes place with fine threads like hair (pilus), that is, as if the word were filus. 6. Skein (mataxa), so called as if the word were metaxa, from the windingaround of threads, clearly, for a turning-point (meta) is a going-around – or it is because it is transferred (cf.  -, “trans-”;   ?, “change of order”). Gubellum (“ball of yarn”; perhaps better lubellum of many manuscripts) is said incorrectly as a diminutive of ball (globus), as if the word were globellum. 7. The panulia (“bobbin” or “shuttle”; cf. panuncula, “thread wound on a bobbin in a shuttle”) is so named because cloths
 
XIX.xxx.1–xxxi.5
(pannus)arewovenwiththem,foritrunsbackandforth through the loom.
The warp (stamen) is so named because it stands (stare) upright. The weft (trama), because it is brought through (transmittere) the loom in a straight path (cf. trames, “footpath”), for it is the thread running through the warp. The thrums (licium) are what join (ligare) the warps, as if the word were ligium. To ‘line up the warp threads’ (ordiri) is . . . To weave (texere) is . . .
xxx.	Ornaments (De ornamentis) 1. So far we have been talking about clothing: from this point we turn to other adornments. An ornament (ornamentum) is so named because one’s face (os, gen. oris) and appearance are adorned by wearing it. The first article of jewelry was the crown (corona, also meaning “garland”) as a mark of victory, or the sign of the king’s honor. It was placed on the king’s head to signify the populations spread around the globe, by whom he was surrounded just as his head was crowned. This is called a corolla by Lucilius (Satires 1143) and a   by Homer (Iliad 8.597). The pagans claim that it had its origins with a certain Liber, because theyestablishedthepracticeofbindingwiththesebands a head affected by drinking wine. That is why crowns were once made of a kind of linen or wool, as they were for pagan priests.
2. The word ‘band’ (corona, i.e. “a circle of people”) is so named for this reason, because in the beginning people would run (currere) around altars, so that a crown was both formed and named according to the image of a circling or a ‘group of dancers’ (chorus). 3. The Roman emperors and certain pagan kings wear gold crowns. The Persians wear turbans (tiara), the kings wearing straight ones and the satraps curved ones. The turban was invented by the Assyrian queen Semiramis; that nation has retained this type of ornament from then up until today. The Athenians used to wear gold ‘cicadas’ (cic[l]ada), some of them on the top of the head and some over the forehead.22 Indeed, not all kings wear the same kinds of regalia.
The pagan seers used to wear infulae, apices, pillea, or galeria. 4. An infula is a small white band for a priest’s head, shaped like a diadem. Fillets hang down on either side of it and fasten the infula, whence also fillets (vitta) are so named, because they fasten (vincire). Most infulae werewideandtwisted,andmadeoutofwhiteandscarlet.
5. The apex (i.e. a conical cap with a rod attached to its peak) is a needlework pilleum that pagan priests used to wear.Itisnamedfromfastening(apere),thatis,binding, for the rod that was on the pilleum was fastened on by thread made from the wool of a sacrificed animal. The galerium (i.e. galerum) is a pilleum made out of skin fromaslaughteredsacrificialvictim.Pilleum(i.e.aclosefittingcap)isnamedfromtheskin(pellis)ofthesacrifice, from which it used to be made. 6. The cidaris (i.e. the head-dressofahighpriest)wasitselfsomethingpriestly, and is called a mitra by most people.
xxxi. Women’sheadornaments(Deornamentiscapitis feminarum) 1. Ornaments for women’s heads are: the diadem, the nimbus, the capitulum and the mitra. The diadem (diadema) is a head ornament for matrons, interwoven with gold and gems. It is fastened at the back with the ends brought to meet one another, and for this reason it is named in Greek, because it is ‘tied round’ (cf. ", “across,” "@, “bind”). 2. The nimbus is a transverse headband made of gold, sewn onto a linen cloth, and is worn by women over the forehead. Plautus (The Little Carthaginian 348) says:
The more I look at her, the more she is ‘crowned with a nimbus’ (nimbatus).
The light that is depicted as being around the heads of angels is called a nimbus, although a nimbus is also the dense part of a cloud (nubis). 3. A hood (capitulum) is commonly called a capitulare. This is also called a cappa (i.e. another word for ‘hood,’ or perhaps ‘kerchief’), because it has two tips like the letter kappa, or because it is an ornament for the head (caput).
4. A mitra (i.e. a kind of head-dress, a bonnet) is a Phrygian pilleum (i.e. a cap), covering the head, the sort of ornament worn on the heads of women who have taken religious vows. But a pilleum is for men, and a mitra for women. 5. And redimicula are what the mitra is tied on with. A pilleum, as we said above, was made from
22 Lindsay–and,apparentlyaccidentally,Rodr´ıguez-Pantoja(ed. 1995) – emend the early manuscripts’ reading cicadas (“cicadas, locusts”) to cycladas, also found in some manuscripts, presumably referring to cyclas, plural cyclades, a woman’s bordered robe of state; see xxiv.10 above. But in fact a cicada was a gold ornamental hairpin shaped like the insect; see Liddell-Scott’s Greek lexicon, s.v.  B  ?, and pseudo-Vergil, Ciris 128.
 
skin, but a mitra is made of wool. The ricula (i.e. a small veil) is a mitra for the head of a virgin. 6. Fillets are what are fastened in the hair; they gather up loose hair, and they are called fillets (vitta) because they bind (vincire). The taenia (i.e. ribbon) is the end of the fillet, and it hangs down in various colors. Again, a crown is tied on with a fillet, and the taenia is the lowest part of the fillet, the part that hangs down from the crown. 7. A hair-net (reticulum) is what gathers the hair, so named because it ‘holds hair’ (retinere crines), so that it is not loose.23 8. Thediscriminaleforwomen’sheadsissonamedbecause it parts the head (i.e. the hair) with gold, for ‘to part’ means ‘to separate’ (discriminare).
Antiae are the curls hanging down around the earlobes. It is from a Greek word, ‘opposite’ (i.e.   ) the ears. 9. The hairpin (acus) is what holds an arrangement for adorning women’s hair in place, lest strands of hair fall loose and fly about here and there. 10. Earrings (inaures) are named from the pierced places of the ears (auris), from which precious beads of stone hang. They were worn this way in Greece: girls would wear them in both ears, and boys would wear them only in the right ear. 11. Torques (torquis) are gold circles hanging from the neck onto the chest. Both torques and bullae (i.e. lockets for amulets) are worn by men, but women wear monilia (necklaces) and catellae (neck-chains). Torques are so called because they are twisted (torquere), and bullae because in their roundness they are like a bubble (bulla) inflated in the water by the wind.
12. A monile is an ornament made out of gems, which would be hung around the neck by women. It is named from ‘gift’ (munus). This is also called a serpentum because it consists of certain gold beads (lit. “small amphoras”) and various gemstones arranged in the shape of a serpent. Some people call this a segmentum, as Juvenal does (Satires 2.124):
Segmenta (properly, “flounces”) and long clothes.
However, we also speak of clothing as ‘trimmed’ (segmentatus; cf. xxii.18 above), as in the same author
(6.89):
And the little girl would have slept in a flounced (segmentatus) cradle.
23 Isidore may tacitly refer to the word rete, “net,” as a basis of the etymology.
XIX.xxxi.6–xxxii.2
13. However, frequently any of a matron’s ornaments is referred to by the term munile (i.e. monile) – whichever ones are given to her as a gift (munus). 14. A murena (lit. “eel”) is so called in common usage, because a chain of a flexible kind, made of pliant tube-beads of gold metal, suitable for adorning the neck, is made in the likeness of a serpentine murena. Sometimes this is constructed from tube-beads of gold and of silver. Whence also it is said in the Song of Songs (1:10): “We will make thee chains (murenulae) of gold, inlaid with silver.”
15. Catellae are chainlets (catenula) for the neck, linking to each other like chains (catena), whence they are named. 16. Bracelets (dextra, i.e. dextrale) are worn by both men and women, because both sexes wear them on the right hand (dextera). Armbands (armilla) are, properly speaking, for men (vir), conferred on soldiers inrecognitionofavictoryfortheirvalor(virtus)inarms (arma). For this reason they were sometimes also commonly called viriolae (perhaps read viriliae). An armilla is no different from a bracelet (circulus) in what it signifies, because it also encloses something by encircling the place where it is put, but an armilla is more extended in depth and a circulus is rounded. 17. Fibulae (i.e. pins or brooches)areusedtoadornawoman’sbreastorareworn by men to hold a cloak over their shoulders, or a belt around their hips. Lunulae are ornaments for women; they are small pendent gold balls shaped like the moon
(luna).
18. Mirrors (speculum) are what women use to look at their faces. A mirror is so named either because the reflection is produced from its brightness (splendor) or because women looking in it study the appearance (species) of their face and add whatever ornament they see is lacking. 19. Ankle bracelets (periscelis) are ornaments for women’s legs, which adorn their appearance as they walk by. ‘Scent bottles’ (olfactoriolum) are small vessels for women, in which perfumes are carried.
xxxii. Rings (De anulis) 1. Prometheus is said to have been the first to put on his finger a circle of iron with a stone set into it; following this practice people began to wear rings. Rings (anulus) are named as a diminutive from the circlets and hoops (anus) that go around the arms and legs. Likewise the signets (signum) of rings are as a diminutive called sigilla. A signum is larger, and a sigillum is like a smaller signum. 2. People first began
 
XIX.xxxii.3–xxxiii.7	Isidore of Seville
 
to wear rings on the fourth (i.e. third) finger from the thumb, because a certain vein reaches from it to the heart, and the ancients thought that this vein should be noted and adorned by some sort of sign.
3. Among the Romans, rings would be distributed from the public treasury, and not indiscriminately, for rings with gems were given as an honor to men of exceptional merit, and plain rings to the rest. A slave or freedman would not wear a gold ring in public. Freeborn men wore gold rings, freedmen silver, and slaves iron, although many very worthy men also would wear iron rings. 4. Among the ancients it was a disreputable practice for a man to wear more than one ring. Gracchus says in the Against Maevius (unique fragment): “Consider his left hand, O Quirites – see whose authority we are following: someone who is adorned like a woman on account of his lust for women.” Crassus, who perished among the Parthians, had two rings in his old age, giving as his pretext the fact that that he had accumulated immense wealth. Many Romans refrained, in their dignity, from wearing a ring on their finger. Women did not wear rings except for the ones given to them as maidens by their fiances, and they used to wear not more than´ two gold rings on their fingers. But nowadays when it comes to gold, no part of a woman’s body is left light and unencumbered.
5. Among the types of rings are the ungulus, the Samothracian, and the Thynian. An ungula has a gemstone, and is called by this name because the gem of this ring is set in gold just as a claw (ungula) is set in flesh. A Samothracian ring is certainly gold, but with an iron capital. It is named from the place. 6. A Thynian ring is unadorned.ItwasfirstmanufacturedinBithynia,which was once called Thynia. Flaccus (i.e. Maecenas’s poem addressed to Horace, fr. 1):
O Flaccus Lucentus, my life, I seek for myself neither emeralds nor glittering beryl, nor white pearls, nor those little rings that the Thynian (Tunnicus) file has polished, nor jasper stones.24
xxxiii. Belts (De cingulis) 1. A cinctus is a wide belt (zona), while a semicinctium is less wide, and a cingulum is less than either, for the word cingulum is formed
24 Rodr´ıgues-Pantoja (ed. 1995) adopts two alterations: Lugenti (“inmygrief”)forLucente(“Lucentus”),andthespellingThunicafor Tunnica. In any case the form Lucente as vocative is here unmetrical.
as a diminutive from cinctus. Young men at athletic (campester) exercises used to conceal their private parts with a cinctum, whence it is also called a campestris. 2. A baldric (balteum) is a military belt, so named because military insignia hang from it, showing the total number of men in the military legion, that is, 6600, of which number the soldiers themselves are a part. Balteus is the name not only for what one girds on, but also for what weapons hang from. 3. Zona is Greek (cf. ;E, “belt, girdle”); what they call ;A (cf. ;A , “belt”) we call a cingulum. A strophium is a gold cingulum with gems. Cinna says this of it (cf. Catullus, Poems 64.65):
With a strophium encircling milk-white breasts.
And Prudentius (Crowns of Martyrdom 4.25):
This is the name of the gem fastened on the strophium.
4.Alimusisanapronthatpublicslavesusedtowear,and it was called limus because it had purple bands that were slanted, that is, oblique (limus). A caltulum is a kind of girdle, named from its ‘constraining strap’ (cogere, ppl. coactus + lorum).
Fibula (“pin” or “brooch”) is a Greek word, which they call fiblis (cf.  or  , “brooch”), because it binds (ligare). Subfibulum (i.e. a white four-cornered veil) . . . Loincloth (subligaculum) . . . 5. The redimiculum is what we call an apron or a bracile, because it comes down from the nape and is divided on either side of the neck, passing under each armpit and tying around below from either side, in such a way that it pulls in the breadth of the garment as it clothes the body, drawing it together and arranging it by means of its fastening (cf. xxxi.5 above). Common people call this a brachilis, as if the word were brachialis (i.e. “bracelet” in classical Latin), even though nowadays it is not a belt about the arms (brachium) but about the loins. An apron (succinctorium) is so called because, as we have said, it is drawn under the arms, goes around under the armpits and is secured below (succingere), coming from either side.
6. A fascia is a band that covers the chest and binds the breasts, and the chest is quite tightly bound with its crimped belt. It is called a fascia because it ties around the body like tying up a packet (fasciculus). Hence also bandages (fasciolae), with which wounds are bound up. 7. A fillet (vitta) is so called because it binds (vincire) the chest like a clinging vine (vitis). A border (limbus) is what we call trimming. 8. It is a band that goes around
 
The Etymologies	XIX.xxxiv.1–xxxiv.13
 
the edges of clothing, woven either of thread or of gold, and sewn onto the outside lower edge of the garment or cloak. Vergil says of it (Aen. 4.137):
Clothed in a Sidonian cloak with embroidered border (limbus).
xxxiv. Footwear (De calciamentis) 1. Shoemakers (sutor) are so named because they sew (suere), that is, they stitch together, with boar bristles (seta; and cf. sus, “pig”)workedintotheirthread,asifthewordweresetor. 2. But bootmakers (caligarius) are so called not from the thick skin (callum) of the foot, but from the last (calum, i.e. cala, lit. “wood”; cf. Y , “wood”), that is, thewood,withoutwhichshoescannotbesewntogether; the Greeks call this a !  (“shoemaker’s last,” lit. “wooden foot”). At first they were only made from willow. Hence shoes (calciamentum) are named because they are made on lasts (calum), that is, wood, or because they are ‘trodden upon’ (calcare).
3. The Greeks used sandals, which had been invented earlier. This is a kind of shoe with a single shape, the same shape being suited to either foot, whether the right or the left. These sandals (crepida) are so named because they are fastened with a noise, or from the pattering (crepitus) of feet while walking. 4. Kings and Caesars used to wear the shoe called calceus. Their shape . . . Romulus invented patrician (patricius) shoes, with four laces and a moon (i.e. a half-moon shaped badge) sewn on them; only patricians used to wear these. The moon onthemdidnotrepresenttheimageofthecelestialbody but a sign of the number one hundred (i.e. C), because in the beginning there were one hundred patrician senators.
5. Greaves (ocrea) are ‘shoes’ for the shins, so named because they cover the legs (crus). The coturnus (i.e.
25	See 12 and 13 below. Traditionally the soccus (“slipper, sock”) was the emblem of comic actors, as the cothurnus (“buskin”) was that of tragic actors.
26	The reading calibatus seems preferable to claviatus; see xix.7 above.
cothurnus, a high, thick-soled boot) was what used to be worn by tragic actors when they were about to speak inthetheaterandchantpoemsinadeep,resonantvoice. It was a shoe like the sandal that heroes used to wear, but such that it fits both the right foot and the left. 6. Baxeae are shoes worn by comic actors, parallel to the coturni of tragic actors.25 Some people call them calones because they are made from willow, for the Greeks, as we have said, call wood Y (i.e. Y ). 7. Talares (i.e. talaria) are slippers (soccus) that seem to be so named because they are so shaped that they come to the ankles (talus); similarly subtolares, because they come below (sub) the ankle, as if the term were subtalares.
8. Obstrigilli (i.e. another kind of sandal) are stitched alongthesole,andhavelacingontheupperssothatthey can be fastened (constringere) by drawing it tight; this givesthemtheirname.9.Ithinkthatosaewerefirstmade from bone (os), and although they are now made from other materials, people have retained the original name. 10. Mullei are similar to coturni (see section 5 above), with elevated soles, but the upper part has a buckletongue (malleolus) of bone or brass, to which thongs are fastened. They are named from their red color, the sort of color a mullet (mullus) fish has. 11. Soleae only cover thesolesofthefeet,andarenamedfromthesole(solum) of the foot. Wooden soleae are made of wood covered by leather.12.Slippers(soccus),whosediminutiveissocellus, are so named because they have a ‘bag’ (saccus) in which part of the foot is put. Callicula (i.e. gallicula, a small Gallic shoe) . . .
Boots (caliga) are named either from the thick skin (callum) of the foot or because they are laced (ligare), for socci are not laced, but only slipped on. 13. Cernui are slippers with no soles. Lingulati (lit. “tongue-shaped”) are the ones we call foliatus (lit. “leaf-shaped”). Nailed (clavatus) shoes, [as if the word were claviatus, because the soles are joined to the uppers with small – that is, sharp – nails (clavus)].26 ‘Fur-lined boots’ (perones) and sculponeae are country shoes. Baxea are women’s shoes. Laces(corrigia)arenamedfromleather(corium)orfrom binding (colligatio), as if the word were colligia.
 

 
Book XX (Provisions and various implements)1
 
 
i. Tables (De mensis) 1. Daedalus was the first to make a table and a chair. The first to devise the equipment for cooking was a certain Apicius, who died by his own choice, after stuffing himself with dainties – and deservedly so, because he who is slave to his maw and to gluttony kills both the soul and the body. The word ‘table’ (mensa) was made from ‘eating’ (esus) and ‘consuming’(comesus),foratablehasnootheruse.2.Acouch (torus) is so called from the twisted (tortus) grasses that are placed under the shoulders of those reclining on it. The ‘semicircular couch’ (stibadium) is named from log (stipes), as if it were stipadium, because it began as such. The ‘large dining couch’ (accubitum) is so called from food (cibus), as if it were ‘for the food’ (ad cibatum) of a banquet.
3. Among the Greeks a banquet (convivium) derives from the idea of ‘drinking together’ (compotatio), from their word ! , “drink.”2 But in Latin it is more correctly derived from ‘living in company’ (convictus), or because there one has conversation about life (vita). Again, convivium from a multitude of ‘people eating together’ (convescentes), for a private table is for sustenance, but it is not a banquet. A banquet has three elements: reclining, eating, and drinking. Reclining, as (Vergil, Aen. 1.708):
Bidden to recline on the decorated couches.
Eating and drinking, as (cf. Vergil, Aen. 1.723)
After the first lull in the banquet, when the tables were removed, they set out great bowls and garland the wines.
ii. Foodstuffs (De escis) 1. Food (cibus) is so called because it is taken (capere) in the mouth, just as foodstuff (esca) because the ‘mouth takes’ (os capit) it. Victuals (victus) are rightly so called, because they sustain life (vita); hence to ask someone to dinner is termed to ‘invite’(invitare). 2. Nourishment(alimonia) is so called
1	This book is untitled in the early manuscripts.
2	Isidore refers to the Greek term ! .
395
because the body is nourished (alere) by consuming it. Youths take nourishment in order to grow, the elderly to endure, for the flesh cannot subsist unless it is strengthened with nourishment. Nutriment (alimentum) is that by which we are nourished (alere), and support (alimonium) is responsibility for nourishing.
3. Affluence (affluentia) is so named as if it were a ‘pouring out’ (effusio) of something overabundant, beyondwhatisenough,andthereisnorestraint.4.Opulence(opulentia)issocalledfrom‘assistance’(ops),andif youexamineityouwillfindthatitobservesmoderation. For how can anything excessive be of assistance (opitulari),whentoomuchisoftenmoretroublesomethantoo little? 5. ‘Sumptuous meals’ (epulae) are so called from the opulence (opulentia) of things. ‘Ordinary meals’ (epulae simplices) are divided into two necessary elements,breadandwine,andtwocategoriesbeyondthese, namely, what people seek out for eating from the land andfromthesea.6.Feasts(dapes)areforkings,andepulae for private persons. Delicacies (deliciae) are so called because people are delighted (delectare) by them, and haveasweettoothforthem.7.Pulmentumtakesitsname from puls (“gruel”); it is named correctly whether it is eaten in the form of gruel alone or whether something elseiseateninamixtureofgruel. 8.Satiety(satietas)and fullness (saturitas) are distinct, for satiety can be spoken of with regard to a single food, because it is enough (satis), but fullness takes its name from a ‘mixed dish’ (satura)thatismadeupofavariedpreparationoffoods.
9. Debauchery (crapula) is immoderate voracity, as if it were a ‘raw meal’ (cruda epula), by whose rawness the heart is burdened and the stomach is made to suffer indigestion. Now immoderate voracity is a vice, and only as much as is sufficient for sustenance and one’s nature is healthy. 10. Breakfast (iantaculum, i.e. ientaculum) is the first food with which a fast (ieiunium) is broken – hence it is named. Nigidius (fr. 109): “We ourselveshaveviolatedfastswithlightbreakfasts.”11.Lunch (prandium) is named for the ‘preparations for eating’ (apparatus edendi). Hence the ancients properly called
 
XX.ii.12–ii.26
the food for all the soldiers before battle ‘lunch.’ Hence theexhortationofthegeneral,“Letuseatlunchlikemen about to dine in the infernal regions.”3 12. Merenda is a meal taken late in the day, as if it were ‘to be eaten in the afternoon’ (postmeridie edenda) and very close to dinner – hence it is also called antecenium (lit. “before dinner”) by some people. Again, ‘to partake of merenda’ (merendare), as if it were ‘to eat at midday’ (meridie edere).
13. The term annona (lit. “provisions”) derives from the time at which the ancient Romans would be summoned to meals. Thus Martial (Epigrams 4.8.6):
The ninth hour (nona; i.e. about 3:00pm) demands that we rumple the high couches.
The Persians still do this today. 14. Dinner (coena, i.e. cena) is named for the community of those eating, for theGreekfor“common”is  .Whencealsotheterm ‘communicants’ (communicantes), because they gather in common (communiter), that is, on an equal basis. Among the ancients it was the custom to take meals in public view and to dine in community, lest dining alone beget excess. Also dinner is the evening (vespertinus) meal,whichtheancientswouldcallvesperna,forintheir practice there were no lunches.
15. Bread (panis) is so called because it is served with all food, or because all living creatures crave it, for ‘all’ in Greek is !Y. Coarse bread (cibarius) is what is given as breadtoslaves,anditisnotrefined.Leavenedbread(fermentacius) is made with leaven. Unleavened bread (azymus)isnotfermented,fortheterm O;  means“withoutyeast,”unadulterated.Acrozymusisslightlyleavened bread,asifitwereacroazymus.‘Whitewheat’(siligineus) bread is named for its type of grain, for siligo is a kind of wheat. Toast (rubidus) is bread recooked and made red (rubefactus). Subcinericius is bread cooked on both sides on hot embers (cinis); it is also called hearth-bread (focacius). Clibanicius bread is baked in a pot. 16. Sponge (spungia, i.e. spongia) bread is a mixture that is softened for a good while in water, and takes in a small portion of fine flour and a small portion of yeast; it has more moisture than any other bread, whence it took the name of the sponge.
17. Placentae are breads made from spelt. Some people call them libum; they are so named because they are agreeable (libere) and pleasing (placere). 18. Sweet cakes(dulcis)aretypesofbreadmadebypastry-cooks,so called from their taste, for they are eaten sprinkled with honey. Crust (crusta) is the surface of bread; another term for this is fragmenta (lit. “fragments”) because the crust is divided up, as in ‘broken pieces’ (fracta, ppl. of frangere). Leaven (fermentum) is named from ‘seething’ (fervor), because it cannot be contained after the first hour, for it pushes out with its expansion. Meal (farina) and bran (furfur) are so called from spelt (far), whose chaff they are. 19. Starch (amolum, i.e. amylum), the best flour of farina, is very fine and is thrown out of the millwheels because of its lightness – hence its name, as if it were ‘from the mill’ (a mola). Wheat flour (simila) . . . Mill dust (pollen) . . .
20. Meats (carnes) are so called because they are flesh (caro); or, from “producing” (creare), whence they are also called B by the Greeks. Raw (crudus) meat, because it is gory (cruentus), for it has blood. 21. Cooked (coctus), [as if it were ‘forced’ (cogere, ppl. coactus), that is, acted upon (agere, ppl. actus) in a forceful way by fire or water, and fit for use in eating]. But also something ripened over a long period of time is called by the sameterm.22.Roasted(assus),somethingthatisblazing hot, as though the word were arsum (“burnt”). Boiled (elixus), because it is cooked in water only, for water is called lixa because it is a solution (solutus) – wherefore also ‘giving rein’ (solutio) to desire is called debauchery (luxus, noun), and dislocated limbs are described as luxus (adj., “sprained”). 23. Fried (frixus) is so termed from the sound food makes when it is seared in oil. Spiced (salsus), as if it were ‘sprinkled with salt’ (sale asparsus), with the [three] middle syllables taken away. Rancid (rancidus) is named after its defect, because it makes meat harsh (raucus). 24. A cut (succidia) is meat set aside for later use, so called from butchering (succidendo).
Lard (lardum), because it is kept stored at home, for theancientscalledtheirhomes‘dwellings’(lar).InGallic lard is called taxea, whence Afranius in Rosa (fr. 284):
The Gaul in his mantle, fed with fat lard (taxea).
25. Grease (axungia) is named from ointment (unctio). Suet(sebum)isnamedfrompig(sus,ablativesue),asifit were suebum, because this animal has more fat. 26. A bit (offa) in its proper sense is a fragment cut by the teeth; its diminutive is offella (i.e. offula). So ‘minced-meat
3 ThegeneralwasLeonidas,kingoftheSpartans:Cicero,Tusculan Disputations 1.101.
 
makers’ (offarius) are cooks who cook with small pieces, that is, “in bits” (offatim). Hence the expression “a bit (offa, i.e. a sop) for barking dogs”; if it is tossed into a dog’s mouth the dog is instantly satisfied, and is curbed and silenced. 27. A morsel (frustum) is so called because it is taken by the frumen, for the frumen is the upper part ofthethroat.‘Leanmeat’(pulpa)issocalledbecauseformerly it would be eaten mixed with gruel (puls). Hence also relish (pulmentarium) and pulmentum have their names.
28.Lucanica(i.e.akindofsausage)issocalledbecause it was first made in Lucania. Sausage (farcimen) is meat cut up into small bits, because with it an intestine is stuffed (farcire), that is, filled, with other things mixed in. 29. Hash (minutal) is so called because it is made of fish and stuffing and vegetables cut ‘in small bits’ (minutatim). Aphratum is a dish called ‘foamy’ (spumeum) in Latin,because  inGreekmeans“foam.”Martisium is made from fish in a mortar (mortarium), whence it is named.30.Isocisisthenameofacertainfishfromwhich an isicium (i.e. a kind of stuffing, from insecare, “chop”) was originally made, and although it is now made from another kind of fish, at the outset that fish gave it its name. 31. Galatica is named for its milky color, for the Greeks call milk . Meatballs (sphera) are named with this Greek word for their roundness, for whatever is round in shape is called @ in Greek.
32. Teachers of cooking have named broth (ius) after the word for ‘law’ (ius), because it is the determining factor in the seasoning of cooking. The Greeks call it zema (i.e. “decoction”). 33. Cheese (caseus) is so called because it “lacks whey” (carere serum), as if the word were careus, for all the whey is drawn out of it so that it can take shape under weights. Colostrum is the milk from a new mother, and is of neuter gender. 34. Milk (lac) is derived from a Greek term for its whiteness, for
4	The title of Galen’s work, apparently his Hygiene, is corrupted in the manuscripts. Isidore is here quoting Jerome, Epistle 54, “To Furia, On Remaining a Widow” (Patrologia Latina 22.554).
5	Here “hot” and “cold” refer to physiologists’ ideas of the elemental properties of various foods, and not to the temperature at which they are served.
6	“Loosen” is solvere; Isidore or his source associates the verb with luere, (i.e. ), “loosen” (solvere = se + luere) and hence with Lyaeus, “the Relaxer,” an epithet of Bacchus. See ii.22 above.
7	The material from Jerome derives from two nearby places in his commentary on the four Pauline Epistles: Ad Galatas 3.5 col. 445, lines 48 and 52.
XX.ii.27–iii.2
the Greeks call something white . Milk and blood are what nourish and what take in nourishment, for we arenourishedbymilk,andwelivebyblood.35.Theterm ‘rennet’ (quactum) is as if the term were coactum (“curdled”), as if ‘coagulated’ (coagulatum), because when other things are mixed with rennet it coagulates them into another form.
36.Honey(mel)isfromaGreekterm(i.e. B),which is shown to have its name from bees, for a bee in Greek is called B. Formerly honey was from dew and was found in the leaves of reeds. Hence Vergil (Geo. 4.1):
Forthwith, the celestial gifts of honey from the air.
Indeed in India and Arabia honey is still found attached to branches, clinging like grains of salt. Nevertheless, all honey is sweet; Sardinian honey is bitter because of wormwood, with whose abundance the bees of that region are fed. The honeycomb (favus) is so called because it is eaten rather than drunk, for the Greeks say @ for “eat.”
37. Finally, physicians and those who write about the physiology of the human body, especially Galen in his booktitled  inquo,4 saythatthebodiesofchildren, youths,andmenandwomenofmatureageburnwithan innate heat, and that for these ages foods that increase heat are noxious, and that to take whatever things are cold for eating conduces to good health. Likewise for the elderly, on the contrary, who struggle with phlegm and cold, it helps to take warm foods and aged wines.5
iii. Drink (De potu) 1. A drink (potio) derives its name from Greek, for they call it !  . Water (aqua) is generally so named because its surface is level (aequalis) – hence also ‘the sea’ (aequor, lit. any level expanse). We speak of water as fresh because it is not useful when it is aged,likewine,butwhenitisimmediatelydrawnfroma river, spring, or well, for it stinks when it is aged. 2. Wine (vinum)issocalledbecauseadrinkofitspeedilyreplenishes the veins (vena) with blood. Some call it Lyaeus, because it loosens (solvere) us from care.6 The ancients called wine venom (venenum), but after poison from a lethal sap was discovered they called the one thing wine, theothervenom.HenceJeromeinthebookhewroteOn Preserving Virginity: “Thus growing girls should avoid wine as poison lest, on account of the fervent heat of their time of life, they drink it and die.”7 Hence it is that Romanwomenwouldnotusewineexceptonprescribed
 
XX.iii.3–iii.18
days for ritual purposes. 3. We speak of merum when we mean “pure wine,” for we call “plain” (merus) whatever is pure and unadulterated, as plain (merus) water, mixed with nothing else at all. Hence also merenda (see ii.12 above), because in ancient times that was the time at which plain (merus) bread would be given to laboring servants – or, because at that time of day people ‘took a siesta’ (meridiare) alone and separately, not, that is, as at lunchanddinner,gatheredatonetable.Hencewethink, furthermore, that the time of day which is after the middle of the day is called afternoon (meridies), because it is pure.
4. Must (mustum) is wine drawn straight from the vat. It is thought to be called mustum because it has sediment and dirt mixed in it, for mus means “dirt,” whence humus (“the ground”). The force of must’s fermenting is so great that it quickly shatters vessels filled with it, however sturdy they are, unless there is a vent. 5. Roseum is wine of a red color, for a rose (rosa) is red. But Aminean (Amineus) wine is as if it were without cinnabar (minium), that is, without red, for it is white. Amber-colored (sucinacius) wine is like the gem amber (sucina, i.e. sucinum), that is, of a tawny color. 6. Limpid (limpidus) wine, that is, clear, is so called from its resemblance to water, as if it were lymphidum, because lympha is water. Turbid (turbidus) wine, as if it were terbidum, thatis,mixedwithearth(terra)–namely,itsdregs.Falernian(Falernus)wineisnamedfromtheFalernianregion of Campania, where the best wines originate.
7.Colatumwinetakesitsnamefromthevesselinwhich it is transported (cf. colum, “strainer”), but Gazean (Gazeum) wine names the region from which it is imported, for Gaza is a city in Palestine. The wine that is poured out as a libation and offered at an altar is called infertus. ‘Polluted’ (spurcus) is wine that may not be offered, or in which water is mingled, as if it were ‘bastardized’ (spurius), that is, unclean. 8. ‘Honorary’ (honorarius) wine is what is offered to kings and potentates to honor them. Cato, On His Own Innocence (1;i.e.Orations73):“WhenIwasalegateintheprovinces, a great many people would give the praetors and consuls ‘honorary’ wine. I never accepted it, not even as a private person.” 9. Crucius (lit. “crucifying”) wine is the sour wine that slaves drink.
Vinegar (acetum) is so called either because it is sharp (acutus),orbecauseitiswatery(aquatus),forwinemingled with water quickly acquires this taste. Hence the term ‘tart’ (acidus), as if the word were aquidus. ‘Spiced’ (conditus) wine is so called because it is not pure, and is blended with a mixture of coloring agents. 10. Lactatum isadrinkmadefrommilk(lac).Honey-wine(mulsum)is winemixedwithhoney,foritisadrinkmadefromwater and honey, which the Greeks call   .8 11. Winehoney (oenomelum) is must mixed with honey and vigorouslystirredandshaken.Honey-water(hydromelum), socalledbecauseitismadefromwaterandMatianapples (malum).Filtered(saccatus)wineismadeofwatermixed with the dregs of wine and filtered through a bag (saccus). Second-press wine (lorea) . . . 12. Vinegar-honey (oxymeli) is so called because it is something made from a mixture of vinegar and honey (mel), whence it has a sweet-sour taste. ‘Honey of roses’ (rhodomelum) is so called because the honey is mixed with essence of rose. Water-mead (melicratum) is wine mixed with honey. 13. Mead (medus), as if it were melus, because it is made from honey (mel), just as calamitas is put for cadamitas. ‘Burnt tartar’ (faecula) is a decoction of plump grapes, cookeddowntothethicknessofhoneyandcooled,good for the stomach. 14. Raisin-wine (passum) is the liquid pressed from dried (passus) grapes. It is called passum from ‘suffering’ (pati, ppl. passus), for the dry grapes are beaten and cooked down, and from this raisin-wine is made. ‘Reduced must’ (defrutum) is so called because it is defrauded (defrudare), and in a way suffers fraud. 15. Reduced wine (carenum), because it lacks (carere) a part from boiling, for when a third part of the must is lost, what remains is carenum. The counterpart of this is sapa, which reduced by boiling goes down to a third.
16. Sicera is any drink apart from wine that can inebriate a person. Although its name is Hebrew, it still has a Latin sound because it is made from the juice (sucus) of grain or fruits, or the fruit of palms is squeezed to a pulp; and the liquid, thick with the cooked produce, like juice, is strained, and the resulting drink is named sicera. 17. Beer (cervisia) is so called from Ceres, that is, from grain, for it is a drink made in various ways from seeds of grain. 18. Caelia beer is so called from ‘heating’ (calefacere), and it is a drink skillfully brewed from the juice of wheat. The strength of the germ of moistened grain is aroused by fire, and then it is dried, and after it has been ground to a meal it is mixed with mild juice
8 +   in Greek is a drink of honey and milk. Mulsum is a mixture of honey and wine.
 
and, by its fermentation, a harsh taste and inebriating heat are added. This is made in the parts of Spain where there is no fertile place for producing wine.
Lees (fex, i.e. faex) are so called because they affix (adfigere, ppl. adfixus) themselves to the vats by settling out. 19. The sauce garum is a liquid made from fish, which formerly was made from the fish that the Greeks called  , and although it is now made from any kind of fish it retains the original name that it had at its beginning. 20. Liquamen is so called because little fish dissolvedinpicklingbrineliquefy(liquare)asthatsauce. The liquid from liquamen is called salsugo or muria, but properlymuria(i.e.“brine”)isthenameforwatermixed with salt, to produce the taste of the sea (mare). 21. Juice (sucus) is the name for what is squeezed from a filter bag (saccus), like barley-water (ptisana). Barley-water, broth (zema), and decoction (apozema) are Greek words (i.e. ! , “barley-gruel”; ;B, “decoction”; !;, “decoction”).
iv. Dishes for food (De vasis escariis) 1. Dishes (vas) are so called from ‘eating’ (vesci), because food is served on them. Its diminutive is vascula, as if it were vescula. 2. Crockery (fictile) is so called because it is made and fashioned (fingere, ppl. fictus) from earth, for to fashion istomake,form,andmold,whencealsopotters(figulus) take their name. And a ceramic (fictilis) dish is not called ‘fashioned’(fictus)becauseitismendacious,butbecause itisshaped,sothatitmayhaveacertainform.9 Hencethe Apostle says (cf. Romans 9:20): “Shall the thing formed (figmentum)saytohimthatformed(fingere)it:Whyhast thou made me thus?” 3. Ceramic dishes are said to have been first invented on the island of Samos, made from white clay and hardened by fire, hence ‘Samian dishes.’ Afterwards it was discovered how to add red earth and to fashion vessels with red clay.
The use of ceramic dishes was more ancient than the practice of casting with bronze or silver, for the ancients haddishesofneithergoldnorsilver,butofpottery–such as the dolium devised for wine, the amphora for water, the hydria for baths, and other vessels that are either
9	From fingere, the participle fictus means both “fashioned” and “feigned.”
10	In classical Latin apophoreta (neuter plural) were “table gifts” givenoutatfeasts;inGreekthesingularadjective!  means “carried away.” Isidore appears to take an apophoreta (feminine singular) as something like a tray (for holding such gifts?).
XX.iii.19–iv.13
made on the wheel or shaped by hand for human use. 4. Potter’s clay (argilla) when fired is spoken of as ‘pottery’ (testa), because from being soft it is ‘baked hard’ (tosta), and it does not keep its original name, because it is not what it was. 5. Arretine (Arretinus) dishes are named for the Italian city Arretium (i.e. Arezzo), where theyaremade,andtheyarered.Onthese,Sedulius(Preface to the Paschal Poem 16):
Vegetables which red pottery displays and serves.
6. Some think that Samian dishes got their name from Samos, a town of Greece. Others say that there is a white potter’s earth from Italy, produced not far from Rome, thatiscalledSamian.7.Chased(caelatus)dishesaresilver or gold, modeled inside and out with figures that stand out, so called from an engraver’s burin (caelum), which is a kind of iron tool, which commonly is called a chisel (cilio). 8. Chrysendetus vessels are those inlaid with gold; the term is Greek (cf. 9, “gold”; "@ “bind on”). Vessels in bas-relief (anaglypha) are those carved on top, for the Greek OA means “above,” , “carving,” that is, carved above.
9. A dish (discus) formerly was named scus after its resemblance to a shield (scutum); hence also ‘salver’ (scutella).Afterwardsitwascalleddiscusbecauseit‘gives food’ (dare escas), that is, it serves it – from this also is ‘those reclining at table’ (discumbentes) – or else it is fromtheword " (i.e. "@,“throw”),thatis,from thethingtheythrow(i.e. " ,“discus”).10.Tableware (messorium)issocalledfrom‘table’(mensa),asifitwere mensorium. A parapsis is a four-sided dish with ‘compartments of equal size’ (par apsis). A paten (patena), because it has a spreading, open (patere, present participle patens) rim. 11. Platter (lancis, i.e. lanx) . . . Gavata (i.e. gabata, a kind of dish), because it is ‘hollowed out’ (cavare, ppl. cavatus), with g put for the letter c. Likewise also mussel-shell (conca, i.e. concha), but the former is ‘hollowed out’ (cavatus), the latter is hollow (concavus): the Greeks also make this distinction. A salver (scutella) is the diminutive of shield (scutum), because it resembles one. 12. An apophoreta is so named by the Greeks (i.e. ! ) from ‘carrying fruits’ (ferre pomum)
or anything [else], for it is flat.10
A salt-cellar (salinum) is a vessel used for salt (sal). A sulzica is the same thing, as if it were salzica. A vinegar cruet (acitabulum), as if the word were acetaforum, because it ‘carries vinegar’ (acetum ferre). 13. Spoons
 
XX.iv.14–vi.9
(coclear) are so called because they were first used for snails (coclea). Hence is the old distich (Martial, Epigrams 14.121):
I am used for eating snails, but I am no less useful for eggs. Pray, do you know why for preference I am called a cocleare?
14.Trisceles,intheGreek(i.e.  ,“three-legged”), are tripods (tripus) in Latin. Those that stand on four legsarecalled‘tripods’withincorrectusage.15.Invessels three pleasing qualities are sought: the workmanship of the maker, the weight of the silver, and the sheen of the metal.
v. Drinking vessels (De vasis potatoriis) 1. A cup (poculum) is named from ‘drinking’ (potare), for it is any vessel customarily used for drinking. A phiala (i.e. a shallow drinking bowl) is so called because it is made of glass, for ‘glass’ in Greek is X . 2. A patera is a phiala socalledeitherbecauseweusuallydrink(potare)fromit, or because they are ‘wide open’ (patere) with wide rims. 3. A mixing-bowl (cratera) is a vessel with two handles. It is a Greek term (i.e.  , masc., “mixing-bowl”), but they decline it crater in the masculine gender, and in Latin it is cratera, feminine. Whence Persius (Satires
2.51):
If for you bowls (cratera) of silver; and Vergil (cf. Aen. 1.724):
They set out great bowls (crater) and they garland the wines.
They were first made from woven twigs, whence they are called craterae from the  @ (“hold fast”), that is, because they hold together mutually.
4. There is also the ladle (cyathus), the goblet (scyphus), and the drinking-bowl (cymbium) – these are types of cups. Of these, the cup cymbium is so called from its resemblance to the boat called cymba. An amystis (cf. -, “without,” , “close (i.e. the mouth)”) is a kind of cup from which one drinks in one draught, that is, in one breath. The cup called baccea (i.e. bacchia) was first named from Bacchus, that is, wine, and afterwards the usage was transferred to mean a water vessel. 5.Chalices(calix)andwine-cups(calathus)andthescala are types of cups formerly made of wood, and hence so called, for the Greeks would call any wood Y . An ampulla (ampulla) is as if the word were a ‘large bubble’ (ampla bulla), for it has the spherical shape of bubbles that are made from foaming water and thus are inflated by the wind.
vi. Wine and water vessels (De vasis vinariis et aquariis) 1.Anoenophorumisavesselcarryingwine,for theword  V  means“wine.”Concerningthis(Lucilius, Satires, fr. 139):
The bottom of the wine jug (oenophorum) is upended, and so is our idea.
2. Flascae are named from a Greek word (cf. , “flagon”). They were first made for carrying and storing phialae (see v.1 above), whence they were named. Later theypassedintouseforwine,butkeepingtheGreekterm withwhichtheyhadtheirorigin.3.Flagon(lagoena)and Sicula (lit. “Sicilian”) are Greek words, partly changed as they became Latin, for they say  , we, lagoena; they, /, we, Sicula. Tankard (cantharus) . . .
4. A hydria is a kind of water pot named from its derivation, for the Greeks call water X"A. Bucket (situla), because it is of use to the thirsty (sitientes) for drinking; the Greeks call this vessel a " . 5. A pot (catinum) is a ceramic vessel, and it is used more appropriately in the neuter rather than the masculine gender, just as we call the vessel for salt a salt-cellar (salinum, neuter gender). An orca is a kind of amphora; from its lesser term, urceus, comes the diminutive term urceolus. Scyphus, in which we wash our hands. 6. A seriola is a straight-sided type of tun, or a ceramic wine vessel first invented in Syria – just as Cilicises are named from Cilicia, from where they were [also] first imported. ‘Large jar’ (dolium) . . . 7. Cask (cupus and cupa) is so called from ‘taking’ (capere), that is, receiving, water or wine – hence also innkeepers (caupo). Wineskin (uter), from‘womb’(uterus).Milking-pail(mulgarium)isavessel into which livestock are milked, and with the same meaning mulctrum, because milk is milked (mulgere, ppl. mulctus) into it. 8. A basin (labrum) is so called because the bathing (labatio, i.e. lavatio) of infants is usually done in it; its diminutive is labellum. Likewise albeum, because ablutions (ablutio) are usually done in it. A laver (pelvis) is so called because the feet (pes) are washed (lavare) there. 9. One vessel is called a siphon (sifon,i.e.sipho,“hose”)becauseitpoursoutwaterwhen air is blown (sufflare) into it. They use these in the East,
 
for when they realize that a house is burning they run with siphons filled with water and extinguish the fire, and they also clean ceilings with water forced upwards from siphons.
vii.	Vesselsforoil(Devasisoleariis) 1.Ahemicadiumis avesselforoil.Ascortiaisavesselforoil,socalledbecause itismadeofleather(corium).2.Analabastrumisavessel for ointments, and is named from the kind of stone of which it is made, which they call alabaster (alabastrites), which keeps ointments unspoiled. 3. A pyx (pyxis) is a little container for ointment made of boxwood, for what we call ‘boxwood’ the Greeks call !? . 4. A lenticula is a little vessel for oil, made of bronze or silver, so called from ‘anointing’ (linire), for with these kings and priests would be anointed.
viii.	Cookingvessels(Devasiscoquinariis) 1.Anyvessel intended for cooking (coquere) is called coculum. Plautus (fr. 181):
Every mercy is boiled out of me in bronze pots (coculum).
2. A pot (olla) is so called because in it water put on the fire ‘bubbles up’ (ebullire), as vapor is released upwards. From ebullire also derives the word ‘bubble’ (bulla), which is supported in the water by the breath of air within. A small pan (patella), as if the word were patula (“spreadout”),foritisanollawitharatheropen(patere) rim. 3. The caccabus and the kettle (cucuma) are named after the sound of boiling.11 These have a common name in Greek and Latin (cf.  , “three-legged pot”), but whether the Latins borrowed these terms from the Greeks, or the Greeks from the Latins, is uncertain. 4.
Bronze cauldrons (lebes) are named from a Greek word (i.e. B, “cauldron”); they are smaller ollae, adapted foruseincooking.5.Thefryingpan(sartago)issocalled from the sizzling (strepitus) sound that comes when oil is heated in it. Tripods (tripus) are so called because they stand on three feet (tres pedes); the Greeks call them tripodae (i.e.  ! , “three-legged cauldron”). 6. A hand-mill (mola), so called from its round shape, as of apples (malum) among the fruits; the Greeks have the same name for it (i.e. , “hand-mill”). The sieve (cribrum), so named because there the ‘grain runs’
11 Compare the verbs cacabare, “cackle like a partridge,” and cucubare, “hoot like a screech-owl.”
XX.vii.1–ix.10
(currere frumentum), as if the word were currifrum. The fire-shovel (rutabulum) is so called from ‘tossing’ (proruere) dung, or fire, for the sake of cooking bread.
ix. Storagecontainers(Devasisrepositoriis) 1.Agazophylacium is a strongbox in a temple where what is given for the needs of the poor is gathered. The term is a composite from Persian and Greek, for gaza in Persian means “treasury,” and   in Greek means “custody.” 2. A strongbox (arca) is so called because it prevents (arcere) and prohibits seeing inside. From this term also derive ‘archives’ (arcivum, i.e. archivum) and ‘mystery’ (arcanum), that is, a secret, from which other people are ‘fended off’ (arcere). 3. Cibutum is the Greek word (i.e. A , “box, ark”) for what we call arca. A loculus is a place (locus) made in the ground for storing something or for protecting clothes or money, and it is so called from the diminutive (i.e. of locus). 4. A coffer (mozicia), as if it were modicia, whence also the word ‘a little’ (modicum), with z for d, as the people of Italy are wont to say ozie for hodie. Scrinium (i.e. a container for bookscrolls)...5.Bag(saccus)issocalledfromtheword ‘blanket’ (sagum), because it is made by sewing one up, as if the word were sagus.
Apouch(marsuppium)isalittlebagformoney,which the Greeks call !  (“pouch”) – for certain Greek words are changed a little in Latin because of Roman pronunciation. 6. The sitarcia (i.e. knapsack), used by sailors, is so called because it is ‘sewn’ (suere, ppl. sutus). A wrapper (involucrum) is so called because it contains something ‘rolled up’ (involvere, ppl. involutus) in it. 7. Thefiscusisthepublicpurse,whencealsotermsfor‘basket’(fiscellaandfiscina).Tax-collectorshaveoneofthese and put in it the public dues that are paid to kings. Fiscus is the primary term, with the derivative fiscina and the diminutive fiscella. 8. A wicker-basket (canistrum) is wovenfromsplitreeds(canna),whenceitisnamed;othersclaimthatitisGreek(cf.   ,“wickerbasket”). A chest (cistella) is named from the ribs (costa) of reed orwoodfromwhichitisconstructed. 9.Abasket(cophinus)isacontainermadefromtwigs,usedforcleaningup dung and carrying dirt. The Psalmist speaks of it before Israel (Psalm 80:7, Vulgate): “His hands had served in baskets (cophinus).” It is also pronounced covinus, as if the word were covus, that is, ‘hollow’ (cavus). 10. Panniers (corves, i.e. corbes), because they are woven from bent (curvare) twigs. Hamper (sporta), either because
 
XX.x.1–xi.1	Isidore of Seville
 
theyareusuallymadefrombroom(spartum),orbecause they carry (exportare) something. [Sporta is so called from spartum, not from exportare as some would have it, for they were formerly made of broom.]
x. Lamp vessels (De vasis luminariorum) 1. The ancients used the word ‘fireplace’ (focus) from tending the fire and wood, for W in Greek means “fire” in Latin. According to some philosophers all things were procreated from fire. And indeed, without heat nothing is born, so that as [the poet] says of the northern regions (Lucan, Civil War 4.108):
In their barren cold they produce nothing.
But Varro says they are called fireplaces (focus) because theynurture(fovere)thefire,forthefireistheflameitself, and whatever keeps a fire burning is called a fireplace, whether it be an altar or something else on which the fire is kept burning. 2. An oil-lamp (lucerna) is so called from lynchnus (“lamp”). The syllable lu- is short, as in the line of Persius (Satires 5.181):
The lamps (lucernae˘	) placed about threw out a greasy cloud.
But if the word were derived from ‘light’ (lux¯ , with long u) the verse would not scan. Wick (licinius, lit. “lint”), as ifitwere‘glowworm’(lucinius),foritistheglowwormof a lamp. 3. A candlestick (candelabrum) is so called from ‘candle’ (candela), as if it were candelaforum, because it carries (ferre) a candle. The wax taper (cereus) takes its name by derivation from ‘wax’ (cera), from which it is made. Of it, a certain poet (cf. Martial, Epigrams 14.42):
Here as a taper (cereus) I will supply nightly fire for you, [for] when the daylight has been stolen, I am another light for you.
4.	A lacunarium is a hanging lamp, as if it were lucanarium, that is, beaming (lucere) in the air.
5.	‘Wax torches’ (funale) are covered with wax, and are so called from the cords (funis) encased in wax that our ancestors employed before the use of papyrus. From this term also comes ‘funeral rites’ (funus). The Greekscallthesetorchesscolaces(i.e. ),because they are scoliae (i.e.  , “twisted”), that is, twisted; the Romans called these things cords and wax torches. The ancients had chandeliers (funale candelabrum) with hooked prongs sticking out, to which were attached cords daubed with wax or a material of the kind that would feed the light. Such pointed prongs were thus likewise called funalia. 6. A lamp (lampas) is a flame that gives light at the top, and is so called because it seems to display a flickering (lambere) motion. The firebrand (fax, gen. facis) is so called because it starts (facere, lit. “makes”) the hearth-fire (focus); its diminutive is facula. 7. The lantern (lanterna) is so called because it has encloseda‘lightwithin’(luxinterius).Itismadeofglass, with its light shut up inside so that a puff of wind cannot get at it, and so that it may easily be carried around anywhere to give light.
8. A lucubrum is so called because it ‘sheds light in shadow’ (lucere in umbra), for it is a small light usually made from a bit of tow and wax. 9. A pyre (pyra) is what is customarily built up from logs in the form of an altar so that it will burn, for !N means “fire.” Now a pyre is a gathering of wood that is not yet burning; a rogus, one that has begun to burn; but a bustum is the name for one already ‘burned up’ (exurere, ppl. exustus, cf. comburere, ppl. combustus, “burn up”). 10. A lighthouse (farum, i.e. pharos) is a very tall tower, which the Greeks (i.e.  ) and the Latins both call farum in accordance with its function, because the signal of its flame may be seen by sailors from afar, as we have said above (see XV.ii.37). Such a lighthouse Ptolemy is said to have constructed near Alexandria for eight hundred talents. Its purpose is to shine a light for the nighttime sailing of ships in order to mark the shallows and the entrances to the harbor, so that sailors might not, misled by darkness, hit the rocks,forAlexandriahastrickyentranceswithdeceptive shoals. Therefore they call the device built in a harbor to serve for lighting the way pharos, for W means “light,” Q  means“vision.”12 HencealsoLucifer(i.e.the‘Lightbearer’) in Greek is called 1A .
xi. Beds and chairs (De lecticis et sellis) 1. Lecticae13 are so called from gathered (legere, ppl. lectus) straw. A coverlet (stratus) is named from spreading (sternere, ppl. stratus), as if the word were ‘matted’ (storiatus; cf. storia below). The ancients would lie in these alone for sleeping,becausewoolenblanketswerenotyetinvented.
12	TheGreekwordS means“boundary,”andcanmeanapillar marking a boundary, but presumably the word meant here is S,
“vision.”
13	A lectica is either a bed or a couch; we translate according to the context.
 
Straw mat (storia), because it is spread (strata) on the ground. 2. A cot (cama) is low and close to the ground, for the Greeks say 9 (lit. “on the ground”) for ‘low.’ A couch (cubile) is a place for lying down (cubare). ‘Pallet’ (grabatum) is a Greek term. A camp-bed (baianula) is a bed that is hauled (baiulare) on a trip, from ‘hauling,’ that is, carrying. 3. A ‘cushioned couch’ (pulvinar) is a couch for the wealthy; hence also ‘pillow’ (pulvillus). Spinga (i.e. sphinga) beds are those on which thereareimagesofsphinxes,whichwecallgriffins.Punic (Punicanus)bedsaresmall,lowbedsfirstimportedfrom Carthage, and hence named. 4. Lectica is the name for a ‘bed with a back’ (pluteus lectus). Concerning these, Rutilius Rufus says in On His Own Life (13): “First, contrary to the custom of generals, he would use couches with backs (lectica) in preference to couches without backs (lectus).” 5. The frame (sponda) is the outer part of a bed, the backboard (pluteus) the inner.
Bridal (genialis) beds properly speaking are those spread for young brides, so called from begetting (generare) children. 6. A cradle (cunabula) is a little bed in which infants usually lie, so called because they are used for a new-born, as if it were cynabula – for @ means “to give birth” in Greek. 7. A bier (feretrum) is so called because the dead are ‘carried off’ (deferre) on it, and it is a Greek word, for B   is taken from B, that is, from carrying (ferre). In Latin a coffin (capulus) is so called because it is carried above people’s heads (caput). Thus Plautus says (The Braggart Soldier 628): “Coffin-bound (capularis) old man,” that is, nearly in his coffin. 8. Stools (scamnum) are set against very high beds, and are so called from ‘climbing’ (scandere), [that is, mounting (ascendere)]. Hence also ‘footstools’ (scabillum), which are set by small beds or chairs for mounting. The footstool is also called a subpedaneum, for what the Greeks call I! !"  Latin speakers call scabillum, and others [call] suppedaneum, because it is ‘under the feet’ (sub pedes). A scansilium is a step (e.g. a bench in an amphitheater) where a distinguished person takes his seat. 9. Seats (sedes) are so called because among the ancientRomanstherewasnotthepracticeofrecliningat table, and hence they were said to ‘sit down’ (considere). Afterwards, as Varro says in On the Life of the Roman People, men began to recline and women to sit, because reclining was seen as unseemly for a woman.
The word ‘seat’ (sedis, i.e. sedes) in the singular number properly belongs to kingship, and in Greek is called
XX.xi.2–xii.5
 . The Greeks say thronus, and we say solium. But for other people, there are ‘benches’ (subsellium); for scholars, ‘chairs’ (cathedra). 10. The throne (solium), on which kings sit for the safety of their bodies, is so called, accordingtosome,forits‘solidity’(soliditas),asifitwere solidum; according to others the word is formed by antistichon (i.e. by antistoechum, “substitution of letters”) as if the word were sodium, from ‘sitting’ (sedere). Hence likewise sella (i.e. another word for ‘seat’) is so called as if it were sedda, and benches (subsellium) as if the word were subseddium. 11. The ‘curule chair’ (sella curulis) is where magistrates would sit (sedere) to render justice. They are called ‘curule’ because, among the ancients, praetors and consuls would be carried to the forum by a chariot (currus) due to the length of the journey. The chairs that were carried after them, from which while sitting they would render justice, were named ‘curule’ chairs from ‘chariot.’ 12. Tripods (tripus) are stools having ‘three feet’ (tres + pes;  - ). But lampstands are also tripods because they likewise have three feet.
xii. Vehicles (De vehiculis) 1. A wagon (carrum) is so called from the axle (cardo) of its wheels, and hence ‘chariot’ (currus) is named, for it is seen to have wheels. A wheel (rota) is so called because it rushes (ruere), and ‘round’ (rotundus) is named from rota. 2. A reda is a kind of vehicle with four wheels. The ancients called these retae, because they had wheels (rota). 3. A carpentum pompaticum (i.e. a processional carriage) is a type of vehicle, as if it were a carrum pompaticum. A cart (plaustrum) is a two-wheeled vehicle that carries burdens, and is called plaustrum because it rolls, as if one said pilastrum (cf. pila, “ball.”). A caracutium is a vehicle with very high wheels, as if it were a ‘high wagon’ (carrum acutum). A capsus is a carriage enclosed on all sides, as if it were a box (capsa). 4. A pilentum or petorritum is an enclosed carriage with four wheels that matrons formerly used. Vergil (Aen. 8.666):
Mothers in soft carriages (pilentum).
Horace (Satires 1.6.104):
Many grooms and nags to be grazed, and carriages (petorritum) to be drawn.
Formerly the pilentum was of a blue color and not, as it now is, red. Unless they were chaste, matrons could not use these; nor, likewise, could they wear fillets. 5. A
 
XX.xiii.1–xiv.10	Isidore of Seville
 
basterna is a vehicle [for a journey, as if the term were viae sternax (“smoother of the way”), fitted with soft rugs and drawn by two animals].
xiii. Other implements that we use (De reliquis quae in usu habentur) 1. The walking stick (baculus) is said to have been invented by Bacchus, the discoverer of the grape vine, so that people affected by wine might be supported by it. As baculus is from Bacchus, so a ‘rod’ (bacillum) is from baculus, as its diminutive. 2. Stakes (fustis) are so called because they ‘stand fixed’ (praefixae stare) in the ground. Country people call these ‘palings’ (palus), and for their misdeeds youths are beaten with them. Levers (vectis) are so called because they are carried(vectare)inthehands;withthese,doorsorstonesare loosened.3.Thetermforfexistreatedinaccordancewith its etymology: if it is so called from ‘thread’ (filum), the letterfisused,asintailors’scissors(forfex);iffrom‘hair’ (pilus), the letter p, as in a barbers’ tweezers (forpex); if from ‘snatching out’ (accipere), the letter c, as in blacksmiths’ tongs (forceps), because they ‘seize the hot thing’ (formum capere). 4. The ancients called a hot thing formus, and hence also the term formosus (“beautiful”; see
XIX.vii.3).
A razor (novacula) [is so called because it ‘renews’ (innovare) one’s face]. Combs (pecten) are so called because they make hair combed (pectere) and arranged. A curling iron (calamistrum) is a pin that, when heated (calefacere)andapplied,heatsandcurlsone’shair.Hence also people who wave their hair are called ‘crimped’ (calamistratus). 5. The key (clavis) is so called because it closes (claudere) and opens. A catenatum (lit. “chained thing”–alatch?),becauseit‘holdsbygrasping’(capiendo tenere). A clock (horologia) is so called because there ‘we read the hours’ (horas legere), that is, we deduce them. It is set up in sunny places, where the shadow from the gnomon runs across the incised lines to show what hour of the day it is.
xiv. Ruralimplements(Deinstrumentisrusticis) 1. A plowshare (vomer) is so called because it ‘digs up the ground by force’ (vi humum eruat), or from its ‘spewing forth’ (evomere) earth. Concerning it, Lucretius (On the Nature of Things 1.314):
The iron hook of the plow, the plowshare (vomer), insensibly erodes in the fields.
It gets its shine from abrasion. 2. The plow (aratrum) is named from ‘plowing the earth’ (arare terram), as if the word were araterrium. The plow-beam (buris) is a curved part of a plow, so called as if it were  R  L (“ox’s tail”), because it looks like an ox’s tail. The sharebeam (dentale) is the foremost part of a plow, in which the plowshare is drawn along, as if it were a tooth (dens). 3. Pruning knives (cultellus) are so called from ‘cultivating’ (cultura), because the ancients did their pruning of trees and vines with them before pruning hooks were invented. 4. The pruning hook (falcis, i.e. falx) is used to prune trees and vines; it is called falcis because at first soldiers would use them to cut bracken (filix). Hence the verses (Martial, Epigrams 14.34):
The settled peace of our general has bent me for gentle uses: now a farmer owns me; before, I belonged to a soldier.
5. A bush-hook (falcastrum) is named for its likeness to a pruning hook (falx), and it is a curved iron blade with a long handle, used for clearing briar-patches. These are also called ‘weeding hooks’ (runco), which cut back thorn-bushes, named from ‘weeding’ (runcare).
6.Aserrula(lit.“smallsaw”)isaverythinbladeofiron that cuts trees or branches with the biting action of its teeth.Drag-hoes(rastrum),too,aresocalledeitherfrom scraping(radere)thegroundorfromthesparseness(raritas) of their teeth. Mattocks (ligo), because they ‘lift up’ (levare) earth, as if the word were levo. 7. A spade (scudicia) is so called because it loosens the ground around the ‘base of the plant’ (codex), and although it is used for other work it still keeps its name from codex. Others name it with the general term ‘digger’ (fossorium), because it makes a pit (fovea), as if it were fovessorium. 8. Ahoe(sarculus)–ofthesetherearethesingle-bladedand the two-pronged. Farmers call the forked iron instrument with which seeds are planted (pangere) a ‘dibble’ (pastinatum, i.e. pastinum). Hence old vines that are trenched again are said to be ‘re-dug’ (repastinare).
9.	A roller (cylindrus) is a stone rounded off in the shape of a column, and it takes its name from its cylindrical shape. Of it, Vergil (Geo. 1.178):
First the threshing floor should be leveled with a huge roller (cylindrus) and turned over by hand.
10.	A threshing-sledge (tribula) is a kind of vehicle used as a means of threshing (terere), and so called from
 
The Etymologies	XX.xiv.11–xvi.6
 
this.14 A winnowing-shovel (pala), commonly called a ‘winnowing-fan’ (ventilabrum), is named for its winnowing (ventilare) chaff (palea). 11. Pitchforks (furcilla) are so called because with them ‘grain is shifted’ (frumentum cellere, i.e. cillere), that is, is moved. In the same way ‘little masks’ (oscillum) are so called because their ‘facesaremoved’(os+cillere)–forcilleremeans“move.” 12. Tallies (tessera) are objects with which the number of grain-measures is designated.
A trapetum is a mill for olives. A prelum is a beam with which trodden grapes are pressed, so called from pressing, as if it were a pressorium (i.e. a press; cf. premere, ppl. pressus, “press”). A prelum is the device with which ‘oil is pressed’ (premitur oleum). A vat (lacus), the receptacle into which what has been made liquid (liquatus, ppl. of liquare) flows, where oil or wine is extracted from olives or grapes by means of pressing. 13. Verennis (an unidentified implement), from ‘carry’ (vehere), that is, to bring out. Qualus, a wicker basket (corbis), and the strainer (colum) of the wine press, through which the must flows, are so called from ‘straining’ (colare). The sieve (fisclum), as if it were fiscolum, is so called from its straining (colare) oil, or as if it were a ‘little basket’ (fiscella) for oil.
xv. Garden implements (De instrumentis hortorum) 1. The waterwheel (rota) is so called as if the word were ruta (i.e. from ruere, “rush,” ppl. rutus), and it is the machine by which water is drawn from a stream. Lucretius (cf. On the Nature of Things 5.516):
We may see the waterwheels (rota) and their scoops (austrum) turn in the stream.
Theaustra(i.e.haustrum,“scoopofawaterwheel”),that is, the waterwheel, is so called from ‘drawing’ (haurire, ppl. haustus) water. 2. A pulley (girgillus) is so called because it moves in a circle (gyrus). It is a movable block of wood on a transverse beam from which a rope with a bucket or leather bag is let down into a well to draw water. 3. Gardeners call the long beam with which they draw water a telo (cf. tolleno, “swing-beam”), and it is so called because of its length, for whatever is long is called   in Greek (cf.  H,   N, “far off”) – hence also they say ‘weasel’ (mustela) as if it were a ‘long mouse’ (mus). The people of Spain call this instrument a ‘stork’
14 Atribulawasastuddedboardorbeam,weightedwithitsdriver, dragged across the threshing floor by oxen.
(ciconia) because it acts like the bird of the same name, raising its beak from the water and dipping it, while it makes its clamor. Water-bucket (ama, i.e hama) . . . 4. The ‘wolf’ (lupus) or ‘little dog’ (canicula) is an iron grapplethattakessuchnamesbecauseifanythingfallsin a well it snatches them and draws them out. The grapple (arpax,i.e.harpago, b!?,“grapplingiron”)issocalled because it ‘snatches’ (arripere), for arpe in Greek means “to seize” (cf. b!, “bird of prey”; i!;, “seize”). ‘Hoe’ (sarculus; see xiv.8 above) . . .
xvi. Equestrian equipment (De instrumentis equorum) 1. Medallions (phalerae) are ornamental bosses worn by horses; the term is Greek (i.e.  , “cheekmedallion”). Bits (frenum) are so called because they force horses to neigh (fremere), or because horses gnash (frendere), [that is, imprint,] and bite at them with their teeth. Hence still-suckling piglets are called ‘toothless’ (nefrens) because they cannot yet ‘gnash’ anything, that is, tear it up, with their teeth. Hence also a ‘fava bean’ (faba) that is ground up is called ‘mashed’ (fresa, ppl. of frendere). 2. A very harsh type of bit is the ‘wolftoothed’ (lupatus), so called from having uneven teeth like wolves’ (lupinus) teeth; consequently its ‘bite’ is a powerful curb. Muzzle (camus) . . . 3. The rein (habena) issocalledfrom‘hold’(habere),becausewehold,thatis, we restrain horses with them; hence also horses are said to be habilis (“controllable”). It is also called a retinaculum, from ‘holding back’ (retinere). Reins (lorum) . . . 4. Halters (capistrus, i.e. capistrum) are so called from the heads (capita) of pack animals. Saddle (sella) from ‘sitting’ (sedere), as if the word were sedda. The cheststrap (antela), as if it were antesella (i.e. “in front of the saddle”) and likewise the tail-strap (postela), as if it were postsella (i.e. “behind the saddle”).
The belt (cingulum) of a human is neuter in gender, but we speak of the girths (cingula) of animals in the feminine. 5. A packsaddle (sagma), which is incorrectlycalledsalmabycommonpeople,issonamedfrom its covering of coarse blanket (sagum), whence a packhorse is called sagmarius, and a mule, sagmaria. A lasso (capulum) of rope, from ‘capturing’ (capere), because untamed pack animals are caught with them. 6. Spurs (calcar) are so called because they are bound to a person’s heel (calx), that is, on the back part of the foot, for goading horses either to fight or to run, on account of animals’ laziness or fear. Goads (stimulus) are so called
 
XX.xvi.7–xvi.8	Isidore of Seville
 
from the word ‘fear’ (timor), although there is also the goad of desire.
7.	Currycombs (strigilis) are named from ‘grooming’ (tergere), because horses are groomed with them. A ‘branding iron’ (character) is a heated iron instrument that burns marks on livestock, for 9  (“brand, shape”) in Greek means “shape” in Latin.
8.	A ‘cauterizing iron’ (cauterium), as if the word were cauturium, because it burns (urere), and a forewarning and severe cautioning (cautio) is branded on the animal so that greed may be restrained when the owner is identified. Sometimes this instrument is used for the brand and sometimes to cure, so that the vigor of a disease may be dried out by the heat of the fire.
 
APPENDIX
 

 
Correspondence of Isidore and Braulio
 
A. From Isidore to my lord and most beloved son in Christ, Archdeacon Braulio (610–620).1 When you receivealetterfromme,dearestson,youshouldnothesitate to embrace it as you would a friend. Indeed, this is the next best consolation for those who are absent from each other, that if someone who is dear to you is not present, his letters may be embraced in his stead. I have dispatched a ring to you on account of my affection, and also a mantle for a cloak (amictus) of my friendship (amicitia), whence this word was drawn in antiquity. Therefore pray for me; may the Lord preserve you that I may be granted to see you in this life, and that you may make happy again by your return one whom you made sorrowful by your departure. I have also sent a booklet of the rules through Maurentius primic[l]erius.2 As for the rest I hope this finds you well, my most beloved lord and my dearest son.
B.FromIsidoretomymostdearandbelovedArchdeacon Braulio in Christ (610–620). Since I am not able to enjoy the sight of you in person, I can at least enjoy your conversation, so that it is a consolation to me to learn from your letters that you whom I desire to see are safe. Both would be good, if it were possible; but I can be refreshed in my mind concerning you, even if I am not
1	Although not all the following correspondence between Isidore and his disciple Braulio (archdeacon, later bishop of the diocese of Saragossa) refers to the Etymologies, the letters precede the text of Isidore’s work in the early manuscripts. The first two letters appear only in the family of manuscripts designated by Lindsay as “Spanish or Interpolated.” The dates assigned to this and the following letters are those suggested by C. W. Barlow
(1969).
2	Bywayofhismessenger,the“firstcleric”(?)Maurentius,Isidore sendsBrauliosomeregulations,perhapspartofIsidore’sownMonastic Rules. Riche´ 1976:286 says that the primiclericus or primicerius was an officer under the archdeacon charged with teaching the clerics in a bishop’s household.
3	Isidore refers to Augustine’s Commentary on Psalms 51–60.
4	That is, in the original letter the following sentence was written by Isidore’s own hand.
5	Brauliomayrefertocivildisorders,includingaBasqueinvasion, that took place around Saragossa in the year 625.
409
able to see you in person in front of me. When we were together, I asked you to send the sixth decade of Saint Augustine to me.3 I beg you somehow to make it available to me. I have sent you the little book of Synonyms, not because it is of some utility, but because you wanted it.
I commend this boy (i.e. the messenger) to you, and commend myself as well, that you pray on behalf of my wretchedself,becauseIamtrulylanguishingwithbodily infirmities and mental failings. In both things I ask for your assistance, because for my own part I am deserving ofnothing.Asfortherest,Iaskthatyoubidmebejoyful by means of your writing, until there is an opportunity, while life is still my companion, for the letter carrier to return to me.
I.	From Isidore to my lord and servant of God, BishopBraulio. With all my desire I have been longing now to see your face. May God fulfill my prayer some time beforeIdie.ForthepresentIpraythatyoucommendme to God in your prayers, that he may both fulfill my hope in this life and in the future life grant to me a meeting with your blessed self. And in his own hand:4 Pray for me, most blessed lord and brother.
II.	From Braulio, the useless servant of the saints ofGod, to my lord and indeed master, Isidore, highest of bishops, chosen of Christ (625). O pious lord, most illustriousofmen,thisrequestisbelated,andtheopportunity for writing was presented to me late, because with my sins rushing in on me I was impeded from making requests,notonlybytheevilofmyunproductivenessand incapacity, but also by the horrible onslaught of plague and enemy attack.5 Now, however, although tied up by a thousand obligations and a thousand cares after a long time of misery, just as if I were waking up from the heaviness of a fitful sleep, so to speak, I presume to attach the courtesy of a greeting to my expression of appeal, and prostrated by humility of both heart and body, I call upon the most excellent power of your blessing, that
 
410	appendix
you may authorize to the very end the commendation of a particular servant, whom you have always supported withthepiousregardofyoursacredesteem.IndeedIam tortured, Christ knows, by severe distress that so much time has passed and I am still not counted worthy of seeing you. But I place my hope in one who does not forget to have pity and who does not cast me off to the very end, that he will listen to the prayer of a poor man and bring me back, wretch that I am, to your gaze.
I propose, indeed, and I request with every sort of entreatythatyou,rememberingyourpromise,willorder that the book of Etymologies be sent to your servant, as we have heard that, God willing, it has been finished. As I am aware, you have sweated over it in large measure at the request of your servant, and therefore be generous first to me, so that in the company of saints you will be consideredthehappyone,andthefirst.Ialsoaskthatthe proceedings of the Synod, in which Sintharius is found tobe,ifnotwhollyrefined,thenatleastcookedbythefire of your questioning, be directed to us by the lord king, your son, at your prompting.6 For thus our request has also been made to his Highness, because there is a great need for the truth to be investigated in the Council.
As for the rest, I make a plea to the mercy of the highest Creator that he give the command to preserve the crown of your blessedness for a long time, for the sake of the integrity of the faith and the condition of his church, andthat,thankstoyourintercession,hemakemestrong among the various and countless carping hazards of the present world, and that at your prayer the most sacred Trinity keep me sheltered in the bosom of your mindfulness and safe from every storm of sin. And in his own hand: I, Braulio, servant of the Lord, to Isidore – may I enjoy you in the Lord, O burning and unfading lamp.
III.	From Isidore to Bishop Braulio, my lord and ser-vant of God (632, probably written from Toledo). I have given thanks to Christ that I have learned that you are well. Would that I might in person have sight of the one about whose health I have learned. But I will reveal what has happened to me due to my sins, because I did not deserve to read your letter. Just at the moment when I received your note a royal servant-boy came to me. I gave it to my chamber-servant, and went straight to the king, intending to read through and reply to your letter later. But when I returned from the royal palace, not only could I not find what you had written, but indeed whatever else was among those papers had disappeared. And for that reason, God knows, I have grieved over my just deserts, because I did not read your letter. But I ask that you write to me again, whenever the opportunity presents itself, and that you do not withdraw the kindness of your words, so that I may again receive through your kindness what I have lost through my fault. And in his own hand: Pray for us, most blessed lord.
IV.	From Braulio, worthless servant of the saints ofGod, to my lord and indeed master, and chosen of Christ, Isidore, highest of bishops (632 or 633). The inner, spiritual man is usually filled with joy when he satisfies the request of someone who loves him. Therefore it is my wish, my most reverent lord, unless the wall of [my] sins is a barrier, that you look kindly upon my request and patiently endure my querulous accusations. For I do both of these things: I make a formal request and I put to you the compelling facts of my case against you. Prostrate at the entrance and gate of this writing I beseech your apostolic highness most kindly to grant me an audience.
And although the hurling of accusations may falter where tears intervene, though tears are not a typical sign ofaccusation,still,Ihope,accusationsmaybetearfuland tearsaccusatory,eachofthesebeingduetotheunbridled audacity of love, not to the rashness of arrogance. But now I will begin my case.
Unless I am mistaken, seven years have rolled by since I recall having requested from you your composition, the books of Origins. In various and diverse ways I have been disappointed when in your presence, and you have written nothing back to me when I have been absent. Rather, with subtle delay, you object that the work is not yet finished, or not yet copied out, or that my letters were lost, and a number of other things, until I have cometothisdayandstillhavenoresultfrommyrequest. For this reason I will convert my prayers into complaint, so that what I have failed to get with supplications I may succeed in getting by challenging you with accusations – for often enough crying out loud will help a beggar.
So why, I ask you, my lord, do you not send what you have been requested to? You should know one thing: I
6 No record of this synod and the inquisition of Sintharius survives.
 
will not give up and pretend that I do not want what has been refused to me, but I will seek it and seek insistently until I either receive it or drag it out of you, since our most holy Redeemer commands (Matthew 7:7): “Seek, and you shall find,” and adds, “Knock and it shall be opened to you.” I have sought and now do seek, and even knock; accordingly I even shout for you to open. Now the devising of this argument is a comfort to me, that, although you have disregarded someone making a request,youmayperhapspayattentiontosomeonewho is making accusations.
From this point on I build on your own knowledge, nordoIunwiselypresume,withthebravadoofafool,to add something new to what is already complete. However, I do not blush to speak with a most learned man, ignorant though I am, bearing in mind the Apostle’s lesson (cf. II Corinthians 11:19), in which you are ordered “to suffer a fool gladly.” On this account, accept these blusteringaccusations.Why,Iask,doyouevennowkeep back the sharing of talents and the dispensing of nourishmentthathasbeenentrustedtoyou?Openyourhand now, and share with the servants so that they do not die of hunger.
Youknowwhatthecreditorwhoapproachesdemands back from you. Whatever you give to us will not be a loss to you. Remember that the multitude was satisfied by small loaves of bread and that the leftover fragments exceeded the original amount of bread.
Doyouthinkthegiftbestoweduponyouwasgivenfor yoursakealone?Itisbothyoursandmine;itisheldcommunally,notprivately.Andwho,evenamadman,would presume to say that you rejoice in your private possessions – you who know only how to rejoice blamelessly in communal possessions? For since God has entrusted to yourcontrolthemanagementofhistreasureandwealth, of health,wisdom,andknowledge,whydoyounotpour out with a generous hand that which you do not reduce by giving? Since, among the members of the lofty head (i.e. the members of the Body of Christ, the Church), each one possesses in another what he has not received himself, and knows that whatever he has is to be possessed by another, is the reason why you remain parsimonious toward me perhaps because you do not find what you may take from me in exchange? If you “give to someone who has,” you acquire the proceeds of a very small reward. But if you “have given to someone who has not,” then you satisfy the command of the Evange-
	Correspondence of Isidore and Braulio	411
list (cf. Luke 14:14) that “it shall be returned to you in the recompense of the just.”
ForthesereasonsI[too]amtormentedbyconscience, inthatIsenseinmyselfnothinggoodthatcanbeshared, because we are commanded (cf. Galatians 5:13) “to serve each other through charity” and (cf. I Peter 4:10) “each to minister to another the grace that he has received, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God” and (cf. Romans 12:3–4) “according as God hath divided to every one the measure of faith in a single group of members,” he ought to share this with the other parts, since (I Corinthians 12:11): “All these things one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing to every one according as he
will.”
But I revert to the one particular resource that I brought up earlier, namely to importunity, which is a friend for those destitute of friendship and for those not distinguished with the favor of a handsome appearance. Therefore, listen to my voice, even with such an expanse oflandlyingbetweenus(Matthew18:28):“Pay,paywhat thou owest.” For you are a servant, a servant of Christ and of Christians, so that in this respect you are greater than all of us, and you should not refuse to share the favor that you know has been bestowed on you for our sake with the thirsty souls who are tormented with a hunger for knowledge.
At any rate, I am not a foot running at command and able to wait upon the stomach of the Church, that is, the judge of the members, by obediently scurrying about, nor am I able to please the ruling sovereignty of the head with obedience. In fact, although I know that I am one of the more insignificant members, let that suffice, because it is fitting that I should draw out what you are known to have learned from the head, and fitting that you should not do without me, however unimportant I am, redeemed as I am by the blood of Christ.
For (cf. I Corinthians 12:21–23): “The head does not say to the feet, I have no need of you,” because “those that seem to be the more feeble members of the body are the more necessary, and such as we think to be the less honorable, about these we put more abundant honor; and those that are our uncomely parts, have more abundant comeliness.” So in this way our creator and dispenser regulates everything so that when the divine gifts of one person, who does not perceive them in himself, are given to be possessed by another, charity is increased. Finally, a manifold favor is well dispensed
 
412	appendix
when the received gift is believed to belong also to the person who does not possess it, when it is thought to be given for the sake of the one to whom it is paid out.
The wisdom of your holiness knows best how the Apostle’s entire chapter, which I have set down in part, fittingly applies to this matter. And whatever it has touched on briefly most certainly does not escape your full knowledge.7 Thus only this remains, which I am at great pains to ask for, that you provide what has been requested, and if not for my sake, at least for the sake of charity itself, which is divinely bestowed, and for whose sake we are ordered both to know and to provide all things, and without which all things are nothing. And even if I have poured out, rather than said, these things excessively, heedlessly, less humbly, and more vainly, I beseech you to take everything kindly, and pardon everything, and pray that God pardon everything.
Therefore I also point out that the books of the Etymologies, which I am seeking from you, my lord, are already held by many people, even though they have been mutilated and corrupted. For this reason I ask that you deem it suitable to send these to me copied out and in their entirety, emended and well organized, lest I be drawn into evil by eagerness and driven to obtain from others vices instead of virtues. However, even though you lack nothing and though unrequested rewards are said to stink,8 I wish that the merit of your kindness would command of me whatever I am able and capable of doing, so that you would make use of my obedience, or rather, that you would enjoy that charity which is God.
With these matters finished, then, I had some questions about sacred and divine pages, whose explanation the light of your heart might reveal to me, if you were to order it to shine on us and to lay open the hidden matters of divine law. Nor, if I receive these things that I am seeking, will I keep silent about the earlier matters – but you would lay open the way for me to gain confidence when you refrain from pricking this brow of mine with the goads of shame, and grant room for mercy towards my ignorance, and when you do not order the rejection of one you used to love, however undeservedly, because it seems a most disgraceful and unworthy thing if someone not yet thoroughly filled with charity is found to draw back from the one whom he used to love.
But to the obedience of my service I add the claims of my salvation, and I beseech the kindness of your most holy power that you might deign to pray for me, so that by your intercession you might in the end win a soul that wavers daily among evils, and so that you might lead it forth to the gate of eternal peace, plucked from wretchedness and temptations. It has been delightful to speak to you at length, as if I had been set in front of you and could see the expression of your face. Thus, I have not been free of wordiness and perhaps I have committed an indiscretion. But I was bound to do either this or something else, only so that at least you would grant, on account of my ranting importunity, what you have been unwilling to grant on account of your humility. See how much audacity the kindness of your benevolence has given me! Therefore, if there has been anything displeasing in this, your kindness, which loves so much that it banishes fear, should take the credit to itself – for (I John 4:18): “Perfect charity casteth out fear.”
Trusting in special kindness from a special lord, in whom the strength of the holy Church stands firm, I suggestthat,sinceEusebius,ourmetropolitan(i.e.ArchbishopEusebiusofTarragona),hasdied,youmighthave compassion and that you might suggest to your son, our lord, that he appoint someone to this position whose teachingandholinessmightbeamodeloflifefortheothers. I commend this present son (i.e. the reigning king, Sisenand) in all matters to your most blessed power, and as much with reference to the matters that I have raised here as to those I complained of above, may I be deemed worthy to be enlightened by your eloquence on his account.
V. From Isidore to my lord and servant of God, Bishop
Braulio (632 or 633). The letter from your holiness
7	The ‘chapter’ Braulio refers to is I Corinthians 12, which treats the“divisionofgraces”andthemutualityofabody’smembers,topics thatBraulioexploitsinhiswittyharangue.LikeBraulio,Paul’sepistle goesontospeakofcharity,withoutwhich“Iamnothing”(ICorinthians13).Beforethetwelfthcentury,differentBiblemanuscriptsdivide the Pauline epistles into chapters at different points of the text, if at all.
8	The sense of the proverb is that rewards conferred for no apparent reason arouse suspicion – in the English version, “proffered service stinks.” Braulio knows that his offer of service in return for the Etymologies is not only puny recompense, but may seem disingenuous – he has no service of value to Isidore to offer.
 
found me in Toledo, for I had been summoned on account of the Council. But though the king’s command suggested that I should return despite already being on the road, nevertheless I preferred not to cut short the progress of my journey since I was nearer to his own presence than I was to my starting point. I came into the presence of the king and found your deacon there. On receiving from him your eloquent letter I clasped it eagerly and read it, and gave thanks to God for your health, wishing with all my might that, although I am weak and worn out, I might still have the assurance, through Christ, of seeing you in this life, because (cf.
9	By word of mouth or a separate letter. Braulio had apparently named a specific person in addition to what he said at the end of the preceding letter.
10	This important text, apparently a dedication of the Etymologies before it was finished, is unfortunately ambiguous. Recordatio (“recollection”) can mean “memory” or “(written) record.” Veteris lectionis probably means “readings from antiquity (i.e., of ancient authors),” but conceivably “my old (course of) reading.” Stilo can mean “by the pen” or “in the style (i.e. manner).” Some manuscripts substitute the name of Braulio for that of Sisebut – perhaps a change made by Isidore after Sisebut’s death in 621 – and some manuscripts preserve the dedications both to Sisebut and Braulio: see Reydellet 1966:435 for the details.
	Correspondence of Isidore and Braulio	413
Romans 5:5): “Hope confoundeth not through charity, which is poured forth in our hearts.”
While on the road I sent a manuscript of the Etymologies,alongwithsomeothermanuscripts,andalthoughit has not been emended due to my health, still I was eager to offer it to you immediately for emendation, if I had reached the place chosen for the council. As far as the appointment of the Bishop of Tarragona is concerned, I have sensed that the king’s opinion is not the one that you sought.9 There is still uncertainty, however, as to where he may more decisively set his mind.
I ask that you may think fit to become an intercessor with the Lord for my sins, so that my transgressions may be obliterated at your successful entreaty, and my misdeeds forgiven. This in his own hand: Pray for us, most blessed lord and brother.
VI. From Isidore to my lord and my son Sisebut (i.e. the Visigoth king of Spain; probably 620). See, as I promised, I have sent you the work On the Origin of Certain Things, compiled from my recollection of readings fromantiquityandannotatedincertainplacesaswritten by the pen of our ancestors.10
 

 
INDEX
 

 
General index
The following index includes only important terms and sub-topics, and most proper names, from the Etymologies. For larger topics consult the Analytical Table of Contents. Both English and Latin terms are indexed, but when a Latin term is close in meaning and form to the corresponding English translation, only the English is given. Book X is a dense list of such terms descriptive of human beings as “lifeless,” “hateful,” “generous,” “enviable.” Its Latin terms are in alphabetical order. Seeing that such terms are unlikely to be the object of an index search, and that including them would unduly swell the bulk of an index already large, we exclude Book X here, though not from the two indexes that follow. The valuable index of the Oroz Reta–Casquero Spanish translation of the Etymologies divides the terms into categories: a general index followed by indexes of proper names, geographical terms, botanical terms, zoological terms, and stones and minerals.
 
Aaron	149, 164 abanet	383 abba	172 abbot	172 abbreviations	51 legal	51–52 Abdias	302
Abel 162 Abella 344 abellana 344 abies 345 abiuratio 123 ablative 44 Abraham 39, 99, 163, 165, 168, 169,
174, 191, 192, 194, 198, 207, 208,
302, 346 abrotanum 357 absida 312 absinthium 353
abstract quantity 89 Abydos 295 abyss 280, 300 Academic philosophers 179 acalanthis 269 acanthus 351 acation 375 accent 49 accent marks 49–50 accentor 147 accident (logical) 81, 82 accipiter 267 Accius 180 accubitum 395 accusative 44 accusator 365 Acephalite 178
417
acer	346 acetum	398 Achaea	290, 303
Achaeus	196, 290, 303 Achaians	196 Achates (river)	296 achates	325 Achatesius of Miletos	65
Achelous (river) 324 Achilles 106, 195, 196, 290 acies 203, 362 acinus 340 acitabulum 399 acitabulus 334 acnua 315 acolyte 172 Acone 351 aconite 351 acorum 350 acredula 266 acridium 353 Acroceraunian mountains 298 acrostic poems, biblical 137 acrozymus 396 acryologia 75 active voice 45, 46 actor 369 actor 205 Acts, Book of 135, 138 actualis 43 actuaria 374 actus 315, 316 acupictus 385 acus 391 acute (diacritic) 49 acute illness 110–111
acyrology 56 Adam 162, 247, 302, 334, 384 adamas 325 Adamite 175 adiectio 145 aditus 311 adjective 43 ctetic 43 ethnic 43
adjutant	202 adnotatio	54 adolescent	242 Adonai	153 adoption	207 adoreum	338 adultery	123 adultus	242 advena	205 adverb	42, 46 adverbum (gloss)	55 adze	383
aedes	308
aedificatio	377 aegopthalmos	327
aegyptilla	325 Aegyptus	287
Aelius Hadrian	301
Aeneas 200, 212, 304, 370 Aeneid 181 aenigma 63 Aeolian islands 296, 317 Aeolic Greek 191 Aeolus 296 aeon 130, 180 Aeos 304
aequinoctium	128, 273
 
aequitas 73 aequivocus (category) 81 aequor 276, 277 aer 273 aera 129, 142 aeranis 250 aerarium 204, 310, 329 Aerian 176 aeromancy 182 aerugo 331 aes 329, 330 Aesculapius (also Aesclepius) 65, 106,
109, 183
Aesop	66–67 aestas	129 aestiva	299 aestuaria	278, 280 aestus	278 aetas	130 aeternus	154 aether	272 aethiopicus (stone)	327 Aetian	176 aetiologia	78 aetites	320, 327 aevum	130
affirmation	83 affluence	395 Africa	292–293, 313, 320, 323, 343, 345,
348
Africans 193, 198, 305, 364 Africus 275 afterbirth 240 agaric 354 agate 325 agea 374 Agenor 289 ager 314 age(s) 130 of humans, six 241–243 of world 210 seven 144
six 130 agger 313, 316 agmen 203 agnatus 208 Agnoites 178 agnomen 42 agnus 247 agon 366 agredula 263 Agrigentum 97
Ahab	165, 166
air	231, 239, 272, 273 ala	264
	(armpit)	235
(military)	203 Alabanda region	326 alabandicus	321 alabandina	326 alabastrites	321 alabastrum	401 Alani	197, 386
Alania	289
Alba Longa	304
Albania	288
Albanians	195, 386 Albans	304 albeum	400 albucium	354 Albula (river)	282 albus	250
Alcmeon of Croton alcyon 265 alder 346 Alea 371 alea 371
Alemanni	197, 386 ales	264	66
Alexander the Great	139, 195, 199,
244, 281, 290, 303
Alexander, Roman emperor	143
Alexandria	303, 307, 331, 376, 381,
402 library of	139
alga	355 alibrum	389 alica	338 alien, resident	205 alieniloquium	63 alimentum	395 alimonia	395
alites	269
alium	356 allegory	63, 135 physical	185, 187, 188, 189
alleluia	147 alliteration	59 Allophyli	195, 302 alluvium	300 alluvius ager	314 almond	344 alnus	346 aloa	349 aloe	349, 351 Alogi	176 alopecia	112–113 Alpha and Omega	156
alphabet (see also letters)	39 alphabetum (acrostic)	137 Alphaeus	169
Alpheus (river) 296 Alps 67, 298, 325 altanus 275 altar 310 althaea 354 alum 276, 317 alvus 240 amaracinum 115 Amazon 98, 186, 195, 303, 361 ambages 75 amber 323 ambiguity 57, 75 ambitus 123, 316 ambo 310
ambrosia	354 amen	147 amens	231 amentum	363 amethyst	324 amethystizontas	324 amiantos	320 amictus	384 amiculum	387 Aminean wine	398 amma	266
ammochrysus	327 ammodyta	257 Ammon	106
ammoniacus	318 Ammonius	142 amnis	280 amomum	349 amor	174, 188 Amos	167 amphibian	259 amphibolia	57 amphibrach	47 Amphictyon	282, 303 amphidoxa	77 Amphion	95 amphisbaena	256 amphitapa	388 amphitheater	307, 370 Amphitus	303 amphora	335 ampulla	400 amulet	183 Amulius	304
 
amurca 348 amygdala 344 amylum 396 amystis 400 anaboladium 387 Anacreon 65 anadiplosis 59, 75 anaglypha 399 analogium 310 analogy 54, 85, 136 analytica (logic) 83 anamnesis 78 anancitis 327 anapest 47 anaphora 59 anas 267 anasceva 73 anastrophe 62 anathema 174 anchor 375 anchorage 299 anchorite 172 anchusa 353 ancile 364 ancilla 205 Ancus Marcius 304 ancyromachus 373 Andalusia 282 androdamantus 320 androdamas 327 androgyne 244 Andromeda 106, 302 anesum 357 anethum 357 anetinum 115 angel(s) 138, 157, 158, 160–162 nine orders of 160–162
Angelic (heresy)	176 Angeus	304
anguilla 124, 261 anguis 255–258 angulus 312 anima 231 animadversio 125 animal(s) 81, 247 aquatic, 144 names of 263 names of 247–270 small 254–255 tiny flying 269–270
animus	231 anise	357
ankle	238 ankle-bracelet	391 annals	67 world	130–133
annona	396
annulled (testament) 120 annus 129 anointed 155 anomaly 54 anquina 376 anser 267 ant 254 ant lion 255 antae 311 Antaeus 305 antanaclasis 76 Antarctic 101, 273 antecenium 396 antegrade (astral motion) 104 antela 405 antemna 374
anthracitis	326 Anthony, Saint	245
Anthropomorphites 176 Anthropophagians 199 antia 391 Antichrist 184 Antidicomarite 177 antidote 113 antimetabole 76 Antioch 281, 302, 303 Antiochus 302, 309 antiphon 147 antiphrasis 63 Antipodes 199, 245,
293 antiquarius 142 antistropha 61 antithesis 60, 76 antithesis 58 antitheton 60 antonomasia 61 Antony 304 anulare 381 anularis (finger) 235 anulus 391 anus (of body) 238 anus (old woman) 243
anvil	377 Apamea	302 aparisis	78 ape	253
Apellite	175 Apennines	291, 298 aper	248
ape, five kinds of 253 apex 42, 365, 390 aphaeresis 57 aphorism 114 aphorus 261 aphratum 397 Aphrodis 128 Aphrodite 188, 244 aphronitrum 318 apiago 354 apianus 340 Apicius 395 Apis 188 apis 269–270 apium 356
	silvaticum	354
aplustria	362 apocalamus	384
Apocalypse	135, 138, 144, 176 apocope	57 apocrypha	135, 137, 138 apodyterium	308
Apollinarist	177
Apollo	44, 57, 65, 109, 117, 181, 182,
186, 187, 195, 199, 239, 241, 290,
295, 298, 304, 361, 370 apology	140
apoperes apophasis	83 apophoreta	399 apoplexy	110 aporia	77 aposiopesis	78 apostate	162, 183 apostem	111 apostle(s)	168–170 names of	168 Apostolic (heresy)	176 apostrophe	50 apotheca	310 apozema	399 appellatio	43
appellatus (category)	82 Appius Caecus	64 apple tree	342 appropriation	123 apricum	299 April	128 apron	392 apsyctos	325 Apuleius	84, 89 Apulia	291 aqua	276, 397
 
aqualiculus	240 Aquarian (heresy)	176
Aquarius 106 Aquila 51, 106, 139 aquila 264 Aquilius 118
Aquilo	275 Aquitania	291 ara	236, 310
Arabia	249, 286, 318, 321, 323, 326,
342, 348–350, 387, 397 Arabic (heresy)	177 arabica (stone)	327 arabicus (stone)	320 Arabs	193, 194, 303, 386, 388
Aracusia	286 Araks (river)	281 aranea	258, 388
(fish) 260 arapennis 315 Arar (river) 281 Ararat, Mount 298 aratio 337 aratrum 404 Araxes (river) 288 arbor 341 arbustum 341 arca 315, 321, 401 Arcadia 249, 291, 320
Arcadians	196, 246, 308
Arcas	291 Arcesilaus	179 arch	312 archangel	160–161 archbishop	170 Archilochus	65 architectus	377 architrave	312, 379 Archontic	175 arcifinius	314 Arctic	273 arctic circle	101 Arctos	101, 104 arcumen	350 arcus	312, 364
	(rainbow)	274
ardea	265 area	314 Arelatum	304 Arenacian stone	378 arenata	371 Ares	362
Arethusa	296
argentum	330 vivum	330
argilla	317, 399 argitis	340 Argives	196, 304, 317
Argonauts	196 Argos	196 argument	69–71, 86, 140 deliberative	69 demonstrative	69 from effects, fourteen kinds of	86
extrinsic, types of	87 types of	71
argumentation	71, 365 argumentum	67 Argyre	294 argyritis	327
Arian	177
Arianism 143 Aries 105, 106 aries 247, 364 arioli 182 arista 338 aristolochia 353 Aristotle 39, 42, 54, 69, 79, 81, 82, 87,
107, 181, 244 arithmetic 39, 80, 89–93 Arius 180 Arles 304 ark, Noah’s 288 arm 235 armamentarium 310 armarium 310 armband 391 Armenia 195, 281, 288, 343, 349, 380 Armenians 199, 386 armentum 247 Armenus 288 armilausa 385
armilla	391 armor	364 armoracia	356 armory	310 armpit	235 arms	362–365 armus	235
army	203
arnoglossos	352 aroma	348
aromatitis	323 arra	122, 210 arrabo	210 Arretine dish	399 arrow 363 arsenic 380 arsis 48, 96, 99 art 39 artaba 335 Artabatitans 245 Artaxerxes 109 artemesia 352 Artemis 352 artemo 375 arteria 234 arteriace 114 arteriasis 111 artery 239 arthritis 112 article (part of speech) 44 articulus 236 artifex 373 Artotyrites 176 arts, invention of 183 artus 236 arundo 347 arvina 236 arx 307
asafoetida 351 asarum 350 asbestos 320 asbestos 320 Ascalon 287, 302, 356 ascalonia 356 Ascanius 304 ascia 383 Asclepiades 115 asellus 249 ash tree 346 Asher 166 ashes 317, 337, 377 Asia 285–289, 318, 321, 325, 326, 359 Asia Minor 193, 288 asilus 270 asinus 249 asp 254, 256 asparagus 356
Asphaltites, Lake (see Sea, Dead) asphodel 354 aspiration 41, 50 asplenos 354 ass 249 assembly 143 asser 382 assus 396 Assyria 286
Assyrians	181, 192, 194, 200, 333
 
asterisk 50 asterites 324 astrion 326 astrologer 182 astrology 99, 106 astronomy 39, 80, 89, 99–107 astrum 103 astula 342 astysmos 63 asyndeton 60 Athene 187 Athenians 196, 390
Athens	184, 290, 303, 307, 368
Athos, Mount	298
Atlantic Ocean	332
Atlas 99, 298 Atlas, Mount 199, 298 atom 271–272 types of 271
atramentum	381 atriplex	356 atrium	308 atrophy	112 Attalus	388
Attic column	312, 379
Attic Greek	191 Attic nation	196
Attica 290 Attis 290 auditus 232 auger 383 augury 99, 181, 182, 266, 269 August 128
Augustine	139 Augustus (appellation)	163, 200 Augustus Caesar	41, 52, 63, 118, 128,
129, 200, 279, 302, 304, 321,
361 aula	308 aulea	388 aunt, maternal	210 aura	275 auraria	329 aureta	260 aurichalcum	330
auricularis (finger)	235 auriga	367 auris	234 aurochs	249 aurora	127 aurugo	113 aurum	329 auspex	182
Auster	275
australis piscis 261 Austroafricus 275 Austronotius 100, 272 authors, prolific 139 autumnus 129 ave (greeting) 265 avena 355 Avernus, Lake 279, 291 avia 209 aviaria 341 avis 264 avunculus 209 avus 206 axe 362, 382 two-headed 234
axilla 235 axis of heaven 100, 272 axungia 396 azymus 396
Baal	166, 185
Babel, Tower of	191
Babylon 174, 286, 301 Babylonia 320 bacchia 400 Bacchus (see Liber) bacillum 404 back 237 backboard (bed) 403 Bactria 287 Bactrians 194, 301
Bactrum 301 Bactrus (river) 281, 286 baculus 404 badger 254
badium	250 Baetica	282, 378
Baeticans 315 Baetis (river) 282, 292 bag 401 baia 299 Baiae 291 baianula 403 Bal 185 balance-tongue 333 balanite grapes 340 balanites 327 balcony 309 baldric 392 Baleares 297 ball 371 ballena 260
ballista	364 balm	115 balneum	307 balsam (ointment)	115 balsam tree	349 balteum	392 banner	361 banquet	395 baptism	149, 159 barathrum	300 barba	234 barbarism	55–56, 58
barbarolexis	55 barca	373 barge	373 bark	341 barley	338 barley-water	399 Barnabas	170 barones	205 baroptenus	325 barrier	311 barritus	252 barro	252 basanites	321 basil	356 basilica	310 Basilidian	175 basilisk	255 basin	400
basis (building) 379 basis 312 basket 389, 401, 405 Basques 198 basterna 404 bat 266 bath(s) 307 hot 307
bathing	149 Bathsheba	309 batin	383 batrachites	320 battering ram	364 battle	360 array	203
batus 335 baxea 393 baxeae 393 bdellium 348 beach 278 beam (of wood) 382 bear 252 beard 234
 
beard (grain)	338 beast	251–254 of burden	247
beaver	253, 384 wool	388 bedbug	259 bedframe	403 bedroom	308 bee	269 beech tree	345 bee-eater	266 beer	398 beet	356 Behemoth	185 being	82 Bel	185
Belgica	291 beli oculus	325 Bellerophon	246 bellicum pallium	386 bellua	260 bellum	359 belly	240 Belphegor	185 Belshazzar	168 belt	392 Belus	325
Belus (river)	328 Belzebub	185 bench	403 beneola	354 Benjamin	166 ben-nut	354 Berenice	303 berry	340 beryl	322 Bessians	197 bestia	251 beta	356 Bethel	302 Bethlehem	302 betrothed	210 bibio	270
Bible	90, 135–138, 272 apostolic writings	135 authors of	136–138 books of (see under individual
books) canon	135 Law, five books of	135 moral sense	135 names in	162–165, 170 narrative	135
New Testament	135 classes of writing	135
number of books	135, 139 Old Testament	39, 135, 139, 334,
352
Prophets, eight books of	135 three kinds of content	135 translations of	139
‘Writings,’ nine books of	135 bibliopola	142 bibliotheca	138, 310 bicinium	147 bier	403 Big and Little Dipper	273
Big Dipper 100, 104, 271, 272, 275 biga 368 bigener 250–251 Bilbilis 331 bile 239 bile, black 109 bipennis 234, 383 bipinnis (see bipennis) birds
kinds of	263–269 origin of names of	264
bireme 374 birrus 387 birth 231 order of, four types 207
birthwort	353 bishop	170, 171 four orders of	170
bissextus 145 bit, horse 405 Bithynia 288, 303, 351 bitumen 317 bivium 316 black 250
black-tail (fish)	261 bladder	240 gall	239 blade
	(grain)	338
	(oar)	374
	(sword)	362
blame	69, 86 blatta	270 blatteum	270, 389 blavum	389 Blemmyans	245 blite	356 blood	109, 239 bloodletting	114 ‘bloom’ (bronze) 331 boa 257 boa 256 Boanerges 169 boar 248 board 382 boca 260 body 231, 232–241 parts of, purpose of 241
Boeotia	290 Boethius	81, 89 bogue	260 boia	124 bolster	388 bombycina	384 bombycinum	259, 384 bombyx	259, 384
bona (goods)	121
bone	236
Bonosiac	177 book(s)	142 collection	139	
manufacture of medical	114 sizes of	141	141
terminology of	142
boot	393 Bootes	103, 105 bootmaker	393 booty	360 booty-share	361 Bordeaux	304 border
	(cloth)	387, 392
	(land)	300
Boreas	275
Boreus 100, 272 Borion 297 borrowing 55 bos 248–249 boss (shield) 237, 364
botanical treatise	110 botanicum	114 botrax	257 botrus	340 boulevard	306 boundary (land)	315 boundary-line	315
bow	364 bowel	240 box tree	347 boy	207, 241 bracae	385
 
bracchium	235 bracelet	391 bracile	392 bractea	329 brain	235, 239 bran	396 branch	341 branchos	111 branding-iron	406 brassica	356 brawn	235, 238 bread	396 breakfast	395 bream	261 breast	236
breathing (see aspiration) breeches	385 breeding of animals	250 breeze	275 sea	275
brevia 279 briar-bush 347 brick 312, 378 bride 210 Bridegroom 157 Brindisi 291, 304 bristle 248 Britain 294, 319, 332 Britons 198, 386 brontea 327 bronze 330–331
(color)	250 broom, Spanish	355 broth	397, 399 brothel	369 brother	208
uterine	208 four kinds in Bible	208
brother-in-law	211 brown	250 bruma	129
Brundisium (see Brindisi)
Brutus	52 bryony	354 bubalus	249 bubo	266 bucina	361 bucket	400, 405 buckler	364 bucolic poem	65 bud	342
buffalo	249 bugloss	352, 353 buildings	308, 311–312, 377
public	305–308 rural	313–314 sacred	309–310
bulbus	354 bull	248–249 bulla	391 bullock	242, 248 bulrush	355 bulwark	306 buprestis	269 bupthalmus	354 Burdigalis	304 burdo	251 burdock	353 burgher	204 Burgundians	197, 205 burgus	197 burial mound	313 buris	404 bury	243 bush-hook	404 business	365 bustard	264 bustum	402 butterfly	270 buttocks	237 buxum	347 buying	120 byssinus	384 byssum	388 Bythnia	392 Byzacium	292 Byzantium	303
caballus	249 cabbage	355 turnip cabbage	356
cabinet 310 caccabus 401 cacemphaton 56 cachexia 112 cacosyntheton 57 cadaver 243 Cadiz 294, 302, 305
Straits of 193 cadmia 331 Cadmus 40, 195, 290, 302, 303 caduca 111
(inheritance)	121 caduceus	186 caecula	257 caecum	239
caelatus 399 caelia 398 caelum 100, 272–276, 377 Caelus (god) 185 caementarius 377 caementum 378 caenum 317 caerefolium 357 caerimonia 148 caeruleum 381 caeruleus 260 Caesar, Julius (see Julius Caesar)
Caesar (Julius?)	243
Caesar (title)	200
Caesaraugusta	304
Caesarea
	(Cappadocia)	303
	(Mauretania)	295, 305
(Palestine) 302, 305 caesaries 232 caespes 341 caesura 64 caesus 397 caetra 364 Cain 95, 162, 301 Cainite 175 cake, sweet 396 Calabria 304 calamint 354 calamistrum 404 calamites 354 calamitis 263 calamus 97, 142, 349 calathus 389, 400 calcaneus 238 calcar 405 calceus 393 calciamentum 393 calculus 319, 371 calcus 333 calendar (literary genre) 67
	liturgical	143–145
calf (animal)	249
(of leg)	238 calicularis	352 calidus	250 caliga	393 caligarius	393 caligo	274 calix	400 callaica	323 callis	316 Callista	196
 
Callisto	106 callitriches	253 calo	373 calones	393 Calpe	298 Calpis	297 caltulum	392 calumnia	122 calvaria	232 calx	238, 319 calx viva	378 cama	403 Cambyses	302 camel	249 camelopardus	252 camera	312 camisia	383, 385 camp (military)	202 campana	333
Campania 291, 331, 344, 398 camp-bed 403 campestre 384 campground 309 campus camus 405 Cana 169
Canaan, son of Ham	163
Canaan	287, 333 tribes of	193 Canaanites	193, 195 canalis	379 Cancer	106
cancer (disease) 113 cancer 262 candelabrum 402 candetum 315 candidus 250 candlestick 402 candor 243 canicula 405 canicula stella 105 canine (tooth) 234 canis 253 canistrum 401 canities 243 cankerworm 259 cannabum 388 Cannae, battle of 202 canon (conciliar) 143 canon 143 canon-table 142–143 Canopea 287, 376
Canopos	265
Canopus 287 Cantabria 332, 351 canterinum 338 cantharis 259 cantharus 400 cantherium 383 canticle 147 Canticle of Canticles (see Song of
Songs) canticum 98 cantor 171 cantus 96 canus 250 capanna 314 caper (plant) 356 caper 248 capilli 232 capillum Veneris 353 capistrum 405 capital (architecture) 312, 379 Capitilavium 146 Capitolium 267, 307 capitulum 390 cappa 390 Cappadocia 288, 318 Cappadocians 302 capparis 356 capra 248 caprea 248 capreolus 340 Capricorn 106 caprificus 344 caprinus 384 capsus 403 captain (of ship) 373
Capua 304 capulum 405 capulus 362, 403 capus 268 caput 232 Capys Silvius 304 carabus 374 caracutium 403 carbo 377 carbuncle 110, 326 carcer 124, 308, 367 carchedonia 326 carchesium 375 carcinias 327
cardamom 350 cardiaca 110 cardinal points 271 cardo 271, 272, 311, 315 (celestial)	100
carduelus	269 carduus	356 carenum	398 carex	355 Caria	288 carica	344 caries	342 carina	374 caritas	158, 173
Carmania	325 Carmel, Mount	328 carmen	64 Carmentis	40 carnelian	323 caro	232, 396 carob tree	345 Carpathos	295 Carpathus	304 carpentarius	382 carpenter’s square	381 carpentum pompaticum	403 Carpocratian	175
Carrara marble	322 Carrhae	301 carrot	355 carrum	403 carta	141 Cartagena	282, 305
Carthago (Spain)	282
Carthage	292, 303, 304, 403
Carthaginians 198 Carthago Spartaria 305 cartilage 236 Carystean marble 141, 322 casa 313
case
	(container)	363
	(grammatical)	44
(legal/rhetorical)	70, 74, 119 five types of	71
casia 349 cask 400 casses 376 cassia cinnamon 349 cassis 364 castanea 344 casting-net 370, 376 castoff (of snake) 258 Castor 367 castor 253 castra 202, 269 castrum 306
 
casula	387 casus	44 cat	254
catachresis 61 cataphasis 83 Cataphrygians 176 catapirates 376 cataplasma 114 catapotia 114 catarrh 111 catasceva 73 catechumen 146, 172 categories 81–82, 83 ten species of 81
catella	391 catena	75 catenatum	404 caterva	202 Cathar	176 cathartic	114 cathedra	403 catholic	172, 173 Catholic Epistles	138 faith	178
catinum 400 Cato 73, 191, 337 cat’s-eye 325 catulus 253 Caucasian mountains 297, 349 Caucasus 195, 322 cauculus 112 caudica 374 caul 239 caula 313 cauldron 401 caulis 355 causa 54, 70, 74, 365
(legal)	119 cauterium	406 cautes	361
cavalry 201, 203 cave 300 Cecropidae 200 Cecrops 184, 196, 303, 304 cecum 239 cedar 345 cedrus 345 ceiling, paneled 379–380 celandine 352 celebration 145 cella 308 cellar 309 cellarium 310
celox	374 Celsus	337 Celtic Gauls	198 cena	396 cenchris	257 cenobite	172 censor	204 census	129 Centaur	249, 290 centaury	351 centenarium	334 centenum	338 centipede	257 cento	66
centuria	315 centurion	201 century (military)	202
(time) 130 cepa 356 cephalea 111 Cephas (= Peter) 168 cera 140 cerastes 256 Cerasum 344 cerasus 344 ceratium 333 Ceraunian mountains 298 ceraunium 326 Cerberus 245 Cercius 303 cercopithecus 253 Cerdonian 176 cerebrum 235, 239 ceremony 148
Ceres 187, 337, 338, 339, 398 cereus 402 Cerinthian 175 cernui 393
ceroferarius 172 certamen 366 cerussa 380, 381 cervicalium 388 cervinus 250 cervisia 398 cervix 235 cervus 248 cessio 122 cetus 260 Ceuta 305 chaff 338 chair 395, 403 Chalane 302 chalazius 321, 324, 326 chalcanthus 381 chalcantum 318 Chalcedon, Council of 143, 178 chalcitis 327, 331 chalcophonos 327 chalcosmaragdos 322 Chaldeans 39, 99, 192, 323 chalice 400 Chalybs (river) 331 chamaedraco 257 chamaedrys 352 chamaeleon (herb) 353 chamaepitys 354 chamber 308 chameleon 252 chamomile 352, 354 Chanaan (see also Canaan) 287 chandelier 402 change (coins) 329 channel 280, 379 chanter, types of 171 Chaonia 290
character
	of a person	74
(see also letter) character 406 characteristics, national 198 characterization 78 charcoal 377 charger (horse) 249 charientismos 63 chariot 368 four-horse 368
charioteer 367 Charity (Holy Spirit) 158 charity 173 Charon 186
Charybdis	279, 296 Chasluim	302 chatter	235 Chebron	302 cheek	233 cheekbone	233 cheese	397 chelidonia	324, 352 chelidoniacus	362 chelonitis	327 chelydros	256 chemites	321 cherry	344 chersydros	256 Cherubim	161, 285 chervil	357
 
chest
	(of body)	236
(furniture) 401 chestnut 250, 344 chest-strap (horse) 405 chickpea 339 chicory 352, 356 children 203, 207, 241 chiliarch 201 Chiliast 175
Chimaera	66, 73, 246, 380 Chimera, Mt.	289 chin	234
chrism	149, 155	
Christ (see also Jesus Christ)
Christ’s-thorn	353 Christian	172
chronic illness	110, 111–112
chronicle	125 world	130–133
Chronicles, Book of	135, 136
Chronos	185 chrysanthemum	354 Chryse	294
chryselectrus	327 chrysendetus	399 chrysites	321 chrysoberyllus	322 chrysocolla	327, 380 chrysolampis	327 chrysolite	327 chrysopis	327 chrysoprase	322, 326 Chrysorrhoa (river)	281 church	137, 173	149
church councils, four major	143
Chinese (see Seres) Chios 296, 347, 348, 349 Chiron 106, 114, 351 chirurgia 113 chirurgus 114 chisel 377, 383 chlamys 386 Choaspes (river) 323 choaspitis 323 choir 147 choler 109 chorda 98 chorea 147 choriamb 48 chorus 147 chreia 73, 76 chrisimon 51
cibarius	396 cibus	395 cibutum	401 cicada	268, 270
(headdress) 390 cicatrix 113 cicer 339 Cicero 51, 54, 69, 71, 81, 85, 88, 180,
191, 205, 386 cicindela 269 ciconia 264, 405 cicuta 353 cidaris 390 Cilicia 288, 350, 382, 400 Cilician 56 cilicium 388 cilio 377 cilium 233 Cilix 289 Cimea 317 cimex 259 cimicia 353 cimolia 317 cinaedia 325 cinctus 392 cinders 317 cingula 405 cingulum 392 ciniphes 270
cinis	317, 337
Cinna 392 cinnabar 380 cinnamolgus 265 cinnamon 265, 349 cinquefoil 352 cinyphius 248 Circe 181, 246, 367 Circensis 367 circinus 382 Circius 275 circle 93
circles (celestial) 101, 273 Circumcellian 177 circumcision 175 circumflex 49 circumlocution 62 circumluvium 300 circumtextus 387 Circus 307 circus 367 circus games 367–369 cirrus 233 Cisalpine Gaul 291 cistella 401 citadel 307 cithara 95, 97, 98 citizen 203–206 citizen, Roman 206 citocacia 353 citron tree 343 citrosus 384 city 301–305 civil philosophy 80 civil war 359 civis 203 civitas 305 clarissimi 204 classicum 361 classis 203, 373 clause 74 clause, punctuated 50 claustrum 311 clausula 66 clava 363 clavatus 393 clavis 404 clavus 375, 382 clay, white 317 cleft 300 Cleisthenes 368 clergy 170–172 nine orders of 170–172
clerus	170 clibanicius	396 clibanus	311 clima	101, 315 climax	75 clipeus	364 clivosum	316 cloaca	306 cloak	386, 404 clod	317 cloth	389 clothing	383–387 clothmaking	383, 389–390 cloud	273, 274 rain-cloud	274 storm-cloud	274
clover	339, 353 club (weapon)	363 clunabulum	362 clunis	237 clura	253 cob	250 cobweb	388 coccymela	343
 
cochleacius stone cockcrow 127 coclea 262, 307 coclear 334, 400 coctus 396 coculum 401 Cocytus 300	378
code, epistolary codex	142	52
codex	339 codicil	120 coenaculum	308 coenobium	172, 309 coetus	143 coffer	401 coffin	403 cogitatio	239 cognatus	208
cognomen	42
cohabitation 211 cohors 312 coin 89, 329 coinage 329 colatus 398 Colchians 303 colena 354 colic 112 collegiatus 205 colles 299 collum 235 collyria 114 collyrium 115 colobium 385 colocasia 354 colocynth 351 colon 50, 237 colon 74 colonist(s) 205 four types of 205
colony	306 Colophonia	348 Colophonius	65 coloring	380–381
(cloth)	389 colors (racing)	369 colostrum	397 coluber	255 Colubraria	297 colum	237, 405 columba	268 columbarium	374 columbinus stone	378 Columella	337 columella	234 column
	(building)	312, 378
(military) 203 columna (of nose) 234 colus 389 Coluthian 177 colymba 347 comae 232 comb 236, 389, 404 comedy 180
New Comedy 180 Old Comedy 180 two types of 180 writer 369
comet	105 comfrey	353 comitial disease	111
comma	50 comma	74 Commagene	286 commandment	140 commentary	140 commerce	122 commissure	382 commodatum	121 common people	203 commonplace	70 community	305–306 Como, Lake	331 comoedus	180 compago	236 comparatio	64 comparison	54, 64 of adjectives	43
compascus 314 compass 382 compensation 124 competition 366–369 competum (see compitum) compitum 306, 316 complaint (legal) 365 compluvium 312 concentor 171 concha 262–263, 399 conchylium 262, 389 conclusion (of an oration) 71 concubine 207 concula 334 condicio 120 condiment 397 conditus 398 conductio 121
cone	94
confession	151 confessor	174 confirmation	73 confrages	299 congius	334 congregation	173 coniugium	211 coniunctivus	45 coniunx	210 coniuratio	203 conjugation	45 conjunction	42, 46 conjuration	149 conlisio	56 conopium	376 consanguinity	208, 210 conscript	202 consecration	148 consobrinus	209 consolation	158 consonant	40, 41 Constans	346
Constantine	117, 143, 303
Constantinople 303 Council of 143 Constantius 177 constellatio (divination) 183 constellation(s) 94, 103, 104, 105,
106
(figures)	94 constitutio	73, 118
(of a case) 70 construction 377–379 consuetudo 73, 117 consul 200 consumptio 111 consumption 111 contagion 110 conticinium 127 continens 300 Contionator 136 contradiction 83 contrapositum 76 contraries, four types of 87–88 contubernium 211 contum 362 contumacia 235 conubium 211 convallis 299 convent 143, 172, 309 conventus 143 convexum 100, 272
 
convivium	395 coot	267 cophinus	401 copia	69 copper	330 copula	382 copyist	142, 204 cor	238 coral	323, 328 coralliticus	321 coranus	321 corax	267
corbis 401, 405 cord 375 coredulus 266 coriander 357 Corinth 290, 303, 322, 330
Corinthian column	312, 379
Corinthian marble 322 Corinthus 303 coritus 363 corium 236 cork tree 345 corner 312 Cornerstone (name of Christ) 157 cornu (military array) 203 cornua 374 corolla 390 corona 390
(of eye)	233 coronarium	331 corpse	243 corpus	232–241, 243 corrigia	393 Corsa	297 Corsica	297 cortex	341 cortina	388 Corus	275 corus	335 corvus (fish)	260 Corybantes	187
Corycium 350 Corycus 289, 327 corymbus 340 coryza 111 Cos 109, 295, 304, 384 cos 319 cosmography, biblical 136 cosmos 271–283 costa 236 costri 269 costum 350
costume	385 cot	403 cothurnus	393 coticula	115 Cotopita	177 cottage	313 cotula	334 coturnix	268 couch	395, 403 cough	111 council	143
Council of Chalcedon	143, 178 of Constantinople	143 Ephesian	143
Nicene 143, 144 counter 371 course 280 courtyard 308 cousin 209 covenant 120 covering 383 coverlet 402 cow 249, 257 coxa 238 crab 262 crabro 269 cradle 403 crag 318 crane 264 crapula 395 cras 127 Crassus 301, 392 cratera 400 cratis 378 creation 130 of the world 334
creator	154, 206, 232
creatures, fabulous	244 creed	149
	Apostles’	143
	Nicene	143
crementum 206, 232 crepida 393 crepido 319 crepusculum 127 Cres 295 cress 356 crest (helmet) 365 creta 368 Cretan earth 317 Crete 290, 295, 307, 317, 327, 343,
345, 351, 363, 382
cretio 118, 120 cribrum 401 cricket 254 crime 122–123 crines 233 crista 365 critical days (in medicine) 114 crockery 399 crocodile 260 crocomagma 350 crocus 350 crops 338
cross 41, 125, 157, 191 cross-beam 382 crossroad 306, 316 crowbar 124 crown 390
	(of head)	232
	(of road)	316
crucius	398 crudus	396 cruet	399 cruor	239 crus	238 crust	396 crusta	379
crustumia (olive) 347 Crustumium 344 crux 125 crystal 325 Ctesiphon 301 cub 251 cube 93, 94, 95, 379 cube number 92
cubiculum	308 cubile	403 cubitum	235 cuckoo	268 cuculla	387 cuculus	268 cucuma	401 cucumber	356 cucumis	356 cucurbita	114, 356 cucurbitularis	354 cudgel	124 cuirass	364 culcita	388 culleum	125 culmen	312 culmus	338 cultellus	404 cultivation	337–338
 
cultor	205 cultura	337 cultus	384 Cumaean Sibyl	181 cumba	374 cummin	357 cunabula	403 cuneus	203 cuniculus	248 cup	400 cupa	400 Cupid	188 cupping glass	114 curator	205 curia	204, 307 curialis	204 curling iron	404 current	280 curriculum	128 currus	368 currycomb	406 cursus	280, 366 curtain	388 cuspis	363 custom	73, 117 custom house	308 customary law	117 cuttings	341
cuttlefish 262 cyanea 324 cyathus 334, 400 Cyclades islands 290, 295–296, 322,
348, 381 cyclamen 354 cycle 144 Cyclopes 245, 296 Cyclos 354
Cydnus (river)	289 Cydonia	343 Cygnus	106 cygnus	265 cylinder	94 cylindrus	404 cymbal	98 cymbium	400 cyme	342, 355 cyminum	357 Cynic	179 Cynocephali	245 cynocephalus	251, 253 cynodontes	244
cynomya	270 cyparissus	345 cyperum	350 cypress	345 cypria	380 cyprinum	115
Cypriots	193
Cyprus	295, 322, 323, 325, 330, 348,
374, 380
Cyrene	292, 305, 318, 351
Cyril of Alexandria	143
Cyrnus	297
Cyrus	194, 304 Cytherea	295
Dacia	289 Dacians	197 dactyl	47
dactylic hexameter (see also heroic meter)	65
dactylus (fruit) 340, 342 dactylus of Ida 327 Daedalus 307, 377, 382, 395 daemon 184 dagger 362 Dalilah 164 Dalmatia 290, 384 dalmatica 384 Damascus 192, 302, 321, 343 dammula 248 damnum 124 damson plum 343 Dan 166
Danae	185 Danai	196 dancer	370
Daniel	137, 165, 166, 168
Danube (river) 197, 282, 291, 352 [Daphnis] 97 daps 395 Dardania 304
Dardanus	195, 304
Dares the Phrygian 67 Darius 167, 277, 321 darkness 127, 274 darnel 355 dart 363 date (fruit) 342 dates, world history 130–133 dative 44 daucos 353 daughter 207
David	65, 95, 115, 136, 164, 168, 309 dawn	127
day(s)	125–127
intercalary	145 names of	126
daybreak	127
De Interpretatione	82–83 De Syllogismis Hypotheticis	84 deacon	170, 171 Dead Sea (see Sea, Dead) death	243 three kinds of	243
debauchery 395 Deborah 164 deceased 243 deceit 123 December 128 Decemvirs 117 deception 122 decoction 399 decoration 379–380 decumanus 315 decurion 204 decursus 280 dedicare 148 dediticius 206 deer 248 defendant 365 defensor 204 definition 80, 84–86 fifteen kinds of 84
defrutum 398 defunct 204 defunctus 243 Deist 179 deity, nature of 159, 160 deliberative argument 69 delicacy (food) 395
Delmi 290 Delos 295 delphinus 260 Delphic Sibyl 181 delubrum 310 Democritus 179, 181, 337 demon 184, 190 demonstrative argument 69 Demosthenes 67 denarius 333 denominativus (category) 81 dens 234 dentale 404 dentix 261 deportatus 125 deposit 121 derivation of words 55 descendant 208
 
description	85 deserter	202 desertum	299 desire	174 sexual	237
desperation	173 desultor	368 Deucalion	282
Deus 153 Deuteronomy 136 devil 184 devium 299 dew 274 dewlap 249 dextra 235 dextrale 391 dextralis 383 diabolus 184 diacodion 114 diaconus 170 diadem 390 diaeresis 58 diaeta 113 dialectic (see also logic) 39, 79 dialogue 140 dialyton 60 diamond 325 diamoron 114 Diana 187, 295, 352 diaphragm 239 diapsalma 147 diarrhea 112 diary 67 diaspermaton 114 diasyrmus 78 dibble 404 dice 371 dice-tumbler 371 dicing 371 dictamnum 351 dictator 200 Dicte 351
Dido	198, 212, 303
Didyme	296 Didymus	139 die (cube)	233 dies	125 Diespiter	186 diet	113 differentia	81, 85 differentiation	55
digamma	41
digitus	235
digression	78 dilectio	174 dill	357 diluculum	127 Dinah	163 dinamidia	114 dining room	308 dinner	396 Diomedes	246, 265 diomedia	265 dionysia	325 dionysius (stone)	320 Dionysius Lintius	47
Dionysius the Stoic	179
Dionysius Thrax	47 Dionysus	296, 301 Dioscoria	303 Dioscorus	143 diphthong	47 diple	51 diplois	387 dipondius	332 dipsas	256, 257 dirge	95 discipline	39 discriminale	233, 391 discus	399 discussion	140 dish	399–400 dispensativus (philosophy)	80 dispositio	377 dispute	365 tripartite
dissaeptum 239 distaff 389 distich 66 distichon 338 distinctio 50 ditch 280 dittany 247, 351 diversorium 309 diverticulum 316 divination 181–183 four kinds of 182 two types of 182
divine philosophy	80 diviner	182 division (military)	203 divorce	211 divortium	316 dockyard	299 doctrinal (philosophy)	80 doe	248, 253
Dog Star 105 dogma 173 dolabra 383 dolium 400 dolo 375 dolon 363 dolphin 260 dolus 122 Domination (angelic order) 161
Dominicus	146
Dominus	153 dominus	200
domus 308 domus 203 Don (river) 195, 281 donaria 148 donarium 310 donatio usufructuaria 120 donation 120 Donatist 177 Donatus 42, 47, 56, 75 donum 148
doorkeeper	172 doorpost	311 doorway	311 of heaven	100
Dor	302
Dorians	196
Doric column	312, 379
Greek	191 dormouse	254 dorsum	237 dos	120 dosinus	250 dotage	242 Douro (river)	282 dove	250, 268 downpour	274 dowry	120 dracaena	251 drachma	333 draco	255 marinus	261
dracontea	352 dracontis	326 drag-hoe	404 dragma	333 drag-net	376 dragon	255, 326 drama	181 dramatist	180 dream	168, 244 dressing room	308
 
drink 397–399 drinking-bowl 400 dromedary 249 dromo 373 drone (bee) 269 drop (of liquid) 280 dropsy 111
drosolithus	325 drug	114 dryad	189 dualism	176 duck	267 duel	359 dulcis	396 dung	337 duracenus	343 Durius (river)	282 Dusii	190 dusk	127 dust	317 duumvir	204 dux	201 dwarf	244 dyeing (cloth)	389 dysentery	112
eagle	264 ear	234
(grain)	338 earring	391 Earth (goddess)	187 earth	285, 293 earwax	235 east	101, 271 Easter cycle	143–145
	Day	144, 145
Eve 144 ebenus 345 Eber (see Heber) Ebionite 176 ebony 345 Ebosus 297
Ebro (river) 198, 282, 290, 292 ebur 252, 322 Ecclesia 137 ecclesia 173 Ecclesiastes 80, 136, 164 Ecclesiasticus 137 echenais 261 echinus (shellfish) 263
echites	327 eclipse
	lunar	103
	solar	103
eclipsis 58 economic philosophy 80 ecstasy 168 ectasis 57 eculeus 124 Eden 285 Edessa 301 edge (blade) 362 edict 73, 118, 200
Edom	163 eel	261 effectum	86 effigy	184 egg	269
Egypt	193, 194, 287, 313, 318, 320, 321,
322, 323, 340, 342, 343, 367, 376,
385
Egyptians	93, 99, 188, 195, 308, 315,
335, 380
El	153 elbidus	389 elbow	235 elder	242 elder tree	347 Eleazar	139 elecampane	357 electria	326 electrum	332 electuarium	114 elefantiacus	113 elegiac meter	65 elements
celestial	271 four	109, 179, 232 physical	272 two main	276, 278
elephant	252, 255 elephantia	257 Eli	164
Elijah	90, 165, 166, 167, 168, 172
Elis	129 Elisha	166, 302 elixus	396 Elizabeth	170 elleborum	351 ellipsis	57, 58 elm	346
elocutio	74 eloquence	69 eloquium figurae	58 Elvidian	177 emancipation	207 ember	377 embolism	145 emerald	322 Emerita	305 emeritus	201 emery	321 Emmanuel	155 emmer	338
emollient	114
Emor	302
emorroida	112 emperor (title)	200 empiesis	111
Empire, Roman	191
Empirical (school of medicine) 109 emplastrum 114 emptio 120 enargeia 75, 78 encaenia 146 enchanter 182 enchiridion 114 Encratite 176 enectio 123 enema 114 enhydris 256 enhydros 253, 326 enigma 140 Ennius 51, 52, 65 Enoch 162
Enoch (city) 301 Enos 162 enpiis 111 ensis 362 ensnarer 370 enthymeme 72 entranceway 311 eon (see aeon) epact 145 epanados 76 epanalepsis 59, 78 epanaphora 59 epangelia 78 Epaphas 303 epenthesis 57 ephebe 241 ephebus 186 ephemeris 67 Epher 292
Ephesus	303, 380
Council of	143 ephod	383 Ephrata	281 epibata	373
 
epichireme	72 Epicurean	179, 180 Epicurus	180 epidromos	375
epiglottis 235 epigram 66 epigrus 382 epilemsia 111 epilepsy 111, 268 epimelas 325 Epiphany 146 Epirus 290, 303 episcopacy 171 episcopus 170 epistola 140 epistylium 312, 379 episynaloephe 58 epitaph 66 epithalamium 65 epithet 43, 61, 213–230 epithymum 350 epitima 114 epitrite 48 epitrope 78
epizeuxis	59 epode	66 epula	395 eques	204, 368 equestrian
equipment	405–406 game	370 order	204
equinoctial circle 101, 273 equinox 128 Equitia 320 equus 249–250 marinus 260
era 129 Erebus 300 eremita 172 ergasterium 310 ergastulum 310 ericium 254 ericius 263 Ericthonius 106, 368 Eridanus 282 erigeron 353 Erimanthus (see Erymanthus)
Eriphusa	296 Ermus (river)	303 eruca	259, 356
ervum	339
Erymanthus (river)	282, 291 erysipelas 112 Esau 163, 192 esculus 345 essence 160 Essene 174 estate 314 Esther 135, 137, 168 estuary 278, 280 eternal 154 Etesiae 275 etesius 321 ether 272 ethicist 179 ethics 79 Ethiopia 199, 319, 321, 323, 324, 327,
345, 349
Ethiopian War 193 Ethiopians 194, 199 ethnicus 183 ethopoeia 74, 78 etiology 78 Etna, Mount 187, 296, 298, 318
Etruria	291, 366
Etruscans	183, 191, 196, 304, 365 Etruscus	291 etymology	54–55
mystical	163 of patriarchs’ names	165–166 of prophets’ names	166
eucharist	146, 147, 148
Eumenides	190
Eunomian 176 Euonymos 296 euphony 96 euphorbium 351 Euphrates (river) 194, 281, 286, 320,
327, 350, 385 Euroauster	275
Europa	106, 185, 289
Europe	193, 289–292
Eurus	275
Eurymedusa	196
Eusebius	67, 125, 142, 143
Eusis (river)	281
Eutyches	143
Eutychian 178 Evander 301, 304 Evangelist 137 evangelium 138 evangelizare 137 Eve 162, 242, 384 Eveians 302 evening 126, 127 evidence	365 evil	123 evocatio	203 examen	333 excelsus	153 exceptor	204 excerptum	139 excetra	245, 256 excodicare	341 exconsul	200 excubitor	202 excusatio	140 exebenus	325 exemplum	64
exercitus	203 exile	125 exoche	76 Exodus	136
exomologesis	151 exorcism	149 exorcist	172 exordium	71 exoticus	384 expression, facial	233 exsequiae	243 extortion	123 extract	139 exuviae	258, 360 eye	233 eyebrow	233 eyelash	233 eyelid	233 upper	233
eye socket	233, 238 Ezekiel	135, 137, 166, 303 Ezra	67, 135, 136, 137, 138, 167
faba	339 faber	376 fable	66–67, 189, 244–246
	Aesopian	66
Libystican	66 fabrica	377 face	233, 235 facietergium	388 facinus	122 faeces	240 faecinian grape	340 faecula	398 faenum	355 faex	399 fagus	345 fairness	73
 
faith	173 falarica	363 falcastrum	404 Falcidius	118 falcon	268 Falernian wine	398 fall	129
	Fall of angels	161,
184 falling sickness	111 fallow	314, 337 falsitas	123 falx	404 fama	124
familia	203, 206 family	207 relationships	206–211 tree	210
famulus	205 fan	239 fanum	309 far	338 farcimen	397 farina	396 farm	314 farrago	338 fas	117 fasces	140 fascia	392 faselum	339 fasti	140, 145
Fasti	140 fasting	150 times of	150
fat	236 Fate	189 Fates, three	189 father	206 father-in-law	209 fatherland	293 fauces	234, 299
fault (verbal)	56–57, 75 faun	189 Faunus	97
Faunus of the Figs	190, 245 fava	339
favilla	317, 377 Favonii	207 Favonius	275 favus	397 fawn (color)	250 fax	402 feast	395 liturgical	145–146
Feast of the Tabernacles 369 feather 234, 264 febris 110 February 128 Februus 128 feet, metrical 47–49, 64 fel 239 femina (thighs) 238, 242 femina (woman) 242 feminalia 383 femoralia 385 femur 238 fence 313 fenestra 311 feniculum 357 fennel 355, 357 feretrum 403 feria 126 fermentacius 396 fermentum 396 fern 355 ferrugo 389 ferrum 331 fertum 148 ferula 355 ferus 251 festival-register 140 festivitas 145 fetus 240 fever 110 fibra 239 fibrinus 384, 388 fibrus 252 fibula 391, 392 ficedula 269 fictile 399 ficus 344 fideicommissum 120 fides 173 fidicula 98 fiducia 122
field 314–315 fig 344 figpecker 269 figura 42, 44, 233 figuration 157 figurative sense 90, 168 figure(s) 58 of speech 58–60, 75–79 of thought 76–79
filbert	344 file (tool)	377 filia 207 filius 207 filix 355 fillet 171, 391, 392 filth 317 filum 389
fine (judicial)	124 fines regundi	121 finger(s)	235 immodest	235 as measure	315 names of	235 ring	235
Finis	156
	finis	315
finitus	93 fir	345 fire	376 firebrand	342, 402 fireplace	402 fire-shovel	401 firewood	342 firmament	162, 272 first fruits	338 fisclum	405 fiscus	237, 401 fish	259–263
	how named	260
fist 235 fistula 113 fistula 97, 312, 379 flabellum 239 flagellum 339, 342 flagitium 122 flagon 400 flagrum 124 flame 377 flamen 171 flasca 400 flatus 280 flautist 97 flax 388 flea 259 fleece 388 fleet 373 flesh 232, 236 flint 318 Flood 191, 245, 282 flood plain 300 floods, three major 282–283 floor 309 Florian 177 flos 342
 
flos thymi	350 flower	342 fluctus	280 flumen	280 flute	97 fluvius	280–282 fly	270
Spanish	259 foam	280
focacius 396 focus 402 fodere 341 foedus 360 foetus 240 fog 274 folium 142, 342, 349 folliculum 338
follis	329 fomes	342 fons	280 font	310 food	395–397 foot	238
as measure	315 metrical	47–49 of sail	375
foot racer	368 foothills	299 footprint	316 footstool	403 foramen oculorum	233 force	122 forceps	377 ford	279 forehead	233 forfex	404 forge	377 forging	183 foris	311
fork (road) 316 form 184 formica 254 formicoleon 255 formulations of the categories 80, 83 fornax 377 Foroneus 365 fort 306
fortification	312–313 fortitude	79 Fortunate Isles	294 Fortune	189 forum	307, 365 forum	311
forus 374 fossorium 404 foundation (building) 311, 377 fountain 276–277, 280 four-horse chariot 368 fox 253 fragor 276 framea 362 frankincense 348 Franks 198, 362 frater 208 fratrissa 211 fraxinus 346 free person 206 freedman 205 freeman 205 frenum 405
frenusculus	113 frenzy	110 frequentative	45 fretum	278 frivolum	211 frixus	396 frog	263 frons	233, 341 frost	274 fructus	342 fruit	342 fruit fly	270 frumentum	338 frustum	397 frutex	341, 355 frux	338 fucus	269, 355 fulcrum	388 fulgetra	273 fulgur	273 fulgus	274 fulica	267
fuller’s earth	317 fulmen	273 fumarole	300 funale	402 funarius	368 functionary	204 functus	243 funda	376 fundamentum	311, 377 fundum	364 fundus	314 funeral	243 fungus	342, 356 funis	375
funus	243 furca	125 furcilla	405 furfur	396 furfurio	269 Furies	189, 190 furnace	311 furniture	402–403 furnus	311 furo	254 furrow	142, 337 furrow-measure	315
furtum	123 furuncle	113 fustis	124, 404 fusus	389
gabata	399 Gabriel	160
Gades (see Cadiz) Gaetulia 292 gagates 319 Gagatis (river) 319 Gaianite 178 galactites 320, 324 Galatia 288, 352 Galatians 176, 193, 195 galatica 397 galbanum 351 gale 276 galea 364 Galen 397 galerum 383, 390 Galicians 198
Galilean	174
Galilee	287
Sea of 279 galingale 350 gall bladder 239 Galli 193, 195, 198
Gallia Belgica	289
Gallic language (see language, Gallic) Gallicia 332 gallicinium 127 gallicula 393 Gallicus 275 gallina 267 gall-nut 346 Gallogreeks 195 galnapes 388 galos 211 games 365
 
circus	367–369 gladiatorial	370 gymnastic	366
gaming-board	371 gamma	41
Gangarus	280
Ganges (river)	194, 261, 280, 286,
351
gangway (ship) 374 Garama 293 Garda, Lake 279, 291 garden 355 garlic 356 garment 384 garrio 235 garum 399 gate 306 Gaul 291, 304, 328, 332, 350, 387
	Cisalpine	291
	Transalpine	291
Gauls	190, 193, 195, 198, 304, 315, 363,
386
Gaza	302
Gazean wine	398 gazophylacium	401 Gehenna	300 gelus	274 gem	322–328 Gemini	106 geminus	207 gena	233, 238 gender (grammatical)	54 human	240
gener 209 general (of army) 201 Genesis 80, 135, 136 genethliacus 182 genetics 240 genetrix 208 genialis 403 genicularis 354 Genista 174 genitals 237 genitive 44 genitus 159 Genius 189 genius loci 255 Gennesaret, Lake 279 genre, literary 139–140 gens 183, 192, 203, 209 gentian 352
gentile	183 genu	238 genus	231
(race) 203 genus and differentiae 81 geomancy 182 geometry 39, 80, 89, 93–95 geometry, types of 93 Geon (river) 280 Georgics 181 germander 352, 353 Germani 197, 385 Germania 289, 323, 326, 345 germanus 208, 209 germen 208, 342 Geryon 245 Getae 195, 197, 198, 386 ghost 190 gibbet 125
Gibraltar
rock of 298 Straits of 278 Gideon 164 gift(s) 148 sevenfold, of Spirit 158
gilvus	250 gimlet	383 ginger	350 gingiva	234 Gipedes	197 giraffe	252 girgillus	405 girl	241 girth (horse)	405 glacies	274 glade	341 gladiator	370 gladiatorial games	370 gladiolus	354 gladius	362
(fish) 260 glass 328 glaucus (fish) 261 glaucus (gray) 250, 389 gleba 317 glide 41 glis 254 globe 277, 285 gloss 55, 85 glossopetra 327 glow worm 269
glycyriza	351 gnat	270 Gnostic	175 goad	405 goal line 368 goat 180, 247–248 goathair 384 goblet 400 God, names of 153–155 gods 160 pagan 183–190
gold	329 leaf	329
goldfinch	269 gomor	335 goods	121 goose	267 gore	239 Gorgades	294 Gorgias	69
Gorgon	188, 245, 294
Gospels 80, 135, 137, 138, 142 names in 170 Goths 193, 197, 198, 305, 386 gouge 383 gourd 356 gout 112 grabatum 403 Gracchus 191 Grace 159 graculus 267 gradatio 75 gradipes 264 Gradivus (Mars) 186 Graecus, King 195, 290 grafting 341 grain 338–339 gramen 355 grammar 39, 42, 69 granary 310 grandchild 207 grandfather 206 grandmother 209 grando 274 grape 269, 340–341 grape press 311
graphium	141 grapple	375, 405 grass	355 gratia	159 grave	49 gray	250 grease	396 greave	393 Greece	290–291, 391
Greek language (see language,
Greek)
 
General index
Greeks 193 Gregorian (law) Codex 117 griffin 252 ground 285, 299 groundsel 353 grove 299, 341 gruel 395 grus 264 gryllus 254 grypes 252 Guadalquivir (river) 282, 292 guaranen 250 gubellum 389 gubernio 373 gula 235 gulf 278
gullet 234 gum 234, 348 gurges 280 gurgulio 234, 270 gustus 232 gutta 280 guttatus 250 guttur 235 guva 114 guvia 383 gymnasium 179, 307, 308 gymnastic game 366 Gymnosophist 179 gynaeceum 311 gypsum 319, 378
Habakkuk 167 habena 405 habit 82 habitation 308–309 haedus 247 haematite 320, 323 haemoptysis 111 haemorrhois 256 haeresis 174 Hagar 163, 192, 195
Haggai	167 Hagiographa	135 hail	274 hair	232 gray	243
hair-net	391 hairpin	391 halcyon	265 half-juger	315 hallec	261 halter	405 Halys (river)	288
Ham 162 hama 405 hamadryad 189 hamio 261 hamlet 306 hammer 377, 382 hammites 321 hammonitrum 328 hamper 401 hand 235 handmaid 205 hand-mill 401 Hannibal 202, 288, 298, 305, 330 harbor 299 hardwood 346 hare 248 harena 319, 378 harmonia 96 harmonicus 96 harmony 95, 96–97 harpago 405 haruspex 181, 182, 183 harvest 338 hash 397 hasta 362 hatchet 383 hatchling 264 haustrum 405 hawk 267 hay 355 hazelwort 350 head 232 headdress 233 health 109 hearing 232 heart 238, 240 hearth-bread 396 heathen (see pagan)
heavens, the (see sky) hebdomada	127 Heber	163, 194
Heber (eponym of Hebrews)	192
Hebrew language (see language, Hebrew)
Hebrew, meaning of	174 Hebrews	329, 333, 334
Hebrews, Epistle of	138
Hebron	302 Hecatompolis	295 heddle	389 hedera	351 hedge	313 hedgehog	254 heel	238 heifer	249 heir	206 Heliopolis	303 heliotrope	352 (stone)	323
Hellas	290 Helle	278 hellebore	351 Hellen	290 Helles river	289 helmet	364 helmsman	373 helvola grapes	340 Hemerobaptista	175 hemicadium	401 hemicranius	259
hemisphere (celestial)
hemlock	353 hemorrhoids	112 hemp	388 hen	267 henbane	352 hepaticus	111 Hephaestia	296 hephaestitis	327	101
Hera (see also Juno)	189
Heraclite	176 Heraclitus	180 herbs	349–355, 356–357 herba lucernaris	354 salutaris	354 sanguinaria	354
herbs, medicinal	113 herciscunda	121 Hercules	106, 195, 198, 216, 246, 256,
265, 277, 290, 297, 304, 305, 316,
356, 363 hercynia	266 herd	247
hereditas	121 heres	206 heresies, nameless	178
heresy	143, 174–178, 180
Macedonian 177 heretics, names of 175 Hermagoras 69 hermaphrodite 244 Hermes 186, 244
Hermes Trimegistus	117, 186 hermit	172 Hermogenian (law) Codex	117
 
Hermogenian	176 Hermus (river)	281, 289 hero	189 Herod	138, 169, 170, 302, 305
Herod (Antipas)	302
Herodian	175 Herodotus	67 heroic maiden	242
heroic meter (dactylic hexameter)	65, 136
heron	265
herpyllos	352 Hesiod	337 Hesperia	291
Hesperians	199
Hesperides 199, 294 Hesperus 105, 368 hesternum 127 hexaticum 338 hexecontalithos 325 hexeris 374 Hezekiah 113, 165, 167 hiatus 300 Hiberia 288 Hibernia 294 hibernus 129 hide (skin) 236 hiemalis 101 hiems 129 Hiera 296 hiera 114 hieracitis 327 hierarchy, angelic 161 hierobotane 353 Hierosolyma (see Jerusalem) Hierusalem (see Jerusalem) hill 299 hilt 362 hinge 311 hinnulus 248 hinny 251 hip 238
hippagogus	374
Hippo	302 Regius	292
Hippocentaur	66, 246
Hippocrates	109, 181, 295 Hippolytus	143
Hippomenes	366 Hippopodes	245 hippopotamus	261 hipposelinon	357 hircosa	263
hircus	247–248 hirmos	60 hirquus	248 hirundo	268 Hispalis	198, 305
Hispania (see Spain) Hispanus	198
historia (biblical)	135 history	67 world	130–133
histrio 369 histrix 253 hive 269 hoar frost 274 hoarseness 111 hock 238 hodie 126 hoe 404 hoeing 337 holocaust 148 holograph 119 holoporphyrus 384 holosericus 384 holus 355 Holy of Holies 309 homeopathy 113 Homer 51, 65, 66, 181, 186, 216, 244,
303, 352 homicide 123 homily 139 homo 231 homoeoptoton 59 homoeosis 63 homoeoteleuton 59 homoeusios 156 Homogirus 337 homonym 57 homousios 156 honey 397 honeycomb 397 honey-water 398 honey-wine 398 honorarius 398 hood 387, 390 hoopoe 268 hope 173 hora 125
Horace	67, 119, 136, 180, 363 hordeum	338 horehound	353 hormiscion	327 horn (instrument)	361 horn (military array)	203 hornet 269 horologia 404 horoscope 106, 182, 183 horreum 310 horse 249–250 colors of 250 qualities of 250 types of 249, 250
horse-fly	270 horse-vaulter	368 Hortensius	235 hortus	355 hosanna	148 Hosea	167 hospice	309 hostia	148 hour	125
hours, canonical 146–147, 150 house 203, 308–309 household 203, 206 house-leek 354 hull 374 human being 231 parts of 231–241 terms for 213–230
humare	243 humors, four	109–110 humus	254, 285 Huns	195
hunting-net 376 hunting-spear 362 husband 210 four reasons to choose 212
husk 338 hut 314 hyacinth 350 Hyades 103, 105 hyaenia 328 hybrid 250–251 hybrida 251 Hydaspes (river and spring) 281, 286 Hydra 245, 256 hydria 400
hydromancy	182
hydromelum	398
hydrophobia hydros	256	110, 255
Hylas (river)
Hymen	95 hymen	211	281
hymenaeus	211 hymn	65, 95, 147 hypallage	60
 
Hypanis (river) 286 hyperbaton 62, 75 hyperbole 62 Hyperborean mountains 298 hypnalis 256 hypodiacones 171 hypogeum 309 hypotheca 122 Hypothetical Syllogisms, On the 84 hypozeuxis 58 Hyrcania 251, 288 Hyrcanus 309 hyssop 352 Hystaspes 281 hysteron proteron 62
iacinthina	384 iacinthizonta	324 iacinthus	324 iactus	366 iaculum	370, 376 iaculus	257 iamb	47
ianitor 172 ianua 311 iaspis 322 Iberians (see also Spaniards) 193, 198 Iberus (river) 282, 292 ibex 248 ibis 248, 266 Ibiza 297
Icaria	295 Icarus	278, 295 ice	274 ichneumon	254 icicle	280 icon	64 icon	319 Icosium	305 ictericus	113 Icthyophagians	199 ictus	124 idea	232 Ides	128 Idis	97 idol	184 idolatry	184 idyll	66 iecur	239 ieiunium	150 ieiunum	239 ientaculum	395 ignis	376
ignominy 124 ileos 110 ilex 345 Ilium 289, 303 ilium 237 illness 109–113 illumination 274 illusion, magical 183 illustres 204 Illyria 350 Ilus 303 image 64 image of god, pagan 184
imaginatio	85 imago	319 imber	274 imbolus	307 imbrex	312 immeasurable	154 immigrant	205 immolation	148 immortal	154 immutable	154 impars	90
impassible 154, 177 imperative 45 imperator 200 impersonalis 45 impetigo 112 implements (farm) 404–405 impudicus (finger) 235 Inachus (river) 282, 290 inaures 391 incantation 183 incantator 182 incense 115 incentor 147 incest 123 inch 315 inchoative 45 incisor 234 incola 205 incolens 205 incorporeal 154, 176 incorruptible 154 Incubo 190 incubus 190 incus 377 index 235
India	245, 286, 319, 320, 322–324,
325–326, 328, 332, 345, 347,
348–350, 381, 397
Indians	194, 199, 322, 349, 353, 386 indictus (feast) 151 indicum 381 indigenous 205 indigo 381 induction (of syllogism) 71 indumentum 384
Indus (river) 194, 281, 286, 301 indutia 360 inerticula (grape) 340 infamy 124 infant 241 inference (of syllogism) 72 inferus 300 infinitive 45 infinitus 44, 45, 93 infitiatio 123 infula 390 ingenitus 159 ingenuus 205 inguen 110 inheritance 120, 121 iniuria 123 injustice 123 ink 381 inn 309
inportunus	299 inquilinus	205 inritum (document)	119 insitio	341 insonus	41 inspectivus (philosophy)	80 instauratio	377 instructum	122 instrument	122 legal	119–121 medical	114–115
insubulus	389 insula	293
insurrection	359	
integers, names of intempestum	127 intercilium	233	89
intercourse, sexual	237, 240
interdictum 122 interfinium 234 interjection 42, 46 intermissio 337 internecivum iudicium 123 interpolus 385 interpres 82, 139 interpretation 82 Interpretations of Apuleius 84 interscapilium 237
 
intervallum	313 intestate	121 intestine	239 large	237
intinctio	377 intubum silvaticum	352 intubus	356 Inui	190 inula	357 invisible	154
involucrum	401
Io	278
Ion	196
Ionians	193, 196
Ionic
	column	312, 379
Greek	191 iotacism	56 Ireland	294 iris	233, 350
iris
	(rainbow)	274
(stone) 326 Irish 198 iron 331 irony 63, 78 Isaac 165, 302 Isagoge (see Porphyry)
Isaiah	113, 135, 137, 166, 168, 387
Isauria	288
Ishmael 163, 165, 184, 192 Ishmaelites 195 isicium 397 Isis 39, 98 Isis 188 island 293–297 Isles d’Hyeres` 296
Israel (Jacob)	194
Israel 165, 334 divided kingdom 194 tribes of 194 twelve tribes of 165
Israelites	194 Issachar	169
Ister (river)	282, 291
Istria	369
Itala (biblical version)	139 Italians	193, 362 Italus	196, 291 Italy	291, 293, 317, 320, 321, 328, 331,
333, 337, 344, 370, 381 iter	316 itinerant	205
Itureans 346 itus 316 Iudaea (see also Judea) 287 Iudaeus 172, 174, 194 iudaicus (stone) 320 iudex 204, 365 iudicium 365 iugerum 315 iuglans 344 iugum 299 iumenta 247 iuncus 355 iuniperus 345 iurgium 365 ius (broth) 397 ius 117, 121 gentium 118 liberorum 120
iustitia	365 iuvencus	242, 248 iuvenis	242 ivory	252, 322 ivy	351
jackdaw	266, 267 Jacob	119, 163, 165, 168, 250, 282, 302,
334
	sons of	165
James of Alphaeus, the Less	169
James of Zebedee	169
James, Epistle of	138
Janiculum	304
January	128
Janus	128, 185, 191, 304, 311
Japheth 163, 193 Jason 194, 195 jasper 322 jaundice 113 javelin 362 jaw 233, 234 Jebus 301 Jebusites 301, 302 jejunum 239 Jeremiah 66, 135, 136, 137, 166, 385
Jericho	302
Jeroboam	302
Jerome	67, 125, 137, 139, 153
Jerusalem	173, 287, 300, 301, 309
Jesus, Hebrew name of	155
Jesus Christ	138, 183 names of	155–157 Jesus son of Sirach	137 jet	319
Jew	172, 174, 183, 193, 194, 301, 333,
386
Jezebel	165
Job	65, 135, 136, 168
Joel	167
John (evangelist)	138, 176
John of Zebedee	169
John the Baptist	168, 172, 302
John, Epistles of	138
joint	236 Jonah	167, 260
Jonathan	164
Joppe	302
Jordan	281
Joseph	166, 176, 177, 210
Josephus (historian)	99, 137, 193
Joshua	164, 302
Joshua, Book of	136
Josiah	165 Jove (see Jupiter)
Jovinianist	177
Juba	305
jubilee	129, 145 Judah, kingdom of
Judas Iscariot	169 Judas of James	169
Jude, Epistle of	138
Judea	279, 287, 317, 328, 348, 349,
353
judge	204, 365 Judges, Book of	136 judgment	365
Day of Judgment 156, 184 judicial argument 69 Judith 137, 168 jug 400 juger 315 Jugula 105 juice 399
Julius Atticus	337
Julius Caesar	53, 117, 128, 139, 200,
305, 359 Julus	200 July	128 jump (game)	366 junction	316 June	128 juniper	345 Juno (see also Hera)	186, 187, 189, 296, 368
Jupiter	95, 105, 106, 184, 185, 187,
189, 196, 199, 248, 289, 296, 344,
361, 367, 368, 383
 
Jupiter Ammon	106 jurisprudence	117 justice	79 Justinian	178
Juvenal	119, 180
Kalends	128, 146 kaminus	377
Karkheh (river) 281, 323 keel 374 kernel 344 kettle 401 key 404 kid 247 kidney 237, 240 kin
maternal	208 paternal	208
king (see rex) Kings, Book of	136 kinship	210 terms of	206–211
kite	268 knee	238 knife, pruning	404 knot (military)	203 knot-grass	354 knowledge	39, 79 koenonosis	77
Laban	119 labia	234 labina	317 labrum	234, 400 labrusca	339 labyrinth	307
(of Crete)	246 lac	236, 397 lace (shoe)	393 Lacedaemon	303
Lacedaemonia 303 Lacedaemonians 196, 303, 321, 384 lacerna 387 lacertus 235, 238
(lizard) 257 lacrima 233 lactans 382 lactatum 398 lacteus circulus 101, 273 lactuca 356 laculatus 384 lacunarium 379, 402 lacus 279, 311, 405 ladder	382 ladle	400 lagoena	400 laicus	172 lakes	276–277 survey of	279
lamb	247 lamb’s tongue	352 lambdacism	56 lament	66
Lamentations of Jeremiah 135, 137 lamia 190 lamp 402 lana 388 lance 363 lancet 114 lane 306 Langobards 197 language 191–192
Chaldean	191 Egyptian	166, 188 Gallic	234, 347
Greek	55, 191 five types of	191
	Hebrew	191, 193, 247, 281, 285, 301,
333, 335, 347, 369
Latin	191 four types of	191
learning of	191 original	192 Persian and Medean	251, 302
	Punic	185, 343
	Sabine	196
	Scythian	194
	Syrian	168, 169, 170, 172, 191, 261,
296
Troglodyte	323 languages
diversity of	191 national types of	191 three sacred	191
lantern	402 lanx	399 Laodicia	302 lap (race)	368 lapathium	356 lapella	354 lapis	318 lapistrus	356 Lapiths	195 lappa	353, 354 lappago	354 lapus lazuli	324 laquearium	312, 379 laquearius	370 larch	346 lard	396 Laricinum	346 Larissa	196 larix	346 larva	190
larvaticus 111 laser 351 lash 124 lasso 405 later 312, 378 laterculum 144 laterculus 312, 378 latex 280 Latin (see language, Latin) Latins 196, 206
Latinus	191
Latium	191, 304
Latona 295 Latonia (Diana) 187 latus 237 laudes 65 laurel 342 laus 69, 147 lavender 354 laver 400 Lavinium 304 law 73, 117–125 civil 118, 119 divine or human 117 military 118 names of 118 natural 117 of nations 118 originators of 117 public 118 purpose of 119 Quirital 118 replete 118
Rhodian	119 lawsuit	365 laxative	114 lay person	172 Lazarus	170 lead	332 leaena	251 leaf	142, 342 league (measure)	315 Leah	163, 165 learn	39 leaven	396
 
Lebanon, Mount	281, 295
lebes	401 lectica	402, 403 lectio	147 lector	171 leech	258 leek	356 lees (wine)	399 legion	202
legitimus (feast)	151 legume	339 lembus	374 lens	339 Lent	146
lenticula	401 lentigo	112 lentil	339 lentiscus	346, 349
Leo	106 leo	251	
Leogoras of Syracuse leontophonos 253 lepra 112 leprosy 112 Leptis 302 lepus (fish) 261 lepus 248
Lesbian marble	322 lese majest`	e´	123 lesson	147 lethargy	110	51
letter(s)(of alphabet)
Egyptian	39 Greek	39, 40
	Hebrew	39, 40	39–42, 47
Latin	39, 40–42 legitimate	41 Phoenician	39 superfluous	41
	(epistle)	140
(kinds of writing) common	40 liberal	40
lettuce	356 Leucata	304
leucochrysus	327 leuga	315 lever	404 Leviathan	185 levidensis	384 levir	211 levite	171 Levites	136 Leviticus	136 levitonarium	385 Lex (Pentateuch)	135 lex	73,117,200 (see also law) Libanus, Mount	298, 348 libation	148 Liber (Bacchus)	141, 180, 183, 186,
196, 198, 201, 298, 301,
339–341, 366, 370, 390, 400,
404 liber 142, 341 liberal arts 39, 107, 115 Liberalia 366 liberi 203, 207 libertus 205 libido 237 Libonotus 275 Libra 106 libra 332, 333 librarius 142 library 138–139, 310 libum 396
Libya 292–293, 325, 326, 359, 380 Libya Cyrenensis 292 Libyans 193 licinium 385, 402 licium 390 licorice 351 lie 73 lien 111 lienitis 111 lientery 112 life 231 light 274 lighthouse 307, 402 lightning 273 lightning bolt 273 lignarius 382 lignum 342, 382 ligo 404 Liguria 357 Ligurian Alps 350 ligusticum 357 lily 351 Lilybaeum 297 lima 377 limax 259 limb 236 limbus 392 limen 311 limestone 319 limit (land) 315 limpidus 398
limus 317, 385, 392 linden 346 line 94 linea 382 lineage 207, 210 linen 384 lingua 191, 234 lingulati 393 linna 385 linostemus 384 lint 385 linum 388 Linus the Theban 95 lion 251 three types of 251
lip 234 liparea 327 Lipare 296 Liparus 296 liquamen 399 liquescere 41 liquid 41 lis 365 Lisbon 305 litany 151 literacy 39 litharge 330 lithostrotum 312, 379 litigation 365 litoraria 374 littera 47 litus 300 liver 239 livestock 247–251 Livy 67, 195 Lix 305 lizard 257 Loaves of Proposition 145 lobe (of liver) 239 locatio 121 loculus 401 locus 293
locus amoenus	299 locus communis	70
locust 270 lodix 388 logic (see also dialectic) 79 Logical school of medicine 109 logician 71, 179 logium 383 loincloth 384, 385, 392 loins 237 Loire (river) 291
 
loligo	262 lolium	355 longao	237
loom	389
loquellaris	46 lord (augustan title)	200 Lord (see Dominus) lorea	398
lorica 364 lorum 405 Lot (of Sodom) 163, 192 lot, drawn 183 lotium 240 lotos 343 louse 259 lovage 357 love 173 lozenge (medicinal) 114 lubricum 299 Lucan 181
Lucan cow	252 Lucania	327 lucanica (sausage)	397 lucerna	402 Lucerne clover	339
Lucifer	104, 307, 368, 402
Lucifer (planet)	105, 126, 147
Luciferian	177
Lucilius	56 Lucina (Diana)	187
Lucina	104
Lucretius 174 Lucrine Lake 279, 291 luctatio 366 lucubrum 402 Lucullean marble 322 Lucullus 139, 322, 344 lucus 299, 341 ludicrum 365 ludus 365 lues 110 Luke 138, 169 lumbar 385 lumbricus 259 lumbus 237 lumen 233, 274 Luna (Diana) 187 luna 104
lunatic	111 lunch	395 lung	239 lunula	391 lupanar	369 lupatus	405 lupine	339 lupus	252, 253, 405
(fish)	260, 261 luscinia	266 Lusitania	326, 332 lustrum	129 lustrum	299 luteus	389 lutum	317, 378 lux	274 Luz	302
Lyaeus (see Liber)
Lyaeus	397
Lycaeus (Arcadian god)	181
Lycaon	106 Lycaonia	289 lychnis	326 Lycia	288 lycinia (olive)	347 lyciscus	253 lycopthalmos	327 Lycurgus	117
Lydia 288 Lydians 366, 373 Lydus 289 lymphaticus 110 lyncurius 252, 324 lynx 252 Lyra 106 lyre 95, 98, 180 lyric 180
Maccabees	137
Macedo	290
Macedonia	290, 380
Macedonians	196 Macedonius	143 macellum	308 maceria	313 machaera	362 machina	382 machio	377 mackerel, Spanish	263 macrology	57 macron	42, 54 madder	353 Maecenas	51 maeniana	309 Maenius	309 magalium	314 Magdalene	170 mage	181–183
maggot 259 Magi 146, 183, 385 magician 181–183 magister 200 magistrate 204 Magnes 319 magnet 319 Mago 337 Magog 193, 197, 288 magpie 267 mahil 383 Maia 128
maiestas 123 maigre 260 mainland 300 Majorca 297 mala (cheekbone) 233 Malachi 167 Malachim, Book of (= Kings) 136 malachite 323 malacoth 160 malagma 114 maleficus 182 Maleum 297 Maleus 297 malleolus 339 malleus 377 mallow plant 355 malomellum 343 malum 123, 342
	Cydonium	343
	Persicum	343
Punicum	343 malva	355 Mambre	302, 346 mamilla	236 man	210, 242 mancipatio	122 mancipium	205 mandatus	120 mandible	233 mandibula	234 mandrake	351
mane	126
Manes (heretic)	176 Manes	126, 189 mania	111 Manichee	176 manicleatus	384 maniple	202 manipulum	355 manitergium	388 mannus	250
 
manor	314 mantelium	388 mantle	386 Manto	304 Mantua	304 manubiae	360 manumission	205, 207 manupretium	235 manus	235 maple	346 mappa	388
Marathon (battlefield)	290 marble	321–322 March	128
Marcion	180
Marcionite	176 Marcius	140 marculus	377 marcus	377 mare	277 Mareotic marsh	346 Mareotis	340 margarita	324 margo	300 maritime	300 maritus	210 Marius	359 marjoram	350, 354 Mark	137, 169 market	122, 308 marmor	321 Maro	180
marriage	210–212 marrow	236 marrubium	353 marrying, three reasons for	211–212 Mars	105, 128, 186, 243, 362, 367, 369,
370
Marseilles 304 marsh mallow 354 marsuppium 401 Marsyas 196 martellus 377, 382 Martha 170 martisium 397 martyr 170, 177 martyrium 310 Mary 170, 176, 177, 178, 210 Mary Magdalene 170 Mary of Clopas 169 Masbotheus 174 mason 377 mass 147
Massilia	304 mast	374 master builder	377 masthead	375 mastic	346 mastic tree	349 masticinum	389 masticinus	384 mastix	349 mastruca	385 mast-step	375 mat	403 mataxa	389 mater	206 Mater Magna	187
materfamilias 206, 211 materia 272 material 382 matertera 210 mathematics 89–99 mathematicus 99, 183 mathesis 106 Matins 147 matrimony 211 matrix 240 matron 206, 211 matter 272 Matthew 137, 169 Matthias 169, 170 mattock 404 mattress 388 matutinum 127 Mauretania 262, 292, 351
Mauretania Sitifensis 292 Mauretania Tingitana 292 mauros 250 mausoleum 313 Mausolus 313 mavors 387 maw-worm 259 maxilla 233 maxim 72, 73, 76 Maximilla 176
May	128 mead	398 meadow	314
meal (grain)	338, 396 meals	396 mean
arithmetic	93 geometric	93, 94 musical	93, 98–99
Meander (river)	281 measure 315–316, 332, 334–335 meat 396 meatball 397 meat-market 308 meatus 238 meconites 327 medallion 405 Medea 194, 325
Medes 193, 194, 199, 302, 324, 339 Media 286, 301, 343 media 325 medial 41 Mediator 156 medica 339 medica arbor 343 medicamen 113 medication 113, 114 medicine 109–114, 115, 183
	three schools of	109
medicus	109 medimnum	335 Mediolanum	304 meditative (verb)	45
Mediterranean Sea	277–278 names of	278 parts of	277
medlar	343 medulla	236 Medus	286, 301 medus	398 mel	397
melancholia 109, 111 melancholy 111 melanites 321 melanurus 261 Melchizedech 163, 301 Melchizedechian 175 meles 254 melichros 323 melichrysus 327 melicratum 398 melinum 381 melipepo 356 mella 343 Melo (Nile) 280 melody 96 melopos 343 Melos 296, 322, 381 melotes 387 membranum 141 membrum 236 Memmia Timothoe 65
Memnon	266
 
memnonides (birds) 266 Memory (goddess) 95 memory 231 Memphis 141, 303, 318 memphitis 320 Menandrian 175 mendacium 73 mens 231–232 mensa 395 menses 240 mensis 127 mensura 315, 334
menta 343, 354, 357 mentum 234 menum 389 menus 384 mercatum 308 mercatus 122 mercenary 205 merchandise 122 Mercury 97, 98, 104, 105, 117, 182, 183,
186, 367, 370 merenda 396 mergus 267 Merida 305
meridies 101, 126, 271 Merista 175 merle 268 merops 266 merula 268, 291 merum 398 merx 122 Mesfres 367 mesomelas 325 Mesopotamia 280, 286, 387 mespila 343 Messapia 304 messenger 160 Messiah 155 messis 338 messorium 399 mesticium 389 meta 367 metal 328–332 metalepsis 61 metallum 125 metalworker 373, 376 metamorphosis 244, 246 Metangismonite 177 metaphor 60, 85
(of God)	155 metaplasm	55, 57–58 metathesis	58 metathesis	78 metatum	309 metempsychosis	179 meteorology	273–276 meter	49, 64–66 musical	96 heroic	65, 136
meters of Psalter	136 Methodical school of medicine	109
Methuselah	162 Metonic cycle	145 metonymy	61
metropolitan (bishop) metrum	334
meu	350
mica
Micah	167	170
Michael (archangel) midday 126 Milan 304 mile, Roman 315	161
miles	201 miliarium	315 Miliast	175 military
origin of	201 service, three kinds of	202 terms	201–203
militia 202 milium 338 milk 236, 397 milking-pail 400 Milky Way 101, 273 millago 261 millenarius 201 millet 338 millhouse 311 millstone 378
milvus	268 mime	370 mina	333 mind	231–232
mine	125
Minerva	184, 187, 303, 368, 370, 377,
383
Mineus (river)	282, 292 minium	380
Mino (river)˜	292
Minorca 297 Minotaur 244, 246, 307 mint 354, 357 minutal 397 mioparo 374
mire 317 mirobalanum 115 mirror 391 mirteus 250 misdeed 122 missa 140, 147 missile 363 mist 274 mithrax 325 mithridax 320 mitra 376, 390 mixing-bowl 400 mode (musical) 96 moderation 109 modius 334, 375 modulation 95 modus (moderation) 109 modus (mood of verb) 45 moenia 306 Moesia 289 mola 378, 401 molar 234 molaris stone 378 molding 379 mole 254
molochinius	384 molochites	323 Molossia	290 molotius	321 moment	125 momentum (pledge)	122 monachus	172 monarch	201 monastery	309 monedula	266 moneta	329, 333 money	329 money-changing	141
monile	391 monk	172 monoceron	252 monodia	147 monogamous	211 mons	297 monster	243–246 monstrum	244 Montanist	176 Montanus	176 month(s)	127–128, 146 names of	128
monument (history as)	67 monument	313 mood (of verb)	45
 
moon 102, 104 distance from earth 103 light of 102–103 new 103 path of 103 period of 145 phases of 102 Moors 198, 364, 386 moral philosophy 80 morals 179 morbus 109 arcuatus 113
morning 126 mors 243 morsel 397 mortar 114, 232 mortuus 243 morus 344 mos, mores 73, 117 mosaic 379
Moschi (river)	288
Moses	39, 65, 67, 90, 95, 117, 135, 136,
140, 145, 149, 153, 164, 167, 168,
181, 282, 303, 332, 334 mosquito-netting 376 motacism 56 moth 270
mother	206, 211 moth-worm	259 mound	313 mountain	297–299 mouse	254 mouth	234 mozicia	401 mucro	362 mud	317, 378 mugilis	261
mulberry tree	344 mule	250 mulgarium	400 muliebria	240 mulier	242 mullei	393 mullein	354, 355 mullet
gray	261 red	261
mullus	261 mulsum	398 multipes	259 mundus	99, 271 munia	204 municeps	204 municipalis	204 municipium	306 munitum	312 munus	148 muraena (eel)	262 murena	262 murena (necklace)	391 murex (shellfish)	262 murex (rock)	319 muria	399 murra	325 murrina	325 murus	306 mus	254
(muscle)	238 mus araneus	254 musca	270 muscatel	340 muscle	235, 238 musculus (boat)	373
	(military engine)	364
	(muscle)	235
(mussel)	260, 262 Muse(s)	95, 189, 370 mushroom	356 music	39, 80, 89, 95–99 inventors of	95 liturgical	147–148 three parts of	96 three types of	96–98
musician, stage	369 musio	254 musmo	251 mussel	260, 262 mussel-shell	399 must (wine)	398 mustard	356 mustela	254 mustio	270 mute	40, 41 mutuum	121 muzzle	405 Mycenae	303 myrice	346 myrmecitis	327 Myrmidons	196 myrobalanum	354 myrrh	115, 348 myrrhites	323 Myrtilus	278 myrtle	346
	(color)	250
Mysia	353
myth	189
mythical monsters	244
Nabaioth	287
Nabateans	287
Nabathea	287
Nabla	136
Naevius	191 Nahum	167 naiad	189 Naid	301
nail (carpenter’s)	382
nail (of finger)	236
name	42
appellative	160 proper	160
prophetic (biblical) 162–165 nanus 244 nape 235 napkin 388 Naples 304 napocaulis 356 napus 355 Narbonne 304 narcissus 351 nardus 349 naris 234 narrative (part of oration) 71 Nasmones 326 nassa 376 nasturcium 356 nates 237 Nathan 166 Nathanian 171 nation(s) 192–199
fabulous	199 fifteen from Japheth	193 seventy-two	192–193 thirty-one from Ham	193 twenty-seven from Shem	192–193
native person	205 nativity (horoscope)	99 natrix	256 natron	318 natural philosophy	80 Nature	243 nature	231–241 nauclerus	373 nauta	373 navalia	299 navel	237 navew	355 navis	373
 
General index
Naxos	296
Nazarene	157, 172, 175
Nazarite	157
Neapolis	302, 304
Nebroth 286 Nebuchadnezzar 165 nebula 274 neck 235 necromancy 181, 182 nefresis 112 negation 83 negotium 365 Nehemiah 137, 167 Nembroth 301 nemus 341 neomenia 146 neophyte 172 nepeta 354 nephrosis 112 nepos 207 Neptune 185, 196, 273, 367, 370 Nero 322 nervus 236 Nestorian 178 Nestorius 143 net 370, 376 net-fighter 370
nettle 352 netus 389 newt 257 Nicea, Council of 143, 144
Nicomachus	89
Nicolaite	175
Nicomedes	303
Nicomedia	288, 303
Nicopolis 304 Nicostrate 40 night 127 nightingale 266 nightshade 354 nightshirt 385 Nile 93, 98, 199, 248, 260, 265, 266,
280, 281, 287, 324, 367, 376 nimbus 274, 390 Nimrod 163, 301 Ninus 185, 359 nipple 236 Nitria 318 nitrum 318 nix 274
Noah	162, 282, 339
sons of	162 noctua	266 nodus	203 Noetian	177 nomen	42, 82 nominative	44 nomisma	329, 333 Nones	128, 150 Noricum	289 norma	381 north	101, 271 North Pole	315 nostril	234 nota	50, 51 notamen	42 notarius	51 notary	204 nothus	43, 207 noun(s)	42–44 agent	43 appellative	42
common	44 derivative	43 diminutive	43 epicene	44 gendered	43 homonymous	43 mongrel	43 neuter	44 plurinomial	43 proper	42
relational	43, 160 synonymous	43 verbal	43
nourishment	395 novacula	404 novalis	314 Novatian	176 Novels (laws)	119 nox	127 nubes	273, 274
nucleus	344
Numa	329 Numa Pompilius	117 number(s)	89–93 equal	91 even	90–91 finite	93 grammatical	44 infinite	93 metrical	64 musical	98–99 names of	89 odd	90–91
perfect	90, 91, 95 prime	90 square	92 types of	91
Numbers, Book of	136
Numidia	292, 322
Numidian marble	322
Numidians 198, 314 Numitor 304 nummus 89, 204, 329 nuntius 160 nupta 210 nuptials 211
nutriment	395 nux	344 Nyctage	178 nyctalopia	112 nycticorax	266 nymph	189 nympha	210 Nysa	301
oak	345, 346 oar	374 oarlock	374 oarsman	373 oath	202 oats	355 Obadiah	167 obelisk	367 oblaqueare	341 oblation	148 obol	333 obolus	50 obryzum	329 obsidian	320, 328 obstinacy	235 obstrigilli	393 occatio	337 occidens	101, 271 occiput	232 Ocean	277, 285 Britannic	193 names of	277
oceloe	262 ochre	381 ocimum	356 ocrea	393
Octavius (see Augustus Caesar) octopus	262 oculus	233
(tree)	341 odor	115 odoratus	232
 
oenomelum 398 oenophorum 400 oestrus 270 offa 396 offertory 148 office, holy 146–151 officials, titles of 199–201 offspring 207 Ogygus 282, 295 oica 325 oil 115 of roses 115
Spanish	347 oil-lamp	402 ointment	115, 155 ola	235 old age	242–243 features of	243 old man	242
Old Testament (see Bible, Old
Testament)
old woman	243 oleander	347 oleaster	347 oleomela	343 oleoselinon	357 oleum	115, 347 olfacere	234 olfactoriolum	391 olfactus	232 olisatrum	356 oliva	347 olive	347–348 oil	347
olla 401 olor 264 olus molle 356 olympiad 129 Olympic games 129 Olympus, Mount 290, 298, 356 omen 244 omentum 239 omnimorbia 353 omnipotens 153 onager 249 onion 356 Onocentaur 246 onocrotalos 266 onomatopoeia 62 onyx 323 opacus 299 opal 324, 325 ophaz 329
Ophite	175 ophites	257, 321 opinion	79 opisphorum	376 opium	351 oppidanus	205 oppidum	305
opposite (logical)	88
Ops 187 opsius 320 optative 45 optio 202 opulence 395 opusculum 139 ora 387 orach 356 oracle 168, 181, 244 oratio 150 oration, parts of 69, 71 orator 69 oratorium 309 oratory 42 orb (insignia) 361 orbis (globe) 277, 285
(fish) 260 orbit, astral, period of 104 orbita 316 orbus 241 orca 400 Orcades 294 orchas 347 orchella-weed 355 orchestra 369 orchid 352 orcibeta 354 Orcus 186 ordeolus 113 ordinance 73 oread 189 organ 97 pipe 239
organicus 96, 97 Organum (Psalter) 136 organum (musical instrument) 97 orgia 148 oriens 101, 271 origanum 354 Origen 139, 177
Origenian	177
Orion	103, 105 Orkneys	294 ornament	390–393 Orontes (river)	281 orphan 241 Orpheus 98 orthodox 172 orthography 52–54 Ortygia 295 ortygometra 268 os (bone) 236 os (mouth) 234, 235 osae 393 oscedo 113 oscines 269
Oscobagum	351 osier	346 Osirus	337 osprey	268 ossifragus	268 ostentum	244 Ostia	304
ostiarius	172 osticium	389 ostium	300, 311 ostracites	321, 327 ostracus	312, 379 ostrea	262 ostrich	265 ostrum	262, 389 ounce	333 outrage	122 oven	311 Ovid	140 ovis	247 ovum	269
owl horned	266 night	266 screech	266
ox	248–249 oxifalus	334 oxymeli	398
oyster	262 Ozam	302
pace (measure)	315 Pachynum	297, 318 packhorse	249 packsaddle	405
pact 120 Pactolus (river) 281, 289 Padus (river) 282 paedagogus 226 paederos 324 paenula 387 Paeon 352
 
paeonia 352 pagan(s) 107, 126, 183 page 142 pagrus 261 pagus 306 pala 237, 405 palace 308 Palamedes 40 palate 234 palea 338 Pales 315
Palestine 287, 335, 356, 398 Palestinians 193, 195, 302 palestra 366 paling 404 paliurus 353 palla 387 Palladius 337, 356 Pallanteum 308
Pallas	308 Pallas Athene	188 pallet	403 pallium	386 palm
	(of hand)	235
	(measure)	315
(plant) 342 Palm Sunday 146 palmatus 386 palmes 340 palmula 374 Palmyra 343 palpebra 233 paludamentum 386 palumbes 268 palus 233, 315, 404 Pamphagians 199 Pamphylia 288 pampinus 340 Pan 97, 188 panaces 351 panchrus 325 pandorius 97 panegyric 140 panel, wall 379 panicium 338 panis 396 Panitae 190 pannier 401 Pannonia 289, 291, 374 pannucius 385 Panotians 245 pan-pipes 188
panther 251 pantry 310 panulia 389 papaten 388 papavera 351 Paphos 295, 304, 347 papilio 270, 313 papilla 236 Papius 118 papula 113 papyrus 140, 141, 150, 355
	types of	141
parable 140 parabola 64 parabola 140, 168 Paraclete 149, 156, 158 paradiastole 76 paradigm (trope) 64 Paradise 280, 285 paradox 78 paragoge 57 paragraph sign 51 Paralipomenon 136 paralysis 112 paromoeon 59 paranympha 210 parapsis 399 parasangs 316 parastata 375 parathesis 78 Parcae 189, 190 parchment 140, 141 types of 141 Pareantus 296 parent 206 resemblance to 240
parenthesis	62 Parian marble	321 parias	257 paries	312
parietinae	312 parma	364
Parnassus, Mount 282, 290, 298 paro 373 paroemia 63 paronomasia 59 Paros 296, 321 parotid 112 parrhesia 78 parricide 123 parrot 265 pars 90, 361 parsley 356
Parthenii	304
Parthenope	304
Parthia 286, 301, 325 Parthians 194, 301, 346 participial 43 participle 42, 46 perfect 243 partridge 268 parts of speech 42 pasch 144 Pasiphae 244 pass (mountain) 299 passenger (shipboard) 373 passer 268 passions, three 189 passive voice 45, 46 Passover 144 passum 398 pastinaca 355 pastinum 404 Pastor (name of Christ) 157 pastoral poem 65 patchwork 385 patella 401 paten 399 pater 206 patera 400 paterfamilias 206 Paternian 177 paternity 208 path 316 patibulum 125 Patmos 138 patratio 206 patres conscripti 204 patria 293 patriarch(s) (bishop) 170 names, meaning of 165–166 Patrician (heresy) 177 patrician 201 patricius 393 Patripassian 177 patronymic 43 patruus 209 Paul (see also Saul) 71, 113, 135, 167,
169, 176, 207, 303
	Epistles of	138
Paulian	176
Paulus, Aemilius 139 Paulus, Julius 118, 121 paunch 240 Pausanias 303
 
pausia (olive)	347 pavement	312, 379 pavilion	313 pavimentum	379 pavitensis	384 pax	360
paxillus 233 payment 122 pea 339 peace 360 peach 343 peacock 267 pear 344 pearl 324 pebble 319 peccatum 123 pecores 247 pecten 236, 389, 404 pectoralis 384 pectus 236 pecudes 247 peculation 123 peculium 121 pecunia 318 pecus 247–251 pedes 368 pedestal 312
peduculus	259 peg	382 Pelagian	178 pelagus	278 pelican	265, 266 pellis	236 Peloponnensis	196, 304
Peloponnese 290 Pelops 196, 290, 303 peloris 262 Pelorum 297 pelta 364 pelvis 400 pen, reed 142 penalty 123, 125 Penates 189 penetralia 309 penicillus 264 penis, large 185 penitence 150 penna 383 pennyroyal 353 pensum 389
pentaphyllon	352 Pentapolis	287, 292
Pentateuch	136 Pentecost	130, 145 penteris	374 peony	352 peplum	387 pepo	356
pepper tree	349	
percussion (instruments)
Perdix	382 perdix	268 peregrinus	205 perendie	127 perfect	154 pergamena	141 Pergamum	141
Perihermenias	82, 84 period	50 periodos	74	97
Peripatetic philosophers periphrasis	62	179
peripleumonia	110 periscelis	391 perissology	57, 75 perizoma	384 perones	393 perpendiculum	382 Persepolis	301
Perses	139
Perseus	106, 303, 343
Persia	286, 301, 320, 325, 326, 327,
343
Persian language (see language, Persian and Medean)
Persians	194, 199, 316, 386, 390, 396 Persius	119, 180, 301 personification (see prosopopeia) persons (of deity)	157, 159, 160 Persus	286 pertica	315
pervasio	123 pes	238
	(metrical)	47
(of sail)	375 pessary	114 pestilence	110 pestle	114, 232 petalum	383 Petephres	303
Peter (see also Cephas and Simon) 137,
150, 168, 175, 177 Peter, Epistles of	138 petilus	250 petition	150 petorritum	403
Petra	348 petra	168 Petronius	122 petroselinon	356 Peucetius	304 peusis	78 Phaenicusa	296
Phaenon	105
Phaethon 104, 105, 126, 282, 323 Phalantus 304 phalanx 202 phalera 405 Pharaoh 163, 166 pharetra 363 Pharisee 174 pharmaceutics 113 pharus 307, 402 Phaselos 356 phaselus 356, 373 phasianus 267 Phasis (river) 288 pheasant 267 phengites 321 Pherecydes 64, 65, 67 phiala 400 Phidon 332
Philadelphia (Arabia)	302 Philargus	51
Philip (apostle)	169
Philippus (tetrarch)	201
Philistines 193, 195 Philo Judaeus 137 philosopher 178 philosophers Academic 179 natural 179 pagan 178–180 schools of 174, 179–180 three kinds of 178, 179
philosophy	79–80 practical	80 speculative	80 Phison (river)	280 phlebotomus	114 phlegm	109 phleumon	110 phlogites	326 phlomos	354, 355 Phocaeans	304
Phoebus (see Apollo) Phoenicia	287, 328
Phoenicians	193, 195, 302, 305, 314,
316, 380
 
Phoenix 195, 287, 303 phoenix 265 Phoroneus 117, 307 Photinian 176 phrase 74, 83 Phrixus 278
Phrygia 97, 288, 320 Phrygians 183, 385 phrygius (stone) 320 phthisis 111
phu	350
physician	109 physics	79 physicus	179 Physiologus	246 piaculum	123 pica	267
pick-ax	383	
pickle (fish sauce)
Pictavia	304 Picts	198, 386 picture	380 Picus	267, 337 piebald	250	261
pigmentum (drug)	114
pignus	121, 122 pike
	(fish)	260, 261
	(weapon)	362
pila 114, 232, 361, 371 pilaster 311 pilentum 403 pillage 360 pilleum 383, 390 pilleus 171 pillow 388 Pilosus 190 pilum 232, 363 Pilumnius 114 pilus 232 pimple 113 Pindar 136 pine 345
pine-thistle 353 pinna 142, 234, 264 pinnula 234 pinus 345 pipe (plumbing) 312, 379 piper 349 piperinus stone 378 pirates 359 pirula 234 pirus 344
Pisces	106 piscis	259–263 Pisistratus	139 pistachio	345 pistrinum	311 pistum	338 pisum	339 pitch	348
(vocal)	49 pitchfork	405 placenta	396 placitum	120, 388 plaga	124 plagia	278 plague	110 plain	299
plaintiff	365 plane figures, five	93 plane surface	92, 93, 94, 95 plane tree	346 planet(s)	100, 104, 105 names of	105
planta 238, 341 plantain 352 plantarium 341 plaster (medicinal) 114 plastice 379 platanus 346 platea 306 Plato 39, 79, 107, 175, 179, 180 Platonist 179, 180 platter 399 plaustrum 403 Plautus 64, 66, 180, 191 plebeian 203 pledge 122, 210 Pleiades 103, 105 pleonasm 56 pleurisis 110 Pliny 258 plow 404 plow-beam 404
plowing 337 plowshare 404 plum tree 343 plumb-line 382 plumbum 332 plume 264 plunder 360 pluteus 364, 403 Pluto 128, 186 Po (river) 282, 291, 324, 346, 374 poculum 400
podagra 112 poderis 383 poem 64, 66, 180 poena 123 poenitentia 150 poesis 66 poet 180–181 lyric 180 theological 181
poetry, three modes of	181 point
	(geometric)	94
(sword) 362 Poitiers 304 polar region 100, 272 pole (celestial) 100, 271, 272 polios 353 pollen 396 pollex 235 Pollio 139 Pollux 367 polus 272 polygonos 354 polymitus 385 polypodion 353 polyptoton 59 polypus 262 polysyndeton 60 pomegranate 343 pomelida 343 pompa 360 Pompeii 304
Pompeiopolis	56
Pompey 117, 198, 359 Pomponius 66 pomum 342 pondus 332 poniard 362
pons	375
pontica(stone) 325, 328 pontifex 171 Pontius Pilate 170 pontonium 374 Pontus (see Sea, Black) Pontus (river) 320 pool 279 poplar 346 Poppaeus 118 poppy 351 populace 203 populus (tree) 346 porca 315 porcupine 253
 
porcus marinus	260 pore	236
Porphyris 295 Porphyry, Isagoge 79, 80–81 porphyry 321 porrum 356
porta	306
portal (celestial) 100, 271 portemia 374 portent 243–246 portentuosus 244 portico 307, 311 porticulus 375 portulaca 354 portus 299 positive degree 43 positura 50 possessio 314 possession (demonic, illness) 111 post 382 postela 405 posterior (of body) 237 posterity 207 posthumous child 207 postis 311 postliminium 125 pot 400, 401 potio 397 potions, medicinal 113 potter’s earth 399 pouch 401 poultice 114 pound 332, 333 Power (angelic order) 161 praecedentia (of stars) 89, 104 praecentor 171 praeceptum 140 praecisor 234 praecordia 239
praecox (fruit) 340, 343 praeda 360 praedicamentum 81 praedium 314
praefectus	201 praenomen	42 praenumeria	244 praepetes	269 praesentia	232 praeses	201, 204 praestigium	183 praetexta	387 praetor	201, 204 praetorium	307 praise 69, 86, 147 prandium 395 prasin 380 pratum 314 prayer 150 hours of 150
precarium	121
precession (astral) predicate	82 predication	81	104
predicative category preface	140 prefect	201	82
prelum 405 preposition 42, 46 presbyter 170, 171 present 148 president 204 press, grape 311 prester 256 pretium 122 Priapus 185 pridie 127 priest 170, 171, 200 primitiae 338 primogenitus 207 prince 160, 201 princeps 201 principales 204 Principality (angelic order) 161, 175 principate 293 Principium 156 Prisca 176 Priscillianist 177 prison 124, 308 privatus 205 privignus 209 privilegium 119 privy 308 Proba 66
probatio 365 problema 140 procatalepsis 77 procella 276 procer 204 procession (pompa) 360 procession (of Spirit) 158 proclamation 120 proconsul 200 procurator 200, 205 procus 210 prodigy 244 produce (crop) 342 proelium 359 proem 140 profit, common 73 profundum 300 progenitor 206, 208 prognostic 114 proheres 206 prolepsis 58 Prometheus 184, 322, 391 promontory 297 promptuarium 310 promurale 306 pronoun 44–45 definite 44 demonstrative 44 indefinite 44 possessive 44
pronuba	210 propaginare	341 property	121–122 kinds of	121
propes	375 prophecy, seven kinds of	168 prophet(s)	157, 166–168, 181 major, four	137 minor, twelve	135, 137 names, meaning of	166
propina	308 propinquitas	210 propitiatorium	309 proportio	54 propositio	140 proposition	74, 83 proprium	81, 82 propugnaculum	306 prora	374 prorostra	307, 365 proscissio	337
proscription 125 prose 64 prosecutor 204 proselyte 172 Proserpina 187 prosnesium 376 prosodia 41 prosody 49 prosopopoeia 74, 78 Prosper of Aquitaine 143 prostibulum 369 prothesis 57 Proverbs, Book of 80, 136, 168 provinces 293 prow 374
 

prudence	79 pruina	274 pruna	377 pruning hook	404 psallere	98
psalm	147
psalmist (clerical)	171
Psalter	135, 136 authors of	136
psaltery 97, 98, 147 psittacus 265 psoriasis 112 psychology 231 psyllios 353 ptisana 399 Ptolemais 303, 328
Ptolemies	200, 343 Ptolemy	99, 139, 307, 402
puberty	241 pubes	241 pubic hair	237 publican	205 pudenda	237 puella	241 puer	207, 241 puerpera	242 pugio	362 pugna	360 pugnus	235 puleium	353 pulex	259 pulla	241 pulley	375, 405 pullus	264 pulmentarium	397 pulmentum	395, 397 pulmo	239 pulp	397 pulpa	236 pulpit	310 pulpitum	310 pulse	239
rhythm of	239 pulvillus	388 pulvinar	403 pulvinus	375 pulvis	317 pumex	319 pumice	319, 378 punctuation	50
Punic language	185, 324 region	343		wars	307, 365
(see also Carthaginians) punishment	123–125 eight types of	124
pup	253 pupil	241
(of eye) 233 puppis 374 purgative 114 Purim 137 purple (dye) 262, 270 purple-fish 262 purpura 389 purpurissum 381 purslane 354 pursuer 370 pustule 113 putare 341 puteolanus 317 puteus 280 pygmy 244, 245 pyramid 94, 313 pyre 402 Pyrenees 298 pyrethron 354 pyrgus 371 Pyrion 105 pyrite 320 pyritis 325 pyromancy 182 pyropus 330 pyrrhic foot 47 Pyrrhus 252, 290, 303
Pythagoras	40, 89, 95, 178, 180, 258,
296, 344
Pythian meter	65 Python	186, 361 Pythoness	182 pyx	401
quactum	397 quadrifinium	315 quadrigo	368 quadrilateral	94 quadrireme	374 quadrivium	89–99 quadruped	247 quaestio	140 quaestor	204
quail	268
qualities, four material (i.e. moist, dry, hot, cold)	128
qualus	405	quantity (metrical) quarterweight 333 quercus 346 question 74, 140 quicklime 378 quicksilver 330 quill 142 quince 343 quinquefolium 352 Quinta Editio 139 quintana 306 Quintilian 69
Quintilis	128 Quirites	196 quisquilia	342 quiver	363 quotidie	126
rabbit	248 rabies	110
race(s)
	(contest)	366	48
			monstrous	244–246
(nation)	203 racemus	340 racer	368 Rachel	163, 166 racing colors	369 rack	124 radiola	347 radish	356 radius	389 radix	341, 356 Raetia	289, 291 raft	373 rafter	383 ragadia	112 rain	274 rainbow	274 rain-cloud	274 raisin-wine	398
rallus	385 ram	247
rambling speech	75 rampart	306, 313 ramus	341 rana	263 rancidus	396 rapa	355 rape	123 Raphael	161 Raphaim	302 raptor	268
 
rasp	383 rastrum	404 ratio	73, 80, 179, 231
(see also reason) ratiocinatio	72 rationale	383
ratis	373 ratum	120 raucedo	111 raven	267
ray, electric	262 razor	404
reader (clerical) 171 reason 73, 80, 179, 231 Rebecca 163 receptus 361 recession, astral 104 recidivum 341 reclinatorium 388 reconciliation 150 rectus 384 red
earth 380 lead 380 ocher 380 Red Sea (see Sea, Red) reda 403 redimicula 390 redimiculum 392 reed 347
(pipe)	97 reed-grass	355 refutation	73–74 regillum	387 regimen	113 region(s)	293
	(celestial) four	101
(celestial) seven 101 registers of speaking 74
regius morbus	113 regnum	199 regression	76 regula	143
	(builder’s tool)	381
(dietary)	113 regulus	255 reign	199 reinforcement	202 reins	405 relatives	206–211 relaxatio	114 relegatus	125 religion	173 reliquiae 243 relish (food) 397 remains (bodily) 243 remedies 113–114 remex 373 remora 261 remotio 104 remulcum 376 remus 374 renale 385 renes 237, 240 rennet 397 reno 385 renovation 377 repetundae 123 repletio 168 reproach 86 reptile 255, 259 repudiation (of wedlock) 211 reputation 124 res (property) 121–122 resident 205 resins 348
resolution
	(legal)	118
(metrical) 48 response (legal) 118 responsory 147 restis 375 resurrection 144, 146, 174, 176, 180 rete 370, 376 retiarius 370 reticulum 391 retinaculum 405 retreat 361 retrograde (celestial motion) 104 reubarbara 352 reuma 111
reus	365
Revelation (see Apocalypse) revelation	138 rex	171, 199, 200, 201 rhagades	112 rhamnus	347
Rhegium, Strait of	278 Rhenus (river; see also Rhine)	282
rhetoric	39, 69–79 rheum	111 Rhine	197, 282, 291 rhinoceros	252 Rhodanus (river; see also Rhone)	282 Rhodes	295, 304
Rhodians	193
rhoditis 324 rhododendron 347 rhodomelum 398 rhomphaea 362 Rhone 282, 291 rhubarb 352 rhythm 64, 96, 97–98 rhythmicus 96 rib 236 ricinium 387 ricinus 259 ricula 391 riddle 63 rider 368 ring 391–392 Riphaean mountains 298 rite 120 river 280–282 river-mouth 300 rivus 280 road 315–316 robigo 331 robur 346 rock 318 rocket (plant) 356 rod 404
	Roman	315
rogation	151 rogus	402 roller	404 Romans	196, 200
Rome	301, 304
Romulus	196, 204, 301, 304, 361, 386,
393 roof	312 roof-tile	378
rooster 267 root 341 rope 375–376 ros 274 rosaceum 115 rose(s) 351 oil of 115 roseum 398 rosemary 354 rosmarinum 354 rostratus 373 rot 342 rota 368, 403, 405 rubeta 263 rubia 353 rubidus 396 rubrica 380
 

rubus	344 rudens	375 rudus	319, 379 rue	357 rug	388 ruins	312 ruler (tool)	381 rumen	235, 249 ruminate	235 rumination	249 runcatio	337 runco	404 rus	314 rush (plant)	355 Rusicada	292 russata	384 rust	331 ruta	357 rutabulum	401 Ruth	135, 164
Saba 286 Sabaeans 348 sabanum 388 Sabaoth 153 sabbath 126, 146 Sabellian 177 Sabines 308 sabinus (stone) 321 sabucus 347 sabulum 317 saccatus 398 saccus 401 sacerdos 171, 200 sacrament (liturgical)	148–149	sail	375 sailor	373 sal	318 salamander	257
Salem	301
Salii	191 salinum	399 salisator	183 Salius	370 salix	346 Sallust	67 salsamentum	261 salsugo	399 salsus	396 salt	318
	Agrigentian	318
Tragasean 318 saltator 370 salt-cellar 399 saltus 299, 341, 366 salvator 155 salver 399 salvia 357 Salvius 41
Samaria	287, 302 Samaritan(s)	175, 194 sambuca	97 Samian earth	317 Samian Sybil	296 samius (stone)	320
Samnium	320
Samos	296, 304, 317, 320,
399
Samothracian ring	392 sampsuchus	350 Samson	164
Samuel 136, 164, 182 sanctuary 309 sanctum 309 sanctus 158 sand 319, 378 sandal 393 sandarach 380 sandasirus 326 sanguis 239 sanguisuga 258 sanies 113 sanitas 109 sapa 398
Sapientia	156 sapling	341
sapphire	324 Sappho	65	sar	261 sarabara	385 Saracens	192, 195, 287
			Saragossa 304 Sarah 163, 169, 195 sarcasm 63 sarcia 112 sarcitector 382 sarcophagus 313 sarcophagus (stone) sarculus 404 sardine 261 Sardinia 397 Sardinians 323 sardius 323 sardonyx 323 Sardus 296 Sarmatians 197 sarmentum 339 sartago 401 Satan 184 satiety 395 satio 337 satire 118 satirist 180 satisfaction 150 satum 335 satura 118, 180 satureia 352 saturitas 395	320
			Saturn	104, 105, 185, 188, 191, 304, 329,
337 Saturnians	196 satyr	181, 245
	(ape)	253
satyriasis	112 satyrion	352, 354 Saul	95, 115, 136, 164, 168 Saul (= Paul)	168, 169 saura	257 sausage	397 savior	155
savory (herb)	352
saw	382 saw-fish	260 saxifrage	352 Saxons	197 saxum	318 scabies	112 scabillum	403 scabra	299 scaffolding	382 scala	382, 400
sacramentum	121, 202 sacrarium	310 sacrifice	148
sacrilege	123 sacrum	309 saddle	405 Sadducee	174 saeculum	130 saffron	260 saffron crocus	350 sagda	323 sage	357 Sages, Seven	79 sagitta	339, 363 Sagittarius	106 sagma	405 sagum	387 Saguntum	305		
 
scale (measure) 332 scale-armor 364 scalprum 383 scammony 353 scamnum 403 scandula 338 scansilium 403 scapha 373 scaphon 375 scaptus 363 scar 113 scarab 141, 269 scarus 261 scena 369 Scenopegia 146 scent 115 scheda 142 schema 56, 58–60 schesis onomaton 59 schism 174 schistos 320 schoeni 315 scholia 139 sciatica 112 scientia 39, 79 scindula 382 sciniphes 270 Sciopodes 245 Scipio(s) 303, 304, 360 scipio 360 scirpus 355 scissors 404 scitum 118 scobina 383 scopulus 318 scoria 331 Scorpio 106 scorpio 124 scorpion 246, 258
(weapon)	363 scorpion-fish	260 scorpitis	327 scortia	401 scothomia	111 Scotia	294 scotica	124 Scotti	198, 386 scribe	142, 204 scrinium	401 scriptorium	141 scripulus	333 scroll	142 scrotum	237 scudicia	404 sculponeae	393 scutella	399 scutulatus	250 scutum	364
Scylla	74, 245, 279, 296, 359, 380 scymnus	251 scyphus	400 scytale	256 Scythia	288, 289, 324 Scythians	186, 193, 194, 195 sea	277 open	278
	surface of	277
Seas
	Black	196, 325, 344, 350, 352, 353,
380
	Dead	279, 281, 317
	Great (= Mediterranean)	277
Mediterranean	277–278 names of	278 parts of	277
	Red	278, 281, 302, 326, 327, 380,
381
Salt 279 sea-dragon 261 sea-hare 261 sea-horse 260 seal (signet) 391 seal of Spirit 159 sea-monster 260 seasons, four 128–129 seat 403 sea urchin 263 seaweed 355 Saba 286 sebum 396 secessus 308 sect 173–178 sectio 382 secundae 240 securis 362, 382 secutor 370 sedes 403 sedge 355 sedition 123, 359 seed (see semen, germen) seedling 341 seer (see vates) seges 314, 338 segmentatus 384 segmentum 391 Segorbe 321
seiuga	368 selenite	320, 324 Seleucia	289, 302, 303 Seleucus Nicanor	139, 302, 303 sella	405 curulis	403
selling	120
Sem	301
semen 206, 208, 232, 240, 255 semicinctium 392 Semiramis 301, 390 semispathium 362 semita 316 semivowel 40 senate 203 Senate House 307 senatusconsultum 118, 204 Seneca 51 senectus 242–243, 258 senex 242 senior 242 Sennacherib 302 Senones 198 senses 231 character of 232 five 232
sentence 74, 76 sententia 72, 73, 76, 232 sentinel 202 sentix 347 sepes 313 sepia 262 seps 256, 257 Septe 305 September 128
septentrio 101, 271, 275 Septentriones 104, 273 septimana 127 Septuagint 139, 167 sepulcher 313 sepultus 243 Seraphim 161 Serapis 188 serculus 341 Seres 194, 287, 331, 380, 384, 386,
388 serica 384 sericum 388 series (literary genre) 67 seriola 400 sermo 80, 140 serpedo 112 serpens 255
 
serpent(s)	245, 248, 252, 255–258
	character of	258
serpentum	391 serpigo	112
serra
	(fish)	260
(saw)	382 serralia	356 serrula	404 serum	126
services, church servitus 125 servus 205 sesame 338 seta 248 Seth 162
Sethian	175	148–149
seven, meaning of	144
Severian	176 Seville	198, 305 sewer	306	
sexes, differences in sextarius 334 Sextilis 128 sextula 333 sfungia 263 Shaddai 153 shadow 274 shallot 356 shallows 279	241
share-beam (plow)	404
sheaf 355 sheath 363 shed 313 sheep 247 sheepfold 313 shekel 333 shellfish 262–263 Shem 162, 192–193, 301 Shepherd (name of Christ) 157 shield 364 shin 238 shingle 382 ships 373, 375 shoal 279 shoe 393 shoemaker 248, 393 shoot 340, 341
shore	300 shorthand signs	51 legal	51–52 shoulder	235 shoulder blade	237
show	365 shrew	254 shrew-mouse	254 shrine	309 shuttle	389 sibilus	255 Sibyl(s)	181 Cumaean	181
Delphic	181 Samian	296 ten names of	181
sica	362 sicel	333 sicera	398 Sichem	302
Sicilians 196 sicilicus 54 Sicily 141, 296, 317, 318, 319, 325 sicinium 147 Siculus 296 side (of body) 237 sideritis 327 side-street 306 sidewalk 316 Sidon 287, 302 sidus 103, 104 sieve 401, 405 Sigeum 297 sigillum 391 signals, finger 52 signatory 119 signe de renvoie 51
sign(s) critical	50–51 legal	51–52 military	52, 361 portent	244 shorthand	51
signum (astral) 94, 104, 105 silex 318, 378 siligineus 396 siligo 338 siliqua 333, 345 silk 259, 384, 388 silkworm 259 silva 272, 341 Silvanus 188 silver 330 Silvii 200 simia 253 simila 396 similarity, medicinal 113 similitude	63 similitudo	64
Simon (= Peter)	169
Simon Bar-Jonah (= Peter) 168 Simon the Cananean 169 simones 260 Simonians 175 Simonides 40, 65, 66 simple (ointment) 115 simplex 154 simulacrum 184 sin 123, 179 sinapis 356 sindon 387 sinew 236 sinistra 235 Sinope 380 sinopis 380 sinus (gulf) 278 Sion 173, 301 siparum 375 siphnius 321 siphon 400 Siren 245 siren (snake) 257 sisamum 338 sister 209 sister-in-law 211 sistrum 98, 361 sitarcia 401 siting 377 situla 256, 400 skein 389 skiff 373 skin 236, 240 disease 112–113
skirmish	359 skirmisher	202, 370 skull	232 Sky (god)	185, 188 sky	100–101, 271, 272–276
	parts of	101, 272–273
slag 331 slave 205 slavery 125 sleeping-chamber 308 sling 364 slip (writing material) 142 slipper 393 slug 259 smaragdus 322 smell 232 smithy 377
 
smyris	321 Smyrna	289, 303 snail, water	262
snake(s) (see serpent(s))
snow	274 soapwort	353 soccus	393 socer	209 societas	305 Socrates	79, 353 Sodomite	163 soil	285 Sol	185, 186 sol	104 solarium	309
soldier	201
sole
	(fish)	260
(of foot)	238 soleae	393 solecism	56, 58 solid (figure)	93 solidus	333 solifuga	254 soliloquy	78 solis	324 solitarius	172 solium	403 sollemnitas	145
Soloe	56
Solomon	52, 65, 136, 137, 164, 165, 168,
302 writings of	135 Solon	117 Solorius, Mount	298 solstice	128 winter	273
solum 299 somnium 168 son 207 Son of God 155 song 96
Song of Songs 80, 137 son-in-law 209 Sonores 296 sonus 41 sophist 178, 179 sorex 254 soror 209 sorrel 356 sortilegus 183 Sotades 65 soul 231–232
sound	41, 234 three forms of	96
sounding-lead	376 south	101, 271 southern-fish	261
sow	248 sowing	337 spade	404 spadix	250 spado	339
Spain	199, 282, 292, 313, 318, 320, 321, 326, 328, 331, 332, 380, 389 Spaniards (see also Iberians)	362, 363 sparrow	268 Sparta	303
Spartans (see Lacedaemonians) spartus 355 sparus (fish) 261 spasm 110 spatha 362 spatium 368 spear 362–363 spectabiles 204 spectacle 365–371 specularis 321 speculatorium 373 speculum 391 specus 300 spelt 338 spelunca 300 sperm 237 spes 173 sphera 397 sphere 94, 272
	celestial	100
sphinga
	animal	253
bed	403 spica	338 spice	348–349 spiculum	363 spider	258 spikenard	349 spina sacra	237 spinal cord	258 spindle	389 spine (human)	237 spira	375 spiraculum	300
spiramentum	236 Spirit, Holy	149, 157–159, 168, 173, 176,
178 spirit	154, 157, 231, 234, 236 spit	280 spleen	111, 239 spleenwort	354 splinter	342 spoils	361 spolia	361 sponda	403 spondee	47 sponge	263
spongia
	(bread)	396
(pumice) 378 Sponsus (name of Christ) 157 sponsus 210 spoon 399 spoonful 334
sporta 401 spotted 250 spouse 210 spring (season) 129 springs (of water) 276–277, 280
	thermal	307
spuma	280 spuma nitri	318 spur	405 spurcus	398 spurge	351, 354 spurius	207 sputum	280 squadron	202 squalidus	314 squama	364
square, carpenter’s 381 squatus 261 squid 262 squill 354 squinum 350 Sri Lanka 286, 294 St. John’s wort 354 stacten 115 stade
stadialis	315 stag	248 stage
building	369 musician	369
stages of life, six 241–243 stagnum 332 stagnus 279 stake 404 stalk 338, 355 stall 308 stamen 390
 
standards, military	361 staphysagria	354 star(s)	103, 104 cluster	103 falling	104 motion of	94 names of	104–106 orbit of	104
starch	396 starting-gate	367 stater	333 statera	333
statio	299
station
	of a fast	150
	of planets	104
status
of a case	70 stellar	104
statutes, private 119 steelyard 333 stella 103, 104 stellio 257 stem 355 stemma 210 stenographer 51 stephanitus (grape) 340 Stephen 170, 175 stepson 209 stercus 337 Stercutus 337 steresios 244 stern 374 sternum 236 stibadium 395 Stilbon 105 stilla 280 stillicidium 280 stimulus 405 stipa 347 stipend 329 stipula 338 stipulation 121 stiria 280 stirps 207 Stoechades 296, 354 stoechas 354 Stoic 105, 176, 179, 180 stola 387 stomach 239 stone 318, 378 bladder 112 stool 403
storax	348 storehouse	310 storeroom	310 storia	403 stork	264 storm	275 cloud	274
stragulum 388 strainer 405 strait 278 strangury 112 strap 363, 376 strata 316 Strato, Tower of 302 stratus 402 straw 347 street 316 strictura 331 Striga 246 strigilis 406 string 382 strings (instruments) 97, 98 strix 266 Stromboli 296 strongbox 236, 401 Strongyle 296 strophium 392 struppus 376 struthio 265, 353 strychnos 354 stuffing (cushion) 388 Stumbling-stone (name of
Christ)	157 stuppa	388 stuprum	123 style	74 levels of	74
stylus, iron	140 stymphalis	265 Styx	276, 300 subbracchium	235 subcinctorium	384 subcinericius	396 suberies	345 subfibulum	392 subhircus	235 subjunctive	45 subligaculum	392 sublinguium	235 suboles	207 subpedaneum	403 subseciva	314 subsellium	403 Subsolanus	275 substance	81, 82
(of deity) 157, 160 substantive 82 suburbs 306 succentor 147, 171 succidia 396 succinctorium 392 sucinacius 398 sucinus 323 sucker 341 sucus 399 suet 396 Suevi 197 suffrago 238
suillus
	(fish)	260
(ichneumon) 254 suitor 210 sulcus 337 sulfur 276, 317 Sulla 359 sulphur 317 sulpuga 257 sulzica 399 summer 129 Sun (Apollo) 186 sun 101, 102, 104 function of 102 path of 102 Sunday 146 sun-roof 309 supercilium 233 superficies (see plane surface) superlative degree 43 superstition 99, 106–107, 174, 327 superveniens 373 Supper, Lord’s 146 supplication 151
supplicium	123, 151 suprema	126 sura	238 surge	280 surgeon	114 surgery	113 sus	248 Susa	301 Susanna	166 suspirium	111 sutor	248, 393 swallow	268 swamp	315 swan	264
 
swelling 110 switch 124, 339, 342 sword 362 sword-cane 363 swordfish 260 sycamore fig 344 sycomorus 344 Syene 321 syenites 321 syllable 47 syllepsis 58 syllogism 71–73, 83–84
	hypothetical	84
symbols
of evangelists	138 for weights	335
symbolum 149 Symmachus 139 symphonia (instrument) 97, 98 symphony 96 symphytos 353 synachis 110 synaeresis 78 synagogue 173 synaloepha 48, 58 syncope 57 synecdoche 61 synochitis 327 synod 143 synonymy 76 synplagium 376 synpsalma 147 synthesis (trope) 62 Syracuse 296
Syria	286–287, 317, 320, 321, 328,
341, 342, 343, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 353, 380, 385,
400
Syrian language (see language, Syrian) Syrians	39, 192, 194 syricum	380 syringio	113 syrius (stone)	320 Syrtes	279, 327 syrtitis	326
Syrus	286 systole	58 syzygy	47, 48
tabanus	270
tabellarius	119, 140 tabellio	204 taberna 308 Tabernacles, Feast of 146 tabernaculum 313 tabes 113 table (furniture) 395 table (list) 144 tablecloth 388 tablets, writing 119, 140 tabula (furniture) 371, 382 tabula (for writing) 119 tabulatum 309 tactus 232 taenia 391 Tages (diviner) 183 Tagus (river) 282, 292 tail-strap (horse) 405 Tajo (river) 282, 292 talaria 393 talaris 384 talent (coin) 333 talio 124 tally 405 talpa 254 talus 233, 238 Tamar 163 tamarisk 346 Tanais (river) 281 Tanatos 294
Tangiers	292, 305 Tanis	303 tankard	400 tantalus	265 Tanus	281 taos	327 taper	402 tapete	388 tapinosis	57 Taprobane	286, 294 Taras	304 taratrum	383 tarda	264 Tarentum	304 tares	355 tarmus	259
Tarquinius Priscus	307
Tarquinius Superbus	124, 191
Tarragona	304
Tarsus 193, 289, 303 Tartarus 300 taste 232 Tatianite 176
Taurus	105, 106
Taurus, Mount	298
taurus 248–249, 269 taxea 396 taxillus 233 taxus 346 tear 233 tegmen 383 tegula 312, 378 tela 389 telaria 389 telinum 115 Tellus (goddess) 187 tellus 285 telo 405 teloneum 308 Telos 115 telum 110, 362, 363 temperance 79, 179 tempestas 275 temple 309
(at Jerusalem) 167 temple (of head) 233 tempus (season) 128 tenant 205 tendril 340 tenebrae 127, 274 Tenedos 295 Tenes 295 tenor 49 tent 313 tentorium 313 tephrias 322 Terce 150 terebinthina 348 terebinthus 347 terebra 383 teredo 259 Terence 66, 180 tergum 237 terminus 315 termite 259 terra 285, 293 terra Samia 317 Terracona 304 territory 293 Tertullianist 177 tesquum 314 Tessarescaedecatite 178 tessella 312, 379 tessera 371, 405 testa 262 testament 119 types of 119 testicle 237, 249, 252, 267
 
testis
	(testicle)	237
(witness)	119, 170, 365 testudo	262, 312, 364 tetanus	110 Tetragrammaton	153 tetraidos (formulae)	115 tetrarch	201 Teucer	198
Thaddeus 169 Thalamon 308 thalamus 308 Thales of Miletus 79, 180
Thanet 294 Thapsus 296 Thasian marble 321 theater 307, 369–370 thebaicus (stone) 321 Thebes (Boeotia) 290, 302, 303 Thebes (Egypt) 303, 321 theca 363 theft 123 Theodosian Code 117
Theodosian	178
Theodosius Augustus	117, 143
Theodotion	139
Theologus	179
Theophilus (Luke 1:3)	138 Theophilus of Alexandria	143 theoretica	80 theristrum	387 thermae	307 thesaurus	329 Theseus	303
thesis
	(of argument)	73
	(metrical)	48, 96, 99
Thessalians	195
Thessalonica	290, 304
Thessalus	290, 304 Thessaly	290 thicket	341 thigh	238 thistle	356 tholus	382 Thomas	169 thorax	236 thought	239 Thrace	289 Thracians	193, 196 thracius (stone)	320 thread	389 threnody	66, 147 threshing floor 314 threshing-sledge 404 threshold 311 throat 234, 235 Throne (angelic order) 161 throne 403 throw (game) 366 thrums 390 thrush 268 thumb 235 thunder 273 thunder-peal 276 thwart (boat) 374 thyites 321 Thyle ultima 294 thymallus 261 thyme 261, 350, 352 thymelicus 369 thymiama 115 Thynian ring 392 thynnus 260 tiara 383, 390 Tiber 282, 291, 304
Tiberius 197, 302, 321, 328 Tiberius, Lake 279 tibia 238 tibia 97 tibicen 97 tibracus 385 Tiburtine stone 378 tick 259 tide 278 tiger 251 tignarius 382 tignum 382
Tigris (river) 251, 280, 286 tile 312 Tiles 294 tilium 346 tiller 375 timber 382
time	185
	intervals of	125–130
tin	332 tinctio	149 tinctura	389 tinder	342 tinea	259 tintinabulum	98 Tiras	289 Tirassona	331 tiro	201 Tiro, Tullius	51 tisis	111
Titan	186
Titans	199, 296, 303, 361 tithymalus	354 “Titianus”	69
Titianus, Julius 195 Tityos 244 tityrus 251 tius 209 tmesis 62 toad 263 toast 396 Tobit 137, 161 today 126 toga 386 toles 234 tome 139 tomentum 388 tomorrow 127 tomus 142 tone (vocal) 96 tongs 377 tongue 234 tongues, speaking in 158, 159
tonitrus	273 tonsil	234 tonsilla	375 tonus	49
tools 377, 381–383 tooth 234 topazion 323 Topazus 380, 381 tophus 378 topics 86–87 Torah 135, 138, 174, 175, 176 toral 388 torch 402 torchbearer 172 torcular 311 tormentum 124, 375 torpedo 262 torque 391 torrent 280
torris 342 Tors 289 torso 236 tortoise 262 tortoise-shell 98 torture 124, 125 torus 235, 238, 395 touch 232 tow 388 towel 388
 
tower	306 town	305 tow-rope	376 toxicus	351 trabea	386 traberia	374 trabs	382 trace-horse	368 track	316 tractatus	140 traducere	341 tragedian	180, 369
tragelaphus 248 tragum 376 trail 365 traiectus 374 trama 390 trames 316 tramosericus 384 Transalpine Gaul 291 Transfiguration 168 transfigured creatures
(see metamorphosis) transformatio 57 transitus 144 translatio imperii 199 transnominatio 61 transposition 62 transtrum 374 trapetum 405 treasury 204, 310, 329 public 329
treatise	140 treatment, medical	109
	three types of	113
treaty	360 tree	341–349 tree, family	210 tribe	203
(military)	202 tribulo	404 tribunal	310 tribune	201, 204 tribute	329 trichrus	325 triclinium	308 trieris	373 trifinium	315
trifolion	353 triga	368 trigonaria	371 trilix	385 trimestris	338 Trinacria	296
Trinity	153, 154, 158, 159–160, 177 names of	160
triones	249 tripod	400, 401, 403 Tripodes	296
Tripolis 292 Triptolemus 337 trireme 373, 374 trisceles 400 Trismegistus, Hermes 117, 186 Tritheite 178 triticum 338 Tritonia (Minerva) 188 triumphus 360 Trivia (Diana) 187 trochee 47 trochlea 375 trociscos 114 Troglodyte language (see language, Troglodyte) 323
Troglodytes	199, 323, 325, 326
Trojan War 67, 198, 371 Trojans 195 trope 60–64 tropeum 360 trophy 360 tropic 101 Tros 195 trout 260 trowel 382 Troy 266, 289, 320 truce 360 tructa 260 trudis 362 truffle 356 trulla 382 trumpet 97 war 361
truncus 236, 341 trunk 339, 341 trust (legal) 120 trutina 332 tuba 97, 361 Tubal 95, 97, 193 tuber 356 tuberculosis 111 tubrucus 385 tucus 268 tufa 378 tugurium 314 tumor 110 tumultus 299, 359 tumulus	313 tun	400 tuna	260 tunic	384 turban	390 turbidus	398 turbiscus	347 turbo	275 turdus	268 turf	341 turma	202
turning-post 367 turnip 355 turnip cabbage 356 Turnus 363 turpentine 348 turpentine tree 347 turris 306 turtle dove 268 turtur 268 tus 348 Tuscan column 312, 379 Tuscans (see Etruscans) Tuscia 291 tusculanus (stone) 321 tussis 111 tweezers 404 Twelve Tables 117, 191 twig 342 twin 207 tympanum 98
typhus (plant) 355 typus 111 tyrant 201 Tyre 198, 261, 287, 302 tyriaca 114 tyro 201 Tyrrhenians 361 Tyrrhenus 289, 366
uber	236 ulcer	113 uliginosus	314 uligo	320 Ulisippo	305 ulmus	346 ulna	235 ulpicum	356 Ultima Thule	294 ulula	266 ulva	355 Ulysses	246, 305 umbilicus	237
 
umbo	237, 364 umbra
	(fish)	260
	(shadow)	274
Umbria	291 Umbrians	196 umerus	235 uncia	333 unciarius (grape)	340 uncle maternal	209 paternal	209
unctio 155 unction 149, 172 (of Spirit) 159 unda 280 underarm 235 underwear 385 underworld 300 unguentum 115 unguis (shellfish) 262 ungula 124, 236, 392 unicorn 252 unigenitus 156 unio 324 unitas 89 universal 173 univocus (category) 81 unnatural 243–246 upupa 268
uranoscopus 261 urbanus 205 urbs 305 urceus 400 Uriel 161 urine 112, 240, 252 urn 335
Ursa Major (see Big Dipper) ursus 252 urtica 352 urus 249 usage 73 usia 82, 259 usta 381 usucapio 118, 122 usufruct 120, 122 usura 121 usus 122 uter 240, 400 uterine brother 208 uterus 240 Utica 302 utilitas, communis 73
uva	269, 340 uxor	211
vacca 249 Vacceans 198 vadum 279 vagina 363 Valentinian 175 Valentinus 180 valerian 350 valley 299 vallum 313 valva 311 Vandals 197 variegated 250 Varro 39, 53, 64, 79, 113, 114, 139, 180, 182, 196, 234, 237, 243,
271, 295, 296, 299, 300, 304,
314, 337, 347, 355, 366, 370,
402, 403 Varro Atacinus 347 vas 399 vat 311, 405 vates 166, 171, 180, 181 vaticinius 180 vault 312 celestial 100, 272
vectigal 329 vectis 124, 404 vegetable 355–356 veientana 325 Veii 325 velenensis 384 veles 202, 370 vellus 388 velum 375, 388 vena 239 venabulum 362 venditio 120 veneris crinis 325 venetum 381 venom 258 venter 240 ventilabrum 405 ventus 275 Venus 105, 128, 188, 245, 295, 320,
350, 370 Venus’s hair	353 ver	129 verb	42, 45–46, 82 common-voiced	46 deponent	46 neutral	46
verbascum	354, 355 verber	124 Verbum (Christ)	156 verbum	45, 96
(speech) 139 verdigris 331 veredus 250 verennis 405 veretrum 237 Vergil 44, 66, 181, 191, 216, 279, 298,
314, 337, 343 Vergiliae 105 vermiculus 389 vermin 258 types of 259
verres 248 verriculum 376 Verrius Flaccus 299 verruca 112 verse 64, 142 vertebra 237 vertebra (of hip) 238 vertex
	(celestial)	271
(human head) 232 vertibulum 236 vertigo 111 vervactum 337 vervex 247 vesica 240 Vesper 104, 126, 127 vesperna 396 Vespers 146 vespertilio 266 vesperum 127 Vesperus 105 vessel, blood 239 vessels (kitchen) 400–401 Vesta 187 vestibule 311 vestigium 316 vestimentum 383 vestitus 384
vestments, priestly vetch 339 veteran 201 vetula 243 Vetus Latina 139 vexillum 361 via 306, 316 vicia 339 victima 148	383
Victorinus, Marcus	72, 81, 84
 
Victorius	143 victory	360 victus	395 vicus	306 vidua	211 vigil	202 vilicus	205 villa	205, 314 vimen	346 vinegar	398 vinegar-honey	398 vines	339–341
vinum	397 violet	351 viper	255 Vipsanius	51 vir	210, 242 vira	242 virago	242 virga	124, 342 virgin	242 Virgo	106 virgultum	341
Virtue (angelic order)
176
virtues
cardinal	79 theological	173
virtus 242, 366 virus (sperm) 237 vis 122 viscera 238 viscus 236 vision 232 prophetic 168 three kinds of 168
visus	232 vita	231 vitals	238 viticella	354 viticiona	340	161,
viticulture, origin of	197
vitis	339 vitium (verbal)	56 vitrum	328 vitta	391, 392 vitulus	249 vituperatio	69, 86 vocalis	40 vocative	44 voice	96, 234 of verb	46 types of	96–97 voices of verb	46 active	45, 46 passive	45, 46
vola	264 volucer	264 volumen	142 voluntas	233
(legal)	119 volutabrum	317 vomer	404 vowel	40 vox	40, 96
Vulcan	183, 185, 188, 368, 370,
376 Vulgate	139 vulgus	203 vulnus	113 vulpes	253 vulture	264 Vulturnus	275 vultus	233 vulva	240
wages 235 wagon 403 wagon-maker 382 Wain (see Big Dipper) walking stick 404 wall panel 379 wall 312 city 306
walnut 344 war 359–361 warfare, three forms of 186 warp 390 wart 112 war-trumpet 361 water 276, 397 bodies of 276–277
water-mead	398 watermelon	356
waterwheel	405 wave	280 wax tablets	140 weapons	362 weasel	254, 255 wedding	211 wedge (military)	203 weeding	337 week	127 weekday	126 weever	260 weevil	270
weft	390 weights	332–334 well	280 west	101, 271 wether	247 whale	260 wheat	338 wheel	368, 403 wheezing	111 whetstone	319 whip	124 whirlpool	280 whirlwind	275 white	250 clay	317 lead	380, 381
whiteness	243 whorehouse	369 wick	402
wicker-basket 401 widow 211 wife 211 four reasons to choose 212
wilderness	299 will (legal)	119 will (volition)	231 willow	346 wind(s)	275–276, 280 four principal	275 twelve	275 two principal	275
window	311 windpipe	234 wine	186, 397–398 wine-cup	400 wine-honey	398 wineskin	400 wing	264
(military) 203 winnowing-shovel 405 winter 101, 129 Wisdom (name of Christ) 156 Wisdom, Book of 135, 137 witch 190, 246 witness 119, 365 wolf 252, 253 woman 242
	subjection of	212,
242 womb	240 wood	382 woodland	299 woodpecker	267
 
General index
wood-pigeon 268 woodworker 382 wood-worm 259 wool 388 Word (Christ) 156, 176 word(s) 45 origin of 55
workplaces	310–311 workshop	310 world	99, 271 shape of	99
worms	258 wormwood	352, 353 wound	113 wrapper	401 wrestling	366 xenodochium	309 xerophagia	150 Xerxes	65, 139, 244, 277, 295, 339 xyliglycon	345
yardarm	374 yarn	389 year	129 common	145
embolismic 145 intercalated 145 solar 145 three kinds of 129
yellow	250 yesterday	127 yew	346 youth	242 zebub	185 Zechariah (in Luke)	168 Zechariah (Old Testament)	167 zema	399 Zeno	179
Zenodotus of Ephesus	51
Zephaniah	167
Zephyrus	275 Zetus	95 zeugma	58 zinziber	350 Zion	173, 301 zizania	355 zmilampis	327
zodiac	101, 105, 182, 273 zona	392
zones (celestial)	101, 271, 273
Zoroaster	181, 194
 
Index of Greek words
This index aims to include all Greek words in the Etymologies (not those supplied by the translators). Unattested Greek words
 
are preceded by an asterisk.
A 40, 156 g A"  295  138, 225 O  168, 225
O 	177
O	375 E	205 i	247 O 	249
 ϕ @  245 OA  355
E	366
O"4 	351 	273
O; 	396
∗ A 189 A 187, 303   78 T 111, 112, 256, 323 V? 278
A: 	193
A: 	191
:   	86 :E	130, 175, 180 O	269
O 	348
O	296
ϕ   193 E!? 112 b 195  348
O! 		355
O! 	B	354
ϕ 	261 Oϕ A	214
 	85
 N	129
" 	244
O 	231
O	195
O ϕ  299 O  357
465
O 	350
O?	113, 326
A! ϕ  	351 OA! 	231
  	101, 273
 	184
 @	88
 ?	85
  9 	312, 379
 ϕ 	189, 190
OA	399
! "	308
!!?	110
! 9A;	332
	310
  39, 42 O  329, 330 l 247, 362  89
 	101, 106,
273
O   105 O 375 l  352
9	201 9	160, 165 O9A	171
 	270  	50
ϕ ?	254
ϕ " 	224, 355
O 9  87 O    85, 271, 272   ϕ  112
L"	234 L	313
ϕ 	85
ϕ H	218
ϕ 	188, 397
Aϕ  " 	128, 188,
244
A9 	300 	98
@  308   340, 346    343
@	364 	260, 297 ! ;	175
	49, 205, 235
 201, 310  9  257
  138   142, 310
?	388
 R	 L	404
 	181
 N	248
9 	111
∗  	329
9	47, 49, 129,
279
∗   	329 W	129
	198, 291, 397  	211
	220
 	399
B  233 B  85, 244 BA 241
H	93, 231, 244, 274,
280
	244 	261
	345, 351 ϕ 	399
 42, 47, 66  320 ϕ  119, 141 N 224
 	307, 308 	311
 
Index of Greek words
"A	184
" 	233 "  	47
"	50
"ϕ 	342
"B	89, 178 "B 	153
"
" B	174
"H 	295
" 	112
" 	229, 359
"ϕ  	85
 	186
  	303
∗ "	399
"?	172
" ";	239
" 	248
"	188
"A	255 " 	249, 373
" 	274
"N	345
"	114
" 	89
"! 	111 "W	308
	 	183
^"  115, 184 T 89
	 	347
!	85 U	89
  	85
 	275
B	89
 	85
	   239 U? 89
! 	86
!	66
!4	111
!!   239 K!  89, 127 	  310 Kϕ  "@  244
K 186 [H 186, 244 Ap" q 266
K   ϕ  244 U   291
K  	291
c	138
L	205
L"A	286
;W	195 ;A	392
n  179 e   323 ZB 175
Z 101, 273 \! 111 e!  300 f 2 189 aA 189 `E 127, 275
6	40, 52
  	40, 215 	101, 273 	307
∗ 	329
B	50, 74, 329 A	307, 369
	138, 310 	255 	360
 	403
;	291
 	350 N	291
;	196
:;	47
R	C  N	237
	39
V 	254
:	280 :	256 j!! 	367 :	128
:9 	112
:9 153   @ 67 g I9  297
" 	400
 	172
’ S 	173
	254
	146
 B	"R	I	345 	354 Y 	373, 389, 393, 400
! 	393
∗  	249, 312 	388 "	110, 238, 311 A 	342
 	344
 8	:   	86
 8	 	85
 8	 ?	85
 8	ϕ 	  N	  	85
 8	"ϕ  	85
 8	! 	86
 8	 ϕ  	85
 ’  ϕ  189, 190   310
  ! 	373
 8	 R	!	 	86
 8	 R	S 	86
 8	I! !A	85
 ’ !P	Q  	Q  
	B 	85
 9 N	172
N	377 N	148
9?	112
" 	343
B" 	345 	233
B	374 B	248, 256  	51
 298, 326 ϕ  111, 168 H   260  98  329
B! 	364
H  170, 373  308
 	220
A 348   191, 309, 396   389
	348
  353, 357   271
 @ 378, 400 B 396
  	245
	220
 	277
 
Index of Greek words	467
 
 
@	403
 387   295   264, 265
∗  375 K 297
   343 ∗   236
A	253, 259, 270 W 	112
E	180
W 	345, 365
 	400
E	248, 267
	172, 203  	184
 	79 	236, 354, 355, 397
BA	251 @	98, 180, 217  	330
	279
 	351
  388   80, 176, 179, 310 ϕ   252  186
  252, 253 9 347
;	195
  245  47, 49, 313, 362  355  233, 354 @ 111
	111
	190
 	182
 	357
! 	401
	95
N 	199, 250, 292
B	109, 111, 224, 261,
354
  	398
B	397
 	156
B 	229
 Y	328
 ϕ  	85
B  	64, 93, 334
H  233  127, 146, 240   346   172, 201   211, 309  262
	346 ?	196
;	239
" 9	349
	182
B 	280
N 	236
ϕ 	112
   @  309    275
? " 9@ 	309 ? 	341, 345
C B	51
C	50 C" 	234
Q  	85
C ;	266
S 	119, 148, 173, 265,
384 O 291 d  196
Q -	156
S  	85
Cϕ   347 Cϕ   346 d  249 d? 236, 323 C? 49, 110, 364
C?"B  	248
C!	349
QY	100
CW 172 Q 298 d   339
∗ Q  307, 402 d  249 S  86, 291, 387 d ? 268, 295 Cϕ  241 d9 347, 352 C  N 237 d  262, 312, 379 d   262  "B 224
 	105, 404
 L	100, 234, 272  c	112  	82, 156, 160
 LE"	84
 
∗ Cϕ  	197
!@	362
!	237, 366
!	188, 366, 387
!Y	245, 251, 396 !" 	39
!	158
!A "	112
!9	144
!9	297
!" 	299
!@ 308 !B  136, 145
!  	129
! B	51
!!AB	49
!M	 9 	51
!	345
! 	348
! 	114 !	348
!ϕ   	317
! 	348 ! 	345
! 	227
! 105 !  306, 346 !@   105
!A 110, 239 ! 110 !N 239
! 	238
!  	179
!  85, 180 ! ! 360
! ϕ 	389
! 	395, 397 !Y	119
! 	353
! 	241
!	49, 86 ! 	111
!? 	347, 401
!N	94, 227, 274, 298, 313, 317, 345,
355, 402
! 	371
 
Index of Greek words
G@	348
[. 	279
GH	69
G 	348
G  ;	69
G A	69
G! 	298 Gϕ 	298
?	112, 313
B	194
ϕ  	368
	297
/	400
	181
∗   	203
	229
B!	319
	146
 !	369
 ! 	245
 !@ 171  ! 373    229   188, 320
∗  9 	203
 ϕ 	79
!  300, 319 ! 111
!  "	285
! 	207
 ; 115    115
 	70
 ϕ 	390
∗    309, 310  9  51    179
/  9"	296
  9@ 	272 ∗   	140, 312, 379
∗   97    140
 	300
 ?	348
  248 ; 48
	47
  	54
	98
9	110
ϕ @ 397 9 @  350
9  	O 	350 A 	155
T	40, 52
 9	300
  ;	300
 B A	377
 "A	383  B	178
 B  	115, 201  N9 	136
 	363
 	405
 	199
  	354   	114, 271
  	272
  !; 323    180, 263   89
 ϕ  	353
  !	360
  !	101, 273
  9 47, 114, 375  ϕ  239
ϒ 40
X 	400
I	345
I" ϕ  	110
I" ϕ  	223, 255
X"A	110, 112, 256,
400
X	105
I 	105
X	272
I 211 I! - 220 I! ϕ  85
I!	74
I! !"  403 I!  160
I! !A	85 Iϕ B	50
ϕ @	313, 320, 339, 345,
397
ϕ   261 ϕ B 403 ϕ B   403
ϕ  111 ϕ   47 ϕ A!  353 ϕ  - 79 ϕ B 110 ϕ   110 ϕ   110, 153 ϕ  109 ϕ  299 ϕ   51 ϕ   401 ϕ   342 ϕ  179 ϕ A 189
ϕ W	307, 311, 317, 355, 356, 377,
402 ϕ E 97 1Aϕ   402
9@	265
9 330 9 249, 299, 403 9  406
E	300
9	101, 273
9	113, 114
9;	114
9 " 	384
9B  256 9  109, 111 9 110 9  110, 111, 125
9W	216
4	50
4 	71
 40, 156 "	49
h 	235 >	216
	269 ] 	245
 
Index of citations
Enclosed in square brackets are references not made explicit by Isidore (a few times by error) but supplied by the translators, as well as citations of texts referred to but not quoted by Isidore. References to authors cited by name but without quotation or a specific place in question are listed in the General Index. Citations from the Bible and from unidentified sources fall at
 
the end of the list. Classical authors
Aelius Stilo fr.	223 Afranius
Lucius
	fr. 407	270
Rosa fr. 284	396
fr. 415	263 fr. 416	228
Alexander (historian) fr.	197 Ambrose On Faith 1.4	246
Apuleius
	God of Socrates 153	190
Atta Satura 12	141
Augustine Christian Doctrine
	3.7.11	60
City of God
	21.4	319
Caecilius fr. 246	215 fr. 256	375 Caesar, Julius Courtney fr. 2	115 fr. on grammar.	243 Calvus
	Against Vatinius, fr. 23	78
Cassiodorus
[Institutes 2.3.5]	80 Cato Orations 73	398 Origins 1. 18	305 fr. 18 (Jordan)	375
469
Catullus
Poems
	1.1	141
	[64.65]	392
Cicero Caelius, Defense of [33–34]	78
Catiline, Against
	1.2	72, 75
	1.8	76
	1.9	77
	1.10	76
	1.27	74, 78
	2.1	59
	2.25	76
	3.1	78
	3.8	235
Cluentius, Defense of
	146	86
Deiotarus, Defense of King
	15	87
Divination, Against Caecilius
	1	77
Flaccus, Defense of
	1	78
	76	265
Invention, On
	1.8	71
	1.12	72
	1.42	86
Ligarius, Defense of
	19	76
	22	122
Marcellus, Defense of
	26	86
Metellus, Against the Speech of fr. 5	76
Milo, Defense of
	1	75
	44	87
59	76 72	78
	79	72, 78
Nature of the Gods, on the
	2.72	227, 228
Orator, on the
	[1.194]	124
Philippics
	2.1	72
	2.113	86
	3.10	389
	4.8	76
	8.3	359
Piso, Against
	19	86
Poems fr. 8	373
Prognostics (translating
Aratus) fr. 6	266
Republic
	2.16	222, 226
	3.35	359
Scaurus, Defense of
	2.7	252
	45	385
Sestius, Defense of
	77	263
Topics
	32	85, 300
	35	88
Tusculan Disputations
	1.5	224
Verres, Second Action
Against
1.49	295 2.52	86
	[2.89]	226
5.110	235 unassigned fr.	227
 
Cinna fr. 2	375 fr. 3	376 fr. 11	141
Clementine Recognitions
	8.45	102
Comedy, Roman
fr. 21 (Ribbeck)
Dorcatius fr. 1	371
Dracontius
Praises of God
	1.515	254
Satisfactio
	63	140
Ennius
Annals
	33	58
	109	59
	179	57
	329	58
	478	374
	483	375
492	374 499	375
	558	368
	607	230
	Satires 27	355	374
Courtney fr. 41	238
Fronto fr. 12	308
Gracchus, Sempronius
Against Maevius (unique fr.)
392 fr. 43	76
Homer (Latin)
Iliad
	8.597	390
	20.215	288
Horace Art of Poetry
	220	180
Epistles
	1.2.26	248
	1.2.56	214
	1.17.25	387
Epodes
	1.1	373
	2.1	66
	12.1	322
Odes
	1.16.20	305
	2.18.1	312, 379
	3.18.1	190
	3.29.4	115
	4.5.23	242
	Satires 1.6.104	403
Jerome Ad Galatas
3.5, col. 445, l. 48,52
397
Epistle 25, to Rusticus
	15	77
Life of Paul the Hermit
	8	245
Site and Names of Hebrew
Places
	202	281
Josephus (Hegesippus)
History
	5.15.1	374
Juvenal Satires
	2.124	391
	6.89	391
	6.590	363
	10.153	298
	12.34	252
	13.83	310
	13.93	98
	14.139	59
Juvencus Gospel Poem
	1.549	124
Livius Andronicus
Odyssey
10	376
Livy
(= Quintilian, Inst. or. 8.3.53)
57
Lucan Civil War
	1.7	361, 363
	1.15	49
	1.62	311
	1.151	64
	1.205	64
	1.296	202
	1.382	224
	1.396	197
	1.555	298
	1.563	244
	2.15	56
	2.51	197
	2.54	197
2.150	359
2.151	359
	[2.271]	298
	3.220	39
	[3.236]	281
	4.58	106
	4.106	101
	[4.108]	402
	4.136	141
	5.428	375
	5.553	265
	5.716	264
	6.198	363
	6.427	181
	6.457	182
	6.490	255
	6.689	266
	7.819	335
	[8.227]	281
	9.614	258
9.711	256
9.712	257
	9.714	257
	9.717	256
9.719	256
9.720	257
9.722	256
9.723	257
	9.737	257
	10.117	346
	10.201	104
Lucilius Satires
13	388 139	58
	[139]	400
1143	390 1165	377 1191	376
	1290	312, 379
Lucretius On the Nature of Things
	1.314	404
	1.315	316
	1.715	274
	2.152	280
	4.133	272
 
	4.1129	206	Fasti	The Haunted House
	5.503	275	3.377	364	562	203
	5.516	405	6.291	187	644	333
	5.743	275	Heroides	The Little Carthaginian
	5.905	66	5.149	77	348	390
	5.1036	251	Metamorphoses	529	308
	5.1192	59	1.19	60	fr. 159	61
	[5.1275]	330	1.84	231	fr. 175	376
	6.555	285	2.53	77	fr. 176	385
	2.246	281	fr. 177	386
Macer, Aemilius	5.341	338	fr. 181	401 fr. 4	265	5.460	257	fr. 188	123
	fr. 8	256	5.549	266	Pliny
Maecenas	10.93	346	Natural History fr. 1	392	10.95	346	8.42	252 Marcius	12.464	242	8.43	252 fr. 1	140	15.369	246	8.148	253 Martial	15.389	258	32.7	262
	Epigrams	32.142	268
	4.8.6	396	Pacuvius	Poem about Weights
	12.98.1	282	fr. 13	280	and Measures
	13.24	343	Paulinus of Nola	3	332
	13.49	269	Poems	69	334
	13.70	267	17.17	197	Propertius
	13.72	267	17.250	197	Elegies 4.1.13
	13.94	248	Persius	361
	14.34	404	Satires	Prudentius
	14.42	402	1.42	345	Against Symmachus
	14.50	362	1.113	255	1.90	182
	14.58	318	2.51	400	1.365	187
	14.73	265	3.10	141	Crowns of Martyrdom
	14.76	267	3.11	61	4.25	392
	14.121	400	3.56	40	Publilius
Munatius	3.84	59	Maxims fr.	224	4.2	353	fr. 19	385
	4.13	52
	5.79	60	Rutilius Lupus
Naevius
	5.181	402	Schemata Lexeos
Comedies
	Petronius	1.4	76
	75	52
	Anth. Lat.	Rutilius Rufus
Punic War
	690.3	122	On His Own Life
	22	384
	Satyricon	13	403
Tragedies
	108	77
	62	249
	Plautus	Sallust
	fr. 55	123
	The Ass-Dealer	Histories
	fr. 58	299
	518	375	1.52	240
Nigidius
	The Braggart Soldier	2.2	297
	fr. 108	236
	436	123	2.28	285
	fr. 109	395
	628	403	3.29	360
	The Casket	3.36	364
Ovid	728	259	3.104	385
	Art of Love	Epidicus	4.7	201
	2.24	246	371	230	4.39	297
 

Sallust (cont.)
	4.77	281
4.26	278, 296 unassigned fr.	360
War with Catiline
6	204, 301
	11.3	214
War with Jugurtha
	78.3	279
Scipio Africanus Minor fr. 33	76 Sedulius
Paschal Poem prol. 16	399
	1.115	247
Statius
Thebaid
	1.363	299
	6.241	105
Suetonius
History of Games
	195	362
On Poets
	2	180
Prata
	109	360
	171	248
Terence
Andria (The Girl from
Andros)
	68	58, 72, 73, 76
218	86 582	87
	648	225
The Brothers
	397	234
The Eunuch
	357	243
	478	228
	732	61
The Mother-in-Law
	11	242
Phormio
	856	217
The Self-Tormentor
	825	217
Terentianus
On Meter
	1591	65
	1799	65
Turpilius fr. 216	375	Valgius
	fr. 4	376
Varro
Latin Language
7.22	278 fr.	180
Varro Atacinus	1.744
2.16
2.20
2.27
2.30
2.234
2.250
2.256
2.262 2.311
2.348
2.417
2.502
2.547
2.719
3.30
3.44
3.56
3.61
3.75
3.109
3.126
3.127
3.157
3.183
3.243
3.409
3.423
3.484
3.520
3.556
3.619
3.662
3.677
3.680
3.687
3.689
3.699	105
48
59
56
203
306
127, 271
62
75
61
62
127
219
63
280
219
196
77
60
62
202, 305
296
222
59
59
226
57
62
385
375
96
61
62
230
345
262
296
226
	fr. 20 Vergil
Aeneid
1.2
1.3
1.11
1.58
1.69
1.70
1.107
1.118
1.135
1.140
1.148
1.159
1.165
1.176
1.184
1.252
1.257
1.259
1.263	347
57
58
76
300
360
360		
			62
57
78
63
64
60
60
342 63
227
77
228
57
200
59
127
216
62
354 62
305
331
61
127
57
87
57
58		
	1.288
1.295
1.374
1.383
1.387
1.403
1.412
1.425
1.449
1.475
1.489
1.499
1.529
1.546
1.553			
			[3.704]	296
4.11–14	212
4.13	87
4.41	221
4.42	198
4.68	274
4.73	351
4.137	393 4.138	57
4.174	124
4.223	76, 223
4.359	234
4.367	288
4.373	76
4.381	77
		1.589–92	225
	1.597	70
	1.605	69
	1.607	70
	1.643	62
	1.693	350
	1.708	395
	1.723	395
	1.724	400	
 
4.483	199	8.641	360	9.45	64
4.487	181	8.660	198	10.67	142
4.511	187	8.666	403	Georgics
4.558	64	9.1	58	1.44	275
4.569	86, 365	9.26	58	1.47	314
4.584	62	9.76	61	1.75	339
4.588	78	9.95	87	1.78	351
4.660	59	9.459	62	1.93	274
5.20	273	9.503	96,	1.178	404
5.157	61	361	1.187	344
5.199	299	9.535	201	1.267	311
5.208	362	9.582	389	1.299	77, 140, 337
5.273	316	9.609	57	1.309	297
5.287	56	9.705	363	1.340	129
5.407	61	9.747	363	1.388	267
5.588	77	10.13	298	1.470	61
5.683	110	10.81	87	2.1	56
5.817	61	10.88	51	2.12	348
6.19	61	10.142	281	2.68	345
6.86	359	10.149	58	2.112	346
6.119	64	10.314	55, 368	2.117	193
6.160	140	10.333	86	2.126–35	343
6.204	329	10:361	319	2.131	61
6.311	61	10.370	201	2.299	77, 140
6.365	77	10.581	86	2.325	187
6.411	374	11.588	223	2.402	129
6.412	311, 374	11.644	362	2.430	299
6.631	219	11.683	226	2.448	344, 346
6.646	98	11.718	226	3.1	339
6.773	58	12.161	58	3.67	243
6.781	301	12.354	273	3.97	188
7.133	148	12.898	365	3.113	368
7.162	202	12.903	59	3.231	355
7.188	364	Eclogues	3.344	60
7.266	201	1.62	281	3.474	298
7.363	86	1.66	198	4.1	397
7.519	361	1.80	59	4.124	346
7.637	361	2.29	308	4.168	269
7.732	364	2.32	97	4.169	115, 350
7.741	363	3.38	347	4.255	243
7.759	59	3.64	343	4.289	373
7.817	363	3.71	63	4.558	347
8.83	49	3.90	63
8.112	77	3.92	222
8.147	87	4.4	181	The Bible (in Vulgate order)
8.232	219	4.10	104
8.313	301, 304	4.42	355	Genesis
8.364	77	4.44	389	[1:2]	149, 159
8.405	62	6.80	60	1:3	192
8.430	276	8.13	351	1:5	126
8.446	331	8.44	199	1:6,8	162
8.526	97, 361	8.55	59	1:10	277, 285
8.560	77	9.30	297	1:28	212
 

Genesis (cont.)
	1:31	177
	2:7	231
	2:22	242
	3:1	258
	3:19	174
	4:1	162
	[4:23–24]	162
	4:26	162
	[5:17]	162
	5:29	162
	[6:4]	245
	[9:25]	163
	13:8	208
	16:11	163
	[16:11]	165
	17:5	165
	17:16	163
	[19:24–25]	287
	[21:6]	165
	22:12	168
	27:36	165
	[28:17]	302
29:32	165 29:33	165 29:35	165
	30:6	166
	30:8	166
	30:11	166
	30:13	166
	30:18	166
	30:20	166
	[30:32–42]	250
	32:30	165
Exodus
	[3.2]	161
	3:14	153
	[8:16–18]	270
	8:19	164
	[21:5–6]	130
[25:30]	145 26:14	388
	[33:20]	154
Numbers
	[6:2–5]	225
	[16:46–48]	164
	[25:6–15]	164
	[33:1–49]	136
Deuteronomy
	6:4	178
	15:12	208
	[32–33]	65
	33.6	57	Joshua
	[9:3–15]	193
Judges
	9:8	67
	14:14	63
Ruth
	1:16	164
I	Kings
	[3:1]	322
	9:9	166
	[28:7–19]	182
II	Kings
	11:2	309
	[12:25]	165
III	Kings
	10:16–17	364
	[12:28]	302
	[13:2]	165
	17:24	167
	18:39	166
IV	Kings
	9:37	165
I Chronicles
	9:6	163
Job
	1:1	192
	3:3	136
	21:33	300
	38:3	237
	42.6	136
Psalms
	1:4	317
	9/10:14	241		138:8	155
Proverbs
	1:5	373
	6:13	52
	8:15	201
	9:1	173
	14:17	222
	31:22	388
Song of Songs
	1:10	391
	8:5	149
Wisdom
[10:6]	287 11:21	90
	[11:21]	332
Ecclesiasticus
	24:19	346
	33:15	76
	50:16	148
Isaiah
	3:23	387
	6:1 ,	168
	[6:1]	166, 168
	6:2	161, 162
	6:3	162
	9:6	157, 241
	[11:2–3]	158
	23	287
	30:8	347
	33:21	373
	[40:3]	137
	45:7	177
	52:7	164–168
	63:4	178
	66:5	208
Jeremiah
	1:5	138, 168
	1:6–8	241
	1:10	166
	51:14	155
Ezekiel
	1:1	166
	1:10	138
	3:17	167
	9:4	40
	[40:3]	315
Daniel
	1:4	191
	3:94	385
	6:13	150
	7:10	161
	[9:23]	167
	10:13	161
	23:10
30:13
61:12
78:2 79:2
79:4
80:4 80:7
81:6
82:6
98:1
101:28
103:3
103:6
103:12
103:25
109:4
112:4
113:16
132:1	153
313
189
272
161
155
97, 146
401
160
119
155
155
160
155
272
259
138
153
154
208	
 

Amos
	2:13	155
	3:7	167
Obadiah
	1:1	167
Jonah
2:3	260 Nahum
	1:15	167
	3:1	167
Zephaniah
	3:18	225
Zechariah
	2:3–4	160
	3:1–2	149
	[3:1]	137
	[8:19]	150
Malachi
	1:1	167
Matthew
	1:1	137
	1:21	155
	[4:16]	238
	5:38	124
	5:5	158
	8:12, etc.	300
	9:15	150,
158
	[10:3]	169
10:16	159 12:28	159
	12:40	300
	16:16	168
	16:18	168
	[26:7–13]	149
	27:9	169
	27:24	170
	27:44	59
	28:19	149
Mark
	1:3	137
	1:11	192
	[3:17]	169
	12:29	160
Luke
	1:5	138
	1:72	168
	3:8	207
	[7:37–50]	149
	[7:37]	321
	11:20	159
	11:23	173
	18:12	150	John
	1:1	138
	1:9	172
	1:10	271
	1:18	154
	4:24	158, 176
	7:37–38	159
	[8:44]	207
	10:18	231
	10:30	157, 177
	12:13	146
	13:1	144
	13:5	227
	14:16	157
	14:28	157
	16:12–13	158
	16:13	158
	16:28	157
[19:20]	191 19:30	231
	[19:32]	125
	21:15	166
Acts
	[2:1–4]	173
	[2:3]	159
	[2:15]	150
	[3:108]	150
	4:27	155
	[8:18–23]	175
	9:4	168
	[10:1]	302
	[10:9–16]	150
	[10:11–12]	168
	13:2	169
	[21:8-9]	302
	[22:3]	303
Romans
	1:8	173
	8:9	158
	8:15	172
	9:3	208
	9:20	399
	[9:33]	157
	13:10	174
I Corinthians
	1:23	157
	2:8	157
	3:7	149
	3:10	377
5:7	144 7:9	212
	8:6	160
	10:4	168		11:20	268
	12:2	183
	12:11	159
	13:1	192
	13:8	192
	[13:12]	155
	15:8	169
	15:9	169
II Corinthians
	5:17	135
	11:20	268
Galatians
	2:9	235
Ephesians
	[1:21]	161
	3:8	169
	6:15	164
Philippians
	[2:7]	155, 157
Colossians
	[1:16]	161
I Thessalonians
	5:17	150
I Timothy
	3:15	173
	6:16	154
Hebrews
	[1:9]	159
	9:17	119
I John
	2:1	156
	2:27	159
Apocalypse (Revelation)
	1:1	138
	[1:4]	173
	2:6	175
	[4:4]	135
	12:10	184
	19:4	148
	22:13	40, 156
Unidentified citations
	Lindsay (1)	40
	Lindsay (2)	100
	Lindsay (3)	345
	“Petronius”	122
	Courtney fr. 1	77
	Courtney fr. 3	241
	Courtney fr. 4	60
Courtney fr. 5	60 Courtney fr. 6	60
	Courtney fr. 7	194

