■A' A 


Ml 


]/\.mMr 


w^wmrn 


MMfmfflmmZwL 


mm 


Mrtm 


mm? 
mam 


If" 


w 


tiU 


f\jfsm 


mmmm 


Qmsm 


^mm^mmm 


mti 


^msffl^B 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 

T#  Jo......... 

6 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


kl 


ABSTRACT 


OF 


SYSTEMATIC    THEOLOGY 


JAMES  PrBOYCE, 


Joseph  Emerson  Brown  Professor   of  Systematic  Theology, 


IN 


The  Southern  Baptist  Theological  Seminary. 


Printed  (not  published)  for  the  exclusive  use  of  his  pupils.  __ 

/<\^COPYRlG^^ 

oFEB  17,1883/ 

LOUISVILLE,    KY.  : 

CHAS.   T.   DEARING. 

1882. 


3* 


Copyright  1882, 
By  JAMES  P.  BOYCE. 


on 

£ 


CONTENTS. 


Lecture.  Page. 

I.     The  Science  of  Theology, 4 

II.     The  Being  of  God, 12 

III.  The  Sources  of  our  Knowledge  of  Theology. 48 

IV.  Unity  of  God, 56 

V.     The  Spirituality  of  God, 64 

VI.     Divine  Attributes, 68 

VII.     The  Immutability  of  God,       76 

VIII.     The  Power  of  God,      88 

IX.     The  Knowledge  of  God,     .    . 94 

X.      Holiness,  Goodness,  Love  and  Truth, 102 

XL     Justice  of  God,      no 

XII.     The  Will  of  God, 118 

XIII.  The  Decrees  of  God, 128 

XIV.  The  Trinity, 138 

XV.      Personal  Relations  in  Trinity, 150 

XVI.      Outward  Relations  of  the  Trinity, ■-....  170 

XVII.     Creation, 182 

XVIII.     Creation  of  Angels,      190 

XIX.      Fallen  Angels, 198 

XX.     Creation  of  Man,      208 

XXL      Providence, 236 

XXII.     The  Fall  of  Man, 250 

XXIII.  Effects  of  Adam's  Sin, 260 

XXIV.  The  Headship  of  Adam, 268 

XXV.      Christ  in  the  Old  Testament, 280 

XXVI.     The  Person  of  Christ, 296 

XXVII.     The  Offices  of  Christ,       .    .    .    .    • 316 

XXVIII.     The  Atonement  of  Christ,       320 

XXIX.      Election 352 

XXX.      Reprobation, 368 

XXXI.     Outward  and  Effectual  Calling, 380 

XXXII.     Regeneration  and  Conversion, 388 

XXXIII.  Repentance, 398 

XXXIV.  Faith,       402 

XXXV.     Justification, 412 

XXXVI.     Adoption,  • 422 

XXXVII.     Sanctification, 428 

XXXVIII.     Final  Perseverance  of  the  Saints,      444 

XXXIX.      Death  and  the  Soul's  Immortality, 456 

XL.     Christ's  Second  Coming,  and  the  Resurrection, 472 

XLI.     The  Final  Judgment, 482 

XLII.  The  Final  States  of  the  Righteous,  and  the  Wicked,    .    .    .    .494 


PREFACE. 


This  book  has  been  printed  by  the  author,  not  as  a  contribution  to 
theological  science,  but  simply  to  facilitate  the  instruction  in  his  own 
classes.  A  necessity  arose  which  required  that  it  should  be  put  to 
press  when  its  printing  had  not  been  contemplated,  and  before  the 
completion  of  the  lectures.  They  have  been  revised  for  that  purpose 
from  week  to  week,  as  'the  class  of  this  session  has  advanced,  and 
many  have  been  written  for  the  first  time.  Various  circumstances 
have  prevented  as  thorough  a  revision  as  was  anticipated  when  he 
consented  to  print  them.  It  is  on  this  account  that  he  is  unwilling 
to  dispose  of  any  copies  to  the  general  public. 

He  has  attempted  carefully  to  give  credit  to  all  authors  to  whom 
he  has  been  indebted,  either  for  the  substance  or  the  form,  of  what 
here  appears.  But  the  loss  of  some  of  the  originally  written  lectures 
and  notes,  and  the  consequent  necessity  which  arose,  to  reproduce 
them  as  far  as  possible  from  copies  written  out  by  students  of  former 
classes  from  dictation,  may  have  caused  the  omission  of  some  credits. 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  I. 


The  Science  of  Theology. 

The  word  Theology  means  literally  a  discourse  concerning  God; 
but  in  analogy  with  other  words,  as  geology,  chronology  and  biology, 
it  means  the  science  which  treats  of  God. 

It  naturally  concerns  itself  with  such  questions  as  these :  Is  there  a 
God  ;  can  He  be  known;  what  is  His  nature,  and  character;  what  are 
the  relations  He  sustains  to  the  universe;  particularly  to  intelligent 
beings  possessed  of  spiritual  natures;  and  above  all,  as  most  important 
to  us,  to  men;  in  what  ways  has  He  made  Himself  known;  and  especi- 
ally in  what  aspect  does  He  reveal  Himself  to  them  as  sinners. 

In  connection  with  this  last  relation  it  treats,  particularly,  of  man, 
as  a  creature  of  God,  placed  under  the  government  of  His  moral  law. 
It  inquires  into  his  original  condition  of  innocence,  and  happiness;  the 
manner  in  which  he  fell  therefrom;  and  his  present  state  of  sinfulness, 
and  condemnation;  and  inability  for  self  rescue. 

It  is  thus  led,  also,  to  discuss  the  nature  of  the  salvation  which  God 
has  provided  as  seen  in  the  person,  and  character  of  Jesus  Christ, 
through  whom  it  has  come,  and  in  the  works  of  active,  and  passive 
obedience,  by  which  he  has  wrought  out  reconciliation  to  God. 

In  like  manner,  also,  does  it  consider  the  nature,  and  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  through  whom  man  is  led  to  accept  the  provisions  of  God's 
grace,  and  to  attain  through  penitence,  and  faith  unto  a  salvation  in 
Christ,  which  consists,  not  in  freedom  from  condemnation  only,  but 
also  from  the  dominion  and  defilement  of  sin,  and  in  attainment  of  the 
holiness,  and  happiness  of  children  of  the  Heavenly  Father. 


5  Abstract  of  Theology. 

It  follows  man  also  beyond  the  death  of  the  body,  and  makes  known 
the  future  state  of  both  the  righteous,  and  the  wicked,  as  well  before, 
as  after  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  together  with  the  final  judgment 
of  both  these  classes,  and  the  Heaven,  and  Hell  which  shall  be  their 
respective  abodes  forever. 

Finally  it  teaches  the  great  end  which  God  is  accomplishing  through 
all  His  works,  in  the  manifestation  to  all  His  creatures  of  His  own 
glory,  as  seen  in  its  twofold  aspect  of  mercy,  and  justice,  in  His  deal- 
ings with  this  fallen  race  of  man. 

The  term  "theology"'  is  applied,  not  only  to  the  science  itself,  but 
to  any  treatise  on  that  science.  This  is  true,  not  only  of  a  discourse 
upon  the  one  true  God,  but  even  of  one  upon  the  many  false  gods  of 
the  Heathen.  It  is  also  true,  though  it  be  not  a  scientific  discussion, 
but  simply  one  in  narrative.,  or  poetic  form,  and  descriptive  of  action, 
rather  than  of  character,  and  nature.  Thus  "Orpheus  and  Homer  were 
called  theologians  among  the  Greeks,  because  their  poems  treated  of 
the  nature  of  the  Gods".  (Charles  Hodge  Sys.  Theol.  Vol  1.  p.  19.) 
Even  the  poems  of  Ossian,  though  probably  written  in  England  with- 
in the  past  century,  is  a  book  of  theology.  Mythology  is  not  less 
theology  because  it  treats  of  false  gods,  and  in  works  of  the  imagi- 
nation. 

The  term  "theology"  is,  however,  especially  appliable  to  learned,  and 
scientific  works  upon  God,  or  the  Gods.  Of  these  numbers  are  to  be 
found  connected  with  Heathenism.  Such  are  the  Vedas,  the  most  an- 
cient of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Hindoos.  Such  is  the  Zendavesta  of  the 
ancient  Persians.  The  Edda  which  sets  forth  the  Scandinavian  my- 
thology, consists  of  poetic  songs,  and  also  of  dialogues  on  the  origin 
of  the,  gods,  on  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  other  like  topics.  [See 
Gardner's  Faiths  of  the  World,  Vol.  1,  p.  795]. 

The  most  valuable  discussions  among  the  Heathen,  however,  are  to 
be  found  in  the  works  of  the  Greek  philosophers,  the  greater  part  of 
which,  when  not  directly  upon  the  nature  of  the  Gods,  involved 
questions  as  to  the  origin  of  the  world,  and  the  presence  therein  of  a 
Divine  controlling  Spirit,  as  well  as  upon  the  nature  of  the  soul,  and 
its  duties,  and  its  immortality.  Of  their  works  many  have  eome 
down  to  us  in  fragments  only,  while  a  large  portion  of  what  they  taught 
is  found  only  in  the  records,  and  reports  made  by  others  among  them- 
selves; but  there  are  also  many  complete  works  which  profess  to  have 
been  written  by  the  authors  of  these  speculations.    Confessedly  the  most 


Abstract  of  Theology.  6 

important  of  these  Greek  writings  are  Xenophon's  Memorabilia  of  So- 
crates, and  the  works  of  Plato,  and  Aristotle.  But  from  the  beginning  of 
Grecian  philosophy  in  Thales  and  Pythagoras  to  its  culmination  in  So- 
crates, Plato,  and  Aristotle,  was  not  quite  two  hundred  years,  while  its 
whole  history  covers  a  period  of  six  centuries  and  a  half  before,  and  five 
centuries  after  the  coming  of  Christ.  No  human  estimate  can  be 
placed  upon  the  value  of  these  contributions,  nor  upon  the  influence 
they  have  exerted  even  over  those  possessed  of  the  Christian 
Revelation. 

The  Latin  writers  also  produced  several  works  of  a  theological 
character,  preeminent  among  which  is  that  of  Cicero  "Concerning  the 
nature  of  the  Gods." 

Theology  is,  also,  frequently  used  for  the  set  of  opinions  exhibited  by 
a  writer,  or  class  of  writers,  in  any  one,  or  more  productions.  Thus  we 
have  the  theology  of  Calvin,  or  of  Arminius,  or  of  Baxter,  that  of  the 
Reformation,  Princeton  theology,  and  New  England  theology.  Men 
also  speak  of  the  theology  of  the^  Old,  or  of  the  New  Testament,  of 
the  theology  of  the  Psalms,  of  the  various  Evangelists,  especially  of 
John,  and  of  Petrine,  and  Pauline  theology. 

Theology  is  defined  as  a  science.  It  is  eminently  worthy  of  that 
name.  It  lacks  nothing  that  constitutes  a  science.  It  is  concerned  in 
the  investigation  of  facts.  It  inquires  into  their  existence,  their 
relations  to  each  other,  their  systematic  arrangement,  the  laws  which 
govern  them,  and  the  great  principles  which  are  the  basis  of  their 
existence,  and  relations 

As  in  other  sciences,  there  is  much  that  is  absolutely  known,  much 
beyond  this  that  is  little  questioned,  much  that  is  still  matter  of  spec- 
ulation, and  much,  as  to  which  there  is  decided  difference  of  opinion. 
New  facts  are  constantly  developing  in  this  science,  as  in  others,  which 
enable  us  to  verify  the  facts,  and  principles  heretofore  accepted,  when 
correct,  and  to  modify  them  when  erroneous.  New  theories  present 
themselves  for  the  better  explanation  of  facts  already  known,  and  are 
tested  by  these,  and  others  subsequently  discovered,  and  are  received, 
or  rejected,  according  to  their  ascertained  correctness.  The  knowledge 
of  the  past  is  built  upon  for  progression  towards  the  future. 

The  discovery  of  the  facts  is  conducted,  as  in  all  other  sciences,  by 
study  of  what  the  field  affords.  Geology  examines  the  earth,  and 
derives  its  facts  from  the  structure  of  that  earth.  Astronomy  inves- 
tigates the  stars.     Theology,  likewise,  studies  the  sources  of  its  knowl- 


j  Abstract  of  Theology. 

edge.  Each  science  seeks  to  arrive  at  the  truth.  The  votaries  of  each 
are  certain  that  it  is  to  be  found  in  their  fields,  either  partially,  or  com- 
pletely. The  perfect  attainment  of  all  facts  prepares  for  the  exactness 
of  scientific  knowledge.  The  absence  of  any  must  make  the  knowl- 
edge incomplete.  The  proper  generalization  of  all  is  essential  in 
this,  as  in  all  other  kinds  of  science.  A  full  knowledge  of  all  the 
facts,  and  a  perfect  generalization  of  them,  will  constitute  theology  an 
exact  science. 

Theology  is  also  as  sensitive  to  the  absence  of  facts  as  is  any  other 
science.  The  astronomer  finds  that  his  calculations,  based  upon  cor- 
rect theories,  are  not  exactly  verified,  and  at  once  suspects  the  presence 
of  some  disturbing  body  as  the  cause  of  this  variation.  So,  also,  in 
theology.  The  omission  of  a  single  fact,  however  small,  must  affect 
the  whole  universe  of  doctrine.  The  common  mind  does  not  perceive 
this,  and,  hence,  is  not  prepared  to  value  the  discovery  of  the  new 
fact.  But  the  theologian  finds  in  the  new  and  more  exact  adjustment, 
thus  made  possible,  the  proof  of  the  truth  of  his  whole  system,  and, 
therefore,  prizes  it,  even  sometimes  beyond  what  he  ought. 

Regarded  as  a  science,  theology  may  be  classified  in  various  forms. 

1.  According  to  the  method  of  revelation  ;  into  natural  and  super- 
natural theology. 

Natural  theology  embraces  what  man  may  attain  by  the  study  of 
God  in  Nature.  This  extends  not  only  to  what  is  beheld  of  Him  in 
the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,  but  also  in  the  intellectual,  and  spiritual 
nature  of  man  himself. 

Supernatural  theology  is  that  derived  from  such  special  information 
as  God  has  given  by  what  we  commonly  call  Revelation. 

2.  According  to  the  purpose  which  it  contemplates ;  into  System- 
atic theology,  also  called  Didactic,  or  Dogmatic ;  Polemic  or  Contro- 
versial; and  Practical  or  Experimental. 

3.  According  to  the  main  religious  idea  associated  with  it;  as 
Pantheistic  Theology,  Deistic  Theology,  Rationalistic  Theology,  &c. 

4.  According  to  the  name  of  its  founder,  or  the  race  in  which  it 
originated,  or  flourishes,  as  Christian  Theology,  Judaistic  Theology, 
Mohammedan  Theology,  &c. 

5.  According  to  the  sources  from  which  it  is  derived;  into  Bibli- 
cal Theology,  Christian  Dogmatic  Theology,  and  Ecclesiastical  Dog- 
matics. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  3 

Biblical  theology  consists  in  the  facts  of  the  Bible,  harmonized  by 
scriptural  comparison,  generalized  by  scriptural  theories,  crystalized 
into  scriptural  doctrines,  and  so  systematized  as  to  show  the  system  of 
truth  taught,  to  the  full  extent  that  it  is  a  system,  and  no  farther.  As 
in  Botany,  one  gathers  all  the  plants  of  the  world,  and  arranges  them 
without  attempting  to  introduce  new  plants,  even  to  fill  up  manifest 
gaps,  so  Biblical  theology,  duly  presented,  shows  scriptural  truth 
in  all  the  perfection,  and  in  all  the  imperfection  which  God  has 
given  it. 

True  Biblical  Theology  should- recognize  the  inspired  source  whence 
come  its  teachings.  But,  as  now  technically  used,  Biblical  Theology 
refers  to  the  statement,  and  development  of  Doctrine  by  the  various 
Biblical  writers,  or  in  other  words  to  the  development  of  Jewish  re- 
ligious thought,  without  assuming,  or  denying  the  inspiration  of  the 
Bible. 

Christian  Dogmatics  adds  to  Biblical  theology  such  philosophical 
explanations,  as  seem  necessary  to  make  the  system  ot  truth  complete,  or 
to  enable  men  better  to  understand  the  facts.  These  are  not  neces- 
sarily non  scriptural,  as  they  should  never  be  unscriptural.  They  may 
be  as  much  a  part  of  Scripture,  as  the  theory  of  gravitation  is  a  part  of 
the  revelation  of  nature.  They  are  applied  to  explain  phenomena.  So 
far  as  able  to  do  so,  as  to  most  of  the  facts,  in  a  way  not  inconsistent 
with  any  of  them,  they  prove  their  probable,  even  in  some  cases,  their 
certain  correctness.  A  failure  to  explain  all  does  not  deprive  them  of 
confidence.  But  the  direct  opposition  of  even  one  fact,  seen  to  be  in- 
consistent with  the  theory,  is  sufficient  to  show  that  it  is  incorrect. 

Christian  Dogmatics  differs  from  Ecclesiastical  Dogmatics  in  two 
particulars. 

(1.)  The  latter  are  the  authoritative  statements  of  doctrine,  put 
forth  by  some  body  of  Christians  claiming  to  be  a  church.  They  are 
found  in  creeds,  symbols,  decrees,  resolutions,  and  apologies.  They 
may  also  appear  in  authoritative  discussions  of  its  creeds,  or  systems 
of  doctrine. 

(2.)  Ecclesiastical  Dogmatics  should  treat  only  of  ascertained  facts 
which  may  be  laid  down  as  a  basis  of  union,  and  agreement.  It  ought 
not  to  touch  merely  speculative  questions. 

Christian  Dogmatics  treats  of  speculative,  as  well  as  ascertained 
questions. 

It  thus  appears  that  a  perfect  system  of  theology  will  combine  all  of 
these  classes.    It  would  be  based  upon  Biblical  Dogmatics,  which  shall 


Abstract  of  Theology. 

Lave  so  collected,  and  systematized,  all  the  teachings  of  a  full  revelation 
as  to  be  concurrent  with  the  facts,  and  doctrines  of  Christian  Dogmatics. 

The  Ecclesiastical  Dogmatics  will  have  gone  no  farther  than  fully 
authorized  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  therefore  concurs  with  Biblical 
Dogmatics,  while  the  fulness  of  revelation  will  have  left  to  Christian 
Dogmatics  no  speculative  questions;  but  in  all  its  discussions  it  will 
have  been  able  to  attain  unto  full  knowledge  of  the  facts,  and  ascer- 
tainment of  all  the  doctrines. 

But  this  concurrence  can  only  be  when  Theology  has  been  reduced 
to  an  exact  science.     This  can  never  be  looked  for  in  this  life. 

The  causes  of  doctrinal  variation  will  therefore  be  apparent. 

If  men  came  to  the  study  of  Biblical  Theology,  with  minds  entirely 
unprejudiced,  capable  of  examining  its  truths  with  the  same  mental 
powers,  and  with  the  same  amount  of  study,  all  would  concur  as  to  its 
facts,  and  doctrines.  But  this  cannot  be  done.  Mental  capacities 
vary.  All  men  have  their  prejudices.  All  have  not  equal  time  for 
study,  and  all  use  not  equally  the  time  that  they  have.  Thus  variety 
is  certain  even  in  studying  Biblical  Theology. 

The  same  causes  increase  this  in  Christian  Dogmatics,  because  here 
the  human  element  enters  more  largely  than  in  the  Biblical;  while 
reverence  for  antiquity,  opposition  to  change,  and  the  influence  of  the 
learned  of  the  past  and  the  present,  prevent  the  alteration  of  Ecclesi- 
astical creeds,  which  underlie  Ecclesiastical  Dogmatics,  and  thus  lead 
men  constantly  to  continuance  in  error,  and  refusal  to  accept  truth. 

These  facts  show  with  what  spirit  we  should  study  Theology. 

1.  With  reverence  for  truth,  and  especially  for  the  truth  taught 
in  the  word  of  God.  * 

2.  With  earnest  prayer  for  divine  help. 

3.  With  careful  searching  of  heart  against  prejudice. 

4.  With  timidity,  as  to  the  reception,  and  propagation  of  new  doc- 
trines. 

5.  But  with  a  spirit  willing,  and  anxious  to  examine,  and  to  ac- 
cept whatever  we  may  be  convinced  is  true. 

6.  With  that  teachable  humility,  which,  knowing  that  God  has 
not  taught  us,  in  His  Word,  all  the  truth  that  exists,  not  even  all  the 
truth  on  many  a  single  point,  accepts  with  implicit  faith  all  that  He 
has  taught,  and  awaits  His  own  time  for  that  more  full  revelation 
which  shall  remove  all  our  present  perplexities. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  ^q 

The  advantages  of  studying  theology  systematically  are  several. 

1.  We  thus  ascertain  all  that  nature  and  the  Scriptures  teach 
on  each  point. 

2.  We  compare  all  these  teachings  one  with  another,  and  are 
enabled  to  define  their  mutual  limitations. 

3.  We  are  brought,  face  to  face,  with  the  fact  that  our  know- 
ledge is  bounded  by  God's  Revelation,  and  are  led  to  acknowledge 
it  as  its  source. 

4.  We  are  consequently  warned  not  to  omit  any  of  the  truth, 
ascertained  irom  any  source,  nor  to  add  to  it  anything,  not  properly 
embraced  therein.  A  departure  from  this  rule  will  lead  into  inevit- 
able error. 

5.  The  harmony,  and  consistency,  which  will  be  found  in  all 
God's  teachings,  from  whatever  source  we  may  draw  them,  will  be- 
come conclusive  proof  of  the  divine  origin  of  revelation.  This  will 
result,  not  only  from  a  comparison  of  what  Reason,  and  Nature 
teaches,  with  the  revelations  of  God's  Word,  but  from  one  of  the 
several  books  of  the  Bible  with  each  other,  and  especially  of  the  body 
of  the  Old  Testament,  as  one  book,  with  that  of  the  New  Testament, 
as  another. 

6.  We  are  thus  led  to  value  each  of  the  doctrines  of  the  word  of 
God.  Each  is  true.  Each  has  been  revealed  that  it  might  be  believed. 
We  cannot  therefore,  omit  any  one,  because  of  its  forbidding  aspect, 
or  its  seeming  unimportance,  or  its  mysterious  nature,  or  its  demand 
for  great  personal  sacrifice,  or  its  humiliating  assertions,  or  require- 
ments, or  the  free  terms  upon  which  it  assures  of  life  and  salva- 
tion. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  12 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  II. 


The  Being  of  God. 

The  fundamental  doctrine  of  Theology  is  that  there  is  a  God;  for, 
if  this  is  not  true,  there  can  be  no  Science  of  God. 

The  first  duty  of  Theology,  therefore,  is  to  set  forth  the  reasons  men 
have  for  believing  that  such  a  Being  exists,  and  is  a  true  object  of  de- 
pendence, and  worship, 

I.     God  can  be  sufficiently  known. 

It  is  objected,  however,  to  any  science  of  God,  that,  if  there  is  a 
God,  He  cannot  be  known,  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  a  true  object  of 
worship. 

If  this  means  that  we  cannot  know  the  essential  nature  of  God,  then 
upon  this  principle  we  can  know  nothing,  for  we  do  not  know  the  es- 
sential nature  of  anything.  We  know  not  our  own  essence.  We  can- 
not ascertain  that  of  any  existence,  not  even  of  the  smallest  atom  of 
matter.  We  can  only  judge  from  the  qualities  anything  is  perceived 
to  possess,  or  by  its  manifestations,  what  it  must  be.  So  as  to  God; 
we  can  find  out  what  He  is,  in  the  different  ways  in  which  He  has 
manifested  Himself  in  ourselves,  and  in  the  World  around  us. 

Is  it  meant  that  we  cannot  know  Him,  because  His  nature  may  be 
Or  must  be,  so  different  from  ours?  But  we  do  know  many  things 
which  differ  greatly  in  nature  from  what  we  are.  Our  bodies  are  ma- 
terial, but  it  is  our  mind  which  knows  them;  and  mind,  and  matter 
are  believed  to  be  essentially  diverse.     We  know  also   our  mode  of 


13  Abstract  of  Theology. 

existence,  and  that  of  other  objects  in  time,  and  space,  but  these  modes 
of  existence  are  essentially  different  from  the  things  which  exist  in 
them. 

Besides,  until  we  know  what  God  is,  we  cannot  be  sure  that  He  is 
in  all  respects  different  from  ourselves.  If  there  be  any  points  of 
similarity,  we  can  known  Him  so  far  as  these  exist;  and,  if  it  be  true 
that  we  have  been  made,  in  any  respect,  in  the  likeness,  and  image  of 
God,  our  knowledge  of  God  may  approach  at  least  to  such  complete- 
ness as  to  enable  us  to  recognize  His  more  manifest  perfections,  and 
to  perceive  that  because  of  these  He  ought  to  be  reverenced,  and  wor- 
shipped. 

Guided  by  the  analogy  of  our  own  natures  we  expect  to  find  in  Him 
a  personal,  conscious,  intelligent,  and  moral  being,  and  this  expecta- 
tion is  confirmed  by  the  manifestations  of  His  presence,  and  workings 
in  the  universe. 

This  analogy  alone  will  not  tell  everything  about  God.  Nor  does 
it  limit  the  knowledge  we  are  able  to  acquire.  It  has  led  some  to  be- 
lieve that  God  has  a  material  body  as  has  man.  That  He  has  not,  is 
to  be  ascertained  from  other  facts.  But  it  so  far  teaches  us,  that  we 
know  that  God  must  either  be  a  spirit,  such  as  we  are,  or  that  He 
must  have  a  higher  nature,  to  which  belong  all  those  attributes  of 
spirit  which  constitute  conscious  personality,  and  intelligent  purpose. 

Does  it  mean  that  we  cannot  know  Him  because  we  cannot  come  in 
contact  with  Him  through  the  senses,  as  we  do  with  our  fellow  men, 
and  cannot  learn  His  nature  through  His  conduct,  and  action,  as  we 
do  theirs?  But  it  is  not  alone  through  personal  contact  with  our  fel- 
lows that  we  know  that  they  are,  and  what  they  are.  We  judge  of  this 
also,  by  their  works,  which  we  may  examine,  though  we  have  never 
seen,  or  known  them  personally.  In  like  manner,  through  our  senses, 
are  we  brought  into  contact  with  God,  Who,  though  not  material,  is 
an  artificer  in  material  things,  and  has  displayed  before  us,  in  the 
universe  around,  the  evidences  of  His  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness. 
Surely,  so  great  a  structure  as  this,  which  manifests  a  grasp  of  thought, 
and  a  power  of  performance,  so  wonderfully  beyond  that  of  any  human 
being,  and  a  minuteness  of  detail,  and  execution,  and  finish,  the  limita- 
tions of  which  defy  the  most  powerful  microscopical  examination,  de- 
mands that  we  should  seek  to  know  its  author,  and  that,  until  known, 
we  should  at  least  recognize  the  evidence  that  He  is  immeasurably 
greater,  and  wiser,  than  ourselves. 

Is  it  meant,  that  the  outward  phenomena  of  the  universe  cannot 
give  such  mental,  and  spiritual  knowledge   of  God,  as  is  essential  to 


Abstract  of  Theology.  14 

our  mental,  and  spiritual  relations  to  Him?  This  is  true;  but  we  find 
that  knowledge  conveyed  to  us  by  our  own  spiritual,  and  mental 
phenomena.  We  find  in  ourselves  consciousness  of  existence,  of 
thought,  and  of  purpose,  and  from  the  manner  in  which  these  operate 
in  us,  we  know  the  nature  of  their  operation  in  any  being  of  intelli- 
gence. We  find  that  the  mind  has  its  laws,  no  less  binding  and  ef- 
fective, no  less  regular  and  permanent,  than  those  of  matter.  We 
must  ascribe  these  to  its  author  no  less  than  those  of  matter  to  its 
creator.  In  their  study,  we  perceive  the  nature  of  mind,  and  spirit, 
not  by  learning  the  essence,  but  as  in  matter  by  studying  the  pheno- 
mena. That  nature  we  ascribe  to  the  Divine  Mind,  and  Spirit,  which 
must,  at  least,  possess  a  nature  equal  to  this.  The  differences  of  men- 
tal, and  spiritual  capacities  in  men  assure  us  that  these  exist  in  de- 
grees of  greater,  or  less.  Hence  we  assign  them  to  God  in  the  highest 
degree;  because  as  their  author  He  must  Himself  be  greater  than  all 
His  mental  and  spiritual  creations. 

But,  in  addition  to  this,  we  have  a  peculiar  source  of  infor- 
mation. We  find  our  minds  capable  of  intuitive  knowledge.  Some 
abstract  facts  need  only  to  be  understood,  and  the  conviction  that  they 
are  true  immediately  follows.  That  "the  whole  is  greater  than  any 
one  of  its  parts"  is  perceived  to  be  true  as  soon  as  understood.  So 
also  of  the  statement  that  "a  thing  cannot  be,  and  not  be,  at  the 
same  time."  Whence  is  this  knowledge  ?  We  say  that  the  mind  is  so 
constituted  that  it  cannot  believe  otherwise.  Who  has  so  constituted 
it  ?  It  must  proceed  from  some  one  upon  whose  veracity  we  rely, 
when  we  accept  what  our  nature  teaches.  But,  if  from  any  one,  then 
there  is  a  creating  mind,  and  that  mind  operates  directly  upon  mind 
without  the  intervention  of  matter,  and  thus  teaches  us  truth.  When, 
then,  we  find  other  convictions  of  like  nature  relative  to  our  dependence 
upon  a  higher  being,  our  obligations  of  duty  to  Him,  our  sense  of  right, 
and  wrong,  and  the  duty  to  do  the  right,  and  not  to  do  the  wrong, 
we  cannot  avoid  believing  that  these  intuitions  come  from  the  same 
source,  and  are  His  instructions  to  us  as  to  our  moral  relations,  and 
duties  to  Him. 

But  it  is  objected  that  in  all  these  ways  we  only  attain  partial 
knowledge  of  God.  This  is  readily  admitted.  But  partial  knowledge 
is  actual  knowledge  as  far  as  it  goes.  We  have  complete  knowledge 
of  nothing.  All  our  knowledge  is  partial.  The  child  only  partially 
knows  its  parent.  The  subject  only  partially  knows  his  sovereign. 
Yet  enough  is  known  for  the  recognition  of  dependence,  and  of  the 


15  Abstract  of  Theology. 

4 

duties  of  obedience,  and  love.  So,  also,  with  the  Heavenly  Father, 
the  King  of  Kings.  The  questions  of  Zophar  have  been,  with  full 
reverence  for  God,  and  earnest  worship  for  such  an  one  as  it  is  be- 
lieved that  He  must  be,  the  language  of  the  pious  of  all  ages.  "Canst 
thou  by  searching  find  out  God?  Canst  thou  find  out  the  Almighty 
to  perfection?  It  is  as  high  as  Heaven;  what  canst  thou  do?  deeper 
than  Hell;  what  canst  thou  know."     Job  11:7.8. 

But  it  is  further  objected  that,  if  there  is  a  God,  He  must  be  the 
Absolute,  the  Infinite,  the  Unconditioned,  and,  therefore,  cannot  be 
an  object  of  comprehension  to  us.  whose  nature  is  finite,  and  whose 
mode  of  existence  is  only  relative,  finite,  and  conditioned. 

But  the  objection  itself  presents  its  own  refutation.  How  do  we 
know  that  God  must  be  such,  if  there  is  a  God?  In  whatever  way 
we  know  this,  we  know  at  least  that  much  of  God  that  He  must  be 
the  Absolute,  the  Infinite,  the  Unconditioned.  Even  before  we  are 
supposed  to  know  that  He  exists,  therefore,  we  know  this  much  of  the 
nature  which  must  be  His,  and  upon  the  first  evidence  of  His  exist- 
ence have  the  right  to  attribute  to  Him  all  that  is  therein  contained. 
The  characteristics,  thus  ascribed  to  Him,  reveal  Him,  therefore,  to 
us,  as  an  infinite  existence,  without  other  limitations  than  are  found 
in  His  own  nature,  or  essence,  who,  as  Absolute,  cannot  be  dependent, 
but  must  be  the  source,  and  Sovereign  of  all  else;  and,  as  the  Uncon- 
conditioned,  cannot  be  subject  to  time,  and  space,  and  matter;  and 
must  exist,  therefore,  without  possibility  of  growth,  or  increase,  and 
without  the  succession  of  periods,  such  as  yesterday,  to-day,  and  to-mor- 
row, and  without  those  measures  of  space,  and  location,  which  belong  to 
matter.  The  God,  therefore,  Who  is  thus  proclaimed  to  be  unknow- 
able is  at  least  known  as  a  self-existent  Spirit,  infinite,  eternal,  and 
unchangeable  in  all  the  perfections  that  belong  to  His  nature.  Let 
but  the  least  evidence  appear  that  there  is  a  God,  and  at  once  this 
nature  may  be  ascribed  to  Him. 

II.      ALMOST   UNIVERSAL    BELIEF   IN    GOD;    ITS    SOURCES. 

Belief  in  the  existence  of  God  has  been  almost  universal  among 
men.  The  same  ideal  of  perfection  has  not  everywhere  been  found. 
Some  have  gone  no  farther  than  to  be  moved  by  the  sense  of  the 
supernatural,  and  to  believe  in  a  power  to  which  they  are  subject,  and 
upon  which  they  depend.  But,  at  least,  this  much  is  to  be  found  in 
the  lowest  forms  of  fetish  worshippers.     Others  have  multiplied  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  lg 

numbers,  and  forms,  of  those  towards  whom  they  have  felt  this  sense  of 
dependence,  and  have  accepted  the  existence  of  many  gods.  Yet, 
among  these,  the  traces  of  the  One  God  have  not  entirely  disappeared, 
for  they  have  referred  the  gods  themselves  to  one  originating  source. 
Some,  following  too  closely  the  analogy  of  man's  nature,  have  believed 
God  to  be  the  animating  soul  of  the  world.  The  highest  spiritual 
conception  of  God  has  been  found  only  in  those  nations  which  have 
been  recipients  of  His  Revelation.  But  the  most  ancient  records  show 
that,  in  the  earliest  times,  the  knowledge  possessed  by  all  wTas  com- 
paratively simple,  and  pure. 

So  universal  has  been  this  belief,  that  but  very  few  of  the  millions 
of  the  race  in  all  its  ages  have  denied  the  existence  of  God.  It  has 
been  questioned  whether  these  few  have  been  deceived  as  to  their 
actual  convictions,  or  have  been  insincere  in  their  avowal  of  Atheism; 
because  it  has  seemed  so  impossible  for  man  not  to  believe  in  a  God. 
A  greater  number  still  have  been  skeptical ;  sometimes  led  by  wishes 
born  of  depravity,  and  sin,  but,  also,  sometimes  misled  by  philosoph- 
ical speculations,  and  apparently  earnestly  desirous  to  know  the  truth. 

But  the  firm  conviction  of  mankind  in  general  that  this  belief  is 
unavoidable  in  any  man  in  his  normal  condition,  and  that  its  absence 
is  due  to  some  crushing  out,  or  erasure  of  his  necessary  moral  capa- 
bilities, is  seen,  not  only  in  the  general  horror  which  men  have  for 
those  who  profess  Atheism,  but  in  the  denial  to  such  men  of  the  right 
to  testify  in  the  courts  of  justice. 

1.  This  almost  universal  concurrence  of  men  ought  to  be  ascribed 
primarily  to  Tradition.  It  has  been  handed  down,  from  parent  to 
child,  throughout  all  the  generations  of  the  past.  Some  theologians 
of  the  present  day  have  been  unwilling  to  recognize  this  fact.  Some 
have  sought  the  source  of  this  general  prevalence  in  the  idea  of  God 
as  innate  in  the  mind.  Others  have  simply  rested  upon  other  argu- 
ments for  God's -existence,  and  taken  the  universal  consent  of  mankind 
as  evidence  that  this  is  not  an  idea  unnatural  to  them,  since  they  have 
yielded  ready  assent  to  the  proofs  of  it  commonly  given.  But  a  re- 
cognition of  the  traditional  teaching  will  not  weaken  the  argument. 
Even  if  it  does,  it  is  a  fact  which  must  be  acknowledged. 

In  favour  of  this  as  the  primary  source  of  this  general  belief  it  may 
be  said, 

(1.)  That  this  is  the  natural  manner  in  which  every  child  among 
us  learns  about  God.    Its  own  questionings,  or  its  parent's  convictions  of 


17  Abstract  of  Theology. 

the  importance  of  this  knowledge,  cause  it  to  be  imparted  at  an  early 
period,  and  by  such  direct  teaching. 

(2.)  Information  obtained  by  travelers,  and  especially  by  Christian 
missionaries,  teach  that  our  own  customs  agree  with  those  of  heathen 
nations  as  they  also  do  with  those  of  Christendom  in  general. 

(3.)  This  accounts  for  the  fact,  that,  while  the  belief  has  varied  at 
different  times,  and  places,  it  is  held  in  the  same  form  by  almost 
every  one  within  a  single  nation  at  a  single  period. 

(4.)  The  uniformity,  too,  in  which  it  has  continued  among  any 
one  people  for  many  generations,  is  also  proof  of  this  truth. 

(5.)  The  general  existence  of  it  in  a  purer  form,  the  nearer  we  ap- 
proach the  origin  of  the  race,  shows  that  this  was  the  primeval  belief 
of  man,  and  has  thence  been  handed  down  from  fatlier  to  son,  until  it 
has  reached  our  own  age,  and  ourselves. 

(6.)  This  accounts  also  for  the  fact  that,  when  it  has  been  corrupted, 
it  has  continued  in  that  corrupted  form  until  some  new  mental,  or  spiri- 
tual force  has  arisen  to  introduce  change,  and  to  give  new  form  to 
the  belief  for  some  time  to  come. 

The  belief  thus  dependent  on  this  traditional  teaching  is  of  great 
value  as  proof  of  the  truth  of  this  doctrine. 

(1.)  Its  general  prevalence  shows  that  this  doctrine  is  suitable  to 
all  mankind.  It  is  one  that,  though  worthy  of  the  wisest  thought,  is 
not  dependent  upon  philosophical  conceptions,  or  abstract,  or  logical 
reasoning,  for  its  acceptance.  The  most  ignorant  of  men  have  been 
able  to  grasp  it.  It  is  like  that  teaching  of  the  Great  Master,  whom 
"the  common  people  heard  gladly."  There  has  been  something  in  it, 
or  connected  with  it,  that  has  made  all  men  believe  it.  What  that  is, 
will  be  hereafter  shown.  Bat  the  fact  that  this  simple  teaching,  from 
father  to  son,  throughout  all  the  ages,  has  been  enough  to  make  it 
dwell  as  a  powerful,  and  controlling  influence  in  the  hearts  of  the 
masses  of  mankind,  is  a  strong  proof  not  only  of  its  truth,  but  also  that 
it  has  come  from  God,  whose  universal  gifts  are  of  this  simple  nature, 
common  to  all. 

2.  That  it  has  come  down  through  all  the  ages,  shows  that  it  has 
come  in  contact  with  all  the  best  thoughts  of  the  wisest  of  mankind. 
That,  in  its  study,  the  wisest,  and  best,  even  among  the  heathen,  have 
approached,  in  their  noblest  conceptions  of  it,  to  what  we  believe 
we  have  received  through  the  revelation  of  God,  affords  a  convincing 
argument,  not  only  in  favour  of  this  noblest  conception,   but  of  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  18 

Divine  Word  which  reveals  it.  The  least  that  can  be  said  is,  that, 
after  being  subjected  to  every  variety  of  thought,  and  philosophical 
speculation,  this  traditional  belief  has  maintained  itself  as  truth,  and 
convincingly  withstood  every  objection  that  has  been  brought  against  it. 

3.  The  varied  forms  in  which  it  has  appeared  show  that  there  is 
some  simple  truth,  or  truths,  common  to  all,  and  of  which  all  men  have 
perceived  the  correctness,  which  lie  at  its  foundations,  though  ocher 
truths  have  been  perceived  through  the  light  of  nature,  by  some  only, 
by  which  they  have  been  able  to  form  a  better  idea  of  God  than 
others. 

4.  These  simplest  truths  are  seen  not  only  to  be  embraced  in  the 
higher  Heathen  ideal,  but  to  enter  also  into  the  conception  given  by 
Revelation  itself. 

5.  There  is  thus  manifested,  also,  the  existence  of  that  knowledge 
of  God  in  all  men,  which  enforces  the  duty  of  worship,  and  reverence, 
and  causes  accountability  to  Him. 

6.  The  continuance  of  this  belief  among  those,  whose  self  interest, 
because  of  sin,  would  naturally  have  led  them  to  reject  it,  is  a  strong 
proof  of  the  sincerity  with  which  it  has  been  held. 

III.     Is  the  Knowledge  of  God  innate. 

The  knowledge  of  the  insufficiency  of  mere  tradition  to  prove  the 
truth  of  any  doctrine  leads  us  to  seek  some  other  ground  of  this  univer- 
sal belief  of  mankind.  Tradition  has  been  pointed  out  as  the  primary 
source  of  this  faith.  But  it  is  primary,  in  point  of  time  only,  not  as 
the  real  cause  of  the  general  acceptance  of  the  doctrine.  Neither  does 
the  belief  in  a  God  arise  from  any  -of  the  Various  arguments  which 
have  been  devised  for  its  support.  All  men  reach  conviction  on  this 
subject  before  they  ever  hear  any  discussion  about  it.  To  the  mass  of 
men  the  arguments  have  been  utterly  unknown.  While  these  argu- 
ments are,  therefore,  to  be  presented  as  confirmatory  proof,  we  must 
seek  some  other  cause  for  this  continued  general  belief  of  man. 

The  true  reason  for  this  is  that  such  is  the  consitution  of  the 
human  mind  that  it  naturally  accepts  as  true,  the  idea  it  has  attained 
of  God,  and  rests  upon  belief  in  His  existence,  as  a  fact  that  ought 
not  to  be  doubted. 

1.  This  is  generally  expressed  by  the  statement  that  the  idea  of 
God  is  "innate".     But  the  expression  seems  to  be  unfortunate. 

(1.)  There  are  no  innate  truths  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the 
word  innate.     The  mind  possesses  no  ideas  independent  of  all  sug- 


19  Abstract  of  Theology. 

gestion,  or  inward  contemplation.  No  truth  becomes  truth  to  the 
mind,  until  it  is  perceived  to  be  truth. 

(2.)  If  the  idea  of  God  were  in  the  mind,  as  innate  is  commonly 
understood,  that  idea  would  be  as  perfect  in  one  man  as  in  another. 
But  there  are  evidently  various  degrees  of  that  perfection.  These, 
therefore,  must  arise  from  the  different  measures  of  cultivation,  and 
thought  as  well  as  from  the  different  circumstances,  by  which  the 
elements  which  compose  that  idea  in  its  perfection,  are  suggested. 

(3.)  Inasmuch  as  that  idea  of  God,  possessed  by  most  men  in 
Christian  lands,  is  the  result  of  the  teachings  of  the  Scriptures,  or  at 
least  of  the  philosophical  conceptions  of  men  of  thought,  when  the  in- 
nateness  of  this  idea  is  urged  as  a  reason  for  belief  in  God,  we  are 
naturally  met  by  the  avowal,  on  the  part  of  many,  if  not  all,  that  they 
have  no  such  innate  idea. 

(4.)  Any  idea  of  God  which  we  have  is  not  an  idea  of  Himself,  but 
of  certain  relations  existing  between  Him,  and  man,  or  the  universe, 
or  of  His  relation  to  certain  facts  which  we  perceive  in  connection 
with  these. 

2.  A  better  statement,  therefore,  is  that  the  belief  in  God  is  based 
upon  the  intuitive  perception  by  the  mind  of  certain  truths,  which 
necessarily  involve  the  existence  of  God  of  the  verity  of  which  it  at- 
tains absolute  conviction. 

It  has  been  already  stated  than  man  attains  intuitive  conceptions. 
He  is  not  confined  to  a  single  method  of  obtaining  knowledge.  He 
arrives  at  truth  through  sensation.  He  is  taught  it  by  experience. 
He  believes  testimony.  -He  is  conscious  of  Himself.  But  he  is  also 
so  constituted,  as  to  certain  truths,  that  they  are  self  evident  upon 
an  intelligent  conception  of  what  is  meant  by  them.  No  reasoning 
about  them  can  make  them  more  convincing.  No  study  of  them, 
except  as  to  the  nature  of  the  things  affirmed,  gives  deeper  con- 
viction of  their  truth.  No  personal  experience,  nor  testimony  of 
others,  gives  stronger  witness  of  their  reliability.  In  each  indivi- 
dual mind,  according  to  its  comprehension  of  what  is  meant  by 
the  things  spoken  of,  there  arises  personal  conviction  of  their  in- 
dubitable truth.  This  is  really  what  is  meant,  when  it  is  affirmed 
that  these  ideas  are  innate  in   man. 

All  that  is  necessary,  prior  to  such  intuitive  conception,  is  a 
knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  the  truth,  which  is  to  be  intuitively 
perceived.  Take,  for  example,  the  mathematical  axiom  before  quo- 
ted "the  whole  is  greater  than  any  one  of  its  parts."      Before  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  20 

truth  of  this  is  perceived,  it  is  necessary  to  know  what  is  meant  by 
"whole",  and  "part",  and  "greater".  As  soon  as  these  are  known, 
the  truth  of  the  affirmation  at  once  appears.  It  is  on  this  account  that 
the  term  "God",  or  the  expression  "the  true  idea  of  God",  cannot  be 
a  part  of  an  intuitive  conception.  We  cannot  know  "God."  We  may 
know  certain  things  about  God.  We  have  not  "the  true  idea  of  God." 
We  only  have  some  true  idea  of  God.  Hence  our  statement  was  lim- 
ited to  the  assertion,  that  "such  is  the  constitution  of  the  human 
mind  that  it  naturally  accepts  the  idea  it  has  attained  of  God  as  true." 

These  intuitive  conceptions  are  originally  single.  Sir  William 
Hamilton  makes  simplicity  a  characteristic  of  intuitive  truth.  In  op- 
position to  this  statement  which  he  quotes,  Dr.  Charles  Hodge  con- 
tends that  "all  of  the  propositions  of  the  First  Book  of  Euclid  were  as 
plain  at  first  sight  to  Newton  as  the  axioms,  and  the  same  is  true  in  our 
moral  and  religious  nature.  The  more  that  nature  is  purified,  and 
exalted,  the  clearer  is  its  vision,  and  the  wider  the  scope  of  its  intui- 
tions. *  *  *  *  If  a  proposition  be  capable  of  resolution  into  simpler 
factors,  it  may  still  to  a  powerful  intellect  be  seen  as  self-evidently  true. 
What  is  seen  immediately,  without  the  intervention  of  proof,  to  be 
true,  is.  according  to  the  common  mode  of  expression,  said  to  be  seen  in- 
tuitively." Sys.  Theol.  Vol.  1,  p.  193.  Both  of  these  writers  appear 
to  be  right,  and  both  wrong.  Hamilton  is  correct  in  stating  that  sim- 
plicity is  a  characteristic  of  intuitive  truth,  but  incorrect  in  maintaining 
as  a  consequence  that  no  complex  truth  can  be  intuitively  perceived. 
For  the  mind,  in  perceiving  separately  the  correctness  of  two  intuitive 
truths,  may  at  the  same  time  combine  them  into  a  single  conception, 
if  they  are  homogeneous,  just  as  we  unite  the  different  qualities  of 
any  object,  as  a  table,  or  chair,  and  express  them  by  a  single  term. 
But  the  mind  apprehends  these  separately  before  it  thus  connects 
them.  Indeed,  it  never  so  unites  them,  as  not  still  to  preserve  their 
separable  character,  and  to  cognize  them  as  such.  "The  clearer  is  its 
vision,"  and  "the  wider  the  scope  of  its  intuitions,"  to  use  the  figura- 
tive language  of  Hodge,  the  more  distinctly  separate,  and  the  more 
plainly  plural  do  these  intuitions  appear. 

3.  In  seeking,  therefore,  for  the  intuitive  conceptions  which  enter 
into  the  idea  of  God,  we  ought  not  to  be  surprised  that  they  are 
simple,  and  yet  that  two,  or  more  of  them,  may  unite  in  the  proof  of 
His  existence.  Thus  is  it,  that  so  far  as  God  is  known,  His  existence 
is  intuitively  known,  however  few,  or  many,  may  be  the  intui- 
tions involved  ;  for  the  mind  while  originally  perceiving  them  separ- 
ately, still  combines  them  together,  and  as  the  result  of  all,  as  of  each, 


21  Abstract  of  Theology. 

believes  that  God  exists.  But  the  meaning  of  what  is  thus  affirmed, 
in  relation  to  a  single  intuition  only,  is  far  less  than  in  relation  to  two, 
or  three,  or  all. 

Of  these  intuitive  conceptions  we  shall  find  that  only  the  simplest 
are  universally  accepted.  Greater  intelligence,  cultivation,  and 
thoughtful n ess  lead  to  the  knowledge  of  others  by  some.  Were  these 
so  stated  to  all  as  to  be  comprehended,  they  would  be  as  fully  accept- 
able to  all  as  to  any.  They  are  limited,  as  to  their  reception,  not  be- 
cause they  are  less  true,  nor  because  the  nature  of  one  man  accepts, 
while  that  of  another  rejects  them,  but  because  they  have  either  not 
been  suggested  to  the  intellect,  or,  if  suggested,  their  meaning  has  not 
been  understood.  The  more  of  these  that  we  know,  and  the  higher 
the  nature  of  the  thought  conveyed  by  them,  the  purer,  and  the 
greater,  will  be  the  meaning  to  us  of  the  Being  of  God. 

4.  Some  of  the  more  manifest  of  these  may  be  taken  as  examples 
of  their  nature,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  men  arrive,  through  them, 
at  the  knowledge  of  God's  existence. 

(1.)  That  which  is  dependent  must  have  its  final  support  in  some- 
thing purely  independent. 

(2.)  Derived  existence  must  have  its  ultimate  origin  in  that  which 
is  self  existent. 

(3.)  Every  effect  must  have  its  cause,  either  within,  or  without 
itself. 

The  truth  of  the  above  affirmations  must  be  admitted  as  soon  as 
their  meaning  is  perceived.  But,  if  the  first  be  true,  there  is  some 
being  upon  whom  men  depend,  and  to  whom,  therefore,  they  are  under 
obligations  of  duty,  and  obedience,  whom  they  must  fear,  and  whose 
protection  they  must  seek.  This  is  the  most  general  idea  of  God.  If 
the  second  be  true,  the  being  upon  whom  men  depend,  is,  also,  the 
one  through  whom  they  exist;  or  there  are  two  beings,  the  one  the 
source  of  life,  the  other  the  cause  of  its  preservation,  and  support. 
One  of  these  will  be  independent,  and  the  other  self  existent.  That 
the  uncultivated  should  not  perceive  that  these  two  are  necessarily 
one  is  not  a  matter  of  surprise.  The  possibility  of  this  has  allowed 
the  existence  of  polytheism.  But,  when  they  are  thus  united,  the  idea 
of  God  has  been  that  of  an  independent  self  existent  Being,  wThich  is  a 
complex  idea,  and  is  consciously  based  upon,  not  one,  but  two  in- 
tuitive conceptions,  though  they  are  now  united  together.  In  like 
mariner,  the  third  of  these    is   accepted    as  soon    as  comprehended. 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


22 


It  is  only  necessary,  to  know  what  is  meant  by  the  terms  "effect," 
and  "cause  within,  and  without  itself."  This  is  attained  through 
observation,  and  experience.  The  idea  of  cause,  and  effect  is  found 
even  in  very  young  children,  who  cannot  be  persuaded  that  any- 
thing has  happened  without  a  cause.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  teach 
what  is  meant  by  "having  the  cause  within,  and  without  itself." 
It  may  be  illustrated  by  the  difference  between  a  clock,  moving  its 
own  hands  because  of  its  own  mechanism,  and  the  hands  of  the 
same  clock,  moved  by  some  person  ;  or  by  that  between  a  horse, 
which  has  the  power  of  self  motion,  and  the  cart  which  moves  only 
because  he  draws  it.  The  meaning  of  the  terms  of  this  intuitive 
suggestion  has  not  been  difficult  to  comprehend;  consequently  the 
existence  of  God,  as  based  upon  it,  has  been  generally  accepted. 
To  the  common  mind,  especially,  it  has  commended  itself,  as  teach- 
ing that  God  is  the  creator  of  the  world,  and  thus  accounting  for 
the  existence  of  all  things  He  has  made.  In  this  case,  also,  men 
have  not  always  associated  the  things  which  we  see,  with  the  one 
God.  In  some  forms  of  belief,  they  have  divided  the  universe 
among  more  gods  than  one.  In  others,  they  have  conceived  of  it  as 
made  by  a  god  inferior  to  the  Great  Supreme,  whom  they  recognized. 
But,  in  these  varied  ways,  they  have  shown  a  universal  accept- 
ance of  the  idea  of  causality,  and  of  the  intuitive  conception  which 
arises  upon  its  comprehension.  The  only  .objection  made  to  it,  is 
that  of  Hume,  and  Kant,  who  have  thought  that  the  knowledge  of 
causation  must  be  limited  by  our  experience.  But  evidently  ex- 
perience only  teaches  the  meaning  of  the  terms  of  that  law,  not  the 
law  itself. 

5.  Other  intuitive  conceptions  might  be  added  which  are  not  so 
simple,  but  which  are  as  truly  believed  by  those  who  comprehend 
them.  Take  for  example  some  of  those  which  enter  into  the  idea 
of  God  as  the  perfect  Being. 

(1.)  The  distinctions  of  right,  and  wrong  must  have  some  absolute 
standard,  which  is  personal,  conscious,  unchangeable,  and  without 
limitations  of  time  or  space.     But  this  is  God. 

(2.)  Moral  perfection  cannot  be  merely  ideal,  but  must  have  some 
real  embodiment;  else  there  could  be  no  imperfection,  and,  especially, 
no  degrees  of  imperfection,  since  degrees  imply  the  existence  of  that 
to  which  imperfection  approaches,  or,  from  which  it  recedes,  and  this 
can  only  be  absolute  perfection.  But  absolute  Perfection  is  itself 
God. 


23  Abstract  of  Theology. 

IV.     The  arguments  which  confirm  this  belief. 

The  theistic  proofs  have  been  divided  into  arguments  a  priori,  and 
a  posteriori.  This  is  a  convenient  division,  although  some  of  those 
a  priori  have  in  them  some  elements  of  an  a  posteriori  nature,  and 
some  of  those  a  posteriori  depend  upon  a  priori  principles.  As  to 
some  of  them,  also,  it  is  difficult  to  draw  an  exact  line,  and  assign 
them  to  the  one  class,  or  to  the  other. 

An  argument  a  priori  is  one  to  prove  the  existence  of  some  effect, 
or  fact,  from  the  knowledge  we  have  of  an  antecedent  cause,  or  of 
some  reason,  or  principle,  in  the  nature  of  things,  which  necessarily 
involves  the  existence  of  a  certain  consequence. 

1.     Some  of  the    arguments   a  priori  in  proof  of  God's  existence. 

An  argument  a  priori,  for  the  being  of  God,  is  one  based  upon  some 
reason  in  the  nature  of  things,  or  some  principle  cognized  by  the 
human  mind,  by  which,  independent  of  any  examination  of  the  works 
of  God,  we  are  led  to  infer  His  existence. 

(1.)  The  most  celebrated  of  all  of  these  is  that  which  argues  the 
being  of  God  from  the  idea  we  have  of  Him  in  the  mind.  It  is  sup- 
posed to  have  been  first  presented  by  Anselm,  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, England,  in  his  work  called  Proslogium  seu  Allogium  de  Dei 
natura,  chap.  2.3.4.  His  form  of  the  argument  may  be  briefly  stated 
thus.  By  definition  God  is  a  Being  such  as  no  greater  can  be  con- 
ceived. But  we  can  conceive  of  a  being  whose  non-existence  is  im- 
possible. If  God,  then,  does  not  necessarily  exist,  we  can  conceive  of 
a  greater  than  God,  which  is  contrary  to  the  definition.  Therefore, 
God  must  exist. 

This  argument,  from  the  idea  of  God  in  the  mind,  was  a  favorite 
one  of  the  Schoolmen.  It  appears  in  various  forms  in  many  of  their 
works.  It  has,  however,  been  commonly  called  the  Cartesian  argu- 
ment, having  been  set  forth  with  signal  ability  by  Des  Cartes.  One 
form  in  which  he  gives  it  is  based  upon  the  idea  in  the  mind  of 
Supreme  Perfection.  To  this  we  attain,  though  ourselves  only  crea- 
tures of  imperfection.  Whence  is  it?  It  must  come  from  the  All 
Perfect,  who  has  stamped  it  on  our  being,  as  the  artificer  sets  his 
trade-mark  on  the  work  of  his  intelligence. 

He  also  presents,  in  the  following  syllogism,  an  argument  more 
closely  resembling  that  of  Anselm. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  24 

"To  affirm  that  any  attribute  is  contained  in  the  nature,  or  concep- 
tion of  a  thing,  is  to  affirm  that  such  attribute  is  true  of  the  thing, 
and  that  it  is  surely  contained  in  it ; 

But,  necessary  existence  is  contained  in  the  nature,  and  conception, 
of  the  Deity  ; 

Therefore,  necessary  existence  is  a  true  attribute  of  the  Deity ;  or 
God   of  necessity  exists." 

[See  Blunt's  Theological  Dictionary,  Art.  Theism:  in  which  are 
also  more  full  statements  of  all  the  above  mentioned  forms  of  this 
argument.] 

But  the  most  complete,  and  clearest  presentation  of  this  argument 
is  given  by  Bishop  Stillingfleet.  Origines  Sacrae,  vol.  1,  pp.  484-492. 
The  following  is  a  mere  statement  of  the  syllogistic  form  presented, 
without  the  arguments  that  support  it. 

That,  which  we  do  clearly,  and  distinctly,  perceive  to  belong  to  the 
nature,  and  essence  of  a  thing,  may  be  with  truth  affirmed  of  the 
thing;  a  clear  and  distinct  perception  in  the  mind  being  the  greatest 
evidence  we  can  have  of  its  truth. 

But  we  do  have  a  clear  and  distinct  perception  that  necessity  of 
existence  doth  belong  to  the  nature  of  God. 

Therefore,  He  must  exist. 

This  argument,  from  the  idea  of  God,  has  been  strenuously  objected 
to.  Kant  opposed  it  on  the  ground  that  "the  mere  supposableness, 
or  logical  possibility,  of  a  perfect  being  is  no  proof  of  the  objective, 
or  real  possibility  of  such  a  being,  and  existence  cannot  be  inferred 
from  a  mere  idea."     Knapp's  Theology,  p.  86. 

But,  in  reply  to  this  objection,  it  may  be  said  that  the  argument 
against  which  it  is  presented,  does  not  prove  the  mere  logical  possi- 
bility, but  the  logical  certainty,  or  necessity,  for  such  a  being.  More- 
over, that  it  is  not  contended  that  every  subjective  conception  must 
have  an  objective  realicy ;  but  only  that. certain  ones  may  have  such- 
a  reality,  and  that  this  one,  the  idea  of  a  God,  which  itself  involves 
the  idea  of  necessary  existence,  must,  in  consequence  of  the  idea  thus 
involved,  possess  that  reality. 

Hodge  objects  that  if  it  "has  any  validity  it  is  unimportant.  It  is 
only  saying  that  what  must  be  actually  is.''  But  this  is  not  merely 
such  an  abstract  statement.  It  is  a  proof  that  something,  namely, 
the  being  of  God,  actually  is,  because  of  the  proof  of  the  correctness 
of  our  conception  that  necessary  existence  belongs  to  His  nature. 


25  Abstract  of  Theology. 

It  has  also  been  objected  to  it  that  "it  confounds  ideal  existence 
with  real  existence."  But  certainly  there  is  no  confounding  of  ideal 
existence,  and  real  existence,  abstractly,  nor  of  forms  of  ideal,  and 
real  existence,  generally,  but  the  arguments  only  show  the  actuality 
of  a  single  form  of  ideal  existence,  because  the  very  nature  of  the  idea 
involves  its  correspondent  reality. 

(2.)  A  second  a  priori  argument  for  the  existence  of  God  was  de- 
vised by  Moses  Lowman,  and  is  from  the  nature  of  existence,  and 'the 
relation  between  necessary  and  contingent  existence.  The  following 
is  a  still  more  brief  statement  of  the  points  of  the  argument,  given 
by  Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith,  in  his  First  Lines  of  Christian  Theology, 
pp.  99-101. 

1.  Positive  existence  is  possible,  for  it  involves  no  contradiction. 

2.  All  possible  existence  is  either  necessary,  which  must  be,  and  in 
its  own  nature  cannot  but  be,  or  contingent,  which  may  be,  or  may  not 
be. 

3.  Some  existence  is  necessary  ;  for  if  all  existence  were  contingent, 
all  existence  might  not  be  as  well  as  might  be;  and  that  thing  which 
might  not  be  never  could  be  without  some  other  thing  as  the 
prior  cause  of  its  existence,  since  every  effect  must  have  a  cause.  If, 
therefore,  all  possible  existence  were  contingent,  all  existence  would 
be  impossible;  because  the  idea,  or  conception  of  it  would  be  that  of 
an  effect  without  a  cause,  which  involves  a  contradiction. 

4.  Necessary  existence  must  be  actual  existence. 

5.  Necessary  existence  must  be  always. 

6.  Necessary  existence  must  be  wherever  any  existence  is  possible. 

7.  There  can  be  but  one  necessarily  existent  being,  for  two  could 
in  no  respect  differ  from  each  other,  that  is,  they  would  be  one,  and 
the  same  being. 

8.  The  one  necessarily  existent  Being  must  have  all  possible  per- 
fections. 

9.  The  one  necessarily  existent  Being  must  be  a  free  agent. 

10.  Therefore,  there  is  one  necessarily  existent  Being,  the  cause  of 
all  contingent  existence,  that  is  of  all  other  existences.besides  Himself; 
and  this  Being  is  eternal,  infinite,  possessed  of  all  possible  perfections, 
and  is  an  intelligent  free  agent;  that  is  this  Being  is  God. 

o.  A  third  argument  a  priori  is  that  of  Dr.  Samuel  Clarke,  in  the 
Bjoyle  Lectures  which  he  delivered.    It  may  be  briefly  presented  thus. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  26 

Some  thing  must  have  existed  from  all  eternity,  for  since  some- 
thing now  exists,  it  is  evident  that  some  thing  always  was, — otherwise 
the  things  which  now  are  must  have  been  produced  out  of  nothing, 
absolutely,  and  without  cause,  which  is  absurd,  for  nothing  can  be  pro- 
duced, and  yet  be  without  cause. 

But  now  if  something  has  existed  from  all  eternity,  either  there 
must  always  have  been  some  unchangeable  and  infinite  being,  or  else 
an  infinite  succession  of  changeable,  and  dependent  beings,  without 
any  original  cause,  which  is  absurd. 

Dr.  Clarke  does  not  discuss  the  absurdity  of  an  infinite  series  in  the 
past. 

The  impossibility  of  such  a  series  appears,  however,  from  its  very 
nature.  There  can  be  no  past  infinite  series,  because  an  infinite 
series  is  one,  the  last  term  of  which  can  never  be  attained,  or  com- 
pleted. But,  in  an  infinite  series,  going  backward,  the  term  now 
present  is  the  first  of  the  series,  and  not  the  last.  The  last  term  of  the 
series  is  really  the  first  in  existence.  But  that  first  was  completed 
before  the  second.  It  has  already  existed.  The  series,  therefore,  as 
now  before  us  is  one,  all  of  whose  terms  have  already  appeared,  and 
the  series,  therefore,  however  indefinite  in  the  numbers  of  its  terms,  is 
still  a  completed, 'and,  therefore,  a  finite  series.  [See  this  matter  ably 
discussed  by  Rev.  Joseph  Tracy,  in  the  Bibliotheca  Sacra,  Vol.  7 
pp.  613-626.  Also  Turretine.  Theol.  Vol.  1,  Book  3,  Ques.  1,  par.  6', 
p.  154.] 

The  value  of  the  arguments  a  priori  has  been  questioned.  But  on 
the  other  hand  they  have  seemed  to  some  eminently  satisfactory.  To 
these  they  have  appeared  to  be  clothed  with  the  authority  of  God  Him- 
self speaking  through  the  constitution  He  has  given  to  the  mind,  and  its  . 
capacity  for  the  intuitive  conception  of  underlying  principles.  To 
those  who  perceive  these  principles,  the  proofs  are  as  conclusive  as  the 
consciousness  of  their  own  existence,  and  as  authoritative  as  the  dic- 
tates of  conscience.  These  principles  are  accepted,  and  arguments  are 
formed  upon  them  in  the  same  way  as  in  mathematical  demonstra- 
tions, and  afford  those  who  perceive  the  truth  of  them  actual  demon- 
strations of  the  fact  that  God  exists. 

But  many  have  thought  them  fallacious,  and  have  denied  the  possi- 
bility of  demonstrative  proof  that  there  is  a  God.  To  such  the  argu- 
ments a  posteriori  have  alone  seemed  to  be  valuable.  Whether  or  not 
this  be  true  they  are  certainly  of  much   greater  value   in  general,  be- 


27  Abstract  of  Theology. 

cause  they  are  much  more  simple,  and  better  adapted  to  force  convic- 
tion upon  the  minds  of  the  masses  of  mankind. 

2.     The  arguments  a  posteriori. 

The  value  of  these  arguments  has  not  been  duly  appreciated.  Men 
have  looked  for  that  kind  of  demonstration  of  God's  existence,  called 
mathematical,  which  alone  can  arise  from  arguments  based  upon  ad- 
mitted axioms,  and  proceeding,  thence  to  their  conclusions  by  invin- 
cible logical  processes.  Such  arguments,  if  they  exist,  can  only  be  of 
the  nature  of  those  a  priori  already  considered. 

But  while  these  may  not  exist,  the  arguments  for  God  a  posteriori 
are  as  conclusive  as  similar  ones  on  any  other  subject.  Their  nature 
is  precisely  like  that  of  those  upon  which  all  physical  science  is  based, 
and  upon  which  men  act  in  all  the  affairs  of  life. 

Physical  science  pursues  the  inductive  method.  It  gathers  all  the 
facts  in  any  matter.  It  recognizes  that  there  are  general  laws  which 
unite  these  facts  in  some  one  principle,  and  those  who  study  them  de- 
vise a  theory  to  explain  them.  Such  a  theory  must  account  for  all 
the  facts,  and  not  be  opposed  by  any  one  of  them.  If  the  series 
of  facts  can  be  traced  very  generally,  and' any  theory  universally 
accounts  for  them,  while  no  other  can,  that  theory  which,  at  first, 
in  the  presence  of  a  few  facts,  was  only  probable,  becomes  more  and 
more  certain,  and  finally  unquestionable. 

Thus,  the  theory  of  gravitation  has  been  accepted  as  a  great  law 
of  the  universe  binding  it  together,  keeping  all  its  parts  in  all 
their  courses,  and  everywhere  equally  effective  according  to  a  fixed 
proportion  of  numbers,  and  yet  it  is  seen  only  in  its  effects. 

In  like  manner  we  arrive,  according  to  the  strictest  scientific 
method  of  induction,  at  the  existence  of  God.  The  only  theory 
which  accounts  for  the  universe  with  all  its  phenomena  is  that 
which  asserts  that  it  has  proceeded  from  Him.  This  alone  has  been 
satisfactory,  in  the  eyes  of  most  men,  from  the  beginning  of  all  his- 
toric records.  Mankind  have  been  incredulous  as  to  the  sanity,  or 
sincerity  of  those  who  have  denied  it.  No  scientific  theory  has  been 
about  facts  so  universally  existent,  and  so  generally  known.  None 
has  dealt  with  matters  of  more  vital  importance,  or  absorbing  in- 
terest. None  has  been,  as  has  this,  an  object  of  thought  to  every 
intelligent  human  being.  None  has  so  commended  itself  at  once  to 
practical  men,  and  philosophers.     None,  after  having  been  so  far  for- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  28 

gotten,  because  of  sin,  and  ignorance,  as  to  be  remembered  only  in 
its  name,  and,  as  to  its  simplest  facts,  has  risen  to  a  beauty  of  con- 
ception, which  beyond  all  else  constitutes  the  glory  of  Grecian 
philosophy,  while  at  the  same  time  its  belief  has  been  preserved 
in  another  race,  in  its  purity,  by  a  literature,  which  despite  all 
tendencies  to  corrupt  the  theory,  has  maintained  it  in  its  purest  form 
for  generation  after  generation. 

(1.)  The  first  argument  a  posteriori  to  be  considered  is  commonly 
called  the  cosmological,  because  it  argues  the  existence  of  God,  as  a 
First  Cause,  from  the  effects  seen  in  the  world.  It  should,  however, 
be  named  the  argument  from  Causation,  to  distinguish  it  from  the 
teleological  argument,  and  others  which  are  equally  cosmological. 

A  very  striking  form  of  it  was  put  forth  by  Bishop  Berkeley  and  is 
quoted  in  Dwight's  Theology,  Vol.  1,  pp.  79  and  80,  who  gives  it  thus  : 

"We  acknowledge  the  existence  of  each  other  to  be  unquestionable. 
We  say  that  we  know  this  from  our  senses.  Yet,  after  all,  it  is 
intuitively  certain  that  what  we  see  is  not  the  living,  thinking  being, 
which  we  call  man.  On  the  contrary  they  are  merely  effects  of  which 
that  living,  acting  thing  is  the  cause.  We  conclude  the  existence  of 
the  cause  from  the  effects. 

So,  in  the  Universe  around  us,  we  perceive  a  great  variety  of  effects, 
produced  by  some  cause,  adequate  to  their  production. 

This  cause  is  God,  or 'a  being  possessed  of  sufficient  intelligence,  and 
power  to  contrive  and  bring  them  to  pass. 

If  it  be  said  that  these  are  only  the  effect  of  certain  inherent 
powers  of  matter,  and  mind  and,  therefore,  demand  no  extrinsic 
agency,  the  answer  is  that  this  affects  the  conclusion  only  by  removing 
it  one  step  farther  back  in  the  course  of  reasoning." 

By  this  is  meant  that  these  inherent  powers  are  only  effects  which 
themselves  demand  an  adequate  cause. 

It  will  be  seen  that  this  argument  is  based  upon  the  law  of  causality. 
Hence  it  should  be  called  the  argument  from  causation. 

I  proceed  now  to  give  this  argument  in  another  form,  simpler 
indeed,  but  yet  more  complete. 

It  may  be  stated  syllogistically  thus  : 

A.  Every  fact  or  effect  must  have  its  adequate  cause,  either  within 
or  without  itself. 

B.  There  are  effects  in  the  Universe  which  have  no  adequate 
cause,  either  in  themselves  or  in  the  Universe. 


Abstract  of  Theology. 

C.  Therefore,  there  must  be  an  adequate  cause  for  their  existence 
individually,  and  as  a  whole,  in  some  being  without,  which  is  the 
Supreme  Being,  the  cause  of  all  things. 

We  consider  first  the  proof  of  the  major  premiss  of  the  syllogism, 
namely  A.,  that  every  effect  must  have  its  adequate  cause,  either 
within  or  without  itself. 

Objection  1.  It  has  been  objected  to  this  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  causation,  and  that  all  of  which  we  have  any  experience  is 
mere  antecedence  and  consequence. 

But  it  may  be  replied  that  experience  teaches  us  that  there  are 
effects  in  some  consequents  which  are  the  result  of  relation  to  and 
power  in  certain  antecedents. 

We  .admit  the  existence  of  many  antecedents  and  consequents 
between  which  there  is  no  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  but  experience 
plainly  teaches  that  relation  in  others. 

This  has  been  so  far  admitted  that  Hume  and  Kant  have  simply 
attempted  to  confine  the  law  of  causation  to  our  experience.     But 

(1.)  It  is  evident  that  causes  must  exist  independently  of  our 
experience,  and,  that,  when  we  see  an  effect,  (namely,  something 
evidently  requiring  some  power  for  its  production),  we  know  that  it 
has  had  its  adequate  cause,  even  though  we  have  never  had  experience 
of  its  special  cause.  Indeed  one  of  the  most  important  branches  of 
scientific  enquiry  is  into  the  unknown  causes  of  existing  phenomena, 
which  without  experience  we  know  must  be  effects  of  adequate  causes. 
[Thus  in  Geology,  the  stratification  of  the  rocks,  the  existence  of  fossil 
remains,  the  broken  up  upheavals  of  stratification,  &c,  are  illustrations 
of  this.  So  in  astronomy,  the  perturbations  of  planets,  the  movement 
of  the  stars,  the  disappearance  of  stars,  the  spots  upon  the  sun,  and 
the  rugged  volcanic  condition  of  the  moon,  &c,  &c,  are  similar 
illustrations.  So  also  in  medicine,  the  production  of  disease — as 
yellow  fever.  Even  in  matters  in  which  the  human  will  or  accident 
seems  to  have  been  most  free  from  external  cause,  as  in  the  building 
of  cities,  in  the  number  of  marriages,  &c,  Social  science  seeks 
adequate  physical  causes.] 

(2.)  It  might  also  with  justice  be  added,  that  this  point  needs  no 
proof,  because  the  idea  that  every  effect  must  have  its  cause  is  an 
intuitive  conception  of  the  human  mind.  It  arises  upon  the  first 
perception  of  what  is  meant  by  power.  The  conviction  of  its  truth  is 
seen  in  the  very  earliest  stages  of  infancy. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  3q 

Objection  2.  It  is  again  objected  that  we  ought  to  carry  this  idea 
of  causation  farther  back  and  apply  it  to  the  great  First  Cause.  If 
subsequent  effects,  or  facts,  or  existences  must  have  had  a  cause,  why 
should  not  this  Being,  whom  we  call  God,  and  who  is  more  wonderful 
in  His  nature  than  all  others,  be  Himself  an  effect  and  Himself  have 
a  cause. 

The  reply  to  this  is,  that  experience  does  not  teach  us  that  every 
thing  has  a  cause  without  itself,  but  only  every  thing  which  has  not 
its  cause  in  itself. 

Wherever  there  is  the  principle  of  life  there  is,  to  a  limited  extent 
at  least,  self-causation  in  its  development. 

(1.)  Thus  the  tree  puts  forth  its  own  leaves,  and  flowers,  and 
fruits.  It  is  true  that  it  needs  to  have  had  its  seed  planted  in  a 
favourable  position  and  to  be  surrounded  by  favourable  circumstances. 
Yet,  despite  this,  even  here,  though  in  a  very  limited  way,  there  is 
self-causation. 

So  with  the  motion  in  a  watch,  the  cause  of  which  is  in  its  own 
mechanism. 

(2.)  This  is  more  distinctly  seen  as  we  reach  higher  forms  of  life. 
Here  the  movement  is  self  caused.  Such  is  the  movement  of  a  bird 
as  it  shoots  into  the  air,  or  of  a  beast  as  it  springs  upon  its  prey. 
The  higher  form  of  this  is  apparent.  The  watch  needed  some  action 
upon  it  from  without,  before  its  springs  within  would  act,  but  no 
outward  impelling  cause  here  originates  the  power.  [This  may  be 
illustrated  by  the  difference  between  a  steamboat,  moved  by  its 
machinery  under  the  guidance  of  men,  and  the  movement  of  a  fish 
which  by  its  own  powers  swims  through  the  seas.] 

(3.)  In  a  still  higher  degree  is  this  seen  in  man.  Here  is  found 
a  self-determining  will  which  puts  forth  effects  which  may  be  more 
confidently  spoken  of  as  self-originated.  We  have  not  here  the  mere 
instinct  which  perhaps  blindly  prompts  the  mere  animal  to  act,  but  a 
will  which,  through  liberty  of  choice,  acts  as  it  pleases,  and  is  governed 
only  by  motives  to  which  it  yields  of  its  own  self-choice. 

We  do  not  presume  to  say  that  this  explains  to  us  God's  self- 
existence,  and  independence,  or  how  he  is  self-caused,  having  the 
cause  of  causes#in  Himself,  but  we  simply  assert  (a)  that  our  experience 
of  causes  does  not  force  us  to  find  an  outside  cause  for  every  effect, 
and,  therefore,  a  cause  for  what  we  call  the  first  or  final  cause,  but 
simply  a  cause  for  every  thing  which  has  not  its  cause  of  existence 
and  action  in  itself. 


31  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(b)  We  may  also  claim  from  this,  however,  that  if,  between  the 
lifeless  clod  and  the  man  made  from  it,  such  difference  exists,  that 
the  one  is  no  cause  at  all  in  itself,  and  the  other  capable  of  such  self- 
causation,  then,  when  we  rise  to  the  Great  Being,  who  has  made  the 
Universe,  we  have  the  right  to  expect  such  infinite  superiority  to  man 
that  He  should  be,  not  only  the  cause  of  all  things,  but,  being  Self- 
existent,  should  have  within  Himself  the  cause  or  ground  of  His  own 
existence. 

That  there  may  not  be  and  is  not  such  a  Great  First  Cause  is  be- 
yond the  denial  of  any.  That  which  satisfies  the  mind  of  His 
existence  is,  that  it  is  so  constituted  that  it  cannot  rest  under  this 
conviction  of  causation,  until  the  idea  is  presented  of  a  Great  First 
Cause  having  self-existence  or  the  cause  of  His  own  existence  in 
Himself. 

If  this  be  not  true,  then  there  has  been  an  infinite  series  of  finite 
causes  from  Eternity,  or  an  infinite  succession  of  such  series,  each  of 
which  is  both  impossible  and  absurd. 

B.  There  are  effects  in  the  Universe  which  have  no  adequate  cause 
in  themselves,  nor  in  the  Universe  as  a  whole. 

1.  This  may  be  argued  from  the  Universe  as  a  whole,  as  an  exist- 
ing substance,  (an  entity),  or  from  its  component  parts  as  existing 
substances  (entities). 

We  have  the  phenomena  of  the  material  world  about  us. 

As  presented  to  our  eyes,  it  is  a  wonderful  mechanism,  more  so  than 
the  most  perfect  machinery  man  can  devise,  and  presents  an  effect  in 
itself,  and  in  its  parts,  which  demands  a  cause  of  more  power  and 
skill  than  we  can  conceive. 

Was  it  made  as  it  is?  If  so,  how  great  the  cause  which  will  account 
for  its  phenomena  ? 

But  it  is  asserted  that  it  was  not  thus  made,  but  is. a  growth  which 
has  been  reached  by  long  ages  of  gradual  development,  accompanied 
by  destruction,  and  renewal,  and  modification  until  it  has  attained  its 
present  form. 

We  shall  not  deny  this,  but  admit  the  force  of  all  the  evidence 
which  suggests  it. 

But,  after  all,  this  growth  is  also  an  effect.  It  has  proceeded  either 
from  some  inherent  power  of  self-development,  or  has*been  produced 
by  the  power  and  will  of  some  outward  cause. 

It  is  claimed  by  anti-theists  that  it  is  a  self-development  of  matter 
which  has  taken  upon  itself  form  after  form  until  this  result  has  been 
attained. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  32 

This  theory  involves  the  idea  that  all  growth,  and  life,  and  mind, 
are  the  outcome  of  original  inorganic  matter.  It  claims  that  in  the 
ultimate  analysis  we  reach  simple  molecules  of  matter,  and  that,  from 
the  development  of  these,  we  have  this  whole  universal  structure. 

Admit  now  all  that  is  thus  claimed  as  fact  by  anti-theists,  even  go 
so  far  as  to  suppose  that  there  has  been  a  time  when  nothing  existed 
bur.  molecules,  even  a  few,  even  two  only,  even  one,  if  it  should  be 
desired ;  reduce  the  whole  material  universe  to  a  speck  the  one 
millionth  part  of  a  grain  of  sand, — and  still  we  have  in  that  molecule 
an  effect  entirely  unaccounted  for,  except  as  it  with  all  its  vast 
possibilities  was  made  by  some  creative  energy.  There  is,  therefore, 
even  here  a  demand  for  the  self-existent  cause. 

Yet,  to  admit  all  of  the  above,  is  to  admit  more  than  we  ought, 
more  than  there  is  the  slightest  reason  to  suppose  to  be  true  ;  for  there 
is  no  evidence  that  any  matter  has  been  added  to  the  Universe  since 
its  creation.  Matter  is  seen  to  expand,  and  contract,  to  take  on  one 
form,  and  then  another,  but  there  is  evidence  neither  of  waste  on  the 
one  hand,  nor  of  increase  on  the  other.  But  there  must  have  been 
such  increase  of  matter  unless  the  world  had  in  its  molecule  period  as 
many  molecules  containing  in  themselves  as  much  material  as  is  now 
existent.  Whatever  growth  or  development,  therefore,  may  be 
ascribed  to  the  world,  the  whole  of  it  has  existed  from  the  beginning, 
whether  in  an  organized  form  or  in  simple  molecules.  It  is,  however, 
as  difficult,  without  admitting  a  producing  cause,  to  account  for  the 
world- mass  of  molecules,  even  for  a  single  molecule,  as  for  the 
Universe  created  in  the  forms  in  which  it  appears  to-day. 

2.  Let  us  now  consider  certain  actual  effects  seen  in  the  Universe 
as  farther  proof  of  an  external  cause. 

(1.)  Motion.  The  principle  of  motion  in  the  Universe  is  beautifully 
developed.  That  Universe  is  regular.  It  is  governed  by  fixed  laws. 
There  is  harmony  in  its  movements.  The  principles  of  centripetal 
and  centrifugal  action,  governed  by  the  law  of  gravitation  not  only 
regulate  this  motion,  but  cause  the  Universe  to  be  self-balanced  ;  so 
that  we  have  a  kind  of  mechanism  not  only  impossible  for  man  to 
imitate,  but  the  principle  of  which  he  cannot  comprehend  though  he 
sees  and  acknowledges  it  as  a  fact. 

Now  whence  this  motion  ?  Inert  matter  has  no  motion.  A  piece 
of  rock,  or  a  clod  of  soil,  even  a  tree,  remains  always  where  it  is, 
unless  moved  by  some  outward  power. 


33  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Our  knowledge  of  this  inertness  in  matter  is  such  that  we  know 
that  an  infant's  ball  will  remain  forever,  where  it  has  been  put,  unless 
disturbed  from  without. 

Whence  then  this  motion  of  the  Universe  which  is  not  a  simple 
movement,  such  as  given  to  a  ball  by  striking  it,  but  a  complex 
motion,  involving  the  description  of  circles  and  ellipses  and  parabola, 
and  so  involving  them  as  to  keep  each  in  its  sphere  without  confusion 
or  distraction  ? 

Can  any  one  persuade  himself  that  ten  thousand  balls  laid  upon  a 
plain  surface  will  have  any  more  power  of  motion  than  one,  or  that  a 
Universe  of  them  created  without  motion,  would  not,  unless  influenced 
from  without,  remain  utterly  and  forever  at  rest  ? 

Some  thing,  therefore,  must  account  for  the  motion. 

Now  our  experience  is  that  all  motion  primarily  proceeds  from 
mind  or  will.  Thus  I  move  a  ball  as  the  result  of  will  influenced  by 
my  mind.  Even  if  I  accidentally  kick  it,  not  intending  to  do  so,  and 
even  ignorant  that  I  have  done  so,  this  is  still  true.  I  had  willed  to 
move  my  body  and  that  body  by  its  contact  when  in  motion  with  the 
ball  has  moved  it. 

Before  motion  then  we  have  mind  ;  before  the  motion  of  these 
atoms  a  directing  mind;  so  that  not  only  for  the  creation,  but  for  the 
motion  of  molecules  we  must  recognize  God. 

If  it  be  said  that  this  motion  was  caused  by  wind,  we  inquire 
whence  came  that  wind?  Is  not  it  itself  produced  by  motion  ?  If  so,  it 
cannot  have  been  the  primary  cause  of  motion.  We  are  still  forced 
to  the  supposition  that  motion  has  proceeded  from  God. 

If  it  be  claimed  that  it  came  from  heat,  whence  was  the  heat  ?  Heat 
is  also  the  result  of  motion.  What  caused  the  movement  which  led 
to  its  existence  ? 

If  it  be  said  that  the  motion  was  a  matter  of  chance,  we  ask  what  is 
chance?  Is  there  any  such  reality?  We  apply  the  name  variously, 
but  in  all  cases  the  thoughtful  mind  knows  that  there  is  no  "chance" 
in  the  sense  of  uncaused,  unwilled  forces  present. 

Thus  I  place  dice  in  a  box  and  throw  them.  I  say  that  the  result- 
ant numbers  come  by  chance.  But  I  know  that  that  result  has  fol- 
lowed unerringly  under  law  from  the  forces  present.  But  law 
supposes  the  mind  of  the  lawgiver,  and  the  results  of  his  law  are  from 
purpose,  not  from  chance.  Hence  the  proverb '.  "The  lot  is  cast  into 
the  lap  ;  but  the  whole  disposition  thereof  is  of  the  Lord."  Prov.  16;33. 

So  also  when  I  meet  in  New  York  an  acquaintance  from  Texas,  I 


Abstract  of  Theology.  34 

sayr  ':we  met  by  chance. '"  By  this  I  mean  that  the  meeting  was  not 
because  of  the  purpose  of  both,  or  either  of  us.  But  I  do  not  deny 
the  laws  which  have  governed  each  of  us,  through  which  guided  by 
a  Higher  Power  we  have  met  as  He  had  purposed  we  should. 

In  no  usage  of  the  word  chance,  therefore,  do  we  mean  to  assert 
absence  of  purpose.  There  is  no  such  kind  of  chance  and  by  none 
such  can  we  account  for  the  existence  of  motion  in  the  Universe. 

(2.)     Form  and  life  also  appear  among  the   effects  of  the  Universe. 

Matter  is  not  simply  inorganic  with  the  form  and  shape  which 
might  have  been  bestowed  upon  it  by  motion.  But  it  takes  special 
forms  of  life. 

Between  the  inorganic  and  this  organic  life  there  is  a  wide  interval. 
Even  in  the  very  lowest  forms  of  vegetable  life  there  is  movement  and 
growth  and  capacity  to  absorb  and  increase,  and  give  forth  which 
shows  a  new  kingdom  in  nature. 

It  is  admitted  that  here  the  whole  substance  is  material  and  that 
the  growth  of  vegetables  is  nothing  more  than  the  absorption  into  life 
of  what  has  been  already  in  inorganic  nature. 

But  this  power  of  taking  on  form  and  life  is  very  striking.  If  the 
change  could  be  made  into  a  single  form  only,  it  would  be  still 
surprising.  But  the  forms  are  innumerable.  Not  only  this,  but  the 
specific  form,  having  been  once  assumed,  attains  not  only  fixedness 
in  the  original,  but  power  continuously  in  the  species  to  reproduce  its 
like.  Yet,  nevertheless,  there  is  a  certain  power  of  adaptation  by 
which,  within  fixed  limits,  there  is  variation. 

This  is  the  law  of  plants.  In  a  still  higher  degree  is  it  true  of 
animals. 

Now  whence  this  change  from  inorganic  to  such  organic  matter  ? 

Is  it  inherent  in  matter  ?  Then  matter  would  be  constantly  engaged 
in  thus  developing  the  organic  from  the  inorganic.  This  is  evident 
from  what  we  see  in  crystallization.  Here  there  is  power  in  matter 
to  assume  special  forms.  The  law  under  which  this  is  done  in  each 
kind  is  known,  and,  in  accordance  with  such  law.  and  not  otherwise, 
are  the  shapes  in  crystallization  assumed.  We  can  place  the  proper 
substances  in  their  appropriate  relations  and  produce  the  result. 
Why  ?  Because  here  certain  matter  has  inherent  power  to  assume 
certain  forms.  But  this  matter  can  not  assume  other  forms.  Other 
matter  cannot  assume  these  forms.  And  thus  is  it  seen  that  matter 
as  such  has  not  the   inherent  power  to   assume   form,  but  that  such 


35  Abstract  of  Theology. 

power  has  been  bestowed  only  on  certain  kinds  of  matter  under  the 
action  of  specific  law  and  not  of  its  own  prompting. 

Yet  from  this  power  of  crystallization  has  been  argaed  the  power  of 
matter  to  produce  both  vegetable  and  animal  life.  The  most  that 
could  be  concluded  is  that  some  kinds  of  matter,  (such  as  we  now  see 
to  do  so,)  under  circumstances,  (under  which  it  now  so  acts,)  are 
capable  of  producing  vegetable  and  animal  life.  But  we  see  this  done 
only  by  propagation  and  generation  from  like  to  like.  Therefore, 
only  thus  are  we  authorized  to  infer  that  such  life  and  form  has  been 
heretofore  prod  need  from  matter  alone.  This  still  leaves  necessary 
the  creation  of  the  first  forms   through   which   matter  has  this  power. 

Various  attempts  have  been  made  to  produce  animals  and  plants 
by  spontaneous  generation.  But  these  attempts  have  thus  far  utterly 
failed. 

Because  of  this  inability  to  produce  by  any  means  the  organic 
directly  from  the  inorganic,  anti-theists  have  been  driven  to  adopt  the 
idea,  (a  mere  idea  without  proof)  that  there  is  a  substance  which 
they  call  protoplasm,  which  common  substance  underlies  all  life 
forms  vegetable  or  animal  and  that,  in  its  varied  changes,  ordinary 
inorganic  matter  finally  attains  to  this  protoplasm. 

As  to  this  we  should  remember  (a)  that  protoplasm  is  not  the  name 
of  a  substance  which  has  been  found  developed  from  inorganic  matter. 
No  such  substance  has  as  yet  been  discovered.  This  is  only  the 
name  that  would  be  given  to  it  if  it  should  be. 

(b)  That  the  name  is  applied  to  the  earliest  forms  of  organic  life 
as  being  what  protoplasm  would  be  if  thus  developed  from  inorganic 
matter.  But  the  substance  here  found  is  really  a  part  of  organic  life, 
produced  by  the  process  of  propagation  or  generation  through  which 
matter  of  this  kind  becomes  life  and  form. 

The  whole  idea  of  protoplasm,  therefore,  is  a  figment,  except  within 
the  limits  of  organic  life. 

But,  admit  this  to  be  true,  and  that  the  first  forms  (the  protoplasm) 
that  we  see  are  the  result  directly  of  inorganic  matter  and  not  of  organic, 
it  must  still  be  acknowledged  that  in  all  the  protoplasm  yet  examined 
there  is  no  variation,  that  all  of  it  is  exactly  alike,  there  being  but 
one  kind  of  protoplastic  germs  so  far  as  investigation  can  perceive  or 
material  elements  indicate.  Yet,  from  a  number  of  specimens  of  this 
protoplasm,  come  several  different  kinds  of  life.  It  is  as  though  from 
seed,  precisely  the  same,  should  come  wheat  and  barley,  and  rice,  and 
rye,  and  maize.     Now,  what  is  here  the  directing  power   which,  from 


Abstract  of  Theology.  36 

the  same  substance,  apparently,  produces  different  forms  of  life,  some 
vegetable  and  some  animal,  and  various  vegetables,  as  well  as  various 
animals,  and  which  so  produces  them  without  variation  that  the  proto- 
plasm taken  from  one  species  of  animals  always  produces  that  species 
and  not  another?  This  can  be  understood,  if  this  be  organic  life 
which  is  acting,  and  acting  under  the  laws  which'  propagate 
species  ;  but  how  explain  it  of  mere  matter  which  has  become  mere 
protoplasm — a  substance  which  differs  in  no  respect  in  itself  and, 
therefore,  for  difference  in  its  results  must  be  indebted  to  some  other 
directing  power  ? 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  protoplasm  we  have  matter  not  in 
a  process  of  self-development,  but  matter  already  organized  in  organic 
forms,  under  a  law  for  reproducing  species  which  law  can  in  no  respect 
account  for  the  origin  of  the  species,  and,  therefore,  forces  us  back  to 
the  idea  of  direct  creation  of  the  species  itself. 

But  if  this  be  true,  the  principle  of  form  and  life  in  the  Universe 
speaks  to  us  distinctly  of  a  God. 

(3.)  Mind  also  appears  among  the  effects  in  the  Universe  which 
can  only  be  accounted  for  upon  the  supposition  of  a  God. 

The  whole  history  of  man  teaches  that,  of  which  we  are  conscious 
in  ourselves,  and  are  taught  by  experience  in  others,  namely,  that  the 
powers  of  the  human  mind  are  wonderful. 

Instinct  in  plants  and  animals  is  itself  incomprehensible.  We  can- 
not tell  why  the  vine  should  put  forth  entwining  tendrils,  or  the  root 
of  a  plant  seek  a  piece  of  bone,  or  push  forward  to  a  well  of  water, 
nor  why  the  birds  should  fly  southward,  or  a  horse  or  dog  should 
dread  danger  which  man  cannot  perceive,  or  an  ox  should  utter  cries 
of  distress  at  the  smell  of  blood,  or  a  bee  construct  its  cells  of  the  most 
economical  shape.  We  account  for  it  by  saying,  that  God  has  so 
constituted  irrational  beasts  for  their  protection  and  happiness.  But 
an  anti-theist  would  say,  these  are  qualities  inherent  in  matter,  so 
that  it  is  the  matter  that  acts  in  the  beast  as  it  does  in  the  vine. 

But  we  have  in  mind  something  of  which  this  cannot  be  said. 
Mind  is  not  mere  instinct.  Indeed  it  differs  widely  from  instinct. 
Thus : 

(a)  Mind  is  individual  will  or  purpose  ;  instinct  is  common  to  the 
whole  species. 

(b)  The  will  or  purpose  is  not  a  blind  tendency,  but  is  the  result 
of  mental  perceptions,  comprehensions  of  facts,  logical  reasoning, 
personal  fancy,  &c,  &c.  ' 


37  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(c)  Its  governing  principle,  being  its  prevailing  motive,  is  the 
desire  of  the  individual  himself,  not  of  another,  not  even  of  God,  not 
even  the  dictate  of  conscience,  or  of  wisdom,  but  merely  of  self-choice. 

(d)  It  often  acts  contrary  to  appetite,  and  desire,  and  passion. 
The  will  refuses  to  do  that  to  which  the  person  is  instinctively 
prompted.  '  This  is  a  peculiar  mark  of  excellence,  not  merely  in  the 
wise  use  of  the  power,  but  in  the  possession  of  the  power  itself.  Irs 
value  in  wise  exercise  may  be  illustrated  by  the  wise  proverb  of 
Solomon  :  '"He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty,  and 
he  that  ruleth  his  Spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."     Prov.  16:32. 

These  are  some  of  the  most  important,  particulars  in  which  mind  is 
seen  to  be  far  superior  to  instinct.  They  have  been  presented  as 
though  admitting  that  instinct  is  a  quality  of  matter. 

But  there  is  no  reason  for  such  admission.  Instinct  is  a  governing 
power  over  animals.  But  whence  comes  it  ?  Is  it  a  growth  in  them,  or 
is  it  something  bestowed  on  them  by  God  for  their  control,  just  as  He 
gives  us  conscience  ;  or  for  their  guidance,  as  He  gives  us  intuitive 
conceptions?  It  is  doubtless  not  the  former,  but,  admit  it  to  be  a  growth, 
whence  the  power  for  such  growth  in  some  matter  and  not  in  all. 
If  it  is  a  property  of  some  of  these  united  molecules,  or  of  these 
particles  of  protoplasm,  why  has  all  matter  not  attained  this  growth, 
and  why  does  not  the  growth  develope  itself  alike  in  all? 

No  reason  can  be  given  for  the  phenomena  of  instinct  which  does 
not  reject  the  idea  of  mere  matter  alone  thus  developing.     Either 

(1.)  The  power  was  first  bestowed  on  some  molecules  to  germinate 
this  instinct,  or 

(2.)  It  was  mOre  directly  given  in  connection  with  the  develop- 
ment of  the  animal  life,  or 

(3.)  The  animal  was  originally  created  with  these  functions,  and 
they  have  continued  by  propagation  to  appear  throughout  the  species. 

If  originating  in  either  of  these  ways  the  existence  of  the  instinct 
proves  that  of  a  regulating,  and  originating,  or  creating  mind. 

But,  as  we  have  seen,  mind  is  still  higher  than  instinct,  and,  if 
instinct  cannot  be  accounted  for  as  a  material  growth,  very  much  less 
so  can  mind.  Even  the  most  persistent  advocates  for  the  develop- 
ment of  life  from  matter,  admit  that  between  the  mind  and  the  body 
which  it  inhabits  there  is  a  wide  interval,  and  while  they  contend  for 
the  development  of  the  latter  through  protoplasm  as  the  work  of 
unaided  matter,  they  admit  that  they  have  never  been  able  to  discover 
anything  which  can  account  for  the  existence  of  mind. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  33 

But,  if  mind  has  no  cause  for  its  existence  in  the  material  Universe, 
it  must  be  the  direct  product  of  the  Infinite  mind,  the  Intelligent 
Personal  God.  There  is  an  old  book  called  Genesis  of  Jewish  origin, 
in  which,  long  before  the  days  of  scientific  inquiry  into  the  origin  of 
man,  was  given  the  only  account  which  has  ever  satisfied,  or  will  ever 
satisfy  the  inquirer  into  that  origin.  "The  Lord  God  formed 
man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the 
breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a  living  soul;"  Gen.  2:7.  This  was 
in  fulfilment  of  the  divine  counsels.  "Let  us  make  man  in  our  image 
after  our  likeness,  &c,"  Gen.  2:26.  Strange  that  any  writer  of  that 
day  should  have  known  that  the  body  of  man  is  of  the  same  material 
as  the  inorganic  matter  of  the  earth,  and  stranger  still  that  he  should 
ascribe  such  origin  to  his  mind  and  soul  as  fully  accounts  for  its  union 
with  matter  and  for  the  soul's  existence,  and,  strangest  of  all,  that  he 
should  have  put  forth  a  theory  such  as  the  world,  with  all  the  wis- 
dom of  the  intervening  ages  to  this  day,  has  not  bettered  ;  but  which 
has  forced  acceptance  of  its  truth  on  all.  Is  not  this  God  telling  us 
what  God  did  and  informing  us  of  the  true  origin  of  mind? 

(4.)  Among  the  many  other  phenomena  of  the  world  which  might 
be  selected,  one  other  only,  namely,  Conscience  need  be  mentioned. 

Of  what  is  this  an  effect  ?  Is  it  the  result  of  matter,  or  of  mind  ? 
What  is  it  but  a  controlling  power,  located  in  each  man,  and  made  a 
part  of  his  nature,  which  commands  him  to  do  the  right  and  avoid  the 
wrong,  and  reproves,  rebukes,  and  punishes  him  for  disobedience  to 
its  dictates. 

Upon  the  theory  that  it  is  God  given,  its  presence  and  its  pheno- 
mena may  be  explained,  but  upon  no  other. 

If  there  be  a  God,  (a)  There  must  be  eternal  principles  of  right  and 
wrong  which  may  form  a  foundation  for  conscience. 

(b)  There  must  be  obligation  to  act  in  accordance  with  these 
principles,  the  non-fulfilment  of  which  would  involve  punishment  by 
God,  and  a  reason  for  the  apprehensions  of  conscience. 

(c)  If  there  be  a  God,  who  has  created  man  with  his  fellows,  that 
God  would  seek  the  happiness  of  the  race  as  such,  which  cannot  be 
attained  if  moral  obligations  be  ignored,  and  hence  would  place 
conscience  in  each  man  to  enforce  these  obligations. 

(d)  If  there  be  a  God  He  must  love  the  right  and  hate  the  wrong. 
How  naturally  would  He  seek  through  conscience  to  have  man  do 
right  and  avoid  wrong. 


39  Abstract  of  Theology. 

If  on  the  other  hand,  there  be  no  God,  then 

(a)  Is  there  any  right  and  wrong  as  conscience  teaches  there  is? 

(b)  Are  we  under  any  obligation  to  our  fellow  men  ?  Have  they 
any  rights  we  should  respect  ?  Is  not  our  power  to  obtain  that  alone 
which  should  limit  our  right  to  possess  ? 

(c)  How  can  we  account  for  the  terror  which  strikes  men  for 
crimes  which  have  been  committed,  terror  not  of  punishment  here, 
but  hereafter  ? 

Conscience,  therefore,  argues  the  existence  of  God  perhaps  even 
more  wonderfully  than  mind ;  for  conscience  is  the  law  which  keeps 
the  moral  Universe  in  being  and  fixes  the  limits  of  its  wanderings,  as 
much,  and  as  truly,  as  the  law  of  gravitation  does  the  material.  Even 
the  defects  of  it  in  our  race  caused  by  sin  only  prove  the  more  con- 
clusively the  power  of  its  law  and  its  necessity  to  human  existence. 
It  is  at  once,  in  connection  with  the  understanding,  the  guide  to 
what  is  right  and  wrong,  the  authority  which  enforces  the  right  and 
forbids  the  wrong,  and  the  avenging  judge  inflicting  punishment  on 
those  who  disobey.  In  the  state  of  innocence  it  was  perfect  in  its 
guidance,  and  authority,  and  peaceful  in  its  approval.  In  our  present 
state,  it  is  imperfect  in  its  guidance  and  has  only  partial  authority 
and  limited  punitive  power.  In  the  future  it  shall  be  like  the  worm 
that  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched. 

Now,  whence  this  conscience,  if  it  be  not  the  messenger  God  sets  in 
the  heart,  teaching  man  more  plainly  than  the  starry  heavens  show 
His  glory,  that  there  is  a  God,  that  He  rules  over  man,  and  governs 
him  by  laws  of  right  and  wrong,  and  punishes  the  sinful  and 
disobedient,  and  rewards  the  obedient  and  righteous. 

The  four  effects  in  the  Universe  which  have  been  mentioned, 
namely,  motion,  form  and  life,  mind,  and  conscience,  prove  this  second 
point  [B]  of  our  syllogism,  namely,  that  there  are  effects  in  the 
Universe  which  have  no  adequate  cause  either  in  themselves  or  in 
the  Universe;  and  from  A.  and  B.  follows  the  conclusion  C,  viz.  there- 
fore, there  must  be  an  adequate  cause  for  the  existence  of  the  Universe 
and  its  facts  individually  and  as  a  whole  in  some  being  without, 
who  must  be  a  Supreme  Being  and  the  First  Cause  of  all  things. 

It  can  only  be  objected  to  this  conclusion  that  the  Being  who  has 
made  our  Universe  may  Himself  have  been  created  by  some  other  and 
that  He  is  not  the  Supreme  Mind.  But  if  He  were  not,  then  there 
must  be  some  being  who  created  Him,  and  thus  we  are  led  to  look  one 


Abstract  of  Theology.  40 

step  further  back  until  we  reach  an  infinite  being  not  created,  but 
having  self-existence,  and  Himself  the  cause  of  all  other  beings  and 
things. 

We  are  shut  up  by  the  argument  from  causation  to  this  result,  or 
to  the  adoption  of  the  idea  of  an  infinite  succession  of  finite  beings 
which  is  absurd  and  impossible. 

The  remaining  a  posteriori  arguments  may  be  more  briefly  presented 
than  this  first  one  from  causation,  for  the  principles  involved  in  this 
to  some  extent  underlie  all  the  rest. 

The  second  a  posteriori  argument  is  that  from  design,  commonly 
called  the  teleological  argument. 

It  may  be  expressed  as  a  syllogism  thus  : 

A.  Whatever  gives  proof  of  design  must  have  had  a  designer. 

B.  The  Universe  gives  proof  of  design. 

0.     Therefore,  it  must  have  had  a  designer. 

Design  may  be  seen  either  in  arrangement  or  adaptation.  In  both 
these  respects  the  Universe  gives  proof  of  design. 

In  its  arrangement  the  specific  purpose  may  not  be  evident  as  it  is 
in  special  adaptation.  But,  evidence  is  given  in  that  arrangement  of 
the  Unity  and  Universality  which  mark  design  throughout  the  whole 
Universe. 

The    syllogism    of   Principal    Tulloch   presents  the  argument  in  a 
convenient  form.     [Burnett  Prize  Essay  on  Theism,  p.  147.] 
I.     Order  universally  proves  mind. 

II.     The  works  of  nature  discover  order. 
III.     The  works  of  nature  prove  mind. 

The  point  here  to  be  proved  is  the  major  premiss.  There  can  be 
no  question  about  the  existence  of  order  and  arrangement  throughout 
the  Universe.  This  is  a  matter  of  universal  experience.  It  is  also 
the  testimony  of  all  science. 

But  does  order  universally  prove  mind?  We  shall  ascertain  that  it 
does  by  noticing  that  order  always  proceeds  from  law  by  which 
arrangement  occurs,  or  from  direct  arrangement.  In  either  event  mind 
is  the  cause  of  the  order  and,  therefore,  is  proved  by  it.  That  the 
origin  of  order,  is  in  one  of  these  ways  is  a  matter  of  universal 
experience,  and  we  may  from  experience  argue  at  least  that  such  is 
everywhere  true.     There  is  no  exception  to  the  rule. 


41  Abstract  of  Theology. 

But,  again,  we  may  argue  this  to  be  true  from  the  fact  that  such  is 
the  constitution  of  the  human  mind  that  "we  cannot  help  apprehend- 
ing everywhere  in  phenomena  of  order  the  operation  of  a  rational  will 
or  mind,  *  *  *  the  laws  of  our  rational  nature  compel  us  to  do 
so.  These  will  not  permit  us  to  rest  short  of  mind  as  an  ultimate 
explanation  of  such  phenomena."     Tulloch,  p.  50. 

Having  proved  the  existence  of  causation  in  the  preceding 
argument  we  have  also  the  right  here  to  apply  its  principles.  The 
order  is  an  effect,  and  as  every  effect  must  have  its  adequate  cause  so, 
as  this  is  an  effect  of  mind,  we  argue  from  it  the  existence  of  the 
Supreme  Mind,  which  is  alone  sufficient  to  account  for  such  harmony 
and  arrangement. 

Finally  we  may  argue  this  from  the  very  meaning  of  the  word 
order.  If  order  means  arrangement  then  it  involves  the  existence  of 
one  who  arranges.  If  order  means  plan,  this  demands  mind  to  devise 
such  plan.  If  order  means  laws  or  regulation,  the  word  involves  the 
idea  of  a  lawgiver. 

Thus  is  it  that  simply  considering  design  as  order  or  arrangement 
we  prove  from  it  the  existence  of  mind. 

But  the  proof  is  much  stronger  when  we  look  at  design  as  adapt- 
ation to  the  object  in  view. 

The  same  arguments  here  as  in  the  syllogism  by  Tulloch  prove  the 
major  premiss — whatever  shows  marks  of  design  must  have  had  a 
designer. 

The  illustrations  of  the  minor  premiss  are  numerous  and  convincing. 

1.  In  the  vegetable  world,  in  the  structure  and  arrangement  of 
plants,  in  their  connection  with  soil,  climate,  atmosphere,  in  their 
relations  to  the  necessities  of  surrounding  animal  life,  in  their  material 
structure,  fitting  them  to  receive  and  assimilate  food,  and  to  breathe 
the  atmosphere  and  absorb  its  gases,  and  to  reproduce  themselves. 

2.  In  the  animal  world ;  in  adaptation  to  climate,  vegetable  pro- 
ductions for  food,  and  all  the  circumstances  which  make  life  possible 
at  various  places  for  some  animals  and  not  for  all,  especially  in  the 
peculiarity  that  man  is  fitted  for  all  climates,  and  that  the  animals 
necessary  to  be  present  with  him  are  capable  of  equal  variety  of 
climate. 

3.  It  is  also  seen  in  the  formation  of  the  various  parts  of  the  body, 
especially  the  eye  which  presents  signal  evidences  of  design,  in  its 
structure  for  seeing,  in  its  capacity  for  motion,  in  its  instinct  against 
danger  and  in  its  protective  apparatus. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  42 

So  also  in  the  hand,  and  foot,  especially  the  thumb  in  man  which 
gives  him  such  superiority  over  all  other  animals,  even  over  the  ape 
which  approaches  him  most  closely,  in  felling  trees,  chopping  wood, 
sewing  clothes,  use  of  mechanic's  tools,  and  numberless  other  respects,' 
intimately  and  essentially  connected  with  a  condition  of  high  civiliza- 
tion, as  well  as  of  mere  physical  capacity  to  prevail   over  brute  force. 

So  with  a  thousand  times  a  thousand  marks  of  special  design  in  the 
forms  of  life  in  this  world.  All  prove  a  designer  and  that  designer 
to  be  the  Creator  of  the  world  and  its  forms  of  life. 

It  is  vain  to  say  that  ail  these  have  grown  from  inferior  attainments 
by  exercise  of  powers. 

There  is  no  evidence  of  any  different  structure  in  these  particulars 
in  the  individuals  of  to-day  than  in  those  which  earliest  appear. 

On  page  18  of  the  Independent  for  September  26th,  1878,  may  be 
found  an  advertisement  in  the  form  of  an  article  headed  : 

The  Romance  of  a  Windmill.  How  it  grew  from  a  shingle 
to  a  machine  indispensable  to  the  world's  progress. 

The  article  relates  how  a  small  windmill,  sufficient  to  grind  corn, 
was  made  under  circumstances  of  necessity  from  a  shingle — and  how 
this  grew  from  time  to  time  until  one  of  the  finest  windmills  of  the 
Western  Country  resulted. 

Now,  tell  any  one  that  that  grew  in  any  other  sense  than  that  mind 
carried  on  the  processes  from  step  to  step  until  the  final  result  was 
the  final  machine,  and  who  will,  or  who  can  believe  any  such  nonsense? 
But  as  well  tell  any  one  that,  as  that  the  marks  of  design  in  this 
world  have  come  from  any  other  source  than  mind. 

3.  Another  argument  a  'posteriori  may  be  drawn  from  the 
evidences  of  God's  Providential  care  and  control  of  the  world. 

It  may  be  thus  stated  : 

Man  perceives  in  his  own  life  and  in  the  lives  of  others,  in  the  history 
of  nations  and  of  the  race,  evidence  of  a  superintending  power, 
governing,  guiding,  and  protecting,  and,  by  means  sometimes  most 
insignificant,  or  minute,  accomplishing  ends  of  greater,  or  less  magni- 
tude. In  the  workings  of  this  power  there  are  traceable  evidences  of 
designing  purpose  which  are  so  marked  as  to  show  it  to  be  not  mere 
blind  force  or  established  law,  but  an  intelligent  agent  exercising  such' 
oversight  as  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  presence  of  free  will  in  man, 
which,  but  for  such  oversight,  wTould  prevent  the  accomplishment  of 
purposes,  which  could  with  certainty  be  attained  through  mere  laws 


43  Abstract  of  Theology. 

alone,  were  the  Universe  with  its  inhabitants  a  mere  machine  governed 
only  by  purely  mechanical  laws, — and  such  oversight  also  as  supplies 
to  man  the  information  and  resources  needed  at  particular  stages  in 
the  world's  progress,  and  as  preserves  from  excess  or  deficiency  the 
equilibrium  of  food  and  work  in  the  world  and  its  various  parts. 

As  none  but  the  Supreme  Mind,  which  is  omniscient,  omnipresent, 
and  omnipotent,  can  exercise  such  care,  the  proof  that  this  care  is 
exercised  is  a  proof  of  the  existence  of  God. 

It  will  be  seen  from  this  that  all  the  proof  which  can  be  presented 
of  Providential  care  becomes  a  proof  of  a  God.  This  is  very  strong 
and  conclusive,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  historical  accounts  of  man- 
kind, as  well  as  in  the  constant  testimony  of  individual  men. 

The  fourth  argument  a  posteriori  is  from  the  miracles  wrought  by 
messengers  from  God. 

A  miracle  is  an  extraordinary  act  performed,  or  event  brought  to 
pass,  by  God,  not  through  the  established  laws  of  nature,  nor  mere 
Providential  control,  but  by  direct  action  without  the  use  of  efficient 
means. 

The  working  of  a  miracle,  therefore,  shows  the  presence  and  act  of 
a  power  superior  to  nature  which  can  be  no  other  than  its  creator  and 
lawgiver. 

A  miracle  is,  therefore,  evidence  of  the  existence  of  God. 

This  argument  rests  upon  the  proof  that  miracles  have  been 
wrought.  Of  this  fact  it  is  universally  acknowledged  that  we  have 
abundant  testimony.  But  the  credibility  of  the  testimony,  as  for 
example  of  the  New  Testament  miracles,  has  been  questioned.  If  it 
be  credible  then  the  fact  has  been  proved. 

(1.)  It  is  charged  that  the  witnesses  are  not  credible,  because  they 
were  not  disinterested. 

(a)  But  disinterestedness  is  not  necessary  in  a  witness.  Formerly 
courts  required  this;  but  now,  in  the  more  civilized  communities,  all 
evidence  is  heard  and  due  weight  is  given  to  each  part  of  it  in  connec- 
tion with  all  the  other  circumstances  and  facts  testified  to. 

(b)  None  of  the  witnesses  for  miracles  were  interested  except  upon 
the  supposition  that  the  facts  which  they  attested  were  true.  They 
could  have  no  purpose,  therefore,  in  testifying  falsely. 

(c)  They  published  their  testimony  at  a  time  when  multitudes 
were  alive  who  had  been  present  at  the  times  and  places  when  the 
miracles  were  said  to  have   been   wrought.     Had  the  facts  not  been 


Abstract  of  Theology.  44 

believed  by  all  present  on  such  occasions  they  would  have  been 
disputed  and  the  witnesses  exposed.  This  was  especially  true  of  the 
miracles  wrought  by  Christ  and  his  apostles. 

(d)  To  the  above  may  be  added,  that  the  statements  made  about 
these  miracles  were  such  as  to  affect  the  character  and  position  of 
men  in  public  authority,  and  in  some  cases  appealed  to  acts  of  the 
rulers  in  council  by  whom  the  miracles  were  admitted.  None 
could  have  dared  to  make  such  statements,  unless  they  knew  they 
spoke  the  truth. 

(2.)     It  is  charged  that  the  witnesses  were  themselves  deceived. 

But  it  was  impossible  that  deception  could  take  place  in  many  of 
the  miracles. 

Could  Israel  be  deceived  about  the  plagues  in  Egypt,  or  the  passage 
through  the  Red  Sea,  or  that  of  the  Jordan,  or  the  fall  of  the  walls  of 
Jericho,  or  the  guidance  of  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire,  &c,  &c. 

But  the  rationalist  will  say  that  the  history  of  these  events  was  not 
written  at  the  same  time  with  the  events  themselves,  and  that  the 
people  in  the  wilderness  never  saw,  nor  heard  the- record. 

While  this  is  not  admitted  of  the  Old  Testament  it  cannot  be  justly 
said  of  the  New  Testament  histories.  The  statements  are  by  eye 
witnesses.  Could  they  have  been  deceived  about  the  stilling  of  the 
waves,  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  on  one  occasion,  and  of  the  four 
thousand  on  another,  about  the  raising  from  the  dead  of  the  daughter 
of  Jairus,  of  the  son  of  the  widow  of  Nain,  especially  of  Lazarus,  and 
still  more  wonderfully  of  Christ  himself.  One  who  looks  at  these  facts 
is  obliged  to  deny  that  these  witnesses  were  deceived.  They  have 
either  knowingly  stated  what  is  false,  or  their  testimony  is  true. 

(3.)  But  it  is  maintained  by  Hume  and  others,  that  even  if  a 
miracle  had  been  wrought  it  would  be  proof  only  to  those  who  saw  it. 
No  testimony  could  convince  others  of  the  fact. 

The  argument  is,  that  the  uniformity  of  the  laws  of  nature  is  a 
matter  of  universal  experience,  and  that  such  is  our  knowledge  of  that 
uniformity  that  no  testimony  can  convince  us  of  the  existence  of  a 
fact  which  is  not  consistent  with  it. 

But  the  history  of  the  world  shows  the  contrary.  Hume  is  actually 
presenting  his  argument,  that  no  such  proof  could  or  would  be  accepted, 
to  men  who  have  already  actually  accepted  it. 

There  are  many  events  in  the  world  which  seem  contrary  to  the 
uniformity  of  nature,  as  much  so  to  the  ignorant  mind  as  the  most 
wonderful    miracle    to    the    educated.      Are    such     not     accepted  ? 


45  Abstract  of  Theology. 

[Examples  are  eclipses  of  the  sun  or  moon  predicted  ;  and  the  rise 
and  fall  of  the  tides  to  those  who  have  never  seen  the  sea,  being  a 
phenomenon  of  water  thus  running  or  swelling  upwards.] 

Yet  testimony  of  the  facts  is  readily  taken  as  evidence. 

The  truth  is  that  men  almost  universally  believe  in  the  truthfulness 
of  their  fellows  and  in  their  capacity  to  perceive  what  has  happened, 
where  there  is  no  apparent  reason  to  the  contrary.  Even  strangers 
are  trusted  to  this  extent.  But  when  men  of  known  probity,  having 
no  motive  to  deceive  and  who  cannot  be  self-deceived,  testify  to  any 
fact,  however  incredible,  conviction  of  the  truthfulness  of  such  persons 
is  stronger  than  belief  in  the  uniformity  of  nature. 

[What  would  appear  more  wonderful  than  that  a  world,  the  greater 
part  of  the  .surface  of  which  is  water,  should  be  burned  up  with  fire, 
yet  has  a  whole  audience,  to  nine  tenths  of  whom  previously  such 
a  thing  would  have  seemed  incredible,  been  known  to  accept  it  as  a 
fact  upon  the  mere  statement  of  a  single  scientific  man.] 

In  this  argument  the  statements  of  the  Bible  have  been  used  not 
as  inspired  truth,  but  merely  as  containing  human  testimony.  In 
like  manner  in  the  succeeding  argument  the  Bible  is  treated  merely 
upon  its  own  apparent  merits  as  a  book,  without  reference  to  its 
divine  character. 

5.  The  fifth  argument  a  posteriori  is  from  the  contents  of  a  book 
we  call  the  Bible,  which  claims  to  have  come  from  God.  If  these 
contents  show  a  supernatural  origin  they  prove  the  existence^  of  a 
mind,  supreme  above  nature. 

This  proof  may  be  presented  : 

(1.)  With  respect  to  the  prophecies  of  the  Bible.  Events  were 
predicted  and  recorded  by  its  writers  long  periods,  even  centuries, 
before  they  took  place.  Many  of  them  were  minutely  described,  as 
to  their  nature,  locality,  persons,  times,  circumstances,  and  causes. 
Such  descriptions  show  such  knowledge  as  belongs  only  to  one  who 
uses  no  conjectural  knowledge,  but  knows  certainly  what  will  come 
to  pass.  But  such  knowledge  of  the  far  future  can  arise  not  otherwise 
than  from  full  knowledge  of  the  eternal  purpose  of  God. 

(2.)  It  may  be  presented  with  reference  to  the  great  central  figure 
of  the  Bible,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Scriptures  taken  as  a  whole  is  his  biography.  The  causes  of 
his  existence  as  seen  in  the  original  and  fallen  state  of  man  and  in 
God's  mercy  to  our  sinful   race,  the   preparation   for  his   coming,  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  46 

gradual  development  of  the  doctrine  of  his  person  and  work,  the 
prophecy  of  his  kingdom,  his  appearance,  life,  death,  resurrection,  the 
establishment  of  his  throne  in  Heaven  upon  his  ascension  from  earth, 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  power  and  progress  of  his  religion  and 
its  suitableness  to  our  sinful  race,  all  present  a  life  of  developed 
growth  as  plainly  the  result  of  a  creative  mind  as  the  most  wonderful 
creation  of  fiction.  The  Unity  of  purpose  is  seen  throughout.  In  the 
beginning  we  see  but  dimly  what  is  taught  and  catch  but  feebly  the 
outlines  of  the  plot ;  but  as  we  progress  it  grows  upon  us  as  a  genuine 
creation.  Whatever  was  at  first,  dim  is  cleared  up  by  the  final  record, 
and  as  we  begin  to  read  it  over  once  more,  its  perfect  unity,  its 
exactness  of  detail  without  superfluity,  its  development  in  the  far 
future  of  the  importance  of  facts  which  at  first  were  only  casually 
stated,  as  though  of  no  special  importance,  its  skilful  interweaving  of 
the  minor  characters  and  events,  and  its  use  of  them  in  all  their 
fulness  to  bring  on  the  final  catastrophe  and  its  results,  the  great 
power  with  which  the  theme  is  handled,  the  majestic  simplicity 
which  everywhere  pervades  it,  all  show  a  master  artist  creating  a 
character  and  work,  through  the  instrumentality  of  writers  so  numer- 
ous, of  such  different  capacities,  under  such  various  circumstances, 
with  such  manifest  unity,  as  proclaims  the  mind  of  God  which  alone 
could  conceive  of  such  a  character  and  work,  and  alone  could  thus 
reveal  it  to  man,  as  He  alone  could  create  the  real  persons  and  events 
which  embody  the  idea  presented. 

(3.)  A  further  proof  from  the  Bible  is  suggested  by  Nitsch,  which 
is  the  revelation  which  it  makes  of  God  in  Christ. 

He  says,  "The  proof  which  is  peculiar  to  Christianity,  independent 
and  historical,  is  not  indeed,  as  some  designate  it,  miracle,  but  the 
accomplishment  of  the  passage  in  Isaiah  40:9.  "Behold  your  God." 
It  is  revelation  in  an  eminent  sense,  the  existence  of  God  in  Christ, 
John  14:9."     [Nitsch  System  of  Christian  Doctrine,  p.  140.] 

This  is  not  the  same  argument  as  the  last.  That  was  an  argument 
from  a  development  extending  over  so  many  thousand  years,  and 
proving  the  existence  of  one,  who  was  contemporaneous  with  all  those 
years,  working  out  the  character  of  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  mankind. 

This  is  based  upon  the  evidence  of  divine  perfection  seen  in  Christ 
while  here  on  earth.     "He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father." 

The  Revelation  of  the  nature  of  God  seen  in  the  Universe  commends 
to  us  the  fact  that  He  exists,  for  the  nature  indicated  is  one  worthy 
of  such  a  Being.     Hence  the  force  of  Paul's  language  in  Rom.  1:20. 


47  Abstract  of  Theology. 

"For  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are 
clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his 
Eternal  power  and  Godhead." 

So  also  with  equal  self-recommendation  comes  the  character  of  God 
set  forth  in  the  words  of  the  Bible  in  which  He  tells  us  what  He  is, 
and  commends  His  spiritual  nature  with  His  unspeakable  holiness, 
justice,  goodness,  and  truth,  with  His  infinite  power  and  wisdom,  as 
the  character  alone  worthy  of  a  God,  and  which  makes  us  say  at  once : 
This  is  the  true  character  of  God.  If  He  exists,  He  must  be  such  as 
is  thus  described. 

But  in  His  incarnate  Son  we  see  the  embodiment  of  that  which 
before  had  appeared  as  but  an  ideal.  Although  appearing  here  on 
earth  most  obviously  as  a  man,  yet  the  divine  attributes  and  character 
were  so  exhibited  in  him  that  we  perceive  the  truthfulness  with  which 
Christ  said  to  Philip.  '"He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father." 
John  14:9. 

6.  and  7.  arguments  a  posteriori.  To  the  above  arguments  for  the 
existence  of  God  may  be  added  two  wThich  by  proving  the  non-eternity 
of  matter  and  that  there  has  not  been  an  infinite  succession  of  finite 
beings  show  that  there  is  a  God. 

6.  The  first  is  the  Historical  argument  based  upon  the  fact  that  the 
records  of  History  cover  so  brief  a  period  of  time.  If  man  has  lived 
forever,  where  is  the  record  of  that  life.  It  is  strange  that  we  find  no 
historical  monuments  which  go  beyond  a  few  thousand  years. 

7.  The  second  is  from  Geology.     This  science  teaches: 

(1.)  That  there  was  a  time  when  life,  both  vegetable  and  animal, 
began  upon  this  globe. 

(2.)  That  the  remoteness  of  the  period  of  that  beginning,  even 
according  to  the  wildest  hypothesis,  is  capable  of  calculation. 

(3.)  That,  in  both  the  vegetable  and  animal  life,  of  which  we  have 
fossil  remains,  there  have  been  distinct  successive  genera  which  began 
with  small  numbers,  gradually  increased  to  their  culminating  points 
and  then  as  gradually  decreased. 

All  of  this  is  at  least  proof  against  Eternity  of  form,  and  against  an 
infinite  succession  of  finite  beings,  if  it  be  not  proof  of  an  actual  direct 
creation  of  each  of  these  genera. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  48 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  III. 


The  Sources  of  our  Knowledge  of  Theology. 

Having  proved -the  existence  of  God  before  we  study  His  nature, 
and  attributes,  and  relations  to  us,  we  should  consider  in  what  ways 
He  has  made  Himself  known.  These  constitute  the  sources  of  our 
knowledge  of  Theology,  which  are  two,  Reason  and  Revelation. 

Reason  is  that  power  in  man,  which  enables  him  to  have  mental 
perceptions,  to  exercise  thought,  and  reflection,  to  know  facts,  to  in- 
quire into  their  mutual  relations,  and  to  deduce,  logically,  the  conclu- 
sions which  may  be  drawn  from  them. 

It  may  be  exercised  either  with  reference  to  the  natural,  or  super- 
natural means  of  knowledge  conferred  by  God. 

When  we  refer  to  reason,  as  a  source  of  knowledge  distinct  from 
revelation,  we  mean  the  information  attained,  by  the  use  of  this  facul- 
ty, in  connection  only  with  the  natural. 

By  revelation,  we  mean  the  knowledge  which  God  conveys  by 
direct  supernatural  instruction,  preeminently,  that  made  known  in  the 
book  known  as  the  Bible. 

Reason  involves  all  the  cognitive  powers  of  man,  which  are  the 
faculties  through  which  the  mind  attains  knowledge.  These  facul- 
ties are  not  separate,  and  independent,  but  are  merely  the  instru- 
ments of  the  mind. 

The  mind  is  not  itself  an  original  source  of  knowledge,  like  the 
Scriptures,  but  is  merely  an  instrument  by  which  the  man  attains 
knowledge  through  the  exercise  of  its  appropriate  faculties.  There 
are  no  such  things  as  innate  ideas,  which  exist,  without  the  exercise 
of  proper  thought,  and  reflection,  in  connection  with  some  perceived 
facts. 


49  Abstract  of  Theology. 

The  means,  by  which  the  mind  attains  knowledge  in  the  exercise  of 
its  faculties,  are  five. 

1.  Through  consciousness,  by  which  we  learn  our  own  existence, 
and  the  fact -that  we  think,  and  are  personal  beings,  possessing  per- 
sonal identity  during  the  term- of  our  natural  life. 

2.  Through  the  senses,  by  observation,  and  experience  of  the  world 
about  us. 

3.  Through  intuitive  conceptions,  by  which,  upon  the  suggestion, 
through  some  external  object,  of  some  principle,  we  find  ourselves  at 
onoe  convinced  of  its  correctness. 

4.  The  dispositions  instincts  and  tendencies  of  our  natures. 

5.  The  course  of  events  in  nature,  as  tending  to  good,  or  evil,  to 
what  is  desirable,  or  disastrous. 

It  is  manifest  that  the  knowledge,  obtained  from  these  various  sour- 
ces, must  be  abundant  to  teach  man  the  simple  facts,  upon  which  rest 
his  duty  to  God  ;  namely,  that  there  is  a  God  to  whom  he  owes  exist- 
ence, and  consequent  reverence,  service,  and  love,  and  whose  greatness, 
and  goodness  enforce  this  obligation;  also  to  show  him,  that  that  duty 
has  not  been  discharged,  and  that  he  has  not  the  disposition  to  dis- 
charge it;  and  consequently  to  render  him  uneasy  in  his  relations  to 
God,  and  anxious  to  appease  Him,  and  secure  some  assurance  of  His 
pardon,  and  approval..  It  has  also  been  thought  by  many,  that 
through  reason  alone  man  attains  the  conviction  of  immortality,  and 
of  a  future  state  of  rewards,  and  punishments. 

However  abundant,  may.be  the  information  thus  conveyed  to  man, 
it  is  nevertheless,  clear  that  his  knowledge,  in  these  directions,  must 
still  remain  very  imperfect. 

This  must  have  been  true  of  him,  even  in  a  state  of  innocence. 
His  finite  nature,  and  the  finite  conditions,  which  surrounded  him, 
must  still  have  left  him  ignorant  upon  many  desirable  matters.  It 
is  natural,  therefore,  to  believe  that,  in  that  condition,  He  received 
direct  communications  from  God,  which  are  properly  esteemed  reve- 
lations. 

But  this  imperfection  must  have  been  greatly  increased  by  any  sub- 
sequent fall  trom  innocence.  By  this,  the  perceptions  of  right,  and 
wrong  would  be  dimmed,  the  power  of  conscience  to  enforce  the  right 
would  be  impaired,  the  desire  to  do  the  right  would  be  diminished, 
prejudices  against  the  right  would  be  created,  and  affection  for  God 
would  be  greatly  decreased,  if  not  entirely  obliterated. 

Upon  these  grounds  we  may  infer  the  necessity  of  some  further 
source  of  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  His  will  with  respect  to  man. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  50 

We  may  also  argue  a  priori,  as  to  the  nature  of  this  revelation. 

1.  It  must  come  from  God  the  source  of  all  our  other  knowledge. 
No  other  could  give  it,  and  it  is  fit  that  no  other  should  do  so. 

2.  It  must  be  suited  to  our  present  condition,  confirming  the  truth 
already  known,  and  teaching  that  practically  useful,  to  man  as  a  sin- 
ner before  God. 

3.  It  must  be  secured  from  all  possibility  of  error,  so  that  its 
teachings  may  be  relied  on,  with  equal,  if  not  greater  confidence,  than 
those  of  reason. 

4.  It  must  come  with  authority  ;  claiming,  and  proving  its  claim, 
to  be  the  word  of  God,  who  has  the  right  to  command,  and  to  punish 
those  who  disobey  His  commands ;  with  authority  also  that  man  may 
with  confidence  believe,  and  trust  the  promises,  and  hopes  of  pardon, 
and  peace,  it  may  hold  out. 

5.  That  it  will  be  accompanied  by  difficulties,  and  mysteries,  is 
what  may  be  expected,  since  these  are  found  frequently  attending  the 
knowledge  derived  from  reason. 

The  gift  of  such  a  revelation  must  of  course,  depend  absolutely  upon 
the  will  of  God.  It  is  not  for  man  to  say,  prior  to  its  gift,  whether  it 
certainly  will,  or  will  not  be  bestowed. 

That  it  is  not  improbable,  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact,  that  God 
has  already  made  Himself  known  to  us  in  various  ways  in  ourselves? 
and  in  nature.     If  we  need  further  revelation  we  may  hope  for  it. 

The  only  reason,  to  the  contrary,  is  that  we  have  sinned  against 
God,  and  He  may  have  chosen  to  abandon  us  to  our  fate.  But  this 
is  not  so  truly  understood,  until  revelation  has  confirmed  our  convic- 
tion of  our  sinful  estate.  On  the  other  hand,  the  favours  which  God 
still  bestows,  and  the  means  of  continued  knowledge  of  Him,  which 
He  affords,  indicate,  that  He  has  not  yet  consigned  us  to  our  deserved 
fate,  and  that  He  may  have  purposes  of  mercy  towards  us. 

That  which  renders  it  highly  propable  is  the  expectation,  seen  in 
man,  in  the  conceptions  He  has  formed  of  God,  as  one  to  be  propitia- 
ted by  sacrifices,  and  approached  with  prayer. 

If  the  expectations,  thus  formed,  are  to  be  verified,  the  important 
question  arises,  in  what  way  can  God  make  known  to  us  the  new  truth 
He  wills  to  teach. 

They,  manifestly,  speak  unadvisedly  who  assert,  that  this  can,  in  no 
wise,  be  done. 

If  He  so  choose,  He  could  impress  it  on  each  one,  in  like  manner 
as  we  attain  intuitive  conceptions.  He  might  reveal  it  to  individuals 
in  dreams,  and  visions,  so  as  to  make  each  one  feel,  and  know,  that  the 


51  Abstract  of  Theology. 

vision  is  from  God.  Those  through  whom  He  has  revealed  Himself, 
have,  in  some  such  way,  attained  absolute  conviction  that  God  has 
spoken  to,  and  through  them,  and,  with  God,  there  is  neither  impos- 
sibility, nor  difficulty  in  producing  like  certainty  upon  the  mind  of 
each  individual  of  the  race. 

But,  as  God  usually  acts  through  means,  so  He  has  revealed  Him- 
self to  a  few,  and  through  them,  to  mankind  in  general, 

The  only  question  then  is,  how  can  He  give,  to  the  race  at  large, 
evidence,  that  the  men  He  has  inspired   are  indeed  His  messengers  ? 

This,  also,  might  be  done  in  various  ways,  but,  He  has  chosen  to  do 
it  by  attesting  their  mission  by  miracles  wrought  through  them. 

As  to  the  measure  of  authority  to  be  ascribed  to  these  miracles, 
men  differ  in  opinion. 

Some  teach  that  any  miracle  wrought  is,  of  itself,  sufficient  attesta- 
tion of  the  messenger,  and  of  the  truth  which  He  teaches. 

Others,  that  miracles  are  only  proofs  to  those  who  behold  them,  and 
dubious  proof  even"  then,  and  that  the  true  purpose  of  them  is  not 
to  set  l he  seal  of  God's  authority,  but  simply  to  awaken  attention, 
and  excite  awe,  and  thus  prepare  the  way  for  a  proper  hearing  of  the 
divine  message.  These  assert  that  the  revelation  comes  to  us  with  the 
authority  only  of  the  self  convincing  nature  of  the  truth  made  known. 

It  is  necessary,  in  this  difference  of  opinions,  to  seek  carefully  after 
the  true  theory.  From  no  source  can  we  better  obtain  it,  than  from 
the  revelation  itself,  the  teaching  of  which  will  be  seen  to  be  fully  cor- 
roborated otherwise. 

The  Scripture  theory  seems  to  be  this,  that,  in  any  new  revelation,  the 
prophet  of  God  must  present  a  doctrine,  perfectly  consistent  with  any 
past  revelation,  and  with  the  knowledge  conveyed  by  nature,  and 
muse,  at  the  same  time,  confirm  His  authority,  as  a  teacher  from 
God,  by  miracle.  Without  the  miracle,  the  new  truth  has  no  evidence 
that  it  is  not  simply  the  product  of  human  reason,  or  imagination. 
The  coincidence  in  doctrine  is  necessary  to  protect  against  pretended 
miracles,  and  the  tricks  ot  unprincipled  men.  Besides,  the  new  truth 
can  have  no  higher  authority  than  the  old,  and  therefore  cannot  su- 
persede it,  for  the  old  also  has  come  from  God. 

1.     The  scriptural  authority  for  this  theory  is  conclusive. 

Moses  announced  the  law  which  shows  the  miracle  alone  not  to  be 
conclusive.  See  Deut.  13:1,2,3.  "If  there  arise  among  you  a  prophet, 
or  a  dreamer  of  dreams,  and  giveth  thee  a  sign,  or  a  wonder,  and  the 
sign,  or  the  wonder,  come  to  pass,  whereof  He  spake  unto  thee,  say- 
ing, let  us  go  after  other  Gods,  which  thou  hast  not  known,  and  let  us 


Abstract  of  Theology.  52 

serve  them;  thou  shalt  not  hearken  unto  the  words  of  that  prophet,  or 
that  dreamer  of  dreams,  for  the  Lord  your  God  proveth  you,  to  know, 
whether  ye  love  the  Lord  your  God,  with  all  your  heart,  and  with  all 
your  soul."  This  passage  shows  that  even  a  miracle,  wrought  by  one 
teaching  doctrine  not  in  accordance  with  that  already  received,  should 
not  tempt  to  belief  in  the  divine  authority,  of  him  who  should  work  it. 

The  Apostle  Paul  gives  similar  instruction  to  the  Galatians.  Gal.  1:8. 
''Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gospel  unto 
you,  than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be  ac- 
cursed." Whatever  might  be  the  accredited  authority  of  the  mes- 
senger, his  teachings  were  not  to  be  received. 

Yet,  with  all  this,  the  Scriptures  do  not  disparage  the  miracle.  The 
miracles  of  Mosaic  times  are  constantly  referred  to,  as  indubitably 
marking  it  as  divine.  Nicodemus  recognized  the  high  position  as- 
signed to  them  by  the  Jews.  John  3=2.  '-No  man  can  do  these  mir- 
acles, which  thou  doest,  unless  God  be  with  him."  Christ  himself 
says:  John  10:25.  "The  works  that  I  do,  in  my  Father's  name,  they 
bear  witness  of  me." 

This  theory  of  the  Scriptures  is  not  necessarily  based  upon  the  idea, 
that  real  miracles  can  be  wrought  otherwise,  than  by  divine  power. 
Still  the  language,  sometimes  used,  is  liable  to  this  construction.  And 
much  depends  upon  the  definition  of  a  miracle.  If  a  miracle  be  a  sus- 
pension of  the  fixed  laws,  which  God  has  established  for  the  world,  that 
suspension  can  only  occur  through  His  special  permission.  Taking  this, 
as  the  true  meaning  of  the  word,  we  can  understand,  why  such  stress 
is  laid  in  the  Scriptures  upon  the  Mosaic  miracles,  and  those  of  Christ, 
since  many  of  them  are  such  as  nothing,  but  divine  power  could  ac- 
complish. But  the  word  miracle  in  the  Scriptures  has  not  this  restric- 
ted meaning,  but  is  applied,  likewise,  to  any  marked  supernatural 
event.  Because  men  are  liable  to  put  these  upon  a  level  with  the 
miracles  w-hich  God  alone  can  work,  they  are  warned  not  to  follow 
after  what  is  thus  supernaturally  done,  if  it  be  accompanied  by  such 
teaching  as  is  contrary  to  truth  already  received. 

See  the  apparent  reality  of  such  miracles  in  connection  with  the 
magicians  of  Egypt,  commencing  with  Ex.  7:11,  and  continuing  to 
Ex.  8:7.  See  also  the  conviction  expressed  by  the  magicians,  Ex.  8:19, 
when  they  failed  to  produce  lice  from  the  dust,  "This  is  the  finger  of 
God." 

See  also  what  Christ  says.  Mark.  13:22.  "For  false  Christs,  and 
false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall  shew  signs,  and  wonders,  to  seduce 
if  it  were  possible,  even  the  elect." 


53  Abstract  of  Theology. 

See  also,  Rev.  16:13.14.  "And  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits,  like 
frogs,  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of 
the  beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet.  For  they  are 
the  spirits  of  devils,  working  miracles,  which  go  forth  unto  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  and  of  the  whole  world,  to  gather  them  to  the  battle  of 
that  great  day  of  God  Almighty." 

It  is  because  of  this  liability  to  be  deceived,  that  the  Scriptures  re- 
quire the  miracle,  and  the  concurrent  doctrine,  as  both  essential  to 
the  reception  of  a  new  revelation. 

2.  This  theory  alone  concurs  with  the  course,  to  which  nature  nec- 
essarily impels  us. 

To  the  extent  that  we  are  fully  convinced  of  the  truth  of  a  doctrine, 
no  subsequent  revelation  could  change  our  belief.  It  is  true,  that  this 
does  not  apply  when  we  have  doubts ;  but,  when  our  knowledge  is 
fixed,  we  cannot  be  moved.  No  amount  of  miracle  could  convince 
those,  who  have  attained  this  knowledge,  thai,  the  nature  of  God  is 
otherwise  than  pure,  and  holy,  or  that  He  delights  in  worship  not  of 
the  heart,  or  that  He  is  not  infinite  in  justice,  and  holiness,  goodness, 
mercy,  and  truth,  or  that  He  will  pardon  sin,  without  due  satisfaction 
to  His  law. 

3.  This  theory  accords  with  the  progressive  character  of  divine 
revelation. 

The  earliest  revelation  came  to  those,  who  had  heretofore  been 
guided  by  reason  only.  This  was  true,  even  down  to  the  beginnings 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and,  in  that  economy,  only  prepara- 
tion was  made  for  the  future  glory  of  the  New  Testament  revelation. 
Hence,  the  truths  taught,  were,  for  the  most  part,  only  those  which 
come  within  the  compass  of  discovery  by  reason,  or  acceptance  by  it, 
upon  due  suggestion,  namely :  the  existence  of  one  God,  the  fact  of 
creation,  the  law  of  moral  obligation  to  God,  and  man,  the  punishment 
of  sinners,  the  duty  of  repentance,  the  pardoning  mercy  of  God,  and 
the  law  of  sacrifices,  with  substitution  and  satisfaction. 

The  new  economy  goes  further  in  its  clear  instructions;  it  teaches 
the  vicarious  atonement  of  Christ,  involving  representation  in  Him, 
and  also  in  Adam,  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  in  the  Godhead,  the 
mysterious  union  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  many  other  truths  here- 
tofore  only  very  indistinctly  revealed. 

These  could  not  have  been  presented  to  those  only  taught  hereto- 
fore by  reason.  But  the  revelation,  which  stood  between,  foreshadowed 
them  in  different  wavs.     From  it  alone,  originally,  thev  would  not  have 


Abstract  of  Theology.  54 

been  discovered.  But  now  that  they  are  made  known,  that  revelation 
is  seen  to  concur  with  the  new  statements,  and,  the  conformity,  of  the 
clearly  expressed  doctrines,  to  the  mere  outlines  ol  them  in  the  past, 
sustains  the  fact,  tint  they  have  a  common  author,  and  that  the  di- 
vine revealer  is  the  same.  It  is  like  the  presence  in  animals  of  the 
same  genus  in  earlier  days,  oi  germs,  which  find  their  developement 
in  species  which  come  later. 

4.  This  accords  with  our  means  of  judging  what  course  of  action, 
infinite  wisdom  would  have  devised. 

The  conviction  we  have  of  past  truth,  renders  it  impossible,  that 
we  should  throw  it  aside.  We  must  therefore,  still  hold  it  fast.  That 
conviction  has  come  from  God,  and  we  can  have  no  higher  evidence. 

Yet,  other  statements,  and  doctrines,  which  may  be  very  probably, 
or  even  certainly  true,  may  be  taught  by  men,  as  revealed  to  them, 
when  they  are  either  self  deceived,  or  attempting  to  deceive  others. 
Hence,  we  must  have  the  attesting  miracle. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  liable  to  be  deceived,  as  to  what  is 
supernatural,  and  especially,  in  the  supernatural,  as  to  what  is 
within  the  limits  of  created  power.  Hence  we  may  be  misled  by 
the  craft  of  men,  or  by  the  superhuman  power  of  wicked  spirits. 
Therefore,  no  doctrine  must  be  accepted  contrary  to  a  truth  already 
received.  . 

A  revelation,  such  as  we  have  described,  having  been  given,  and 
proved,  another  question  arises  ;  what  is  the  relation,  which  reason 
bears  towards  it  ? 

We  may  lay  down  the  following  facts. 

1.  That  reason  is  the  first  revelation,  and  is  consequently  pre- 
supposed in  any  other. 

2.  That  the  facts  of  reason  cannot  be  denied  by  any  subsequent 
revelation.      No  truth  can  destroy  other  truth. 

A  limitation  must,  however,  be  put  on  the  province  of  reason. 
The  doctrines  of  which  it  may  judge,  are  those  only  which  come 
within  its  sphere.  Upon  the  presentation  of  a  new  doctrine,  rea- 
son may  decide,  whether  it  agrees  with  former  knowledge.  If  agree- 
able thereto,  it  must  be  accepted.  If  opposed,  it  must  be  rejected. 
But,  if  it  be  above  reason,  it  must  stand,  or  fall  with  the  rest  of 
the  revelation.  God  may,  in  His  mercy,  refrain  to  try  faith  by  a 
revelation  of  supernatural  doctrine,  but,  if  He  reveals  it,  it  must  be 
no  barrier  to  the  reception  of  that  doctrine  itself,  or  of  the  revela- 
tion which  accompanies  it.  In  an  able  article  in  the  Southern  Pres- 
byterian Review,  Vol.  1,  pp.  1-34,  on  Reason  and  Revelation,  Dr. 


55  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Thorn  well,  puts  this  limitation  npon  reason,  that  it  is  sole  arbiter, 
within  its  own  bounds,  but  no  judge  beyond  thein.  He  thinks  that 
in  this  way,  only,  can  it  be  applied  as  a  test  of  doctrine.  The  theory 
is  undoubtedly  correct.  It  errs,  only,  in  not  recognizing  the  pre- 
cise manner  in  which  Scripture  brings  it  in,  as  an  arbiter  ;  not  as 
the  judge  of  truth,  as  disconnected  from  the  past,  but,  as  related 
to  the  various  times,  and  forms,  in  which  God  has  taught  it.  Rea- 
son may  not  only  judge  a  new  revelation,  by  the  truths  taught  by 
reason  alone,  but  also  by  those  which  have  been  made  known  in 
some  previous  revelation. 

The  office  of  reason    with  respect  to  revelation,  is  therefore  seen 
to  be: 

1.  To  examine  the  evidence  of  the  miracles  upon  which  it  rests. 

2.  To  compare  its  doctrines  with  the  teaching  of  the  past,   and 
recognize  their  correspondence  with,  or  opposition  to  that  teaching. 

3.  To  adopt,  or  reject  the  revelation,   according  to  the  evidence 
afforded  that  it  is  God's  truth. 

4.  To  interpret  its  contents,  according  to  the  best    light,   which 
learning  affords. 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  IV. 


UNITY  OF  GOD. 

The  arguments  by  which  we  have  proved  the  existence  of  God  have 
shown  us  : 

1.  From  that  of  causation  —  that  He  is  self  existent  — having  the 
cause  of  His  existence  in  himself. 

2.  From  the  proof  of  design,  and  from  His  creation  of  spirit,  that 
He  is  an  intelligent  personal  and  spiritual  Being. 

3.  From  the  non-eternity  of  matter,  that  He  alone  is  eternal. 

4.  From  Providence  and  Miracles  that  He  continues  to  rule  and 
govern  the  world  which  He  has  created. 

In  them  all,  have  been  the  foundations  upon  which  proofs  of 
his  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  as  well  as  many  other  attributes  are 
based. 

The  information  thus  received  is  however  insufficient,  and  is  cap- 
able of  being  greatly  increased  by  further  examination.  Having 
proved  that  God  is,  we  naturally  desire  to  know  more  of  what  He  is, 
and  who  He  is. 

This  leads  to  an  inquiry  into  His  nature  or  essence,  and  since  the 
nature  and  essence  of  all  being,  even  of  ourselves,  can  be  known  only 
by  considering  its  mode  of  existence,  its  qualities  and  its  manner  of 
manifestation,  we  are  led  to  inquire  into  the  mode  of  God's  existence 
and  into  the  attributes  and  works  by  which  He  has  made  Himself 
known  to  us. 

Preliminary  to  this  however  are  two  subjects  which  first  demand 
attention,  viz  :     The  Unity  and  the  Spirituality  of  God. 

The  Unity  of  God. 

1.  The  proof  thus  far  attained,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  is  not  incon- 
sistent with  that  unity.  Indeed  one  God  is  all  that  is  demanded  by 
or  involved  in    that  proof. 


57  Abstract  of  Theology. 

But  one  first  cause  is  needed;  but  one  designer  is  suggested;  one 
being  alone  meets  all  the  conditions  arising  from  our  sense  of  depen- 
dence on  another ;  but  one  is  required  to  account  ior  the  evidences 
of  providential  care  over  the  world  ;  but  one  for  the  wonders  in 
miracles.  But  one  for  the  scriptures  with  their  prophecies  and  their 
revelation  of  Christ  and  God  ;  and  but  one  for  the  common  consent 
of  mankind. 

This  last  point  is  the  only  apparent  exception, 

But  1.  Universal  consent  only  goes  so  far  as  to  admit  the  existence 
of  one  God.  Many  have  in  one  way  or  another  assumed  there  are 
more,  but  the  belief  in  more  than  one  is  not  universal. 

2.  The  belief  of  more  than  one  God  was  not  the  earliest  type,  but 
has  been  the  result  of  corruption  of  the  truth.  This  may  be  ac- 
counted for  either  from  reverence  for  objects  as  representations  of  the 
divinity,  as  of  the  heavenly  lights  or  of  animals  or  statues  represent- 
ing deified  attributes  of  God,  or  for  men  after  death  regarded  as  ex- 
ponents of  the  same. 

3.  The  belief  of  one  God  thus  found  in  the  earliest  records  of  all 
nations  was  maintained  among  most  men  of  intelligence  even  in  the 
days  of  Heathenism.  See  Cudworth's  Intellectual  System  of  the 
Universe,  Vol.  I.  pp.  293  to  638,  for  ancient  Latin,  Greek,  Persian  and 
Egyptian. 

As  to  Brahminism,  see  Maurice's  Religions  of  the  world,  p.  59. 
As  to  Buddhism,  see  Maurice  p.  102-3.  ■ 

As  to  the  classic  writers,  see  also  the  testimony  of  Cicero  de  Natura 
deorum,  pp.  11-13  of  translation  in  Bohn's  library. 

As  to  the  mass  of  Heathenism  we  have  this  testimony  from  Tertul- 
lian,  quoted  by  Tholuck  on  Heathenism,  p.  23. 

"In  the  deepest  emotions  of  their  minds  they  never  directed  their 
exclamations  to  their  false  Gods,  but  employed  the  words  "By  God", 
"As  truly  as  God  lives",  "God  help  me".  Moreover  they  do  not 
have  their  eyes  directed  to  the  capitol,  but  to  heaven." 

This  belief  in  one  God  is  true,  even  of  that  dualism  which  arose 
among  the  Persians,  because  of  their  knowledge  of  the  struggle  be- 
tween good  and  evil  connected  with  the  presence  of  sin  in  the  world, 
ior  they  believed  in  a  God  superior  to  the  two  contestants  in 
this  struggle  and  thus  may  be  claimed  as  accepting  the  idea  of  the 
unity  of  God.  See  Cudworth,  Vol.  1,  p  411,  &c.  The  argument  for 
universal  consent  therefore  does  not  demand  more  than  one  God. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  58 

2.  But  the  proof  of  God's  existence  is  not  only  not  inconsistent  with 
the  unity  of  God,  but  renders  that  unity  highly  propable  and  indeed 
almost  certain. 

The  unity  of  the  first  cause,  and  of  the  designer  'is  naturally  if  not 
necessarily  involved  in  the  unity  of  will  or  purpose  or  design,  seen  in 
the  effects  produced  in  Creation  and  Providence. 

These  show  at  least  such  perfect  harmony  and  agreement  between 
the  wills  of  all  Gods,  if  there  be  more  than  one,  as  can  result  only  from 
one  Being,  or  from  several,  as  fully  agreeing  together  as  though  they 
were  but  one. 

But  the  very  idea  of  will  involves  choice,  and  choice  involves  such 
right  and  possibility  to  select  between  two  or  more  things  as  forbids 
original  agreement  in  choice  between  two  different  Beings.  Either 
therefore  there  must  be  difference  of  choice  which  would  destroy  the 
uniformity  or  there  must  be  a  subordination  of  will  one  to  another,  which 
gives  supremacy  to  one  of  the  Beings.  This  result  would  be  to  make 
that  one  a  first  cause  of  will  or  action  to  the  others,  and  therefore  to 
make  Him  alone  God. 

If  therefore  there  be  uniformity  in  the  designs  and  works  of  nature, 
that  is  almost,  if  not  quite,  certain  proof  that  there  is  but  one  God. 

That  uniformity  is  seen 

1.  In  the  materials  which  compose  it. 

2.  In  the  qualities  possessed  by  these  materials. 

3.  In  the  nature  of  the  forces  which  they  evolve. 

4.  In  the  unity  of  design  between  all  living  forms,  fishes,  reptiles, 
birds,  mammalia  in  all  parts  of  the  world  whether  adapted  for  air, 
water  or  earth,  whether  in  fossils  of  the  past  or  living  organisms  of 
the  present  —  and  in  germs  seen  in  one  'species,  only  as  germs  and 
developed  in  another  separated  from  it  by  a  wide  interval  of  time. 

3.  The  only  objection  to  the  unity  of  God  which  can  be  drawn  from 
the  world  arises  from  the  presence  of  pain  and  ill,  of  sorrow  and  suf- 
fering, of  guilt  and  sin,  together  with  the  violent  and  destructive 
forces  of  nature. 

1.  But  these  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  unity  of  God. 

(a.)  If  they  ought  not  to  be  and  God  could  prevent  them,  they 
would  prove  lack  of  goodness,  not  of  unity. 

(b)  If  they  ought  not  to  be  and  God  cannot  prevent  them,  then  they 
would  prove  some  other  Being  to  exist  greater  than  He,  and  then 
He  would  be  God. 

2.  But  there  is  no  evidence  that  they  ought  not  to  be,  and  are  not 
perfectly  consistent  with  God's  goodness. 


59  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(a.)  They  may  be  part  of  a  system  which  best  exists  in  connection 
with  them.  We  see  this  in  part  so  far  as  the  destructive  forces  of 
the  world  are  concerned. 

(b.)  We  find  among  them  traces  of  a  working  together  for  final 
and  intermediate  good  ends,  and  hence  they  may  safely  be  said  neither 
to  militate  against  goodness  nor  unity. 

(c.)  The  evils  referred  to,  are  as  apparently  under  uniform  general 
laws  a^  any  other  things  known  to  us.  Hence  their  perfect  consistency 
with  unity. 

4.  But  while  some  of  the  arguments  for  God  are  only  consistent  with 
His  unity  and  highly  suggestive  of  the  same,  and  others  make  it  so 
highly  probable  as  to  be  almost  certain,  there  are  others  which  estab- 
lish that  absolute  certainty. 

1.  The  idea  of  God  in  the  mind,  to  which  is  attached  that  of  neces- 
sary existence,  is  the  idea  of  one  God,  and  one  only.  The  notion  of 
two  or  more  Gods  is  self  contradictory,  for  neither  of  them  can  be  the 
absolute  and  perfect  and  independent  Being  which  is  our  idea  of  God. 
All  the  evidence  for  God  therefore  contained  in  the  first  of  the  a  priori 
arguments  is  for  one  God  and  one  only. 

2.  In  the  argument  from  the  nature  of  necessary  existence,  (the 
2nd  a  priori,)  the  7th  point  was  :  "There  can  be  but  one  necessarily 
existent  Being,  for  two  necessarily  existent  Beings  could  in  no  respect 
whatever  differ  from  each  other;  that  is  they  would  be  one  and  the 
same  Being." 

The  nature  of  necessary  existence  therefore  proves  the  unity  of 
God. 

5.  The  proofs  we  have  thus  far  presented  from  nature  for  the  unity 
of  God  are  abundantly  confirmed  by  the  statements  of  Scripture. 

1.  The  passages  which  declare  explicitly  that  God  is  one.  Deut. 
6:4.  Mai.  2:10.  "Hath  not  one  God  created  us."  Mark.  ,12:29,  32. 
Gal.  3:20.     1.  Tim.  2:5.     Eph.  4:6.     James  2:19. 

2.  Those  that  assert  that  there  is  none  else  or  none  beside  Him. 
Deut.  4:35.  39.  Deut.  32:12.  1.  Sam  2:2.  2.  Sam.  7:22.  1.  Kings 
8.60.  1.  Chron.  7:20.  Isa.  44:6.8.  Isaiah  45:5.6.21.22.  Isa.  46:5. 
Joel  2:27. 

3.  That  there  is  none  like  Him  nor  to  be  compared  with  Him.  Ex. 
8:10.  Ex.  9:14.  Ex  15:11.  2.  Sam.  7:22.  1.  Kings  8:23.  1.  Chron. 
7:20.  2.  Chron.  6:14.  Isaiah  40:25.  Isa.  46:5.  Isa.  45:22.  Jer. 
10:6. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  60 

4.  That  He  alone  is  God.  2.  Sain  22:32.  1.  Kings  19:15.  Ezra 
1:3.  Neh.  9:6.  Psalm  18:31.  Ps.  86:10.  Isaiah  37:16.  Isaiah 
43:10.  11.  12.  Isaiah  45:22.  Isa.  46:9.  John  17:3.  1.  Cor.  8:4 
5.  6. 

5.  That  He  alone  is  to  be  worshipped.  Ex.  20:5.  Ex.  34:14. 
Judges  13:16.  1.  Sam.  7:3.  2.  Kings  17:36.  Matt.  4:10.  Rom. 
1:25.    Rev.  19:10. 

6.  Which  forbid  any  one  else  to  be  accepted  as  God.  Ex.  20:3. 
Deut.  5:7.     Isaiah  42:8.     Hosea  13:4. 

7.  Which  proclaim  Him  as  supreme  over  all  so-called  Gods. 
Deut.  10:17.  Josh.  22:22.  Psalm  96:4.5.  Jer.  14:22.  1.  Cor.  8:4. 
5.  6. 

8.  Which  declare  Him  to  be  the  true  God.  Jer.  10:10.  1.  Thess. 
1=9. 

(a.)  The  Scripture  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God  is  not  affected  by 
those  expressions,  which  seem  to  recognize  other  gods  as  when 
the  gods  of  the  heathen  are  spoken  of  as  their  gods  in  Judges 
8=33,  9:27,  11:24,  16=23,  24.  1.  Sam.  5=7.  1.  Kings  11:33.  2.  Kings 
1=2.  16,  and  many  other  passages.  Deut.  10:17.  "The  Lord  your  God 
is  God  of  God  and  Lord  of  Lords  "  Josh.  22=22.  The  Lord  God  of 
Gods,  the  Lord  God  of  Gods,  he  knoweth  and  Israel  he  shall  know. 
Psalm  96:4.  5.  For  the  Lord  is  great  and  greatly  to  ^>e  praised,  He  is 
to  be  feared  above  all  gods.  For  all  the  gods  of  the  Nations  are  idols 
but  the  Lord  made  the  heavens. 

Jeremiah  14:22.  Are  there  any  among  the  vanities  of  the  Gentiles 
that  can  cause  rain  ?  or  can  the  heavens  give  showers  ?  art  not  thou 
He,  O  Lord  our  God? 

1.  Cor.  8=4.  5.  6.  As  concerning  therefore  the  eating  of  those 
things  that  are  offered  in  sacrifice  unto  idols,  we  know  that  an  idol 
is  nothing  in  the  world,  and  that  there  is  none  other  God  but  one. 
For  though  there  be  that  are  called  Gods  whether  in  heaven  or  in 
earth  (as  there  be  gods  many  and  lords  many)  but  to  us  there  is  but 
one  God,  the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  in  him. 

1.  "  Such  Gods  are  only  so-called  Gods  and  exalted  to  such  places 
by  the  false  conceptions  of  men. 

2.  Many  of  them  have  solely  imaginary  existence. 

3.  WThere  there  is  any  corresponding  existence,  they  are  but  crea- 
tures of  God  dependent  upon  him  for  existence  and  even  permission 
to  exercise  power  and  influence. 


61  Abstract  of  Theology. 

4.  These  Gods  are  identified  in  the  New  Testament  with  the 
devils  which  Christ  cast  out,  and  which  were  subject  to  him  and  his 
disciples,  and  who  are  only  the  angels  or  messengers  of  Satan,  and 
therefore  fallen  created  angels. 

Acts  17=18.  Some  of  the  philosophers  who  met  Paul  at  Athens 
said  of  him,  "He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods," 
(daemons) — This  passage  shows  that  the  word  which  is  constantly 
used  in  the  New  Testament  for  the  Devils  cast  out,  was  a  word  pro- 
perly used  by  these  Greeks  as  applicable  to  their  gods. 

But  we  have  places  in  which  the  word  is  applied  by  the  sacred 
writers  themselves  to  these  gods. 

1.  Cor.  10--20.  21.  The  things  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they 
sacrifice  to  devils  and  not  to  God,  and  I  would  not  that  ye 
should  have  fellowship  with  devils.  We  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the 
Lord  and  the  cup  of  devils,  we  cannot  be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  table 
and  of  the  table  of  devils. 

Rev.  9=20.  And  the  rest  of  the  men  whist  were  not  killed  by  these 
plagues  yet  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  hands  that  they  should 
not  worship  devils  and  idols  of  gold  and  silver,  and  brass  and  stone, 
and  of  wood,  which  neither  can  see,  nor  hear,  nor  walk. 

(b  )     Such  expressions  as  apply  the  word  God  to  Moses  as, 

Ex.  4:16.  And  he  (Aaron)  shall  be  thy  spokesman  unto  the  people, 
and  he  shall  be$  even  he  shall  be  to  thee  instead  of  a  mouth,  and 
thou  shalt  be  to  him  instead  of  God. 

Ex.  7=1.  And  the  Lord,  said  unto  Moses,  see  I  have  made  thee  a 
God  to  Pharaoh. 

John  10:34.  35.  Jesus  answered  them,  is  it  not  written  in  your  law, 
I  said,  ye  are  gods.  If  he  called  them  gods,  unto  whom  the  word  of 
God  came,  and  the  Scripture  carnot  be  broken. 

The  reference  is  to  Ps.  82=6.  7.  I  have  said  ye  are  gods  (Elohim,) 
and  all  of  you  are  children  of  the  most  High.  But  ye  shall  die  like 
men    and  fall  like  one  of  the  princes. 

As  to  these  passages  referring  to  Moses,  the  idea  manifestly  is  that 
#he  stood  before  Aaron  and  Pharaoh  as  the  representative  of  God, 
clothed  with  His  authority  and  having  the  right  to  demand  confidence 
in  his  utterances  and  obedience  to  his  commands.  But  all  of  this 
not  because  of  any  partaking  of  divine  nature,  but  because  he  was 
God's  ambassador. 

As  to  the  passage  in  the  Psalms  quoted  by  Christ  it  is  equally 
manifest  that  this  was  a  metaphorical  use  of  the  words  to  denote  the 
recognition  of   exalted    dignity    and   mighty    power.     In    the    psalm 


Abstract  of  Theology.  62 

which  records  the  word,  it  is  said  in  the  1st  verse,  "God  standeth  in  the 
congregation  of  the  mighty  ;  he  judgeth  among  the  gods."  This  lan- 
guage and  the  threat  of  death  like  men  in  the  6th  verse  show  that 
it  was  applied  to  men  who  are  only  metaphorically  spoken  of  as  gods. 

The  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  not  opposed  to  the  unity  of  God,  but 
only  enables  us  to  form  just  conceptions  as  to  that  unity. 

It  presents  to  us  three  Persons  who  are  not  three  gods,  but  one 
God,  and  as  will  hereafter  be  seen  shows  us  that  the  unity  of 
God  is  to  be  found  in  His  nature  or  essence  and  not  in  the  personal 
relations  in  that  essence,  so  that  there  is  but  one  divine  nature  or 
essence,  one  Being,  one  God,  although  there  are  three  persons  subsist- 
ing therein  who  by  virtue  of  that  subsistence  are  each  God. 

We  are  not  led  by  this  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God,  therefore  to 
adopt  the  Arian  notion  that  the  Father  is  Supreme  God  and  the  Son 
only  a  divine  Being  in  a  subordinate  sense.  Nor  is  it  proper  to 
accept  as  teaching  the  Sabellian  notion,  that  God  is  one  person  mani- 
festing Himself  sometimes  as  Father,  sometimes  as  Son  and  sometimes 
as  Holy  Ghost.  "Neither  does  it  at  all  teach  Tritheistic  unity  by 
which  these  are  really  three  gods,  but  considered  one  because  they 
have  the  same  nature  just  as  three  men  may  be  said  to  be  one  because 
of  the  same  human  nature."  See  Gill,  vol.  1,  pp  183,  184  from  which 
this  is  condensed. 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 

LECTURE  V. 

The  Spirituality  of  God. 

I.     The  one  God  has  undoubtedly  a  spiritual  nature. 

1.  He  is  the  creator  of  spirits.  But  Spirit  is  the  highest  order 
of  existence  and  its  creator  must  himself  have  the  nature  which  belongs 
to  that  order. 

2.  The  creation  and  government  of  the  world  give  evidence  of 
wisdom,  skill,  knowledge,  and  purpose;  but  these  are  attributes  of 
Spirit.     God  therefore  must  have  a  spiritual  nature. 

3  We  arrive  at  the  idea  of  the  perfect  being  by  the  exclusion 
of  all  imperfection  and  the  ascription  of  all  perfection.  But  spiritual 
nature  is  in  every  respect  an  imperfection.  Therefore  we  ascribe  it 
to  God. 

4.     The  Scriptures  ascribe  a  spiritual  nature  to  God. 

It  is  involved  in  the  abundant  language  .about  the  spirit  of  God, 
in  which  however  reference  is  had  distinctively  to  the  third  person 
in  the  Trinity. 

It  is  also  involved  in  all  the  intellectual,  and  moral,  and  emo- 
tional thoughts  and  acts  ascribed  to  Him. 

But  it  •is  directly  asserted  in  two  places;  John  4:24;  the  lan- 
guage of  our  Lord  to  the  woman  of  Sychar ;  "God  is  a  spirit  and 
they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

Again  in  Heb.  12:9,  where  fathers  of  the  flesh,  and  of  the  spirit 
are  contrasted. 

"Furthermore  we  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected 
us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence:  shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in 
subjection  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live. 

Compare  also  Acts  17=24,  25.  "God  that  made  the  world,  and 
all  things  therein,  seeing  that  He  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth, 
dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands;    neither    is    worshipped 


6o  Abstract  of  Theology. 

with  men's  hands,  as  though  he  needeth  anything,"  &c. 

II.  But  when  we  ascribe  spirituality  to  God,  we  do  not  intend 
simply  to  assert  that  He  possesses  a  spiritual  nature,  but  that  His 
nature  is  exclusively  spiritual.  By  this  we  mean  that  He  has  no 
material  organization,  that  He  has  neither  body,  nor  members  of  the 
body  such  as  we  have,  no  shape  nor  form,  no  passions  nor  limitations, 
but  has  only  a  spiritual  nature. 

1.  This  is  evident  from  His  immensity  and  eternity  ;  (infinity  in 
time  and  space.) 

To  have  an  omnipresent  and  eternal  mode  of  existence  is  possible 
for  a  spiritual  nature,  because  spirit  has  not  of  necessity  succession  of 
time  and  specific  limitation  of  location.  But  these  ot  necessity  belong 
to  matter.  It  is  of  necessity  that  it  has  a  here,  and  not  an  everywhere; 
spirit  alone  can  combine  the  two,  the  here  and  the  everywhere.  It  is 
also  of  necessity  that  matter  exists  in  time;  we  know  that  it  exists  now, 
that  it  existed  yesterday,  that  it  may  exist  to-morrow.  We  know 
that  it  necessarily  has  this  succession  and  difference  of  time.  But  with 
the  eternal  God  there  can  be  no  succession  of  time,  and  consequently 
He  can  have  no  material  nature,  but  must  be  purely  spiritual. 

2.  It  also  follows  from  His  independence  and  immutability. 

If  God  have  body,  He  is  capable  of  being  influenced  from  without, 
for  all  matter  is  thus  capable  of  being  influenced,  of  being  moved,  di- 
vided, added  to  and  diminished.  But  if  thus  capable  of  influence  from 
without  He  is  not  independent.  Therefore  the  independent  God  can- 
not be  material. 

Again,  if  He  is  body,  He  is  mutable,  for  all  matter  is  capable  of 
change.       Therefore  the  immutable  God  cannot  be  material. 

3.  This  may  be  proved  from  His  absolute  perfection. 

(a.)  Negatively.  From  the  idea  of  absolute  perfection  We  exclude 
all  that  admits  of  limitation,  or  change.  But  body  is  both  limited 
and  changeable.  Therefore  the  absolute  perfection  of  God  excludes 
a  bodily  organism. 

(b.)  Positively.  To  absolute  perfection  we  ascribe  the  possession  of 
intelligence,  will,  and  moral  perception.  But  these  do  not  belong  to 
body.  Therefore  body  cannot  be  either  in  part  or  whole  the  abso- 
lutely perfect  one. 

4.  We  realize  in  ourselves,  the  defects  of  a  material  organization, 
how  it  confines  us,  how  it  causes  pain  and  suffering,  how  it  imposes 
on  us  joy  in  sensual  pleasures,  how  incapable  it  is  of  knowledga  and 
power  in  itself.  Hence  we  naturally  disbelieve  that  in  God  is  to  be 
found  an  organism  so  necessarily  imperfect.     On   the   other   hand  we 


Abstract  of  Theology.  .  66 

find  our  spiritual  nature  to  be  of  wondrous  power  and  capacity,  en- 
dowed with  intelligence,  skill  and  wisdom,  capable  of  knowing  right 
and  wrong,  and  the  true  and  the  false,  and  possessed  of  liberty  of 
choice,  and  we  therefore  ascribe  to  God  the  possession  of  such  a  nature 
to  an  infinite  extent,  with  infinite  intelligence,  skill  and  wisdom,  and 
a  will  absolutely  untrammeled  from  without. 

In  apparent  opposition  to  this  doctrine  of  the  pure  spirituality  of 
God  is  a  large  number  of  passages,  which  represent  God  in  or  with 
bodily  form.  This  language  is  partly  figurative,  and  partly  used  as 
an  accomodation  to  human  thought,  and  the  incapacity  of  human  lan- 
guage to  express  exclusively  divine  things.  Such  language  is  called 
anthropomorphic,  and  is  generally  so  realized  as  such,  as  to  make  no 
false  impression,  even  upon  the' most  ignorant.. 

It  is  true  however,  that  some  have  held  that  God  has  body,  as  for 
example  some  of  the  early  heretics  and  even  Tertullian,  who  says  : 
"Quis  negabit  Deum  Corpus  esse  etsi  Deus  Spiritus  est." 

Mohammed  held  the  idea  of  bodily  form  in  God.  So  also  did  some 
of  the  later  Socinians,  and  this  idea  is  taught  in  the  Racovian  Cate- 
chism. 

In  forming  such  views  they  have  been  misled  by  these  passages  and 
by  the  Scripture  statement,  that  man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  passages  as  collected  in  West's  Analysis, 
pp.  17-19. 

Those  which  speak  of  Him  as  having  location.  Gen.  4:16.  Ex. 
19:17,  21.     Ex.  20:21  and  Ex.  33:14,  15. 

As  having  motion.  Gen.  17:22.  Gen.  18:33.  Ex.  19:20.  Num.  12:5. 
Num.  23:4.  Deut.  33:2.  Judg.  5:4.  1.  Sam.  4:7.  Ps.  47:5.  Ps. 
68:7,8.    Ezek.  11:23.     Micah.  1:3.    Hab.  3:3.    Zech.  2:13. 

As  using  vehicles.  2.  Sam.  22:11.  (Cherub  and  wings  of  wind,  Ps. 
18:10.)  Ps.  104:2.  Clouds  and  wings  of  the  wind,  Hab.  3:8,15. 
Zech.  9:14. 

Said  to  dwell  on  the  earth.  Ex.  25:8.  Ex.  29:43.  44.  1.  Kings 
6:11,12.  1.  Kings  8:13.  2.  Chron.  6:2.  Ps.  132:14.  Mic.  1:2.  Heb. 
2:20.  • 

Dwells  with  man.  Ex.  29:45.  Lev.  26:11,12.  2.  Chron.  6:18. 
Zech.  2:10.     Rev.  21:3. 

Dwells  in  men.     1.  Cor.  3:16,  17. 

As  having  face.  Gen.  32:30.  Ex.  33:11,20.  Deut.  5:4.  Deut. 
34:10.  Rev.  20:11.  Eyes.  2.  Chron.  16:9.  Prov.  22:12.  Nostrils. 
2.  Sam.  22:9.16.     Ps.  18:15.      Mouth.     Num.  12:8.     Ps.  18:8.     Lips 


67  Abstract  of  Theology. 

and  Tongue.  Isa.  30:27.  Breath.  Isa.  30:28.  Shoulders.  Deut. 
33:12..  HandandArm.  Ps.21=8.  Ps.  74:11.  Pa.  89:13.  Ps.  118:16. 
Isa  52:10.  Hab.  3:4.  Fingers.  Ps.  8:3.  Bach  Ex.  33:21,22,  23. 
Jer.  18:17.  Feet.  Ps.  18:9.  Voice.  Ex.  19:19.  Ex.  20:22.  Lev.  id. 
Num  7=89.  Num.  12:4.  Num.  22=9.  Deut.  4:12,36.  1.  Kings, 
19:12,  13.     Ps.  68:33.     Jer.  25=30.     Ezek,  43:6. 

Voice,  (as  dreaded.)  Ex.  20=19.  Deut.  4:33.  Deut,  5:24,  25,  26. 
Joel  2=11.     Joel  3=16.     Amos.  1=2.     Heb.  12=19,26. 

To  exercise  laughter.     Ps.  2:4.     Ps.  69:8. 

Appears  to  men.  Gen.  35:9.  Gen.  48:3.  Ex.  3:6.  Ex.  19=9. 
1.  Kings  9=2     Job  42=5,6.     Amos  9=6. 

So  that  His  appearance  is  described.  Ex.  24:10.  Deut.  31=15. 
Isa.  6=1.  Isa.  60=1,2.  Ezek.  1=1.  Ezek.  8:1,2,4.  Ezek.  43:2. 
Dan.  7=9,10.     Rev.  4=5. 

In  human  form.     Gen.  18=1.     Ezek.  1=26,  27.     Rev.  4=2,  3. 

Four  Remarks  further, 

1.  The  Spirituality  of  God  necessarily  involves, 

1.  That  He  is  invisible  and  intangible,  or  incapable  of  appre- 
hension by  the  bodily  senses. 

2.  That  He  is  unchangeable,  incorruptible  and  indestructible. 

3.  That  He  is  simple  and  uncompounded. 

4.  Thac  He  is  a  living  personal  Being,  intelligent,  moral,  free 
and  active. 

5.  That  He  is  infinite  and  eternal. 

2.  Upon  the  Spirituality  of  God  depends. 

1.  His  knowledge  of  all  events,  and   especially  of  his  Spirit- 
ual creatures. 

2.  His  control  of  all  events. 

3.  His  purposing  all  things  that  shall  come  to  pass. 

3.  Because  of  it,  He  must  receive  spiritual  worship — 

1.  Not  that  of  the  body  only, 

2.  Nor  of  the  outward  form, 

3.  Nor  of  presented  service, 

4.  But  of  genuine  emotion. 

4.  Because  of  it,  He  cannot  be  represented  in  that  worship  by 
outward  forms  or  images.  He  is  to  be  approached  not  with  the  bodily 
senses,  but  with  the  communings  of  the  heart.  Hence  the  second 
commandment,  "Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image, 
or  any  likeness  of  anything  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  that  is  in  the 
earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water  under  the  earth ;  thou  shalt  not 
bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them."     Ex.  20:4,  5. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  68 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  VI 


DIVINE  ATTRIBUTES. 

The  Attributes  of  God  are  those  peculiarities  which  mark  or  define 
his  nature  and  constitute  his  character. 

They  are  not  separate  from  His  essence  or  nature,  and  yet  are  not 
that  essence,  but  simply  have  the  ground  or  cause  of  their  existence 
in  it,  and  are  at  the  same  time  the  peculiarities  which  comprise  the 
mode  and  nature  of  its  existence. 

As  they  are  not  separable  from  His  essence,  so  they  are  not  to  be 
regarded  as  so  many  different  powers  and  peculiarities  or  faculties, 
which  so  belong  to  God  that  He  is  "composed  of  different  elements." 
Hodge  1:369. 

This  would  take  away  the  simplicity  of  the  divine  nature  and  make 
it  compound  and  therefore  divisible  and  changeable. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  not  simply  our  different  concep- 
tions of  God.  They  have  existence  independently  of  His  creatures. 
There  is  some  true  foundation  in  God  himself  for  the  distinctions  be- 
tween them,  so  that,  when  we  say  that  God  is  wise,  we  do  not  only  say 
that  we  conceive  of  Him  differently  than  when  we  say  that  He  is  just, 
but  we  mean  that,  there  is  that  in  God  which  makes  it  proper  that  we 
should  conceive  of  Him  under  the  different  aspects  of  wisdom  and 
justice. 

CLASSIFICATIONS. 

Various  divisions  have  been  made  of  the  attributes  of  God. 

1.     One  is  into  communicable  and  incommunicable. 

The  communicable  attributes  are  those,  which,  to  a  limited  degree, 
He  can  also  bestow  upon  His  creatures.  Such  are  power,  knowledge, 
wisdom,  love,  holiness,  &c. 


69  Abstract  of  Theology. 

The  incommunicable  are  those  which  cannot  thus  be  bestowed,  but 
which  of  necessity  exist  only  in  God.  These  are  infinity,  including 
immensity,  eternity,  and  immutability. 

Two  other  divisions  which  arrange  the  attributes  precisely  like  this, 
giving  the  same  lists  for  the  one  and  the  other,  are  absolute  and  rela- 
tive, immanent  and  transient. 

2.  Another  is  into  natural,  and  moral. 

By  the  natural  are  meant,  those  which  describe  the  nature  of  God 
as  distinct  from  His  character  ;  by  the  moral,  those  which  describe 
His  character. 

Hodge  objects  to  this  division,  because  "the  holiness  and  justice  of 
God  are  as  much  natural  as  His  power  or  knowledge.  And  on  the 
other  hand  God  is  infinite  and  eternal  in  His  moral  perfections,  al- 
though infinity  and  eternity  are  not  distinctively  moral  perfections," 
"In  the  common  and  familiar  sense  of  the  word  natural  the  terms 
natural  and  moral  express  a  real  distinction."     Hodge  375:6. 

3.  Again  divided  into  negative  and  positive.  Dr.  Hodge  states  the 
division  thus.  "Others  arrange  the  attributes  according  to  the  mode 
in  which  we  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  them.'1  We  form  our  idea  of 
God,  (1.)  By  the  way  of  causation  ;  that  is  by  referring  to  Him  as  the 
great  first  cause,  every  virtue  manifested  by  the  effects  which  he  pro- 
duces. (2  )  By  the  way  of  negation  ;  that  is  by  denying  to  Him  the 
limitations  and  imperfections  which  belong  to  His  creatures.  (3.) 
By  the  way  of  eminence;  by  exalting  to  an  infinite  degree  or  without 
limit  the  perfections  which  belong  to  an  infinite  being.  If  this  be  so, 
the  attributes  conceived  of  by  one  of  these  methods  belong  to  one 
class,  and  those  conceived  of,  or,  of  which  we  attain  the  knowledge  by 
another  method  belong  to  another  class.  This  principle  of  classifica- 
tion is  perhaps  the  one  most  generally  adopted.  It  gives  rise,  how- 
ever, really  but  to  two  classes,  namely  the  positive  and  negative,  i.  e. 
those  in  which  something  is  affirmed,  and  those  in  which  something 
is  denied  concerning  God.  To  the  negative  class  are  commonly  re- 
ferred, simplicity,  infinity,  eternity,  immutability ;  to  the  positive 
class,  power,  knowledge,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth." 
Hodge,  vol.  1,  p.  375. 


The  Simplicity  of  God. 

By  this  we  mean,  that  the  nature  of  God,   comprising  His   essence 
and  his  attributes,  is  a  simple  or  uncompounded  pure  spirit. 

It  means  more  than  His  unity — for  the  latter   expresses  only  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  70 

fact  that  there  is  but  one  Being,  that  is  God.  Were  God  both  matter 
and  spirit,  or  compounded  in  any  other  way,  His  unity  would  not  be 
affected. 

Were  there  but  one  man  in  the  world,  we  should  ascribe  to  him 
unity,  and  if  there  could  be  but  one,  we  should  ascribe  essential  unity. 

It  means  more  than  the  spirituality  of  God,  for  that  includes  only 
that  He  must  be  spiritual,  and,  also,  as  we  have  seen,  that  He  should 
be  purely  spiritual. 

But  there  is  nothing  contradictory  in  the  idea,  that  created  spirits 
might  have  a  composite  spiritual  nature,  composed,  for  example,  of 
mind,  soul  and  spirit  as  three  distinct  essences,  or  that  a  spiritual  nature 
should  have  a  spiritual  body  as  well  as  a  spiritual  soul. 

But  in  God  there  can  be  no  composition,  and  therefore  His  spiritual 
nature  must  be  uneompounded.  Even  His  attributes  and  His  nature 
must  be  in  such  a  manner  one  that  His  attributes  essentially  inhere 
in  that  nature  and  are  not  capable  of  separation  from  it,  which 
really  makes  them  one  with  that  nature. 

1.  Because  composition  (or  a  putting  together,)  involves  possibilty 
of  separation.  But  this  would  involve  destructibility,  and  change- 
ableness,  each  of  which  is  inconsistent  with  absolute  perfection  and 
necessary  existence. 

2.  Composition  involves  a  time  of  separate  existence  of  the  parts 
compounded.  If  so,  then  there  was  a  time  when  God  did  not  exist, 
because  the  parts  of  His  nature  had  not  been  united,  or,  when  He  existed 
imperfectly,  not  having  yet  received  to  His  essential  nature  the 
additions  subsequently  made  ;  all  of  which  is  inconsistent  with  abso- 
lute perfection  and  necessary  existence 

3.  If  the  parts  have  been  compounded,  it  has  been  done  by  some 
force  from  without  or  has  been  a  growth  in  His  nature.  They  have  not 
been  added  from  without;  because  God  is  independent  and  therefore 
cannot  be  affected  from  without.  And  besides  all  outward  form  and 
all  else  besides  God  had  its  origin  in  Him,  and  He  existed  as  God 
before  it.  They  have  not  been  a  growth  in  Him,  for  if  so,  he  is  not 
unchangeable.  Any  such  addition  to  God  or  growth  in  Him  is  also 
inconsistent  with  absolute  perfection  and  necessary  existence. 

In  ascribing  simplicity  to  God,  therefore  we  declare  that  His  nature 
is  so  purely  or  simply  one,  as  not  to  be  compounded  of  separate 
substances  as  matter  and  spirit,  or  even  of  the  same  substances  in  dif- 
ferent forms,  or  a  substance  with  separable  attributes,  and  we  assert 
that  even  His  attributes  are  one  with  His  essence,  and  that  He  is  not 
only  essentially  spiritual,  but  also  essentially  wise  and  good,  and  holy 
and  just,  and  true,  and  almighty,  and  omnipotent. 


71  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Infinity  of  God. 

When  we  say  that,  God  is  infinite,  we  deny  to  him  all  limitation  in 
His  nature  or  essence.  We  are  conscious  of  the  finite  nature  of  our 
soul  as  well  as  of  oar  body;  it  has  limitations  as  to  place,  time 
and  capabilities.  In  arriving  at  the  idea  of  the  perfect  being  by  way  of 
negation,  we  deny  all  such  limitation  in  Him,  and  therefore  ascribe  to 
Him  infinity  as  to  time,  and  space,  as  well  as  infinite  perfection,  in  His 
mode  of  existence,  in  His  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  justice,  holiness 
and  truth. 

The  infinity  of  God  as  to  time  is  called 
His  Eternity. 
By  this  we  mean, 

1.  That  He  has  no  beginning  nor  end. 

2.  That  with  Him  there  is  no  succession  of  moments. 

It  is  difficult  to  attain  any  conception  of  the  mode  of  existence  which 
is  thus  ascribed  to  Him.  It  is  so  different  from  our  own.  Yet  a  brief 
consideration  of  what  is  involved  in  the  nature  of  God  must  convince 
us  that  the  idea  which  we  express  by  these  statements  is  just  and 
true. 

(1.)     As  to  the  statement  that  He  has  no  beginning  or  end. 

When  we  say,  that  we  shall  live  forever,  we  can  understand  how  a 
life  once  begun,  may  never  be  completed. 

But  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  a  life  which  goes  back  equally  for- 
ever as  one  may  go  forward.  The  past  is  always  completed,  and  as 
completed  must  be  measurable.  That  which  has  been  by  succession 
of  moments,  or  days,  must  have  had  some  first  day,  or  moment  with 
which  it  began.     We  can  form  no  other  conception  of  it. 

That  division  of  eternity,  therefore  which  is  called  eternity  a  parte 
post,  we  can  comprehend;  but  the  complement  of  it,  the  eternity  a 
parte  ante  which  is  united  with  it  to  express  infinite  duration,  is  felt 
at  once  to  be  an  attempted  conception  of  the  mind,  to  express  some- 
thing which  we  know  must  be  true  and  yet  which  we  perceive  is  in- 
adequately conceived  as  well  as  expressed. 

While,  therefore,  we  know  that  God  has  had  no  beginning,  we  see 
that  His  mode  of  existence  cannot  have  been  one  in  which  He  has 
had  in  the  past,  that  infinite  duration,  which  corresponds  to  what  may 
be  ours  in  the  future. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  72 

Again.  When  we  say  that,  in  reference  to  any  period,  any  being 
has  always  existed,  and  will  always  exist,  we  mean,  that  there  has  not 
only  been  no  moment  in  that  period  when  he  has  not  existed,  but 
that  during  that  period  he  has  been  and  will  be  existent  in  a  constant 
succession  of  moments.  There  is  at  all  times,  after  the  beginning,  a 
past;  and  present,  and  will  be,  until  the  end,  a  future.  One  moment 
passes  away,  and  another  succeeds.  But  with  God  there  can  be  no 
succession  of  moments. 

(1.)  Because  then  He  would  have  had  a  beginning,  which  is  op- 
posed to  His  infinity. 

(2.)  Because  then  He  would  not  be  unchangeable,  for  that  would 
be  true  of  Him  to-day,  which  was  not  yesterday  and  will  not  be  to- 
morrow. 

(3.)  He  would  not  be  perfect.  Because  something  could  be  added 
to  him  from  day  to  day,  He  would  become  older,  He  would  have  new 
experience.  Indeed  there  would  be  either  increase  or  diminution  of 
His  power,  wisdom,  &c,  &c. 

The  schoolmen  attempted  to  express  the  eternity  of  God  by  saying 
that  it  is  punctum  stans,  or  nunc  semper  stans.  The  poet  Cowley 
thus  expresses  it, 

"Nothing  there  is  to  come,  and  nothing  past, 
But  an  eternal  Now  does  always  last." 

This  is  the  conception  of  eternity  which  we  strive  to  attain.  Oar  dif- 
ficulty in  doing  so  is  that  we  can  no  more  conceive  of  duration  with- 
out succession,  than  we  can  of  an  eternity  a  parte  ante  But  we  see 
that,  in  this  conception,  we  are  not  arriving  at  a  thought  in  itself  erro- 
neous, as  in  the  other  case,  but  are  simply  recognizing  the  fact  that 
God's  mode  of  existence,  as  to  time,  is  different  from  ours. 

Ours  has  succession  of  moments,  increase  in  the  length  of  the  period, 
is  not  all  of  it  possessed  at  the  same  time,  has  had  beginning  and 
might  have  an  end,  and  has  a  past  and  future  as  well  as  present. 

God  has  no  succession,  no  increase  of  life,  is  possessed  of  the  whole 
of  His  existence  at  once,  and  eternally  possessed,  has  had  no  beginning, 
can  have  no  end,  and  lives  in  the  present  only,  having  no  past  or 
future. 

This  accords  with  the  statements  of  scripture.  God  is  always 
spoken  of  in  the  present. 

He  calls  himself  I  am.  His  name  Jehovah  has  been  supposed  mys- 
tically to  express  this. 

In  Ps.  90:2.  "Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  ever  thou 
hadst  formed  the  earth  and  the  world,  even  from  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting, thou  art  God." 


73  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Thus  our  Lord  when  He  would  declare  his  equality  with  the  father 
uses  the  present  tense  for  each.  "My  father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I 
work." 

So  also  in  like  manner  He  declared  His  Divinity  by  saying  ''Before 
Abraham  was,  /  am." 

A  question  arises,  what  then  is  the  relation  of  time  and  eternity  to 
each  other. 

Time  is  not  a  part  of  eternity,  for  if  it  were,  eternity  must  have 
succession,  viz  :  before  time,  during  time,  after  time. 

They  are  in  reality  different  modes  of  existence  which  are  unlike 
each  other,  time  being  suited  to  the  measurement  of  creation  periods 
and  creature  life.     True  eternity  belongs  only  to  the  life  of  God. 

While  time  however  is  not  a  part  of  eternity  it  co-exists  with  it. 

Through  the  divine  purpose  all  its  events  have  been  eternally  pre- 
sent with  God,  and  as  well  known  and  realized  by  Him,  as  though 
actually  existent.  And,  in  the  actual  existence  of  time,  it  has  been 
present  actually  with  God,  and  eternity,  although  not  constituting  a 
part  of  eternity. 

The  nature  of  these  relations  we  cannot  understand.  Our  ideas  are 
vague,  and  the  language,  in  which  we  would  convey  them  is  incapable 
of  expressing  even  what  we  perceive  and  know.  But  while  this, 
is  true,  we  have  no  question  as  to  the  possibility  of  better  knowledge 
in  the  future  on  this  point.  The  difficulty  is  in  reality  no  greater 
than  in  the  connection  between  the  immensity  and  omnipresence  of  God. 
Yet,  from  the  knowledge  of  the  presence  of  our  spirits,  as  compared 
with  that  of  our  bodies,  we  comprehend  the  fact  of  the  omnipresence 
of  God  with  all  created  things,  while  the  space  in  which  they  exist  is 
no  more  a  part  of  His  immensity  than  is  time   a  part  of  His  eternity. 

Corresponding  to  the  infinity  of  God  in  respect  to  time  is  His  in- 
finity, in  respect  to  space  which  is  called 

His  Immensity. 

God  is  not  confined  to  space  any  more  than  He  is  measured  by 
time. 

Space  must  have  its  limitations  because  its  existence  is  commen- 
surate only  with  the  universe.  Where  there  is  no  creation,  there  can 
be  no  space  nor  time.  But  creation  cannot  be  infinite,  but  must  have 
its  bounds,  impossible  as  it  may  be  for  us  to  imagine  the  non-existence 
of  space.  In  our  mode  of  existence,  space  and  time  are  so  necessary 
that  we  cannot  even  deny  their  existence  without  using   words  which 


Abstract  of  Theology.  74 

involve  that  existence.  Thus  if  I  say,  "Where  there  is  no  universe, 
there  is  no  space,"  the  very  words  "where"  and  "there"  involve  the 
notion  of  space. 

But  withal  this,  we  know  that,  just  as  time  is  the  period,  so  is  space 
the  location,  in  which  creation  exists. 

When  therefore  we  speak  of  God's  immensity,  we  mean  more 
than  his  filling  all  space  just  as  when  we  speak  of  His  eternity,  we 
mean  more  than  His  existing  throughout  all  time. 

We  can  only  express  the  idea  by  the  fiction  of  infinite  space  as 
in  the  other,  we  have  done  by  that  of  infinite  time. 

Immensity  is  an  absolute  attribute  of  God  to  which  corresponds 
the  relative  one 

His  Omnipresence. 

By  this  word  we  express  the  relation  of  God  as  present  with 
creation. 

He  is  present  everywhere.  He  is  present  at  one  and  the  same 
time  everywhere. 

His  presence  is  not  merely  contact,  but  energy,  and  power. 

It  is  not  merely  through  his  knowledge  of  it,  or  the  exertion  of 
His  power  upon  it,  but  He  fills  it  with  His  essence. 

He  fills  it,  not  as  part  to  part,  but  the  whole  infinite  deity  is 
entirely  undividedly  present,  at  each  point  of  creation,  in  each  mo- 
ment of  time. 

The  following  valuable  questions  and  answers  are  taken  from 
Hodge's  Outlines  of  Theology,   p.    141,   of  the  new  edition. 

"What  are  the  different  modes  of  the  divine  presence  ?" 

God  may  be  conceived  of  as  present  in  any  place,  or  with  any 
creature,  in  several  modes ;  first,  as  to  His  essence ;  second,  as  to 
His  knowledge ;  third,  as  manifesting  that  presence  to  any  intelli- 
gent creature  ;  fourth,  as  exercising  his  power  in  or  upon  His  crea- 
tures. As  to  essence  and  knowledge  His  presence  is  the  same 
everywhere  and  always.  As  to  his  self  manifestation  and  the  exer- 
cise of  His  power,  His  presence  differs  endlessly  in  different  cases, 
in  degree  and  mode.  Thus  God  is  present  to  the  church  as  He  is 
not  to  the  world.  Thus  He  is  present  in  hell  in  the  manifestation 
and  execution  of  righteous  wrath,  while  He  is  present  in  heaven 
in  the  manifestation  and  communication  of  gracious  love  and  glory. 

How  may  it  be  proved  that  He  is  everywhere  present  as  to  his 
essence  ? 


75  Abstract  of  Theology. 

That  God  is  everywhere  present  as  to  His  essence  is  proved  from 
Scripture.  1.  Kings  8:27.  '  Ps.  139=7-10.  Isaiah  66:1.  Acts  17=27.28. 
And  from  reason.  (1.)  It  follows  necessarily  from  His  infinitude. 
(2.)  From  the  fact  that  His  knowledge  is  His  essence  knowing,  and  His 
actions  are  His  essence  acting,  yet  His  knowledge  and  His  power 
reach  to  all  things. 

State  the  different  relations  that  bodies,  created  spirits  and  God 
sastain  to  space. 

Turretine  sa}s  =  "Bodies  are  conceived  of  as  existing  in  space  circum- 
scriptively  because,  occupying  a  certain  portion  of  space,  they  are 
bounded  by  space  upon  every  side.  Created  spirits  do  not  occupy 
any  portion  of  space,  nor  are  they  embraced  by  any,  they  are  how- 
ever in  space  definitely  as  here  and  not  there.  God  on  the  other 
hand  is  in  space  repletively,  because  in  a  transcendent  manner  His 
essence  fills  all  space.  He  is  included  in  no  space;  He  is  excluded 
from  none.  Wholly  present  to  each  point  He  comprehends  all  space 
at  once." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  76 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  VII 


The  Immutability  of  God. 

The  immutability  of  God  makes  him  incapable  of  change,  either  in 
duration,  which  is  involved  in  His  eternity,  or  in  nature,  character, 
will,  or  happiness.  In  none  of  these,  nor  in  any  other  respects  is  there 
possibility  of  change. 

1.  This  is  implied  in  His  absolute  perfection.  Perfection  permits 
neither  increase,  as  though  He  lacked,  nor  decrease,  as  though  He 
could  lose.  Change  must  be  for  the  worse,  or  for  the  better,  but  God 
cannot  become  worse,  nor  better. 

2.  It  arises,  in  like  manner,  from  the  pure  simplicity  of  His  nature. 
That  which  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  compounded,  cannot  be  changed. 

3.  It  is  expressly  taught  by  the  Scriptures  in   several  particulars. 
(a.)     They  declare  Him  to  be  unchangeable  in  life.       Gen.   21:33. 

He  is  called  "the  Lord  the  everlasting  God."  So  also  in  Rom.  16:26. 
Deut.  32:39,40.  "See  now  that  I,  even  I,  am  He,  and  there  is  no  god 
with  me  ;  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive  ;  I  wound,  and  I  heal  ;  neither  is 
there  any,  that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand.  For  I  lift  up  my  hand 
to  heaven,  and  say,  I  live  forever."  In  Ps.  55:19,  He  is  called  "God, 
*  *  *  even  He  that  abideth  of  old."  Also,  Ps.  90:1,  "From 
everlasting  to  everlasting  thou  art  God."  In  Ps.  102:12,  and  in  Ps. 
9:7,  we  have,  "Lord,  shall  endure  for  ever."  In  Habakkuk  1:12,  the 
Prophet  asks  :  "Art  thou  not  from  everlasting  0  Lord  my  God,  mine 
Holy  one?" 

1.  Tim.  1:17.  "Unto  the  king  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only 
wise  and  true  God." 

1.  Tim.  6:16.  "Who  only  hath  immortality,  dwelling  in  the  light 
which  no  man  can  approach." 


77  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(b.)     They  declare  Him  unchangeable  in  His  nature. 

Mai.  3:6.     'T  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not." 

Rom.  1:23.     "And  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God." 

James  1:17.  "The  Father  of  lights  with  whom  is  no  variableness, 
neither  shadow  of  turning." 

Ps.  104.31.     "The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  forever." 

(c.)     Unchangeable  in  His  will. 

Ps.  33:12.  "The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  forever,  the  thoughts 
of  His  heart  to  all  generations." 

Prov.  19:21.  "There  are  many  devices  in  a  man's  heart;  neverthe- 
less, the  counsel  of  the  Lord,  that  shall  stand." 

Being  even  independent  of  the  will  of  others. 

Job.  23:13.  "But  He  is  in  one  mind,  and  who  can  turn  Him?  and 
what  His  soul  desireth,  even  that  He  doeth." 

(d.)     Unchangeable  in  His  character. 

In  Sis  Justice. 

Gen.  18:25.     "Shall  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?" 
•    Job  8:3.     "Doth  God  pervert  judgment?  or  doth  the  Almighty  per- 
vert justice  ?"     Similar  to  this  is  Job  34:12. 

Rom.  2:2.  "We  are  sure  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to 
truth." 

In  His  Mercy. 

Mai.  3:6.  "I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not;  therefore  ye  sons  of 
Jacob  are  not  consumed." 

Exodus  34:7.     "Keeping  mercy  for  thousands." 

Deut.  4:31.  "For  the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  merciful  God;  He  will 
not  forsake  thee,  neither  destroy  thee,  nor  forget  the  covenant  of  thy 
fathers  which  He  sware  unto  them." 

Ps.  107:1.     "For  His  mercy  endureth  forever." 

Lam.  3:22,23.     "It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  con- 
sumed, because  His  compassions  fail  not.    They  are  new  every  morning; 
great  is  thy  faithfulness." 
n  In  His  Truth. 

Deut.  23:19.  "God  is  not  man  that  He  should  lie;  neither  the  son 
of  man,  that  He  should  repent." 

1.  Sam.  15:29.  "The  strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repent ;  for 
he  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  repent." 

Rom.  11:2.  "God  hath  not  cast  away  his  people  whom  He  foreknew." 

Rom.  3=3.  "For  what  if  some  did  not  believe  ?  shall  their  unbelief 
make  the  faith  of  God  without  effect." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  78 

Micah  7:20.  "Thou  wilt  perform  the  truth  to  Jacob,  and  the  mercy 
to  Abraham,  which  thou  hast  sworn  unto  our  fathers  from  the  days  of 
old." 

2.  Tim.  2:13.  "If  we  believe  not,  yet  He  abideth  faithful,  He  can- 
not deny  himself." 

Titus  1:2.  "In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  pro- 
mised before  the  world  began." 

Eom.  11=29.  "The  gifts  and  calling  of  God,  are  without  repent- 
ance." 

In  His  Holiness. 

Job  34:10.  "Far  be  it  from  God  that  He  should  do  wickedness,  and 
from  the  Almighty,  that  He  should  commit  iniquity." 

James  1:13.  "God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  neither  tempteth 
he  any  man." 

Hab.  1:13.  "Thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canst 
not  look  on  iniquity. 

In  his  knowledge. 

Acts  15:18.  "Known  unto  God  are  all  His  works  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world." 

Isaiah  40:13,14.  "Who  hath  directed  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  or 
being  His  counsellor,  hath  taught  Him?  with  whom  took  He  counsel, 
and  who  instructed  Him,  and  caught  Him  in  the  path  of  judgment, 
and  taught  Him  knowledge  and  shewed  to  Him  the  way  of  under- 
standing." And  so  on,  to  the  end  of  the  40th  chapter,  especially  in 
verse  28,  "there  is  no  searching  of  His  understanding." 


I.  It  is  objected  to  the  immutability  of  God,  that  a  change  must 
have  taken  place  in  Him  in  the  creation  of  the  universe.  It  is  claimed 
that  He,  then,  must  have  formed  a  new  purpose,  and  must  have  passed 
from  a  state  of  rest  to  one  of  activity. 

(a  )  But  this  objection  is  based  upon  a  forgetfulness  of  the  fact,  that 
in  Him  there  is  no  succession,  and  no  change  from  one  moment  to 
another.  The  creation  of  the  universe  is  no  less  an  outward  act,  than 
is  the  time  in  which  it  has  existence.  It  "appears  in  time  and  with 
time.  But  with  God  there  is  no  time,  and  no  relation  of  time,  exclu- 
sive of  time  itself.  There  was  not  before  its  creation.  There  will  not 
be  when  there  shall  be  no  more  time  in  creation.  We  may  not  be 
able  to  understand  how  this  is,  but  we  know  that  the  fact  must  be  so. 


79  Abstract  of  Theology. 

It  is  on  this  account,  that  the  purpose  of  God  to  create,  was  not 
a  new  one  formed  at  one  time,  and  not  at  another.  On  the  contrary, 
that  purpose,  and  indeed  His  whole  will  is  eternal.  Whatever  may 
have  given  rise  to  that  purpose,  does  not  exclude  this  fact. 

(b.)  There  was  nothing  outside  to  influence  Him.  He  was  moved 
entirely  by  His  own  will.  Whether,  that  will  was  altogether  volun- 
tary, or  arose  from  some  necessity  in  His  nature,  we  need  not  now 
consider.  If  it  was  either  the  one  or  the  other,  in  either  event  it  was 
eternal,  for  if  His  nature  be  eternal,  then  any  necessity  of  His  nature 
is  an  eternal  necessity,  and  any  purpose  He  forms  of  necessity,  or  vol- 
untarily, must  be  an  eternal  volition.  So  much  for  the  objection  based 
upon  a  supposed  new  purpose. 

That  from  a  transition  from  rest  to  labour  is  equally  baseless.  It 
supposes  labour  and  toil  in  God.  But  the  scripture  account  of  crea- 
tion, as  well  as  the  dictates  of  reason  forbid  this.  There  was  no  la- 
borious work  of  God.  There  never  is,  there  never  can  be.  His  in- 
finite power  compasses  His  infinite  will,  in  the  mere  wishing.  And, 
as  in  the  creation,  so  also  in  the  sustentation  of  the  universe,  there  is 
in  God  none  of  that  busy  careful  thought,  and  protracted  weary  effort 
by  which  man  maintains  government,  or  sustains  the  lives  of  those  de- 
pendent on  Him. 

This  view  of  God's  creation  accords  with  reason.  It  alone  is  worthy 
of  an  all  wise,  all  powerful,  independent  and  self  existent  God. 

It  is  established  by  Scripture.  Heb.  11:3.  "Through  faith  we  un- 
derstand that  the  worlds  were  made  by  the  word  of  God,  so  that  things 
which  are  seen,  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear." 

The  whole  account  of  the  creation  in  Genesis,  Chap.  1-1  to  chap.  2:3 
is  full  of  this  truth.     In  every  case  it  is  simply,  "And  God  said,"  &c. 

Psalm  33:9.  "For  He  spake,  and  it  was  done,  he  commanded  and 
it  stood  fast." 

When  it  is  said,  that  He  rested  on  the  seventh  day,  no  more  is  im- 
plied than  that  He  ceased  as  to  further  creation ;  for  the  sustenta- 
tion  of  the  universe  requires  constantly  the  same  exercise  of  power  and 
will  as  its  creation. 


II.     It  is  again  objected,  that  the   Scriptures  represent   change    in 
God,  when  they  speak  of  Him  as  "repenting."     Thus  they  say  : 


Abstract  of  Theology.  80 

Gen.  6=6.  "And  it  repented  the  Lord  that  He  had  made  man  on 
the  earth,  and  it  grieved  Him  at  His  heart." 

1.  Sam.  15:25.  ,(And  the  Lord  repented  that  He  had  made  Saul 
King  over  Israel." 

Ps.  106:35.  "And  He  remembered  for  them,  his  covenant  and  re- 
pented according  to  the  multitudes  of  His  mercies." 

Amos  7=3.  "The  Lord  repented  for  this  =  It  shall  not  be  saith  the 
Lord." 

Jonah  3=10.  "And  God  repented  of  the  evil,  that  He  had  said,  that 
He  would  do  unto  them." 

In  reply  to  this  objection  it  may  be  stated,  that  these  are  merely 
anthropopathic  expressions,  intended  simply,  to  impress  upon  men  his 
great  anger  at  sin,  and  his  warm  approval  of  the  repentance  of  those, 
who  had  sinned  against  Him.  The  change  of  conduct,  in  men,  not  in 
God,  had  changed  the  relations  between  them  and  God.  Sin  had 
made  them  liable  to  his  just  displeasure.  Repentance  had  brought 
them  within  the  possibilities  of  His  mercy.  Had  He  not  treated  them 
differently,  then  there  would  have  been  change  in  Him.  His  very 
unchangeableness  makes  it  necessary  that  He  shall  treat  differently, 
those  who  are  innocent,  and  those  who  are  guilty,  those  who  harden 
themselves  against  Him,  and  those  who  turn  toward  Him  for  mercy 
with  repentant  hearts.  So  far  as  the  first  of  these  passages  is  con- 
cerned, it  is  simply  a  protest  against  the  great  wickedness  into  which 
the  great  race  of  man  has  fallen.  The  scriptures  show  that  God  has 
had  a  purpose,  with  reference  to  such  sin,  which  from  the  beginning 
contemplated  the  fall  of  man,  and  the  different  stages  of  wickedness 
by  which  in  various  ages  that  fall  has  been  accompanied. 

III.  Again  it  has  been  objected,  that  God  must  be  changeable  or  He 
could  not  answer  prayer.  It  is  said,  if  His  purposes  stand  forever 
and  He  changes  not  His  will,  then  there  is  no  place  for  prayer. 

It  is  unquestionably  true,  that  God  promises  to  answer  prayer. 
It  is  also  true,  that  prayers  have  been  answered,  and  that  the  course 
of  human  events  has  thus  been  different  from  what  it  would  have 
been,  had  there  been  no  prayer  and  no  answer  to  it. 

But  the  mistake  arises  from  supposing  that  there  has  been  change 
in  God's  purpose  or  action  from  what  He  always  contemplated. 

The  difficulty  is  not  one  that  affects  prayer  only.  It  arises  as  well 
in  connection  with  labour,  or  with  any  other  act,  by  which  through 
man,  a  new  force  is  introduced  into  the  universe. 


81  Abstract  of  Theology. 

It  proceeds  from  the  fact  that  man,  being  a  voluntary  agent,  may 
act  according  to  choice  at  any  moment  of  his  life.  That  choice  puts 
his  action  outside  of  the  mere  mechanical  movements  of  the  universe. 
Over  these  it  is  admitted  that  God  has  absolute  control,  and  that  His 
purpose  relative  to  them  has  no  change.  But  it  is  thought,  that  if 
man  can  choose  one. thing,  or  another,  or  can  do,  or  not  do,  any  spe- 
cial act  he  pleases,  then  so  much  of  the  future  being  dependent  and 
resultant  from  his  act  or  volition,  God  must  change  His  purpose  to 
correspond  with  that  act  or  volition. 

To  this  it  may  be  replied  that  even  without  explanation  we  know, 
that  such  cannot  be  the  case,  for  this  would  take  away  the  indepen- 
dence of  God.  It  would  make  His  volitions  dependent  upon  those  of 
man.  If  it  be  therefore  true,  that  man  cannot  be  a  free  agent,  without 
such  mechanical  action,  on  his  part,  as  would  leave  God  free,  we  know 
that  free  agency  does  not  belong  to  him.  But  we  are  so  fully  con- 
scious of  our  free  agency,  that,  that  consciousness  becomes  to  us  the 
highest  revelation  from  God  that  it  has  real  existence.  If  prayer  then 
be  offered  the  only  doubt  about  it,  as  a  power  and  force,  the  effect  of 
which  does  not  change,  is  whether  God  answers  it.  And,  in  His  word 
He  has  so  plainly  taught  this,  as  to  leave  no  room  for  doubt. 

In  what  aspect,  then,  are  we  to  regard  prayer.  Evidently  in  this 
simple  way,  that  it  is  a  secondary  cause,  which  has  a  place,  like  all 
other  secondary  causes,  which,  like  other  such,  is  necessary  to  produce 
the  result,  to  which  God  has  given  means  of  efficient  entrance  into  the 
working  of  the  universe,  the  existence  of  which  has  been  as  fully  known 
and  purposed  as  any  other  secondary  cause,  and  the  presence  of  which 
can  in  no  way  take  God  by  surprize,  nor  render  any  new  purpose  or 
action  on  His  part  necessary.  So  far  then  from  changing  His  pur- 
pose when  He  answers  prayer,  God  is  in  reality  only  carrying  out 
that  purpose.  But,  even,  if  we  be  not  able  to  explain  how  any  will, 
or  act  of  ours,  can  be  at  the  same  time  as  fixed  and  certain  with  God, 
as  if  it  were  a  decree  about  some  mechanical  action  of  the  universe,  or 
were  his  own  personal  purpose,  and  at  the  same  time  be  perfectly  vol- 
untary with  man,  so  that  he  can,  either,  will,  or  not  will,  do,  or 
not  do,  as  he  may  himself  choose,  we  are  perfectly  sure  that  it  must 
be  so,  from  our  consciousness  of  ourselves,  and  our  certainty  of  what  is 
the  nature  of  God. 

IV.  It  is  further  objected,  that  there  was  change  in  God,  in 
the    act  of    the   incarnation  of   the   second   person    of   the    Trinity- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  82 

I  meet  this  objection  here,  because  the  most  suitable  place  in  our 
course  to  do  so,  though  the  explanations  may  not  be  comprehended 
fully,  until  we  have  discussed  the  Trinity,  and  the  relations  of  the 
persons  of  the  Godhead  in  it. 

It  is  based  upon  a  misconception  of  the  Scripture  doctrine  of  the 
incarnation. 

1.  It  was  not  the  divine  nature,  which  became  incarnate,  but 
simply  one  of  the  persons  subsisting  in  it. 

2.  No  change  took  place  in  the  divine  nature.  The  human  and 
divine  natures  of  the  Son  of  God  were  so  related  to  Him,  and  to 
each  other,  that  while  He  was  truly  God  and  truly  man,  possessing 
every  characteristic  of  each,  the  two  natures  remained  entirely  dis- 
tinct, each, with  its  own  peculiarities  and  properties.  The  divine 
nature  was  in  no  degree  affected.  The  Son  of  God  therefore,  was 
as  truly  divine  after,  as  before  the  incarnation. 

3.  So  distinct  were  these  natures,  that  in  becoming  man,  the 
Son  took  not  simply  a  human  body,  but  also  a  human  soul.  These 
were  united  with  the  personality  with  which  He  subsists  in  the 
divine  nature,  but  not  with  the  divine  nature  itself.  Christ  lacked 
nothing  to  make  Him  as  separate  from  God  as^  any  other  man,  ex- 
cept human  personality.  He  united  His  human  nature  to  himself 
by  subsisting  in  it  in  the  same  personality  with  which  He  subsists  in 
the  divine  nature. 

4.  The  Son  has  not  divine  nature  separate  from  the  Father  and 
the  Spirit,  so  that  we  can  say  His  divine  nature  in  the  exclusive 
sense,  in  which  we  speak  of  the  human  nature  of  Paul  and  Peter. 
Human  nature  is  distributed  among  individual  men,  so  that  each 
one  has  his  own,  and  in  no  wise  partakes  with  another.  But  the 
one  divine  nature  is  common  to  the  three  persons. 

These  statements  will  show,  why  God  has  not  been  changed  in 
the  act  of  incarnation. 

(1.)  There  would  have  been  change,  had  the  human  nature  been  so 
united  to  the  divine,  as  to  add  to  it  such  qualities,  properties  and 
conditions  as  do  not  belong  to  God.  These  may  be  possessed  by  a 
divine  person  in  the  human  nature  He  has  assumed,  for  thus  is  there 
no  change  in  His  nature  as  God,  but  they  cannot  be  transferred 
to  the  divine  nature  without  making  it  finite  as  well  as  infinite, 
material  as  well  as  spiritual,  fallible  as  well  as  infallible,  mortal 
as  well  as  immortal.  These  contradictory  states  may  exist  in  the 
one  person,  but  cannot  in  any  such  compounded  nature. 


83  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(2.)  There  would  have  been  change,  had  the  divine  nature  be- 
come the  soul  of  the  human  nature.  This  would  have  made  that 
nature  subject  to  human  passions,  and  appetites,  to  human  frailties 
and  imperfections,  and  liable  to  pain,  suffering,  and  temptation  and 
to   limitation  in  goodness,  knowledge,  power  and  wisdom. 

The  knowledge  therefore  of  the  true  doctrine  of  the  incarnation 
shows  conclusively,  that  in  it  there  has  been  no  change  in  God. 

V.  It  is  alleged,  that  God  cannot  be  without  change,  because  He 
suffered  during  the  incarnation  of  Christ. 

The  argument  is  that  the  declarations  about  Christ's  suffering 
are  made,  not  simply  of  the  human  nature,  but  of  both  natures  com- 
bined, and  that  thus  we  are  taught,  that  it  was  not  merely  man,  but 
God  also  that  suffered.  This  position  is  assumed  by  some,  who  main- 
tain that  Christ  had  a  complete  human,  as  well  as  divine  nature, 
not  a  mere  human  body,  but  also  a  rational  soul.  It  is  neces- 
sarily also  the  position  of  those,  who  claim  that  He  had  no  human 
soul,  but  that  His  divine  nature  took  the  place  of  a  rational  soul. 

The  reply  to  this  argument  is  that  the  Scripture  statements  do  not 
teach  that  the  divine  nature  suffered.  This  is  nowhere  said.  They 
teach  that  the  second  person  of  the  Trinity,  who  became  man,  suffered. 
But  they  plainly  refer  that  suffering  to  His  human  nature  only.  They 
teach  us,  that  in  the  relations  of  His  natures  to  His  person,  He  pre- 
served unchanged  the  properties  and  qualities,  which  belonged  to 
them  separately,  and  that  this  was  especially  true  of  the  divine  na- 
ture. There  were  indeed  some  communications  from  the  divine 
nature  to  the  human,  but  none  from  the  human  to  the  divine.  But 
while  thus  distinct,  they  were  united  together  in  a  single  personality 
and  by  such  a  union,  that  whatever  might  be  said,  to  be  true  or  to 
be  done,  or  to  be  suffered  by  either  of  the  natures,  might  in  like  man- 
ner be  affirmed  of  the  person  in  whom  they  were  united.  It  is  be- 
cause of  this,  that  Christ,  the  son  of  God,  is  said  to  have  suffered. 
He  did  this  in  His  human,  though  not  in  His  divine  nature.  The 
scripture  declarations  that  Christ  suffered,  are  no  proof  that  God  suf- 
fered, or  that  God  can  change  in  this  respect. 

But  there  are  those,  who  do  not  receive  the  above  statements  as  an 
exposition  of  the  teachings  of  Scripture  on  this  point.  They  claim,  as 
necessary,  an  interpretation  which  asserts  suffering  of  the  divine  na- 
ture.    Those  indeed,  who  hold  that  the  Divine   nature  is  in  the  place 


Abstract  of  Theology.  84 

of  the  human  soul  are  forced  to  maintain  such  an  interpretation.  It  is 
in  reply  to  both  of  these,  that  the  unchangeableness  of  the  divine  nature 
is  presented  as  conclusive  against  any  such  interpretation.  Against 
their  position  are  adduced  the  numerous  statements  of  Scripture  assert- 
ing that  God  does  not  change,  and  that  He  is  immutable  in  His  nature, 
and  in  His  various  perfections,  as  well  as  the  arguments  from  reason, 
by  which  the  same  truth  is  maintained.  So  incontestable  are  these 
statements  and  reasonings  that  the  objectors  readily  admit,  that  there 
is  no  power  or  being,  who  can  change  God  contrary  to  His  will,  and 
that  the  idea  of  enforced  suffering  is  revolting.  The  possibility  of 
change  and  suffering  in  God,  they  conceive  therefore  to  result  from 
His  own  will  and  His  own  voluntary  choice. 

This  raises  the  question  of  the  possibility  of  voluntary  suffering  on 
the  part  of  God. 

If  this  be  possible,  it  must  arise  in  one  of  two  ways;  either  the  na- 
ture of  God  is  essentially  such  as  to  admit  suffering,  or  the  will  of  God 
is  capable  of  so  changing  his  nature  for  a  time,  as  to  enable  it  to  suffer. 
In  the  first  instance  the  essence  of  God  itself  is  supposed  to  remain 
unchanged,  but  to  be  capable  of  existing  in  different  states  at  the  dic- 
tation of  His  will.  In  the  other,  the  essence  itself  is  changed  by  the 
will,  and  made  capable    of  that,   which   otherwise   it  could  not  have. 

In  the  first  case  God  could  suffer,  because  of  the  contingent  condi- 
tions of  His  life  liable  to  the  action  of  His  will,  just  as  we  can  inflict 
suffering  upon  ourselves. 

In  the  last  case,  the  nature  of  God  would  be  so  dependent  on  His 
will  that  He  could  change  it  at  pleasure. 

This  last  view  however  is  based  upon  an  erroneous  conception  of 
the  relation  of  the  will  of  God  to  His  nature.  That  relation  is  not 
causal.  The  will  does  not  create  the  nature  nor  confer  upon  it 
its  powers,  nor  exercise  a  controlling  influence  upon  it.  It  is  the 
nature  that  influences  the  will.  It  is  because  He  is  holy,  just 
and  good  that  He  wills  holiness,  justice  and  goodness,  and  wills 
these  in  Himself,  because  He  alone  is  the  infinitely  holy,  just  and 
good.  His  will  therefore,  so  far  from  causative  is  only  approbative 
and  complacent,  and  His  essence  can  in  no  degree  be  affected  by  it. 
If  this  were  not  so,  the  nature  of  God,  must  be  the  effect  of  the  will  of 
God  as  a  cause  and  must  be  dependent  upon  that  will.  The  founda- 
tion of  all  excellence,  righteousness  and  holiness  would  be,  not  what 
God  is,  but  what  He  happens  to  will  at  one  time,  and  would    be  yet 


85  Abstract  of  Theology. 

again  at  another,  should  He  will  differently  as  to  Himself.  And 
such  will  would  be  capricious;. for  in  making  the  will  superior  to  the 
nature,  there  is  taken  away  all  reason  for  choice  in  God,  to  good  or  ill, 
or  in  one  direction  or  another,  and  He  is  left,  without  motive,  to  acci- 
dental or  capricious  volition  only.  Morever,  if  God  is  capable  of  this 
kind  of  change  in  any  respect,  He  is  so  in  all  others,  for  the  power  of 
the  will  to  effect  one  modification  in  the  divine  nature,  necessarily 
involves  the  power  to  effect  any  or  all  other  such. 

As  the  will  therefore  cannot  change  the  essence  of  God,  but  is 
itself  controlled  by  that  essence,  it  is  not  possible,  that  it  can  con- 
fer the  power  to  suffer,  which  otherwise  God  would  not  have.  If 
therefore  this  power  of  suffering  be  not  inherent  in  the  divine  na- 
ture, it  can  have  no  existence. 

But  if  this  be  inherent  in  the  divine  nature,  it  must  be  a  quality 
necessarily,  and  constantly  belonging  to  the  nature  of  God,  and 
must  therefore  be  destructive  of  the  blessedness  so  fully,  and  emi- 
nently ascribed  to  God  in  the  Scriptures,  or  it  must  exist  there 
after  the  manner  of  the  contingent  conditions  of  our  life  because 
of  which  we  can  pass  from  a  state  of  happiness  into  one  of  suffer- 
ing, and  back  to  happiness  again;  and  its  passage  from  one  of  these 
states  to  the  other,  must  be  the  result  of  the  exercise  of  a  divine 
volition. 

But  with  God  there  can  be  no  such  contingent  conditions. 

1.  The  very  nature  of  His  necessary  existence  forbids  it.  The 
language  of  scripture  "I  change  not,"  and  "with  whom  there  is  no 
variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning"  is  expressly  contrary  to 
such  a  supposition. 

2.  The  contrast  between  God  and  men  in  respect  to  change,  is 
distinctly  based  upon  that  contingency  in  man,  to  which  there  is 
no  similarity  in   God. 

3.  The  truth  'and  faithfulness  of  God  are  magnified  by  the  fact 
of  their  exercise  where  man  would  thus  change,  but  where  God 
does  not,  because  He  is  fixed  and  constant.  The  passage,  "I  change 
not"  is  presented  in  a  context,  where  the  will  of  God  might  be 
presumed  to  induce  change,  and  the  essertion  that  this  is  His  nature 
is  made  to  show  why  that  will  would  not  so  effect  Him. 

4.  In  addition  to  all  of  this,  such  contingent  conditions  or  states 
are  incompatible  with  the  nature  of   His  eternity,    which,  as  being 


Abstract  of  Theology.  86 

without  succession,  excludes  change,  as  well  as  with  His  simplicity 
which  denies  separation  between  His  essence  arid  His  attributes,  and 
therefore  gives  no  room  for  change,  while  they  are  absolutely  excluded 
by  the  perfection  of  God,  which  cannot  be  always  asserted  of  Him 
if  the  states  or  conditions  of  His  being  can  be  changed,  unless  in  all 
these  states,  He  could  be  equally  perfect  in  all  respects,  which 
surely  cannot  be  affirmed  of  the  two  states  of  happiness  and  suf- 
fering. 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  VIII. 


THE  POWER  OF  GOD. 

We  derive  our  knowledge  of  power  from  the  consciousness  of  our 
will,  or  purpose,  to  effect  an  end,  and  experience  that  we  have  accomp- 
lished that  end. 

Over  our  own  bodies,  our  will  acts  directly,  without  the  interven- 
tion of  any  means  known  to  us.  Thus,  when  we  will  to  move  the  arm, 
the  arm  is  moved,  but  whatever  necessity  there  may  be,  of  nervous 
influence  or  muscular  action,  we  know  of  no  such  connection  between 
these  and  our  will,  save  the  fact,  that  the  will  puts  these  into  opera- 
tion. 

<   Over  other  material  objects,  we  can   only   act   through  our  bodies, 
and  other  necessary  means  of  contact. 

Experience  teaches  us  however,  that  mind  can  act  upon  mind  with- 
out such  contact,  though  the  mode  in  which  this  is  done  is  still  mys- 
terious. 

The  action  of  our  minds  upon  our  material  structure,  and  over  other 
minds,  a]so  suggests  that  mind,  by  some  subtle  connection,  may  act 
upon  outward  matter,  as  we  see,  that  our  minds  act  upon  our  bodies. 

In  this  way  many  of  the  curious  phenomena,  which  have  been 
falsely  used  for  the  proof  of  the  spiritualistic  theories  of  the  present 
day,  will  probably  be  accounted  for. 

But,  whatever  may  be  the  power  of  man,  it  is  evident,  that  it  is 
marked  by  limitations,  not  only  as  to  what  can  be  done,  but  also  as  to 
the  way  in  which  it  may  be  done. 

In  ascribing  power  to  God  however,  we  must  exclude  all  such  limi- 
tation. Not  only  is  He  all  powerful,  (Almighty)  but  Tie  needs  not 
instrumental  contact. 


89  Abstract  of  Theology. 

But,  although  this  is  true,  God  accomplishes  much  that  He  does 
through  secondary  means,  which  partake  of  the  nature  of  instrumen- 
tal contact.  Such  action  however  is,  with  Him,  not  a  matter  of  neces- 
sity, but  simply  His  economic  way  of  doing  what  He  could,  as  per- 
fectly, and  as  easily,  do  by  direct  action. 

Power  in  God,  therefore,  may  be  denned  to  be  the  effective  energy, 
inherent  in  His  nature,  by  which  He  is  able  to  do  all  things.  The 
exercise  of  that  power  is  dependent  upon  His  will  or  purpose,  and  is 
limited  not  by  what  He  can  do,  but  by  what  He  chooses  to  do. 

We  ascribe  power  to  God. 

1.  Because  we  perceive  that  its  possession  is  a.  perfection  in  us, 
and  is  therefore  to  be  attributed  to  the  all-perfect  Being. 

2.  Because  we  cannot  account  for  the  existence  and  phenomena 
of  the  universe,  without  ascribing  to  God  the  power  which  has  pro- 
duced them. 

3.  Because  our  own  sense  of  depen dance  assures  us  that  there 
must  be  power  to  create,  preserve,  and  protect  us,  in  Him  in  Whom 
we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being. 

4.  The  Scriptures  also  teach  us  to  ascribe  power  to  God. 

(a.)  In  such  passages  as  directly  ascribe  power  to  Him,  as  Jer. 
32:17.  "Ah  !  Lord  God,  behold  thou  hast  made  the  heaven  and  the 
earth  by  thy  great  power,  and  stretched-out  arm,  and  there  is  nothing 
too  hard  for  thee." 

Ps.  115:3.  "But  our  God  is  in  the  Heavens:  He  hath  done,  what- 
soever He  hath  pleased." 

Eph.  1:19.  "And,  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power 
to  us-ward,  who  believe  according  to  the  working  of  His  mighty 
power." 

Eph.  3:20.  "Now  unto  Him,  that  is  able  to  do,  exceeding  abun- 
dantly above  all  that  we  ask  or  think." 

(b.)     By  reference  to  His  unlimited  works. 

Jer.  10:12.  "He  hath  made  the  earth  by  His  power,  He  hath  es- 
tablished the  world  by  His  wisdom,  and  hath  stretched  out  the  heavens 
by  His  discretion." 

John  1:3.  "All  things  were  made  by  Him,  and  without  Him,  was 
not  anything  made  that  was  made." 

Acts  17:24.     "God,  that  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein." 

(c.)  By  declaring  that  what  He  does  is  done  by  mere  will,  without 
labour,  by  His  word,  as  in  Gen.  1:1  to  Gen.  2'-3,  the  whole  account  of 
creation. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  90 

Ps.  33=9.  "For  He  spake,  and  it  was  done,  He  commanded,  and  it 
stood  fast."  • 

(d.)  By  denying  the. necessity  of  great  means,  and  asserting  that 
what  He  does,  can  be  done  with  the  many  or  the  few. 

1.  Sam.  14=6.  "There  is  no  restraint  to  the  Lord,  to  save  by  many 
or  by  few." 

2.  Chron.  14:11.  "Lord  it  is  nothing  with  thee  to  help,  whether 
with  many,  or  with  them  that  have  no  power." 

(e.)  By  figurative  or  anthropomorphic  expressions,  as  "the  hand," 
"the  right  hand  of  God,"  "the  strong  hand,"  "the  arm,v  "the  arm  not 
shortened." 

Exodus  15:6.  "Thy  right  hand,  oh  Lord,  has  become  glorious  in 
power  ;  thy  right  hand,  0  Lord,  hath  dashed  to  pieces  the  enemy." 

Numbers  11:23.     "Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short?" 

Joshua  4:24.  "That  all  the  people  of  the  earth  might  know  the 
hand  of  the  Lord,  that  it  is  mighty." 

Neh.  1:10.  "Whom  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy  great  power,  and  by 
thy  strong  hand." 

Job  40:9.     "Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God?" 

Ps.  98:1.  "His  right  hand,  and  His  Holy  arm,  hath  gotten  Him 
the  victory." 

Is.  50:2.     "Is  my  hand  shortened  at  all,  that  it  cannot  redeem?" 

Is.  59:1.     ''The  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened  that   it  cannot  save." 


God's  power  may  be  described  as, 

I.  Absolute,  which  is  equivalent  to  what  He  can  do,  and  is  mea- 
sured by  His  nature. 

IL  Actual,  which  is  what  He  exercises,  and  is  measured  by  His 
will.     It  is,  what  is  put  in  action  by  Him. 

Knapp  makes  a  division  of  absolute  and  ordinate,  making  the  abso- 
lute that,  by  which  He  created  the  world  out  of  nothing,  and  the  ordi- 
nate that,  by  which  He  continues  to  create  or  produce  according  to 
the  laws  He  has  established,  as  by  secondary  causes,  as  in  the  pro- 
duction of  plants,  animals,  &c.  But  these  are  different  kinds  of  exer- 
cise of  power,  but  not  different  kinds  of  power. 

Our  power  differs  from  that  of  God  in  three  particulars. 

1.  We  cannot  do  whatever  we  choose,  even  if  it  be  right. 

2.  We  cannot  do  it  without  intermediate  means. 


91  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  We  cannot  do  it  at  any  moment  we  please,  but  only  when  the 
circumstances  favour. 

But,  while  God  is  not  subject  to  the  limitations  which  thus  affect  us, 
He  also  is  limited  in  His  power.  These  limitations,  however,  are  such 
as  arise,  not  from  without,  bat  from  the  excellence,  and  perfection  of 
His  own  nature.  Hence  the  limitations  are  concurrent  with  His  will, 
which  can  never  desire  to  do  what  His  nature  does  not  permit. 

1.  God  cannot  create  a  being  or  world  to  which  His  essential  in- 
communicable attributes  can  be  given,  viz  :  Infinity,  embracing  eter- 
nity and  immensity,  and  self  existence. 

2.  He  cannot  create  a  being  whose  nature  is  sinful. 

3.  He  cannot  impose  laws  which  are  not  accordant  with  righteous- 
ness and  holiness, 

4.  He  cannot  deal  with  any  of  His  creatures  unjustly. 

5.  He  cannot  commit  sin. 

6.  He  cannot  change  His  own  nature. 

7.  He  cannot  change  His  decrees  or  purpose. 

8.  He  cannot  do  impossibilities. 

If  it  be  asked,  why  He  can  do  none  of  these  things,  the  answer  is, 
because  His  own  nature  is  to  Him  the  law  of  what  He  does,  as  well 
as  of  what  He  wills,  and  of  what  He  is. 

He  is  not  just  and  holy  because  He  wills  to  be  so,  but  He  wills  to 
be  just  and  holy,  because  He  is  so.  His  will  does  not  make  His  na- 
ture.     But  His  nature  controls  His  will. 


An  apparent  objection  to  the  infinite  power  of  God  is  the  presence 
of  sin  in  the  universe. 

The  holiness,  justice  and  even  goodness  of  God  render  it  impossible, 
that  sin  can  be  either  created  or  permitted  as  something  indifferent 
to  God.     He  must  hate  it,  and  punish  it  wherever  it  appears. 

Its  presence  therefore  is  due,  either  to  the  fact  that  He  could  not 
prevent  it,  or  that  He  has  permitted  it  for  some  wise  purpose. 

What  that  wise  purpose  is,  ought  properly  to  be  shown  in  proof 
that  the  existence  of  evil  is  consistent  with  God's  goodness. 

That  its  presence  is  due  to  such  purpose,  rather  than  to  lack  oi 
power  of  God,  appears  from  the  fact,  that  He  could  have  prevented  it. 

1.     By  not  creating  beings  capable  of  sinning. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  92 

2.  By  not  allowing  them  to  be  placed  in  circumstances,  which 
would  lead  to  sin. 

3.  By  sustaining  and  fortifying  them  in  those  circumstances,  so  as 
to  counteract  the  temptation  and  keep  them  from  sinning. 

4.  And,  as  the  objection  is  the  rather  to  the  continued  existence  of 
sin,  than  its  origin,  by  the  immediate  destruction  of  those  who  have 
sinned. 

But  so  far  from  the  presence  of  sin  showing  lack  of  power  in  God, 
it  has  served  the  more  signally  to  display  that  power. 

1.  Over  sin  itself,  in  its  destruction  and  punishment. 

2.  Over  its  final  victims,  by  causing  them  to  feel  and  acknowledge 
the  terrible  power  of  His  wrath. 

3.  Over  others,  by  their  signal  deliverance  through  His  power, 
not  only  from  the  penalty,  but  from  the  presence  of  sin. 

4.  In  the  sin  itself,  by  exhibiting  that  restraining  and  conquering 
power,  by  which  God  makes  evil  itself  to  work  out  His  purposes  of 
good  and  glory. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  94 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY 


LECTURE  IX. 


The  Knowledge  of  God. 

God  is  an  intelligent  Being  possessed  of  knowledge. 
This  may  be  proved, 

1.  From  His  spirituality;  for  intelligence  is  an  essential  element 
of  spiritual  existence. 

2.  From  His  perfection;  for  the  perfect  one  must  have  intelligence 
as  one  of  His  perfections. 

3.  From  His  causal  relations  to  other  beings. 

(1.)  As  the  cause  of  mental  powers  and  action  in  others,  He  must 
Himself  be  possessed  of  mind.  As  the  Scriptures  aptly  inquire,  "He 
that  planteth  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear  ?  he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall 
he  not  see?"  Ps.  94:9  ;  so  may  we  ask,  He,  that  made  the  mind  and 
gave  the  power  of  thought,  and  knowledge,  shall  He  be  without  intel- 
ligence. 

(2.)  The  effects  He  has  produced  show  that  they  are  the  result  of 
conscious  action  in  the  fulfilment  of  purpose,  which  He  has  formed. 
His  causation  is  not  like  that  of  mechanical,  or  chemical  forces,  which 
operate  with  blind  productiveness,  or  effective  operation  towards  ends 
unknown  to  them,  and  not  predetermined.  This  is  possible  to  second- 
ary causes,  because  they  are  the  instruments  of  some  other  cause,  itself 
intelligent  and  purposing.  But  intelligence  and  purpose  are  neces- 
sarily present  in  Him,  who  is  the  great  first  cause,  the  prime  mover 
and  designer  of  all  else  that  exists.  All  the  evidences  of  design  in 
creation  therefore  prove  the  intelligence  of  Him,  who  bears  to  it  the 
relation  of  its  first  cause. 


95  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(4.)  It  is  sometimes  argued  from  His  omnipresence,  but  omnipre- 
sence alone  would  not  prove  intelligence.  His  intelligence  however 
having  been  established,  His  omnipresence  enables  us  to  determine  the 
extent  of  His  knowledge. 

How  does  God  know  ?  or  in  what  way  does  He  possess  knowledge? 

1.  Not  as  we  gain  it,  by  using  faculties  fitted  to  acquire  it.  There 
is  in  Him  nothing  corresponding  to  observation,  comparison,  generali- 
zation, deduction,  processes  of  reasoning  by  wnich  we  pass  from  one 
step  to  another,  or  the  contemplation,  or  conjecture  of  suppositions,  or 
theories  with  which  we  would  account  for  facts. 

2.  It  is  even  improper  to  speak  of  His  knowing  by  intuition,  as  is 
frequently  done, 

3.  All  that  we  can  say,  is  that  His  knowledge  is  His  essence  or 
nature  knowing.  It  is  not  something  acquired,  but  something  belong- 
ing to  that  nature  itself  and  identical  with  it,  in  like  manner  as  are 
His  love,  and  truth,  and  justice.  It  is  something  so  inherent  in  his  na- 
ture, that  it  exists  exclusively  of  any  means  of  attaining,  or  perceiving 
it,  which  we  call  action. 

4.  The  knowledge  of  God  therefore  not  being  acquired,  cannot  be  in- 
creased. Time  does  not  add  to  it.  Succession  of  events  does  not 
bring  it  before  God.  All  the  objects  of  His  knowledge  are  to  Him 
eternally  present  and  known. 

What  then  are  the  objects  of  His  knowledge. 

1.  Himself,  His  nature,  or  essence  ;  the  personal  relations  subsist- 
ing in  that  essence ;  all,  that  that  nature  is,  and  all  that  it  can  ap- 
pear to  be  in  its  manifestations;  all  that  the  purposes  of  God  in- 
clude, and  all  that  might  be  purposed  by  Him,  whether  to  be  done, 
or  to  be  permitted. 

2.  His  creation  in  all  its  fulness;  in  its  whole  extent,  whether 
marked  by  magnitude,  or  minuteness,  or  variety.  The  whole  uni- 
verse with  its  innumerable  worlds  is  ever  before  Him,  while  not  an 
atom  of  dust,  nor  the  most  microscopic  of  sensitive  existencies  is  unper- 
ceived  thoroughly. 

3.  Not  merely  inanimate  matter,  nor  simple  animal  natures,  but 
all  spiritual  beings,  He  knowing  their  essences  which  to  them  remain 
unknown,  and  having  perfect  perception  of  the  intents  and  thoughts  of 
their  hearts.  "When  Thales  was  asked,  if  some  of  the  actions  of  men 
were  not  unknown  to  God,  he  replied,  "not  even  their  thoughts." 
Knapp's  Theology.  An  inspired  writer  has  taught  us,  that  God 
knows  us  even  better,  than  we  know  ourselves  ;  "For  if  our  heart  con- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  96 

demn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things." 
1.  John  3:20.  His  knowledge  is  not  limited  to  the  manifestations  and 
operations  of  spiritual  beings,  but  extends  to  their  essences,  and  in- 
cludes not  only  what  they  are,  but  also  those  tendencies  which  indi- 
cate what  they  may  be. 

4.  He  knows  all  the  past,  present,  and  future  of  all  things,  know- 
ing the  future  with  the  same  certainty,  and  accuracy,  with  which  He 
knows  the  present,  and  past ;  for  that  future  is  already  as  present  to 
Him  as  though  actually  existing  with  the  creatures,  and  time  belong- 
ing to  it,  and  is  as  distinctly  perceived  as  it  shall  be  then. 

But  more  specifically  as  to  His  knowledge  of  future  events  it  may 
be  said, 

1.  That  He  knows  all  events  that,  are  certain  or  fixed.  The  cer- 
tainty that  they  will  come  to  pass,  is  based  upon  His  decree.  He 
therefore,  knows  all  things  that  shall  come  to  pass. 

2.  He  knows  all  events  that  could  possibly  come  to  pass.  This  is 
based  upon  His  infinite  knowledge  of  Himself,  and  of  all  His  creatures, 
by  which  all  things,  or  events,  which  could  at  any  time,  or  under  any 
circumstances  occur,  are  known  to  him. 

In  these  two  classes  are  necessarily  included  all  objects  of  know- 
ledge. 

Knapp  lays  down  a  third  kind  of  knowledge,  namely,  the  know- 
ledge of  contingent  events,  or  events  which  might  take  place  under 
certain  circumstances;  for  example,  that  God  foresees,  that  if  James 
lives  until  he  is  grown,  he  will  commit  murder,  he  therefore,  deter- 
mines to  prevent  this  by  removing  him  from  life.  The  knowledge  of 
the  murder,  is  here  claimed  to  be  that  of  a  contingent  event.  And 
hence  it  is  claimed  to  be  another  kind  of  knowledge. 

Bat  to  examine  this.  It  is  readily  admitted,  that  the  murder  does 
not  come  under  the  classification  of  things  certain,  or  decreed,  because 
it  will  not  take  place.  But,  it  does  come  under  the  head  of  things 
possible,  and  between  it,  and  all  other  possible  things,  no  distinction 
can  be  made.  All  possible  things  are  contingent,  until  made 
certain  by  a  decree.  Every  possible  thing  is  only  possible  in 
connection  with  the  circumstances  under  which  it  can  happen.  There 
is  therefore  no  distinction,  between  possible  things,  and  contingent 
things,  and  consequently  no  third  class  is  to  be  added. 

The  kind  of  knowledge,  which  he  thus  speaks  of  as  contingent,  is 
stated  by  Knapp,  to  be  what  is  called  Scientia  Media.  It  is  one  form 
only,  in  which  Scientia  Media  is  presented  by  those  who  maintain  it. 


97  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Another  form  of  Scientia  Media,  is  however  held  by  some.  Accord- 
ing to  this,  the  future  event  to  which  it  refers,  is  known  to  God  as  an 
event  that  will  take  place,  but  His  knowledge  of  that  fact  is  attained, 
not  through  His  decree,  but  through  His  foreknowledge  that,  under 
certain  circumst-iuces,  a  man  will  pursue  one  course  of  action,  rather 
than  another. 

This  kind  of  Scientia  Media  teaches, 

(1.)     The  future  event  as  certain. 

(2.)     That  God  knows  it  as  such. 

(3.)     That  this  knowledge  does  not  arise  from  His  decree. 

(4  )  But,  from  His  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  man,  together 
with  that  of  the  circumstances  that  will  surround  Him,  He  knows 
that  He  will  act  in  a  particular  way. 

The  only  question  here,  is  as  to  the  3rd  and  4th,  for  it  agrees  with 
the  usual  orthodox  statement  in  saying,  1st,  that  it  is  certain,  and 
2nd,  that  God  knows  it  as  such. 

But  the  3rd  and  4th  assert  that  this  knowledge  is  the  result  of  a 
foreknowledge  of  God  as  to  how  a  man  will  act  under  certain  cir- 
cumstances, and  this  foreknowledge  is  necessarily  accompanied  by 
a  determination  to  allow  Him  so  to  act. 

Now  the  question  arises,  is  this  universally  the  method  of  God's 
action?  If  it  be  so,  then  God  has  left  the  world  entirely  to  itself, 
without  any  influence  from  Him.  Everything  has  come  to  pass, 
not  because  of  His  will  and  action,  but  because  He  has  left  the 
general  laws,  under  which  He  has  placed  the  world,  to  work  out 
their  results,  without  any  action,  or  influence  on  His  part. 

But  this  is  so  manifestly  untrue  and  unscriptural,  that  it  never  has 
been  maintained  by  any  christian  men,  and  it  is  by  christian  writers 
only,  that  this  idea  of  Scientia  Media  has  been  presented. 

This,  therefore  is  denied  to  be  meant  by  these;  but  they  say  that, 
while  God  does  operate  in,  and  interfere  with  the  world,  and  carry 
on  His  own  purposes,  in  certain  matters,  He  does  not  choose  in  other 
events  to  exercise  any  influence,  but  simply  refrains  and  leaves  the  events 
to  work  out  their  own  effects,  and  that  the  knowledge  which  He  has 
of  these  events  is  based  upon  the  fact,  that  they  will  take  place  if 
He  does  not  thus  interfere. 

The  theory  thus  presented,  as  will  be  seen,  admits  the  con- 
tinued preservation  of  all  things,  with  all  their  powers.  This  can 
only  result  from  God's  providential  action,  and  involves  all  that 
concurrence  with  events  on  the  part  of  God,  through  which  alone 
they  preserve  and  exercise  effectively  the  powers  He  has  given  them. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  98 

This  being  admitted,  then,  the  views  held  by  these  parties,  stated  in 
any 'form  in  which  they  could  hold  them,  would  involve  no  additional 
fact  beyond  the  distinction,  recognized  by  all  orthodox  divines,  be- 
tween the  absolute  and  permissive  decrees  of  God. 

But,  in  any  event  there  is  a  decree,  determination,  intention,  pur- 
pose, or  whatever  else  men  may  call  it,  in  the  broadest  language,  a 
will,  or  volition,  to  leave  these  things  so  to  operate.  And  upon  this 
will,  or  decree,  is  based  His  knowledge,  that  these  things  will  be,  for 
without  the  knowledge  of  such  a  purpose,  how  could  He  know  that 
He  will  not,  at  some  time,  choose  to  change  the  circumstances,  or  pre- 
vent their  accomplishment  of  the  event. 

It  will  be  seen,  that  in  neither  of  the  forms  of  Scientia  Media 
thus  far  referred  to,  is  there  any  serious  disagreement  from  the  truth. 
The  objection  to  them  is  more  the  lack  of  accuracy  and  the  mistaken 
notion  that  some  new  idea  is  involved ;  or  rather  the  great  objec- 
tion has  been,  the  purpose  by  which  men  have  been  led;  viz,  a  desire 
to  lay  down  the  distinction  of  conditional  decrees  in  salvation.  Ac- 
cording to  these  decrees. 

(1.)     God  offers  salvation  to  every  man. 

(2.)     But  does  not  decree  his  salvation  or  damnation, 

(3.)     But  only  decrees  his  salvation  if  he  believes, 

(4.)     Or  his  damnation,  if  he  does  not  believe. 

(5.)  That  the  knowledge,  which  God  is  admitted  to  have  had  of 
the  event  from  the  beginning,  arises  from  foresight  that,  under  the 
circumstances  in  which  the  man  is  placed,  He  will  exercise,  or  will  not 
exercise  belief. 

The  Scientia  Media  is  therefore  introduced,  to  show  how  an  event 
can  be  known  as  something  that  will  actually  take  place,  and  yet  as 
something  not  fixed  by  a  decree  of  God,  and  consequently  known 
upon  some  other  ground  than  because  decreed.  This  we  have  shown 
to  be  a  mistaken  conception  in  the  forms  already  examined. 

But  a  third  kind  of  Scientia  Media,  is  by  no  means  as  harmless  as 
the  two  already  presented,  although  its  absurdity  is  readily  seen.  It 
is  given  in  Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith's  First  lines  of  Christian  Theology,  p.  145, 
as  follows: 

"That  God  foresees  all  future  events,  depending  upon  the  will  of 
His  voluntary  agents,  (i.  e.  all  possible  beings,  and  all  possible  actions 
of  all  possible  beings,)  under  a  position  of  antecedents  endlessly  varied 
and  that,  then,  in  every  case,  certain  consequents  will  follow.  The 
Deity  does  not  certainly  know  which,  in  the  endless  number  of  possible 
antecedents,  a  voluntary  creature  will   choose  and  practice;    but  He 


99  Abstract  of  Theology. 

knows,  what  will  be  the  result  under  every  possible  variation  of  these 
antecedents ;  when  therefore,  the  creature  has  made  his  election,  and 
fulfilled  his  course  of  action,  the  Deity  may  say,  that  He  foreknew 
the  whole." 

The  objections  to  this  scheme  are  manifest. 

1.  It  makes  the  God,  whose  purposes  we  see  constantly  manifested 
to  us,  a  God  of  no  purpose  at  all.  He  can  have  no  end,  He  can  only 
know,  that,  at  any  time  given  in  the  universe,  some  one  end,  of  many 
myriads  may  be  the  one  attained. 

2.  It  is  contrary  to  the  power  to  prophesy  the  actual  events 
which  shall  happen  at  a  given  time,  wrhich  God  has  exercised  through 
His  prophets. 

3.  It  is  opposed  to  His  independence,  for  it  makes  Him  dependent 
upon  the  will  of  His  creatures,  and  not  their  actions  dependent  upon 
Him. 

4.  It  is  opposed  to  His  perfection,  for  that  perfection  forbids 
the  idea  of  increase  or  addition  from  without,  yet  according  to  this 
view,  His  knowledge  is  constantly  increasing,  as  to  what  is  done  by 
His  creatures.  Every  moment  that,  which  heretofore  has  been  only 
one  of  many  possibilities,  becomes  a  certain  event. 

5.  As  there  can  be  no  reason,  for  God's  will  not  being  effective,  at 
least  in  some  respects  in  man,  this  Scientia  Media  which  rests  upon  the 
idea,  that  God  ought  not  thus  to  operate  on  the  mind,  even  by  a  pur- 
pose, must  be  a  misconception.  Else  how  could  God  bestow  such  in- 
fluences upon  intelligent  creatures  as  are  fitted  to  affect  their  minds, 
as  by  the  gift  of  Christ,  or  of  the  Spirit.  Even  the  conscience  within 
ought  not  to  exercise  its  powers,  nor  even  to  exist  in  man.  If  it  be 
said,  that  these  would  only  operate  with  the  free  consent  of  the  party, 
it  may  be  replied,  that  such  is  the  case  with  all  the  influences  arising 
in  connection  with  God's  decrees.  Is  it  said,  that  these  are  influences 
for  good  only?  So  also  is  it  in  connection  with  His  decrees.  The  ef- 
fective decrees  of  God,  by  which  He  changes  in  any  respect  the  will 
of  His  creatures,  are  altogether  connected  with  influences  for  good. 
In  all  other  respects,  men  are  left  to  act  as  they  please.  But  their 
action  is  known,  and  known  because  of  God's  decree,  to  leave  them 
thus  to  act. 

6.  That  God  should  exert  no  influence  over  His  intelligent  crea- 
tures, also  involves,  that  He  be  excluded  from  the  physical  universe. 
The  very  circumstances,  under  which  men  are  supposed  to  act  in 
Scientia  Media,  are  circumstances  arising  from  things  around  as  well 
as  within.     Neither   can  He,  who  can  control  these  circumstances,  be 


Abstract  of  Theology.  100 

shut  out  from  the  control  of  those  physical  events,  which  He  knows 
will  affect  the  will  of  a  voluntary  agent.  If  it  be  necessary  to  re- 
sponsible freedom  of  the  will,  that  man  shall  not  be  influenced  at  all, 
God  must  be  excluded  from  the  universe,  yea  every  other  being  and 
thing  than  man.  And  every  man  must  be  completely,  isolated  from 
all  others,  even  so  far  too,  that  he  shall  suppose,  that  He  owes  no  ob- 
ligations of  obedience,  and  that  none  shall  know  His  action.  These 
absurd  conclusions  might  even  be  further  extended. 

The  passages  in  Scripture,  supposed  to  support  Scientia  Media,  do 
not  sustain  it.  These  are  Genesis  3:22.  Ex.  4:8.  1.  Sam.  23:5,14. 
Jeremiah  38:17,20.     Matt.  11:21,23.     See  also,  Acts  27:22.31. 

The  Wisdom  of  God.  . 

Wisdom  is  that  power,  which  enables  one  to  put  to  practical  use 
the  knowledge,  and  skill,  which  He  possesses,  to  choose  wise  ends 
of  action,  and  to  attain  these  ends  by  wise  means.  It  is  that  guid- 
ance of  the  understanding,  under  which  the  will  determines  wisely  its 
pleasure,  and  puts  forth  power  to  accomplish  it. 

Wisdom  in  God.  is  infinite  and  unerring,  choosing  always  the  best 
end,  and  the  best  means  of  attaining  it.  It  is  seen  in  creation,  and  in 
providence,  but  is  most  signally  manifested  in  redemption. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  102 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  X 


'Holiness,  Goodness,  Love  and  Truth. 

After  the  consideration  of  the  wisdom,  and  knowledge  of  God,  which 
correspond  to  the  characteristics  of  our  mental  organism,  we  take 
up  that  of  those  attributes  sometimes  called  moral,  because  they  corres- 
pond to  those  which  form  our  moral  character.  These  are  holiness, 
goodness,  truth,  and  justice. 

Holiness. 

Holiness  is,  however,  not  a  distinctive  attribute,  but  rather  the 
combination  of  all  these  attributes.  We  may  suppose  a  being,  in 
whom  there  may  be  love  without  justice,  or  truth,  or  any  one  of  these 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  other  two  ;  but  no  being  can  be  holy,  who  does 
not  combine  in  himself  all  of  these,  and  all  other  moral  perfections. 
Nor,  when  we  have  such  a  combination,  is  there  anything  to  be  added 
to  constitute  holy  character.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  holiness  is 
the  sum  of  all  such  excellence,  the  combination  of  all  such  attributes, 
and  that  these  constitute  its  complete  parts. 

In  the  study  of  these  constituents,  we  first  consider 

Goodness. 

In  one  aspect  of  this  word,  it  is  merely  equivalent  to  holiness.  If 
we  look  at  it  as  marking  the  excellence  of  God's  nature,  as  we  often 
use  it  with  reference  to  man,  we  mean  by  it  simply  holiness.  Thus, 
when  I  say  of  any  one,  he  is  a  good  man,  I  mean  to  assert  the  com- 


103  Abstract  of  Theology. 

bination  of  traits  of  character,  such  as  have  just  been  pointed  out  as 
constituting  holiness.  This  is  the  goodness  which  terminates  in  God 
Himself. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  goodness  of  God  may  be  spoken  of  as  kind- 
ness, benevolence,  or  beneficence  towards  others,  in  wThich  it  is  seen  to 
terminate  outside  of  Himself.  Thus  we  speak  of  Him,  as  being  very 
good  to  us.  Thus  the  Psalmist  says:  "Surely  goodness  and  mercy, 
shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  life."     Ps.  23:6. 

It  is  on  account  of  this  ambiguity  in  this  word,  that  it  is  best  to  con- 
sider it,  in  its  first  aspect,  as  merely  holiness,  and,  therefore,  as  disposed 
of  in  what  we  have  said  of  that,  and  to  refer  it  in  this  second  respect 
to  one  of  the  divisions,  into  which  the  love  of  God  naturally  falls. 

I  therefore  take  up  next 

Love. 

Of  this  there  are  five  kinds,  which  vary  according  to  the  object 
upon  which  love  is  exercised.  The  attribute  in  God  is  the  same;  but 
it  is  in  its  exit,  or  in  its  termination,  that  it  assumes  these  different 
forms. 

1.  There  is  the  love  of  complacency,  or  approbation.  This  is 
exercised  towards  a  worthy  object,  in  which  excellencies  are  perceived. 
Itis  of  the  nature  of  the  love  of  the  beautiful,  or  the  good,  or  the  useful 
in  us.  It  complacently  or  approvingly  regards,  because  there  is  in  the 
object  something  worthy  of  such  regard. 

This  is  exercised  by  God,  in  its  highest  degree,  in  the  love  of  Him- 
self, of  His  own  nature,  and  character,  because  the  infinitely  excellent 
must,  to  God,  be  the  highest  object  of  complacent  love. 

Were  God  but  one  person,  in  this  way  only  could  such  love  be 
exercised.  But  in  the  Trinity  of  the  Godhead,  there  is  found,  in  the 
love  of  the  separate  persons  towards  each  other,  another  mode  in 
which  this  love  of  complacency  may  in  this  highest  sense  be  exercised. 

Such  love  is  also  felt  by  God  for  His  purposes.  As  He  per- 
ceives them  to  be  just,  wise  and  gracious,  He  approves,  and. regards 
them  with  complacent  love. 

But  this  love  extends  itself  also  to  the  creations,  which  result  from 
this  purpose. 

This  is  true  of  inanimate  creation.  It  is  perfect,  as  far  as  conformed 
to  His  will,  and  fitted  to  accomplish  His  end,  and  as  such  God  can 
regard  it  and  pronounce  it  good.  Thus  we  find,  that  He  did  in  the 
creation.  Genesis,  Chap.  1:10,12. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  104 

The  same  record  is  made,  in  verse  25,  as  to  the  animal  creation, 
before  that  of  man;  and,  after  the  creation,  and  investiture  of  man  in 
the  dominion  over  the  earth,  with  its  plants  and  animals  we  are  told, 
verse  31,  "And  God  saw  everthing  that  He  had  made,  and  behold  it 
was  very  good." 

The  complacent  love  of  God,  therefore  extends  not  only  to  Himself 
and  His  will,  but  to  all  His  innocent  creation  and  even  to  inanimate 
nature. 

This  love  of  complacency,  however,  as  it  is  exercised  in  its  highest 
degree  towards  Himself,  so,  also,  is  it  exhibited,  in  the  nearest  approach 
to  that,  towards  those  beings,  who  are  most  like  Himself,  having  been 
made 'in  His  nature  and  likeness.  Innocent  angels,  and  innocent  man 
are  therefore  by  nature  a  joy  to  God,  as  is  the  child  to  the  father  who 
sees  in  it  a  peculiar  likeness  to  himself. 

But  the  guilty  cannot  thus  be  lo.ved.  Sinful  man  cannot  receive 
such  love,  so  long  as  sinful.  Even  the  penitent  believer  in  Jesus,  until 
the  time  of  his  perfect  sanctification  in  the  life  to  come,  and  perhaps 
even  then,  has  access  to  God  only  through  Christ,  and,  of  himself,  can 
in  no  respect  secure  the  approbation  of  God. 

2.  The  second  kind  of  love,  is  the  love  of  benevolence,  which  cor- 
responds to  the  idea  of  God's  goodness  towards  His  creatures. 

This  is  the  product  of  His  wishes  for  their  happiness.  It  is  not 
dependent  on  their  character,  as  is  the  love  of  complaeency,  but 
is  exercised  towards  both  innocent,  and  guilty. 

It  is  general  in  its  nature,  not  special,  and  exists  towards  all, 
even  towards  devils,  and  wicked  men,  because  God's  nature  is  bene- 
volent, and,  therefore,  He  must  wish  for  the  happiness  of  His  crea- 
tures. 

That  that  happiness  is  not  attained,  nor  attainable,  is  due,  not  to 
Him,  but  to  their  own  sin. 

When  the  benevolence  of  God  is  exercised  actively  in  the  be- 
stowment  of  good  things  upon  His  creatures  it  is  called  His  benefi- 
cence. By  the  former,  He  wishes  them  happiness,  by  the  latter, 
He  confers  blessings  to  make  them  so. 

This  is  done  also  to  the  wicked,  as  well  as  to  the  righteous.  It 
is  to  this,  that  Christ  refers,  Matt.  5:45,  "He  maketh  the  sun  to 
rise  on  the  evil,  and  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and 
on  the  unjust." 


105  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  A  third  form  of  love  is  the  love  of  compassion. 

This  corresponds  to  our  idea  of  pity.  It  is  benevolent  disposi- 
tion to  those  who  are  suffering,  or  in  distress. 

This  also  may  be  exercised  towards  the  guilty,  or  the  innocent; 
if  it  be  possible  to  suppose  that  guilt,  and  suffering  are  separable. 

It  has  been  very  commonly  held,  that  they  are  inseparable.  Pain, 
suffering,  and  distress,  have  been  believed  to  be  the  result  of  sin,  and 
consequently  inseparable  from  guilt. 

I  do  not  believe  them  so,  Man  in  a  state  of  innocence  was  made 
capable  of  physical  suffering.  That  capacity  was  necessary  to  the 
protection  of  his  physical  organism. 

The  lower  animals  also  suffer. 

Whatever  addition  to  the  capacity  of  suffering,  has  therefore  been 
made  by  the  fall,  and  is  the  consequence  of  sin,  we  are  not,  on 
that  account,  forced  to  the  conclusion,  that  there  can  be  no  suffering, 
where  there  has  been  no  sin. 

The  capacity  to  suffer,  may  so  belong  to  a  higher  organism, 
that  we  would  naturally  choose  that  organism,  with  that  capacity, 
rather  than  a  lower  without  it.     If  so,  God  can  justly  so  create  us. 

If  misery,  then,  may  be  the  lot  of  the  innocent,  God's  love  of  com- 
passion can  be  exercised  towards  such. 

It  can,  and  is  also  exercised  towards  the  guilty.  We  see  this 
in  the  forbearance  with  which  He  delays  their  punishment,  in  His 
constant  offers  of  mercy,  in  His  yearnings  after  their  salvation,  and, 
most  signally,  in  the  gift  of  His  only  begotten  son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  on  him  might  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life. 

4.  A  fourth  form  of  the  love  of  God,  corresponds  to  what  we 
call  mercy. 

This  can  be  exercised  only  towards  sinners. 

Its  very  nature  contemplates  guilt  in  its  objects. 

In  consists,  not  only,  in  the  desire  not  to  inflict  the  punishment 
due  to  sin,  and  the  neglect,  and  refusal  to  do  so,  but  in  the  actual  par- 
don of  the  offender. 

It  cannot  be  exercised  towards  a  righteous  being,  because  in  him 
is  no  sin  or  guilt  to  be  pardoned. 

It  is,  however,  no  new  attribute  in  God,  which  has  arisen  because 
of  the  existence  of  sin,  and  which  is,  therefore,  an  addition  to  His 
attributes. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  106 

It  is  a  virtue  inherent  in  His  nature,  and  is  especially  only  one 
form  in  which  His  love  exhibits  itself,  the  same  love,  as  that  benev- 
olence, which  innocent  creatures  calls  forth,  and  the  same  love 
which  in  another  form  of  complacency,  has  been  eternally  exercised 
in  the  Godhead. 

When  we  say,  that  this  mercy  must  be  exercised  in  accordance 
with  the  truth,  and  justice  of  God,  we  say  no  more  than  is  true  of 
every  attribute  of  God.  No  one  can  be  exercised  in  such  a  way 
as  to  destroy  another.  Every  one  must  be  in  harmony  with  the 
others.  Or,  remembering  what  we  have  before  stated,  that  these 
attributes  are  not  separate  faculties,  all  that  is  meant  in  this  case, 
as  in  all  others,  is  that  God  must  act  in  harmony  with  His 
nature. 

The  objects  of  the  exercise  of  this  attribute,  are  all  to  whom  God 
pardons  offences  of  any  kind. 

They  are  not  to  be  confined  to  redeemed  sinners,  although  this 
is  the  most  signal  exhibition. 

Under  the  ancient  economy,  God  ruled  as  theocratic  ruler  over 
Israel.  Sins  of  the  nation,  and  sins  of  individuals  in  their  capacity 
of  citizens  of  the  nation,  were  pardoned. 

Under  that  dispensation,  God  occupied  to  that  people  the  posi- 
tion of  an  earthly  ruler,  and  consequently  might  have  pardoned  sins 
against  His  government,  at  will,  upon  repentance,  and  upon  merely 
governmental  principles,  that  is,  such  as  would  secure  obedience  to 
the  law,  and  peace,  and  order,  and  the  welfare  of  the  nation. 
These  were  offences  against  the  mere  person  of  the  King  or  the  laws 
of  His  state,  and  not  against  the  fundamental  principles  of  holiness 
and  righteousness,  hence  sovereignty  and  expediency,  could  decide,  in 
each  case 'what  might  be  done,  and  mercy  was  exercised,  and  justice 
dispensed  accordingly. 

But  this  is  very  different  from,  the  case  of  God  the  righteous  judge, 
the  dispenser,  not  of  arbitrary  law  but  of  a  law  based  upon  His  own 
nature,  and  that  of  man,  essential  obedience  to  which  is  necessary,  not 
for  maintaining  government,  bat  for  preserving  and  maintaining  the 
right,  and  preventing  the  violation  with  impunity  of  eternal  law. 

In  both  cases,  God  must  act'  in  harmony  with  His  whole  nature. 

But  in  that  of  Israel,  no  obstacle  was  presented,  by  that  nature 
to  the  pardon  of  individual,  and  national  sins  against  the  theocratic 
King. 

Hence  mercy  was  extended,  apparently  at  least,  without  compensa- 
tion to  justice. 


107  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Yet,  amid  it  all,  there  was  a  typical  relation  to  the  atonement 
made  by  Christ,  through  which  God  pardons  sinners,  in  the  sacrificial 
offerings,  through  which  the  people  were  required,  to  approach  God 
seeking  pardon  for  both  individual,  and  national  political  «ns,  which 
shows  that,  in  some  way  in  that  atonement,  is,  after  all,  found  the 
reason,  why  God  even  in  those  cases  could  be  just,  and  yet  justify  the 
offenders. 

5.     The  fifth  form  of  love  is  that  of  affection. 

This  differs  from  that  of  complacency  in  as  much,  as  it  does  not  al- 
ways demand  a  worthy  object.  This  is  exhibited  in  the  parable  of 
the  '-Prodigal  Son". 

It  differs  from  that  of  benevolence,  in  as  much  as  its  object  is  not 
viewed  in  general  with  all  others,  but  is  one  of  special  interest. 

It  differs  from  that  of  compassion,  and  that  of  mercy,  because  the 
object  may  neither  be  in  distress,  nor  sinful. 

It  arises  from, 

1.  Mutual  relationship;  of  the  Father  to  the  Son,  and  other  per- 
sons in  the  Trinity ;  of  God  to  Israel ;  of  Christ  to  his  apostles,  dis- 
ciples, church;  of  the  adopted  sons  to  God  the  Father. 

2.  From  dependence;  as  of  creatures  on  the  Creator;  of  the  re- 
deemed upon  the  Redeemer. 

3.  From  ownership;  as  of  God  over  man;  of  God  over  Israel;  of 
Christ  over  the  redeemed.     Illustrated  in  the  coin  in  Luke  15:8,9. 

This  kind  of  love  arises  in  each  of  these  ways  in  man,  and,  as  the 
Scriptures  show,  is  also  found  in  God. 

It  is  from  this  aspect  of  God's  love,  that  proceeds  grace,  which  is 
to  be  distinguished  from  love,  and  pity,  and  mercy. 

Love,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  general  characteristic,  exhibiting  itself 
in  these  five  different  forms. 

Mercy  is  one  of  these,  but  is  given  to  the  guilty  only. 

Fity  is  given  to  guilty  or  innocent,  who  may  be  in  distress,  pain, 
or  suffering. 

Grace  is  also  given  to  guilty,  or  innocent,  and  does  not  necessarily 
suppose  distress  in  the  object,  but  involves  an  affectionate  interest  in 
it,  arising  either  from  peculiar  relation  to  it,  or  ownership  of  it,  or 
compassion  for  its  dependence. 

Grace,  is  underserved  favour,  (to  innocent  or  guilty)  arising  from 
affection. 

Mercy,  is  underserved  compassion,  (to  the  guilty  only.) 


Abstract  of  Theology.  108 

The  Truth  of  God. 

The  expression,  truth  of  God,  is  ambiguous,  and  must  be  considered 
under  the  specific  terms  which  set  forth  its  various  meanings. 

I.     His  Verity.     He  is  True  God. 

By  this  is  meant,  the  exact  correspondence  of  the  nature  of  God,  with 
the  ideal  of  absolute  perfection,  The  foundation  of  that  ideal  may  be 
indeterminable.  But,  whether  it  is  in  the  nature  of  God  Himself,  or 
in  His  will  proceeding  from  His  nature,  or  in  eternal  principles  of  the 
fit,  and  the  necessary,  and  the  right,  which  exactly  coincide  with  that 
nature,  God  and  that  ideal  must  be  perfect  counterparts.  That  ideal 
can  only  be  partially  comprehended  by  any  of  His  creatures,  because 
of  their  imperfections,  But  it  is  known  by  God  in  all  its  supreme 
excellence,  and  His  nature  must  fully  correspond  to  the  ideal  thus 
known.     Otherwise  He  would  not  be  God. 

It  is  in  this  aspect  of  God's  truth,  that  the  Scriptures  call  Him  the 
true  God.  See  2.  Chron.  15:3,  Jer.  10:10,  John  17:3,  1.  Thep.  1:9, 
1.  John' 5:28,  Rev.  3:7. 

II.     His  Veracity. 

By  this  is  meant,  God's  truthfulness  or  incapacity  to  deceive.  It 
is  an  attribute  of  His  nature,  which,  like  His  power,  exists,  and  makes 
Him  what  He  is,  even  though  there  be  no  outward  relation  to  it.  By 
virtue  of  it,  He  is  the  source  of  all  truth,  not  moral  only,  but  even 
mathematical.  s 

In  its  relation  to  God's  creatures,  it  is  the  foundation  of  their  confi- 
dence in  the  knowledge,  obtained  through  the  use  of  their  own  facul- 
ties, whether  by  intuition,  observation  or  reason.  Whatever  imper- 
fection there  is  in  such  knowledge,  is  perceived  to  be  due  to  the  crea- 
ture, and  not  to  God  the  creator.  Upon  it  is  also  based  belief  in  the 
revelations,  God  makes  to  man,  of  facts  beyond  the  attainment  of 
merely  human  power. 

The  Scriptures  affirm  the  veracity  of  God  in  the  strongest  terms. 
In  addition  to  its  assertion  in  numerous  passages,  we  are  told,  Ps. 
108:4,  that  His  ''truth  reacheth  unto  the  clouds".  Tit.  1=2,  calls  Him 
"God  that  cannot  lie." 

III.     His  Faithfulness. 

This  consists  in  the  truth  of  God  viewed  in  its  relation  to  His  pur- 
poses whether  secret,  or  revealed.    When  revealed,  these  become  either 


109  Abstract  of  Theology. 

promises,  or  threats.  But  as  promises,  the  ground  upon  which  these 
purposes  must  be  fulfilled,  is,  not  any  obligation  to  the  creature,  for 
God  can  come  under  none,  but  simply  because,  of  His  own  faithful- 
ness to  His  purposes.  Henne  His  faithfulness,  demands  equally  the 
performance  of  His  threatenings,  as  His  promises. 

This  faithfulness  is  based  upon  the  veracity  of  His  nature  consi- 
dered above.  It  is  by  virtue  of  that  veracity,  that  God  must  be  faith- 
ful; yet  the  faithfulness  is  a  new  aspect,  in  which  God's  truthfulness 
appears. 

This  faithfulness  is  the  ground  both  of  hope,  and  fear.  In  the 
Scriptures  it  is  more  frequently  presented  as  a  reason  for  hope,  and 
trust.  Bat,  it  is  also  the  foundation  of  judgment  and  punishment. 
The  faithful  God  has  been  true  to  His  threatenings,  as  well  as  His 
promises.     His  faithfulness  assures  us,  that  He  will  so  continue. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  110 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XI 


Justice  of  God. 


By  justice  is  meant  that  rectitude  of  character  which  leads  to  the 
treatment  of  others  in  strict  accordance  with  their  deserts. 

The  justice  of  God,  differs  in  no  respect  from  this  attribute,  as  seen 
among  His  rational  creatures,  except  that  His  justice  must  be  perfect 
while  theirs  is  imperfect,  and  His  must  be  impartial,  while  theirs  is  par- 
tial. These  differences,  however,  exist  in  the  exercise  of  justice,  and 
not  in  the  thing  itself.  They  arise  from  the  limited  knowledge,  reason, 
perception  of  right,  and  wrong,  among  men,  and  from  the  extent  to 
which  they  naturally  yield  to  their  prejudices  and  passions.  In  the  all 
perfect  Being,  however,  justice  has  none  of  these  deficiencies,  and  must 
be  exercised  according  to  its  strictest  nature,  and  in  every  conceivable 
form  of  perfection.  To  all,  therefore,  He  must  deal  out  the  most  ab- 
solute justice,  whatever  they  deserve,  only  what  they  deserve,  and  the 
full  measure  of  their  deserts. 

Inasmuch  as  the  justice  of  God  may  be  considered  as  it  exists  in 
Himself,  or  as  it  is  manifested  towards  His  creatures,  a  distinction 
has  been  made  in  it  as  viewed  in  these  aspects,  into  the  absolute,  and 
relative  justice  of  God. 

By  absolute  justice  is  meant  that  rectitude  of  the  divine  nature,  in 
consequence  of  which  God  is  infinitely  righteous  in  Himself.  This  rec- 
titude is  essential  to  Him,  and  existed  before  there  was  a  creation  in 
which  to  exhibit  it. 

By  the  relative  justice  of  God  is  meant  that  justice,  as  exhibited 
towards,  and  exercised  upon,  His  creatures  in  the  dispensation  of  the 
universe.     It  is  seen  in  the   nature   of  the  laws  He  gives,  in  His  im- 


Ill  Abstract  of  Theology. 

partiality  in  dealing  with  those  subjected  to  them,  in  His  maintenance 
of  right,  and  virtue,  by  the  threats  and  promises  Tie  attaches  to  them, 
and  His  punishment  of  those  who  violate  them.  To  this  form  of  jus- 
tice is  often  applied  the  name  of  rectoral  justice,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
justice  exercised  by  a  ruler,  in  the  form  of  government,  and  by 
means  of  laws. 

There  is  a  form  of  justice,  known  among  men  *as  commutative  jus- 
tice, which  consists  in  giving  to  each  one  his  due  in  the  barter  and  ex- 
change of  commerce,  or  in  any  other  of  the  mutual  relations  of  life.  As 
it  is  based  upon  the  ground  of  mutual  obligation,  and  therefore,  is  not 
suited  to  a  being  entirely  independent  of  others,  it  cannot  properly 
be  ascribed  to  God.  The  blessings,  given  in  consequence  of  His  pro- 
mises to  man,  are  not  matters  of  obligation,  but  of  grace.  The  only 
aspect,  in  which  this  could  be  connected  with  God,  would  be  as  be- 
tween the  Father  and  the  Son,  in  conferring  upon  His  people  those 
blessings  which  the  Son  had  purchased  through  His  sufferings.  It  is 
in  this  sense  that  the  Scripture  says,  that  God  is  "faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness." 

In  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of  His  creatures,  God  exer- 
cises distributive  justice.  By  this  is  meant,  the  rewarding,  and 
punishing  His  subjects,  according  to  the  sanctions  of  His  law.  His 
justice  is  here  evinced  in  the  maintenance  of  punishment,  if  the  law 
be  broken,  but  not  in  the  bestowment  of  rewards,  since  these  are  given 
graciously  as  further  inducements  to  duty.  While,  therefore,  God 
gives  all  the  rewards  promised,  they  are  given  because  promised,  and 
not  because  due.  These  punishments  further  show  forth  the  justice 
of  God,  as  they  are  impartially  inflicted. 

The  grounds,  upon  which  the  offenders  against  God's  law  are 
punished,  is  not  simply  the  fact,  that  a  law  of  God  has  been  broken, 
but,  that  in  the  breaking  of  that  law,  essential  right  has  been  violated 
and  wrong  committed.  It  would  be  sufficient  to  authorize  punish- 
ment, that  the  law  of  the  ruler  is  broken.  Still  it  might  appear  that 
the  will  of  the  ruler  might  remit  a  punishment  due  to  a  mere  violation 
of  His  will.  But  the  law  of  God  is  based  upon  the  immutable  dis- 
tinctions between  right,  and  wrong,  and  sin,  and  holiness,  as  they  exist 
in  the  nature  of  God.  Its  violation,  therefore  is  sin.  It  is  a  destruc- 
tion of  the  right.  Hence,  that  which  impels  God  to  punish,  is  not 
His  rectoral  character,  but  His  holy  nature.  It  is  when  justice  is 
regarded   in  this  respect,  that  it  is  called  punitive,  or  vindicatory. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  112 

But  punitive  justice  is  not  admitted  by  all,  nor  that  God  punishes 
sin  in  any  other  respect,  than  as  a  violation  of  His  will;  nay  it  is  even 
disputed,  whether  He  even  punishes  the  violations  of  His  will. 

Three  questions  therefore,  arises  here. 

1.  Does  God  punish  the  violations  of  His  law  ? 

2.  Does  He  punish  them,  because  they  are  merely  violations,  or 
because  they  are  sin  ? 

3.  Is  this  done  because  of  anything  essential  in  His  nature,  or  be- 
cause it  is  expedient  for  governmental,  or  other  purposes? 

Upon  these  questions,  there  have  been  several  opinions  expressed. 

1.  The  Universalists,  and  some  of  the  Socinians  deny  that  God 
punishes  even  the  violations  of  His  law.  They  regard  the  precepts 
of  morality,  and  duty,  set  forth  in  His  word,  as  merely  intended  to 
guide  us  in  this  life.  When  this  life  is  ended,  there  may  be  no  deal- 
ing with  man  for  such  violation.  They  are  only  for  a  temporary  pur- 
pose, and  having  accomplished  that  purpose,  will  have  no  further 
effect.  God  looks  now  only  to  the  good  of  His  creatures,  and  if  the 
same  method  of  dealing  be  extended  beyond  this  life,  it  will  be  only 
for  a  time,  and  only  for  the  good  of  those  who  suffer.  According  to 
this,  these  are  not  punishments,  but  chastisements,  and  God  is  moved 
by  goodness  and  not  by  justice. 

2.  A  second  theory  is,  that  the  laws  given  by  God  are  merely  ex- 
ponents of  His  will;  that  the  ground  upon  which  He  commands  is 
simply  His  sovereignty;  that,  looking  at  the  universe  as  a  world  to  be 
created,  and  to  be  occupied  by  His  moral  creatures,  He  selected 
such  a  system  of  laws  as  seemed  to  Him  best  to  secure  the  welfare  of 
those  creatures,  and  that  these  laws  while  seeking  the  happiness,  not 
of  the  individuals,  but  of  the  mass,  are  such  as  are  really  best  fit- 
ted to  that  end;  and  that  the  justice  of  God  is  seen  in  so  administering 
these  laws,  by  rewarding  those  who  obey,  and  punishing  those  who 
disobey,  as  to  maintain  His  government,  and  thus  secure  the  welfare 
of  the  whole.  God,  punishes  sin,  therefore,  under  this  system, 
but  He  punishes  it,  not  because  of  its  heinous  nature,  but  because  it  is 
best  that  men  should  not  sin,  and  thus  the  best  interest  of  all  is  se- 
cured by  preventing  the  commission  of  it.  The  end  He  has  in  view, 
therefore,  is  rather  to  furnish  a  spectacle  which  shall  restrain  sin, 
than  to  perform  an  act  demanded  by  the  inherent  nature  of  sin.  It  is 
His  rectoral  justice,  therefore,  rather  than  His  vindicatory  justice,  that 
is  thus  shown. 


113  Abstract  of  Theology. 

This  theory  therefore,  embraces  four  points. 

(1.)     God  punishes  offences  or  sins. 

(2.)  The  object  is,  thus  the  better,  to  secure  the  welfare  of  His 
moral  creatures. 

(3.)  The  laws  of  His  government  are  based  entirely  upon  His 
mere  will. 

(4.)  Consequently  He  punishes  sin,  not  because  of  its  inherent  de- 
sert, but  because  the  general  happiness  of  His  creatures,  and  not  His 
own  holiness  demands  it. 

3.  The  third  theory  is  different  in  all  respects,  except  the  first 
of  these  points. 

(1.)     It  agrees,  that  God  punishes  sin. 

(2.)     But  it  makes  His  object,  the  maintenance  of  the  right. 

(3.)  His  laws  and  action  are  based  upon  the  immutable  principles 
of  right. 

(4.)  He  punishes  sin,  because,  from  its  nature,  it  demands  punish- 
ment from  Him. 

The  great  difficulty,  in  attaining  a  right  conclusion  in  this  matter,  is 
that  whatever  might  have  been  the  origin  of  these  laws,  they  would 
have  been  the  same.  Hence,  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  the 
nature  of  the  laws  themselves.  It  is  manifest,  that  God  in  the  establish- 
ment of  the  government  of  the  world  for  any  purpose,  will  not  give  to 
it  laws,  contrary  to  His  nature. 

It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  because  the  same  effect  may  be  pro- 
duced by  either  of  these  causes,  it  is,  therefore,  unimportant  to 
which  of  them  it  is  assigned.  There  may  be,  and  in  the  present 
case  it  is  believed  that  there  are,  important  reasons,  why  only  one 
cause  should  be  assigned,  and  that  it  should  be  ascertained  to 
exist  in  the  nature  of  God.  Matters  of  great  moment,  in  connection 
with  the  atonement  especially,  but  also  with  other  parts  of  the  plan 
of  salvation,  demand  the  true  answer. 

But  this  fact  is  not  to  be  allowed,  to  warp  our  judgment  or  lead  us 
away  from  the  truth.  It  is  only  mentioned  to  show  the  importance 
of  the  subject  now  under  consideration. 

As  to  the  first  of  these  theories,  it  need  only  be  said,  that  the 
objections  to  it  are  involved  in  those  to  the  second,  in  part,  and  that 
those  peculiar  to  it,  are  too  plain  to  need  presentation. 

As  to  the  2nd,  it  may  be  objected, 

1.  "That  it  makes  happiness,  and  not  holiness,  and  virtue,  the  great 
end  of  God.  The  dictates  of  nature  teach  us  all  plainly,  that  hap- 
piness does  not  occupy  this  place."    Hodge  :  Manuscript  lecture. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  114 

2.  "It  destroys  the  essential  difference,  between  right  and  wrong, 
which  conscience  teaches  us."    Hodge  :  manuscript  lecture. 

3.  It  supposes,  that  God  might  have  made  a  world,  in  which  pre- 
cisely opposite  laws  might  have  prevailed  by  His  command,  and  that 
thus  it  would  be  His  duty,  in  this  world  to  reward,  in  that  world  to 
punish,  His  creatures  for  the  same  action. 

4.  It  is  opposed  to  the  relation  of  the  true  will  of  God  to  His 
nature.  It  ascribes  the  laws  of  God  to  that  will.  It  recognizes 
those  lawrs  as  flowing  from  it  alone.  They  are  as  God  pleased.  Now, 
it  is  not  denied,  that  they  come  from  the  free  will  of  God,  and  are 
such  as  please  Him.  But  they  have  a  higher  basis  even  than  His 
will.  That  will  is  influenced  by  His  nature,  and  is  its  exponent. 
Now,  whether,  that  nature  is  itself  the  basis  of  good  and  right,  or 
whether  good  and  right  considered  as  distinct  from  it,  in  the  na- 
ture of  things,  simply  accord  perfectly  with  that  nature,  the  result 
is  the  same;  the  will  is  influenced,  by  the  nature,  to  establish  the 
laws  of  creation  according  to  the  immutable  principles  of  right  and 
wrong. 

5.  This  theory  is  also  opposed  to  the  independence  of  God,  who 
is  thus  forced  to  punish  sin;  not  by  any  law  of  His  own  nature, 
which  would  still  maintain  that  independence,  but  from  a  regard 
to  the  government  of  His  creatures,  which  could  not  be  otherwise 
maintained.     (Altered  from  Hodge's  Outlines.) 

6.  The  instinctive  sense  of  justice  in  man  testifies  to  the  ill 
desert  of  sin.  This  is  the  universal  testimony  of  conscience.  But 
conscience  speaks  for  God,  and  therefore,  testifies  to  the  fact  that, 
independent  of  the  evil  to  society,  the  wrong  doer  deserves  punish- 
ment proportioned  to  his  offence. 

7.  Hodge  in  his  Outlines,  thus  argues  this  from  the  love  of  holiness 
and  hatred  of  sin  in  God.  "If  the  reason  for  God's  punishing,  was 
founded  only  in  God's  arbitrary  will,  then  He  could  not  be  said 
to  hate  sin,  but  only  to  love  His  own  will,  or,  if  His  reason  for 
punishing  sin  rested  upon  governmental  considerations,  then  He 
could  not  be  strictly  said  to  hate  sin,  but  only  its  consequences." 
But  both,  conscience  and  Scripture  teach,  that  God  does  hate  sin, 
and  love  holiness. 

Leaving  these  considerations,  as  to  the  second  theory  with  the 
statement  of  these  objections,  I  proceed   to  establish  the  third  theory 


115  Abstract  of  Theology. 

by  the  teachings  of  Scripture.  It  will  be  seen,  that  the  Scriptures 
represent  God  as  a  just  God,  thus  ascribing  that  character  to  Him; 
that  they  do  it  in  such  a  way,  as  shows  that  His  justice  is  not  simply 
in  His  will,  but  is  a  part  of  His  nature ;  that  they  challenge  denial  of 
the  position,  that  the  acts  of  God  are  in  accordance  with  right,  and  jus- 
tice, and  that  not  of  His  sovereignty,  but  because  of  His  absolute  jus- 
tice; that  they  present  Him  as  actually  claiming  vindicatory  or  aveng- 
ing justice,  speaking  of  His  justice  as  hatred  of  sin,  and  not  desire  to 
maintain  government;  nay  that  they  are  constantly  showing  us  instance 
after  instance,  in  which  God  has  exercised  that  avenging  justice,  com- 
mencing with  the  ejection  of  Adam  from  Paradise,  and  culminating 
in  its  highest  and  most  signal  example  in  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ. 
It  is  remarkable,  that  all  of  this,  can  be  established  from  the  Scrip- 
tures in  favour  of  vindicatory  justice,  and  not  a  passage  can  be  given, 
in  proof  that  He  is  only  active  for  the  maintainance  of  His  govern- 
ment, or  the  mere  happiness  of  His  creatures.  Indeed,  in  the  Scrip- 
tures everywhere,  it  is  God's  glory,  and  dishonour,  His  holiness,  and 
sin,  His  love,  and  His  justice,  that  are  placed  in  fearful  contrast. 

1.  Passages  in  which  God  is  spoken  of,  as  having  a  just  character, 
and  in  which  this  is  held  forth  as  an  excellence  in  Him.  How  can 
these  be  accounted  for,  if  justice  and  will  are  the  same  or  even 
if  justice  is  no  more  than  the  administration  of  human  affairs  accord- 
ing to  His  plan  ?  While  this  is  done,  there  are  no  passages  in  which 
He  asserts  His  power,  or  choice,  or  justice  in  changing  the  essential 
laws  laid  down  for  our  rule.  Deut.  32:4.  Job  8:3;  34:10,12,21;  36:3. 
Ps.  9:4;  11:7;  33:4  5;  71:19;  89:14;  92:15;  97:2;  99:4;  119:137,138. 
Zeph.  3:5.    Rom.  2:2. 

2.  Passages  in  which  God  vindicates  His  claim  to  this  character, 
by  asserting  His  justice  and  His  impartiality  to  all  men.  Gen.  18:16.33, 
Deut.  10=17.  Job  37.24.  Eccl.  3:17;  12:14.  Ezek.  18:29.  Acts 
10:34,35;  17:31.  Rom.  2:3—6,  11;  14:12;  Gal.  2:6.  Eph.  6:8.  Col. 
3:25.     1.  Pet.  1:17.     Jude.  15. 

3.  In  those  passages,  in  which  God's  justice  is  spoken  of,  it  is  never 
based  upon  His  will,  nor  His  economy,  but, 

(a.)  Judgment  is  always  based  upon  His  righteousness.  Ps.  9:8; 
50:4,6;  96:10,13;  98:9. 

(b  )  His  economy  among  the  Jews  is  commended,  not  because  of 
its  setting  forth  His  will,  but  because  of  its  justice  or  righteousness. 
Deut,  4:8.     Ps.  19:7—9.     Ps.  119=138. 

4.  Passages  in  which  God  speaks  of  His  justice,  as  being  a  hatred 
of  sin.     Ps.  5:4,5.     Hab.  1:13. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  116 

5.  Passages  in  which  God  is  spoken  of  as  a  jealous  God,  exercising 
avenging  justice.  Ex.  20:5.  Deut.  32:34,35,39,41,42,43.  Ps.  94:1,2. 
Is.  34=8,  66=6.     Heb.  10:26—31' 

6.  Passages  in  which  the  dealings  of  God  with  His  enemies  are 
spoken  of,  in  connection  with  such  words  as  anger,  wrath,  fury,  &c 
Num.  12=9.  Deur,  32:22.  Judges  10:7.  2.  Sam.  22:8.  Job  19:11. 
Ps.  2=5;  7:11;  2P9;  90:11.  Is.  28=21.  Is.  30:30;  65=15-  Jer.  30:24. 
Lam.  2:3;  3=43.     Ezek.  5:13;  38:18.     Hos.  12:14.     Nahum  1:6. 

7.  Passages  in  which  angels  are  spoken  of  as  ministers  of  such 
vengeance.  These  are  not  introduced  as  proof  of  the  justice  of  God, 
but  simply  as  parts  of  transactions,  by  which  that  justice  is  manifested. 
Num.  22=22,31.  2.  Sam.  24:16-  1.  Chron.  21:14,15,16,27.  Ps.  35:5,6. 
Rev.  7=1,2  3;  9=15;  15:1;  16:17. 

8.  The  instances  given  of  the  actual  exercise  of  God's  wrath  are  asso- 
ciated, not  with  the  idea  of  producing  effect  in  His  moral  government, 
nor  with  the  exercise  of  His  mere  will, -but  as  results  produced  by  His 
emotions  against  sin,  or  in  other  words  his  avenging  justice.  . 

Some  of  these  are,  (1.)  The  fallen  angels,  (2.)  our  first  parents,  (3.) 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  (4.)  the  flood,  (5.)  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  (6.)  the 
punishments  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  (7.)  the  cap- 
tivity of  the  Jews,  (8  )  God's  punishment  of  heathen  nations,  because 
of  their  wicked  instrumentality  in  the  exercise  of  His  wrath,  against 
the  delinquent  Israelites  and  (9.)  The  threatened  eternal  punishment 
of  the  wTicked. 

9.  Passages,  which  point  out  something  in  the  work  of  Christ,  as 
being  essential  before  God  could  pardon  sin.  Matt.  26=39.  Rom.  3=26. 
2.  Cor.  5=21. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  118 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY 


LECTURE  XII. 


The  Will  of  God. 

By  the  will  of  God  is  meant  that  power,  inherent  in  His  nature,  by 
which  He  purposes,  and  choose*s  any  end,  or  object,  or  determines  its 
existence. 

I.     That  God  mast  have  this  power  is  evident. 

1.  Because  it  is  an  attribute  of  personality.  A  conscious  personal 
being  cannot  be  without  will.  Every  proof  that  we  have,  therefore, 
that  God  has  personal  existence,  is  evidence  that  He  must  have  will. 

2.  Will  is  also  a  perfection,  and  must  be  found  in  the  Being  of  all 
perfection. 

3.  The  absolutely  independent  God,  who  is  controlled  by,  and  de- 
pendent upon,  no  person,  nor  thing,  must  have  will,  by  which  to  guide 
His  own  acts. 

4.  It  cannot  be  separated  from  the  possession  of  the  power,  and 
wisdom,  seen  in  the  creation  of  the  universe,  and  in  all  God's  out- 
ward acts,  for,  without  it,  the  things  which  wisdom  devises,  and  power 
executes,  could  neither  be  devised,  nor  executed. 

5.  It  is  essential  to  the  sovereignty,  by  which  He  rules  the  uni- 
verse, for  will  is  the  element  in  which  sovereignty  consists. 

6.  Without  it  there  could  be  no  existence  whatever,  not  even  of 
God  Himself. 

II.  The  objects  of  that  will  are  all  beings  that  exist,  and  all  events 
that  take  place. 


119  Abstract  of  Theology. 

1.  God  must  will  His  own  existence,  and  nature.  These  are  ob- 
jects of  supreme  desire.  The  infinite  excellence  of  that  nature,  which 
furnishes  a  completely  worthy  object  of  His  complacent  love,  cannot 
be  contemplated  without  a  correspondingly  infinite  desire  that  it  should 
exist,  and  should  be  what  it  is.  The  will,  thus  exercised,  however,  is 
not  causal,  as  it  is  towards  all  other  objects.  It  does  not  give  exist- 
ence to  God,  nor  make  His  nature  what  it  is,  but  on  the  contrary,  it 
is  because  God  is,  and  has  such  a  nature,  that  He  must  so  will. 

2.  The  will  of  God  is  also  exercised  in  establishing,  and  maintain- 
ing, the  personal  relations  revealed  to  us  as  existing  in  the  Godhead. 
It  is  by  the  will  of  the  Father,  that  He  begets  the  Son,  and  by  the 
will  of  the  Father  aud  the  Son,  that  the  Spirit  proceeds.  The  action 
of  the  will  here  is  causal,  although  these  relations  are  eternal,  and 
are  characteristic  of  the  Godhead.  They  are  the  results  of  the  divine 
activity,  and,  as  effects,  must  find  their  final  cause  in  the  will  which 
moves  to  action.  The  fact,  that,  because  this  is  divine  will,  and  action, 
there  can  be  no  priority  of  time  in  the  will  to  the  act,  does  not  forbid 
the  causal  relation  which,  because  of  the  eternity  of  God,  must  make 
cause,  and  effect  in  Him  coeternal. 

3.  Another  exhibition  of  will  in  the  Divine  Being,  is  connected 
with  the  mutual  love  of  the  divine  persons  towards  each  other.  This 
love  proceeds,  from  these  persons,  as  one  form  of  eternal  activity,  and 
is  willed  by  each  to  the  full  extent  of  its  infinite  exercise. 

4.  The  will  of  God  is  more  plainly  made  known,  however,  to  His 
creatures,  in  His  outward  activity  in  creation.  This  was  called  into 
existence  by  the  word  of  His  power.  He  willed,  and  it  was.  But 
for  that  will,  it  had  not  been.  Viewed,  as  a  whole,  or  in  its  minutest 
part,  the  universe  presents  everywhere  the  impress  of  its  Maker's  will. 
To  that  will  is  due  not  only  all  material,  but  also  all  spiritual  exis- 
tence. 

5.  The  will  of  God  is  also  manifested  in  His  providential  care,  and 
government  of  the  universe.  In  creating  it,  He  has  established  laws, 
both  mechanical,  and  spiritual,  by  which  it  is  regulated.  But  He  has, 
also,  not  withdrawn  His  own  presence,  and  power,  in  its  continued 
guidance,  and  preservation;  but  is  constantly  developing,  through  it, 
and  in  it,  His  eternal  purpose. 

6.  In  human  affairs,  however,  the  will  of  God  is  most  distinctively 
exhibited  in  the  work  of  redemption.  Let  this  be  admitted  as  a  true 
work  of  God,  and,  at  once,  appear  the  proofs  of  a  far  reaching  end, 
accomplished  by  frequent  acts  of  interposition,  and  guidance,  in  which 


Abstract  of  Theology.  120 

concentres  and  culminates  the  entire  scope  of  God's  outward  activity. 
The  will  of  God  is  seen  to  be  the  propelling  force  of  His  devising  wis- 
dom, and  executing  power;  in  the  accomplishment  of  one  great  pur- 
pose, to  which  is  indissolubly  linked  all  His  other  acts  and  volitions. 

III.  A  question  arises  as  to  this  will  of  God,  whether,  in  its  exer- 
cise, He  acts  necessarily  or  freely. 

It  has  been  answered,  that  His  will  is  exercised  both  necessarily,  and 
freely,  according  to  the  object  of  that  will. 

1.  He  is  said  to  will  necessarily  Himself,  His  holy  nature,  and 
character,  and  the  personal  relations  in  the  Godhead.  This  language 
may  be  admitted,  if  it  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  necessity  here  de- 
clared, is  not  one  of  fate,  nor  of  outward  compulsion.  Whatever,  is 
meant  by  it,  must  be  fully  consistent  writh  God's  free  agency.  It  is 
a  necessity,  that  arises  from  His  nature,  because  of  which,  such 
must  be  the  will  of  God,  that  He  wills  Himself,  His  existence,  and 
the  relations  of  the  persons  of  the  Godhead.  Such  being  the  nature  of 
the  necessity,  it  would  be  better  to  express  it  in  some  way,  which 
would  indicate  its  source  and  prevent  misapprehension.  The  word 
"naturally"  would  suffice,  were  it  not  for  its  ambiguity  in  common 
use;  consequently  "essentially"  is  suggested,  as  expressive  of  all  the 
necessity,  and  at  the  same  time  of  all  the  freedom,  which  must  ac- 
company an  act  of  the  will  proceeding  from  the  very  essence,  or  nature 
of  God. 

2.  As  to  all  else  than  Himself,  God  wills  freely,  whether  His  will 
has  regard  to  their  existence,  or  mode  of  existence,  or  their  actions,  or 
the  events  which  influence  or  control  them.  He  does  His  own  will, 
not  that  of  another.  He  chooses  what,  and  whom,  He  will  create,  and 
the  times,  places,  and  circumstances,  in  which  He  will  place  those  He 
creates.  He  marks  out  to  all  His  intelligent  creatures  the  path  of  life. 
He  uses  them  for  His  purposes.  Though  He  gives  to  them,  also,  like 
freedom  of  the  will,  yet  is  their  will  subordinate  to  His,  and  controlled 
by  it,  and  their  actions  by  His.  Yet  is  this  so  wisely  done,  and  so 
truly  in  accordance  with  their  own  natures,  as  fully  to  preserve  in 
them  consciousness,  and  conviction,  of  the  power  of  contrary  choice, 
and  of  full  responsibility  for  what  they  choose,  and  do. 

When  it  is  said,  however,  that  God  wTills  freely,  it  is  not.  meant,  that 
no  influence  is  exerted  upon  His  will.  It  is  only  intended  to  deny 
that  His  will  is  influenced  from  without.  In  all  His  outward  acts,  as 
well  as  in  those  within,  He  is  governed  by  His  own  nature.  That 
nature,  and  that  will,  must  always  be  in  unison.     As  He  is  infinitely 


121  Abstract  of  Theology. 

wise,  so  mast  His  will,  and  action,  be  directed  towards  wise  ends,  in 
the  use  of  wise  means.  His  infinite  justice  forbids  that  He  should 
will,  or  do  anything  contrary  to  the  strictest  justice.  The  God  of 
truth  mast  also  purpose  in  accordance  with  truth,  and  faithfulness. 
His  love  too,  which  is  so  gracious  a  characteristic  of  God,  forbids  that 
He  shall  will,  otherwise  that  benevolently  towards  all.  securing  the 
happiness  of  the  innocent,  and  desiring  that  even  of  the  guilty,  when 
it  can  be  made  consistent  with  His  jastice.  The  holiness  of  His  na- 
ture makes  it  essential  that,  as  all  perfection,  in  perfect  harmony,  is 
involved  in  that  holiness,  so  also  must  it  be  found  in  every  purpose 
which  He  forms,  as  well  as  in  every  action,  by  which  His  purposes  are 
accomplished.  When,  therefore,  God  is  said  to  will  freely  in  all 
matters  which  are  without,  it  is  not  meant  to  deny,  that  He  is  gov- 
erned by  His  nature  in  all  the  respects,  in  which  that  nature  ought 
to  affect  His  will. 

But,  even  in  the  volition  thus  formed,  God  does  not  will  freely,  in 
the  sense  of  willing  arbitrarily.  He  is  not  indifferent  as  to  what  He 
will  do.  There  is  choice,  and  not  arbitrary  choice.  There  are  rea- 
sons perceived  by  Him,  which  induce  Him  to  choose  one  end,  rather 
than  another,  and  one  set  of  means  to  that  end,  in  preference  to 
others.  There  is  in  each  case  a  prevailing  motive,  not  necessarily 
dependent  upon  its  own  force,  or  power,  but  upon  the  simple  fact, 
that,  in  the  midst  of  the  numerous  ends,  and  means  known  to  Him 
through  His  infinite  knowledge,  this  motive  makes  this  end,  and  these 
means  best  pleasing  to  Him.  The  very  nature  of  choice  in  any  being 
of  intelligence,  and  free  agency,  makes  this  the  method  by  which  the 
will  forms  its  decision.  There  is  nothing,  in  the  nature  of  the  omnis- 
cient, and  all-purposing  God,  which  forbids  that  this  also  should  be 
the  method  of  His  volitions.  Our  conception  of  God  in  this  respect 
cannot  be  incorrect,  although,  as  in  all  instances  in  which  we  attempt 
to  arrive  at  the  perfections  of  God,  through  those  recognized  as  such 
in  man,  this  conception  may  be  very  inadequate. 

IV.  The  discussion  of  the  preceding  question,  shows  how  truly  so 
far  as  the  will  of  man  is  concerned  he  has  been  made  in  the  image  of 
God.  It  suggests  the  propriety  therefore,  of  setting  forth  more  par- 
ticularly the  points  of  similarity,  and  dissimilarity,  between  the  will  of 
man,  and  that  of  God. 

1.     Some  points  of  similarity  may  be  mentioned. 

(1.)  In  man,  will  is  the  element  in  which  sovereignty  exists;  so  also 
in  God. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  122 

(2.)  In  man,  will  depends  upon  the  understanding,  that  is,  it  is 
exercised,  all  other  things  being  equal,  in  accordance  with  its  dictates; 
so  also  in  God. 

(3.)  In  man,  the  will  is  essentially  influenced  by  His  nature  ;  so 
also  in  God. 

(4.)  In  man,  the  will  is*  controlled  by  the  prevailing  motive,  which 
is  made  the  strongest,  because  it  is  that  most  pleasing  to  Him;  so  also 
in  God. 

2.     But  there  also  points  of  dissimilarity  between  these  wills. 

(1.)     God  never  wills  what  He  cannot  do  ;  man  often  does. 

(2.)  In  God,  the  will  is  never  controlled  from  without;  in  man  this 
is  frequently  done. 

[By  the  outward  control  in  man  is  not  here  meant,  that  physical 
compulsion  by  which  a  man  is  sometimes  said  to  act  against  His  will ; 
but  those  legitimate  outward  influences  from  persons,  circumstances, 
and  events  which  lead  men  freely  to  choose,  in  accordance  with  the 
laws  of  the  mind.] " 

(3.)  In  God  the  prevailing  motive  is  not  only  the  most  pleasing ; 
but,  presumably,  the  best;  in  man  it  is  only  the  most  pleasing,  not 
the  most  reasonable,  and  right,  and  most  conducive  to  happiness  ;  but 
often  the  very  contrary  of  these. 

(4.)  In  God  there  is  but  one  will,  or  purpose,  which  comprehends 
all  His  ends  and  means ;  He  does  not  will,  by  successive  acts,  nor  in 
successive  moments,  but  simultaneously,  and  eternally ;  man  wTills 
successively,  one  will  follows  another,  and  the  volition  of  one  man  of- 
ten succeeds  the  acts,  as  well  as  the  volitions,  of  others. 

(5.)  The  will  of  God  is  always  accomplished;  that  of  man  is  often 
defeated. 

(6.)  God  never  -changes  His  will,  nor  perceives  any  reason  for  such 
change  ;  man  changes  his  frequently,  from  caprice,  or  because  of  new 
information,  or  because  He  sees  the  importance  of  a  better  life,  or  is 
carried  off  by  passion  to  one  that  is  worse. 

V.  Various  distinctions  as  to  the  will  of  God  have  been  pointed 
out,  some  of  which  are  correct,  or  at  least  admissible,  and  others  in- 
correct, and  objectionable. 

The  following  list  is  given  by  Turretine  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth 
questions  of  his  third  book.  The  statements  made  are  in  the  main 
taken  from  his  discussion. 


123  Abstract  of  Theology. 

1.     The  correct  distinctions. 

(1.)  The  first  distinction  is  between  the  decretive  and  preceptive 
will  of  God.  t 

By  the  decretive  will  is  meant  that  will  of  God  by  which  He  pur- 
poses, or  decrees,  whatever  shall  come  to  pass,  whether  He  wills, 
Himself  to  accomplish  it  effectively,  or  cau^atively,  or  to  permit  it  to 
occur  through  the  unrestrained  agency,  or  will  of  His  creatures.  In 
either  case  however,  He  has  determined,  purposed,  or  decreed,  either 
to  bring  it  to  pass,  or  to  cause  it  to  be  brought  to  pass. 

By  the  preceptive  will  is  meant,  that  which  He  has  prescribed  to  be 
done  by  others.  Such  are  the  laws  under  which  He  places  His  crea- 
tures, or  the  duties  which  He  enjoins  upon  them.  It  is  the  rule  of 
duty. 

The  decretive  will  must  always  be  fulfilled  ;  the  preceptive  may  be 
disobeyed,  and  therefore  remain  unfulfilled. 

(2.)  Nearly  corresponding  to  this  first  distinction  is  another  into 
the  will  of  eudokia,  and  that  of  euarestia*.  As  the  former  was  taken 
from  two  Latin,  so  this  is  from  two  Greek  words;  and  these  Greek 
words  are  scriptural.  The  former  division  was  made  in  connection 
with  purpose  to  do,  this,  with  pleasure,  or  desire  to  do,  or  to  see  done. 
But  the  two  correspond  in  the  fact  that  the  will  of  eudokia,  like  that 
of  decree,  comprises  what  shall  certainly  be  accomplished,  and  that  of 
euarestia  like  that  of  precept  embraces  simply  what  it  pleases  God 
that  His  creatures  shall  do. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that,  because  of  the  meaning 
eudokia,  (well  pleasing,)  the  decretive  will,  expressed  by  this  word, 
is  confined  to  those  volitions  of  God,  in  which  the  happiness  and 
blessing  of  man  are  involved.  It  was  with  reference  both  to  evil  to 
some,  and  blessing  to  others,  that  Christ  used  it  when  He  said,  "Yea 
Father  for  so  it  was  well  pleasing  in  thy  sight."  Matt.  11:26.  [Can- 
terbury Revision.]  The  decretive  will  of  God,  ^whatever  its  effect 
upon  His  creatures,  is  "well  pleasing"  to  God. 

(3.)  A  third  distinction  is  between  the  will  of  the  signum  and  that 
of  the  beneplacitum. 

By  the  beneplacitum  is  intended,  a  will  of  God  which  is  only  in 
Himself  and  is  subject  to  His  power,  until  He  makes  it  known  by  some 
revelation,  or  by  the  event  itself.  Any  will  thus  made  known  becomes 
the  signum.     Manifestly  these  may  differ  in  several  respects. 

If  the  will  of  the  beneplacitum  be  confined,  as  it  should  be,  to  the 
decretive  will  of  God,  it  will  be  broader,  and  narrower,  than  that  of 
the  signum;  broader,  because  at  no  time  has  the  whole  decretive  will 


Abstract  of  Theology.  124 

of  God  been  revealed;  and  narrower,  because  the  will'  of  the  sigrmm 
must  extend,  also,  to  the  preceptive  will  of  God,  which  God  prescribes 
as  duty,  and  yet  does  not  determine  shall  be  performed.  In  some 
cases,  God  even  gives  commands,  which  are,  for  the  time,  a  rule  of  duty 
and,  therefore,  a  part,  of  His  preceptive  will,  and  thus  also  of  this  will 
of  signum,  obedience  to  which  He  actually  intends  to  prevent.  Thus 
He  ordered  Abraham  by  the  will  of  signum  to  sacrifice  Isaac,  which 
was  thus  made  to  His  servant,  a  rule  of  duty,  yet,  by  the  will  of  bene- 
placitum,  He  not  only  did  not  purpose  the  sacrifice,  but  intended  to 
interpose  to  prevent  it. 

(4.)  A  fourth  distinction  is  between  the  secret,  and  the  revealed 
will  of  God.  Turretine  says,  "The  former  of  these  is  commonly  re- 
ferred to  the  will  of  decree,  which  for  the  most  part  is  hidden  in  God; 
the  latter  to  the  will  of  the  precept,  which  is  revealed,  and  disclosed 
in  the  Law  and  the  Gospel.  Its  basis  is  sought  in  Deut.  29.29.  "The 
secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord,  our  God;  but  those  things  which 
are  revealed  belong  unto  us,  and  to  our  children,  forever,  that  we  may 
do  all  the  words  of  this  law."  The  former  is  called  a  profound  and 
unsearchable  abyss.  Ps.  36=6.  Eom.  11:33,34.  The  latter  is  ac- 
cessible to  all,  nor  is  it  far  from  us.  Deut.  30:14.  Rom.  10:8.  That 
has  for  its  object  all  those  things,  which  God  wills,  either  to  effect,  or 
permit,  and  which,  especially,  He  wishes  to  do  concerning  each  man, 
and  which  are,  therefore,  absolute,  and  fixed  without  exception. 
The  latter  refers  to  those  things,  which  belong  to  our  duty,  and  which 
are  conditionally  set  forth.  The  former  is  always  done,  the  latter  is 
often  violated." 

2.     The  incorrect  distinctions; 

(1.)     That  of  antecedent,  and  consequent  volitions. 

By  this  is  not  meant  one  will,  or  decree,  which  precedes  another  in 
its  logical  order  in  the  divine'  mind,  or  in  its  execution  by  God,  as 
that  of  the  creation  of  man,  before  that  of  His  redemption;  nor  one  will 
of  the  precept,  which  consists  in  the  prescribed  duty,  followed  by  an- 
other which  sets  forth  the  consequent  rewards  and  punishments. 
Were  this  so,  the  distinction  would  be  objectionable,  only,  because 
of  its  inaccuracy  in  transferring  to  God  such  methods  of  our  action, 
or  logical  conception,  as  belong  to  that  succession  in  our  acts,  and  will 
which  cannot  exist  in  God.  It  would  be  only  the  same  kind 
of  misstatement,  of  which  orthodox  theologians  are  guilty,  when  un- 
der the  form  of  sublapsarianism,  or  supralapsarianism,  they  attempt 


125  Abstract  of  Theology. 

to  set  forth  the  order  of  God's  decrees.  In  one  form,  in  which  this 
distinction  is  incorrectly  made,  it  is  claimed,  that  a  consequent  will 
in  God  arises  after  He  sees  the  results  of  one  which  is  previous,  or 
antecedent;  another  that  He  forms  a  particular  volition,  especially 
affecting  an  individual  man,  following  upon  a  general  volition,  or 
disposition,  to  seek  the  happiness  of  His  creatures,  or  to  prescribe 
a  course  by  which  that  happiness  may  be  secured. 

To  the  distinction  of  antecedent,  and  consequent  volitions,  in 
these  forms,  there  are  many  objections. 

(a.)  It  admits  succession  in  the  decrees  of  God.  and  makes  them 
many,  where  they  are  bat  one. 

(b.)     It  makes  them  temporal,  when  they  are  eternal. 

(c.)  Turretine  ably  argues,  that  thus  contrary  wills  would  exist 
in  God,  who  would  thus  be,  at  one,  and  the  same  time  willing,  and 
not  willing,  the  same  event. 

(d.)  He  also  justly  states,  that  the  antecedent  will,  thus  spoken 
of,  could  be  only  a  mere  wishing  (velleitas,)  and  not  a  will  (vol- 
untas.) 

(e.)  He  suggests,  that,  thus,  the  independence  of  God  would  be 
taken  away,  since  He  must  wait  upon  man  to  will,  and  act,  before 
He  could  will. 

(2.)  A  second  incorrect  distinction  is  between  the  efficacious  and 
inefficacious  will  of  God. 

This  distinction  would  also  be  admissible,  if  by  the  efficacious  will 
were  meant  that  of  the  decree,  and  by  the  inefficacious,  that  of  the 
precept.  But,  as  introduced,  both  terms  are  applied  to  the  will  of 
the  decree.  Turretine  objects  to  this  application,  in  the  first  place, 
"because  the  scripture  testifies,  that  the  purpose  of  God  is  immutable, 
and  His  will  cannot  be  resisted.  Isa  46\10.  Rom.  9:19;  but  if  it 
cannot  be  resisted,  He  will  surely  perfect  that  which  He  intends; 
secondly,  inefficacious  will  cannot  be  attributed  to  God,  unless  He 
be  accused  either  of  ignorance,  because  He  knew  not  that  the  event 
would  not  occur,  or  of  impotence,  because  He  could  not  accomplish 
the  result  He  purposed;  finally,  the  same  reasons  which  proves 
that  antecedent,  and  consequent  will  are  not  allowable,  are  also 
proofs  against  efficacious,  and  inefficacious." 

(3.)  The  third  of  the  incorrect  distinctions  is  that  of  absolute  and 
conditional. 

If,  by  the  conditional  will,  were  meant  the  conditions  appended 
to  the  preceptive  will  of  God,  in  the  promises,  and  threats,  given 
as  inducements  to  duty,  it  would  not  be  objected  to.     But  the  object, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  126 

of  those,  who  present  it,  is  to  apply  it  to  the  decretive  will,  and  to 
suppose  that  God,  in  His  purposes,  determines,  on  certain  conditions, 
that  He  will  do  a  certain  act,  which  He  will  not  do  if  those  con- 
ditions fail.  Whether  these  conditions  shall  fail,  or  not,  is  supposed 
to  be  unknown  to  God,  or,  if  known,  yet  at  least,  so  far  undeter- 
mined, that  He  has  formed  no  purpose  whether,  or  not,  to  permit, 
or  to  accomplish  them.  The  purposes  of  God,  thus  formed,  are  not, 
therefore,  absolute  decrees,  as  are  all  those  concerning  what  shall 
actually,  and  absolutely  take  place,  but  are  only  conditional  ones, 
based  upon  some  antecedent  condition,  which  must  first  occur. 
•  This  distinction  is  introduced,  chiefly,  to  show  how  God  can  make 
an  absolute  decree  about  the  salvation  of  mankind  in  general,  and, 
yet,  not  about  that  of  any  one  man  in  particular.  Absolutely  He 
decress  the  salvation  in  general  of  all  who  believe.  But  the  sal- 
vation of  each  one  is  decreed,  only  upon  the  condition  that  He  be- 
lieves. Whether  that  faith  will  be  exercised  by  any  one,  is  not 
determined  by  God.  Nor  so  far  as  any  purpose  made  by  Him  is 
it  even  known  to  God." 

Such  is  the  theory  and  purpose  of  this  distinction.  The  objec- 
tions presented  against  the  other  two  of  these  incorrect  distinctions 
are  also  justly  made  against  it. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  128 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XIII. 


The  Decrees  of  God. 

The  decrees  of  God  may  be  defined,  as  that  just,  wise,  and  holy 
purpose,  or  plan,  by  which  eternally  and  within  Himself,  He  deter- 
mines all  things  whatsoever,  that  come  to  pass. 

I.  This  purpose,  or  plan,  is  just,  wise,  and  holy.  Since  it  is  formed 
by  God,  it  must  have  this  character.  His  nature  forbids  that  any- 
thing otherwise  shall  proceed  from  Him.  Though  that,  which  He 
permits,  may  be  unrighteous,  or  foolish,  or  sinful,  these  characteristics 
belong  to  it  because  of  others,  while  His  will,  purpose,  or  plan,  con- 
tinues just,  wise,  and  holy. 

It  is  needful,  that  this  fact  be  always  remembered. 

1.  Because,  on  account  of  the  ignorance  of  man,  there  must  be 
much  in  connection  with  this  matter,  which  cannot  be  comprehended; 
because,  (1.)  man's  finite  knowledge  cannot  compass  the  nature,  and 
mode,  and  reasons  of  the  will,  and  action,  of  the  infinite  God,  (2.)  be- 
cause of  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  free  agency,  and  responsibil- 
ity of  man,  with  the  preexistent  knowledge,  and  purpose  of  God,  and 
(3.)  because  of  the  perplexities,  which  arise  from  the  existence  of  sin, 
in  a  world  planned,  created,  and  governed  by  a  holy,  all  wise,  and  al- 
mighty God. 

2.  The  same  fact  should- also  not  be  forgotten,  because  of  the  na- 
tural corruption  of  the  human  heart,  which  makes  it  (1.)  revolt  against 
the  sovereignty  of  God,  (2.)  seek  refuge  from  the  condemnation  justly 
due  to  sin,  and  (3.)  endeavour  to  find  excuses  for  continuance  therein. 

It  is  our  duty,  therefore,  (1.)  to  seek  to  learn  all  the  facts  made 
known  by  reason,  and  revelation,  (2.)  to  accept  them,  (3.)  to  recognize 
them  as  the  testimony  of  God,   (4.)   to   admit  that  our  knowledge  is 


129  Abstract  of  Theology. 

still  imperfect,  (5.)  to  believe  that  further  imformation,  will  still  fur- 
ther remove  the  difficulties,  (6.)  to  refuse  on  their  account  to  reject 
what  God  has  actually  taught,  and  (7.)  amid  all,  to  believe  that,  what- 
ever that  teaching  is,  it  must  accord  with  justice,  wisdom,  and  holy 
perfection,  because  it  is  God  of  whom  these  things  are  affirmed. 

II.  These  decrees  are  properly  defined,   to   be   God's  purpose,  or 
plan. 

The  term  "decree"  is  liable  to  some  misapprehension,  and  objection, 
because  it  conveys  the  idea  of  an  edict,  or  of  some  compulsory  deter- 
mination. "Purpose"  has  been  suggested,  as  a  better  word.  "Plan" 
will  sometimes  be  still  more  suitable.  The  mere  use  of  these  words  will 
remove,  from  many,  some  difficulties,  and  prejudices,  which  make  them 
unwilling  to  accept  this  doctrine.  They  perceive  that,  in  the  creation 
preservation,  and  government  of  the  world,  God  must  have  had  a  plan, 
and,  that  that  plan  must  have  been  just,  wise,  and  holy,  tending  both 
to  His  own  glory,  and  the  happiness  of  His  creatures.  They  recog- 
nize that  a  man,  who  has  no  purpose,  nor  aim,  especially  in  important 
matters,  and  who  cannot,  or  does  not,  devise  the  means  by  which  to 
carry  out  his  purpose,  is  without  wisdom,  and  capacity,  and.  unworthy 
of  his  nature.  Consequently,  they  readily  believe,  and  admit,  that 
the  more  comprehensive,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  more  definite,  is 
the  plan  of  God,  the  more  worthy  is  it  of  infinite  wisdom.  Indeed 
they  are  compelled  to  the  conclusion,  that  God  cannot  be  what  He  is, 
without  forming  such  a  purpose,  or  plan. 

III.  Any  such  plan,  or  purpose  of  God,  must  have  been  formed 
eternally,  and  within  Himself. 

1.  It  must  have  been  eternally  purposed,  because  God's  only  mode 
of  existence,  as  has  been  heretofore  proved,  is  eternal,  and  therefore 
His  thoughts,  and  purpose,  and  plan,  must  be  eternal.  The  fact  also, 
that  His  knowledge  is  infinite,  and  cannot  be  increased,  forbids  the 
forming  of  plans  in  time,  which,  as  they  become  known  to  Him,  would 
add  to  that  knowledge.  It  is  also,  to  be  remembered,  that  the  plan 
must  precede  its  execution,  but,  as  time  began  with  that  execution,  the 
plan  could  not  have   been  formed  in  time,  and  must  be  eternal. 

2.  In  like  manner  also  was  it  formed  within  Himself.  He  needed 
not  to  go  without  Himself,  either  for  the  impulse  which  led  to  it,  or  the 
knowledge  in  which  it  was  conceived.  He  had  all  knowledge,  both 
of  the  actual,  and  the  possible,  all  wisdom  as  to  the  best  end,  and 
means,  all  power  to  execute  what  He  devised,   in   the  use,  or  without 


Abstract  of  Theology.  130 

the  use  of  appropriate  secondary  means,  and  free  will  to  select,  of  all 
possible  plans,  and  means,  whatever  He  Himself  should  please,  and 
the  impulse  which  moved  Him,  existed  alone  in  that  knowledge  and 
will. 

IV.  By  this  plan,  or  purpose,  God  determined  all  things,  which  it 
included. 

This  is  manifestly  true,  even  if  all  things  whatsover  were  not  thus 
embraced. 

To  say  the  least,  all  the  parts  of  it,  as  well  as  the  whole,  were  known 
to  Him.  But  this  knowledge,  apart  from  any  decree,  determines,  marks 
out,  and  fixes,  the  nature,  limits,  time,  sequence,  and  relation  to  each 
other,  of  the  whole,  and  of  all  the  parts.  Things  which  are  known  by 
God  as  future,  must  certainly  be  future.  A  determination,  or  decree 
to  bring  them  to  pass,  and  even  their  actual  existence,  does  not  make 
them  more  certain. 

But,  whence  is  God's  knowledge  of  the  futurity  of  any  events,  ex- 
cept from  the  knowledge  of  His  purpose,  to  cause,  or  permit  them 
to  come  to  pass  ?  The  knowledge  of  the  futurity  of  any  event,  over 
which  any  one  has  absolute  control,  is  the  result  of  his  purpose,  not 
its  cause.  And,  as  God  has  such  absolute  control  over  all  things, 
His  knowledge  that  they  will  be,  must  proceed  from  His  purpose 
that  they  shall -be.  It  cannot  be  from  mere  perception  of  their 
nature,  for  He  gives  that  nature,  and  in  determining  to  give  it, 
determines  what  it  shall  be,  and  thus  determines  the  effects  which 
that  nature  will  cause.  Nor  is  it  from  mere  knowledge  of  the  mutual 
relations  which  will  be  sustained  by  outward  events,  or  beings,  for, 
it  is  He,  that  establishes  these  relations  for  the  accomplishment  of 
His  own  purposes.  To  say  that  this  nature,  and  these  relations  are 
from  God,  and  are  not  from  His  purpose,  is  in  the  highest  degree 
fatalistic,  for  it  would  involve  that  they  originate  in  some  necessity 
of  the  nature  of  God,  because  of  which  He  must  give  them  exist- 
ence without  so  willing,  and  even  against  His  will.  In  this  way 
alone  could  God  be  said  to  know,  and  yet  not  to  purpose  them. 
His  knowledge  would  arise  from  knowledge  of  His  nature,  and  of 
what  that  nature  compels  Him  to  do,  and  not  from  knowledge  of 
His  purpose,  and  of  His  will  involved  in  that  purpose.  This,  and 
this  alone,  would  make  equally  certain,  and  known  what  will  come 
to  pass,  without  basing  that  knowledge  upon  His  purpose  ;  but  it 
would  not  only  be  destructive  of  His  free  agency,  and  will,  but, 
from  the  nature  of  necessity,  would  make  the  outward  events  eter- 


131  Abstract  of  Theology. 

nal,  and  prevent  the  existence  of  time,  and  the  relation  to  it  of  all 
things  whatever. 

V.  This  plan,  or  purpose,  includes  all  things  whatsoever  that 
come  to  pass;  not  some  things,  but  all  things;  not  all  things  in 
general,  but  each  thing  in  particular. 

So  interwoven  are  all  these  things,  that  the  lack  of  purpose,  as  to 
any  one,  would  involve  the  same  lack  as  to  multitudes  of  others,  in- 
deed as  to  every  other  connected  in  the  slightest  degree  with  the  one 
not  purposed. 

This  is  evidently  true  as  to  all  subsequent,  events;  but  it  is  equally  so 
as  to  those  that  are  antecedent,  for  these,  thus  connected,  antecedent 
events  have  been  established  with  efficient  causative  power,  to  all 
their  effects.  God  knows  the  existence  of  this  power;  He  has  in  fact 
ordained  and  bestowed  it.  He  knows  also  what  will  be  its  effects. 
With  this. knowledge,  God  must,  therefore,  either  allow  them  to  act, 
because  He  purposes  that  the  result  shall  follow,  or  He  must  hinder, 
or  restrain,  or  accelerate,  their  action  because  He  would  change  the 
effect.  In  each  case  He  purposes,  in  the  one  to  effect,  in  the  other  to 
permit,  and  His  purpose  thus  extends  to  all  things.  Any  limita- 
tion of  His  purpose  involves  limitation  of  His  knowledge,  and  this 
cannot  be  true  of  the  omniscient  God. 

To  such  an  extent  is  the  force  of  this  realized,  that  it  is  admitted 
by  all,  that,  in  the  mechanical  universe,  and  even  in  the  control  of 
the  lower  animals,  this  is  true.  But  the  free  agency  of  man,  and 
of  other  rational  and  moral  agents,  is  supposed  to  prevent  God's  pur- 
posing, or  willing,  all  things  with  reference  to  them.  It  is  said  to  take 
away  that  free  agency,  and  consequent  responsibility. 

The  Scriptures  recognize  both  the  sovereignty  of  God;  and  the  free 
agency,  and  accountability  of  man.  Consciousness  assures  us  of  the 
latter.  The  nature  of  God,  as  has  just  been  shown,  proves  the  former. 
The  Bible  makes  no  attempt  to  reconcile  the  two.  Paul  even  declines 
to  discuss  the  subject,  saying,  "Nay  but  oh  man  who  are  thou,  that 
repliest  against  God."  Rom.  9:20.  The  two  facts  are  plainly  revealed. 
They  cannot  be  contradictory,  they  must  be  reconcilable.  That  we 
cannot  point  out  the  harmony  between  them  is  a  proof,  only  of  our 
ignorance,  and  limited  capacity,  and  not  that  both  are  not  true.  It  is 
certain,  however,  that,  whatever  influences  God  exercises,  or  permits,  to 
secure  the  fulfilment  of  His  purposes,  He  always  acts  in  accordance 
with  the  nature,  and  especially  with  the  laws  of  mind  He  has  bestowed 


Abstract  of  Theology.  132 

upon  man.  It  is  equally  true,  that  His  action  is  in  full  accord  with 
that  justice,  and  benevolence,  which  are  such  essential  attributes  of 
God  Himself. 

Acting,  however,  upon  the  belief  that  the  purpose  of  God,  accom- 
plishing His  will  in  His  rational  creatures,  is  inconsistent  with  their 
free  agency,  several  classes  of  theologians  have  presented  theories  in 
opposition  to  the  scriptural  doctrine  of  decrees  above  set  forth. 

1.  The  most  objectionable  theory  is  that  of  the  Socinians,  who 
deny  that  God  can  know  what  a  free  agent  will  choose,  or  do,  before 
He  acts,  or  wills.  They  maintain  that  the  will  is,  at  the  moment  of  its 
choice,  in  such  perfect  equilibrium,  that  there  are  no  tendencies  in  any 
direction  which  prevent  an  absolute  freedom  of  choice.  No  knowledge, 
therefore,  of  the  will  itself,  nor  of  the  circumstances  which  surround 
its  action,  will  enable  any  one  to  say,  before  it  is  exercised,  what  will 
be  its  choice.  Its  act,  therefore,  is  entirely  undetermined  and  inde- 
terminable, until  the  free  agent  wills.  It  cannot  even  be  known,  be- 
forehand, by  God  Himself. 

The  objections  to  this  theory  are  obvious. 

(1.)  It  is  based  upon  a  wrong  conception  of  the  nature  oi  free 
agency;  for  it  supposes  each  act  of  the  will  to  be  an  arbitrary  choice. 
But  such  arbitrary  choice  is  not  found  even  in  God.  As  regards  man, 
we  know,  from  consciousness,  and  experience,  that  His  will  is  in- 
fluenced by  motives.  Indeed,  so  truly  is  it  governed  by  the  nature 
of  the  man,  and  the  attendant  influences,  that,  even  we  can  predict 
his  will,  and  action  in  many  cases,  and  only  fail  to  do  so  perfectly 
in  all  because  of  our  limited  knowledge.  The  omniscient  God  can- 
not fail  to  know  everything  that  affects  the  decision,  and  therefore, 
what  the  decision  will  be. 

(2.)  This  theory  is  also  opposed  to  the  independence  of  God.  It 
supposes  Him  to  have  made  beings  of  such  a  nature,  that  His  own 
actions,  and  will,  must  depend  upon  theirs,  and  that  He  must  await 
their  decision,  wherever  it  will  have  any  influential  bearing  on  any- 
thing future,  before  He  can  know,  or  purpose  what  He  Himself  will  do. 

(3.)  It  is  also  manifest,  from  what  has  been  said  under  the  first  ob- 
jection, that  this  theory  is  opposed  to  the  omniscience  of  God.  It  ex- 
pressly puts  a  limitation,  upon  that  omniscience,  by  declaring  that 
He  is  limited  in  His  knowledge,  at  least  so  far  as  not  to  know  before- 
hand the  decision  of  the  will  of  His  creatures.  But  ignorance  of  this 
would  also  involve  ignorance  of  all  things  in  the  future,  with  which 
it  may  be  connected.  This  would,  in  a  world  inhabited  by  free  agents, 
constitute  no  small  part  of  all  that  will  Occur. 


133  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(4.)  It  is  opposed  to  the  instances,  mentioned  in  Scripture,  of  the 
prediction  beforehand  by  God,  even  of  the  bad  actions  of  certain  men. 
See  as  to  Pharaoh,  Ex.  7:3,4.  Hazael,  2  Kings  8=13.  Judas,  Matt. 
26:21.     Peter,  Matt.  26:34.  &c,  &c. 

(5.)  It  is  opposed  to  the  power  of  forming  habits,  which  is  a  mat- 
ter of  universal  experience.  Such  habits,  when  known,  constitute  a 
source  of  information,  upon  which,  to  some  degree,  reliance  can  be 
placed  in  foretelling  what  any  man  will  do.  A  perfect  knowledge  of 
his  habits,  as  well  as  of  all  else  that  influences,  would  secure  infallible 
prediction  of  the  choice.  God  has  this  perfect  knowledge,  and  if  He 
cannot  foreknow  the  decision,  it  must  be  because  it  is  not  true  that 
habits  can  be  formed  which  according  to  the  law  of  habit  will  influ- 
ence, and  control. 

2.  Another  theory  has  been  advanced  by  some  Arminians,  who 
maintain  that  God  does  not  know  the  free  actions  of  men,  not  because 
He  cannot  know  them,  but  because  He  chooses  not  to  do  so. 

(1.)  The  first  objection  to  this  theory  is,  that,  were  it  true,  it  would 
not  give  greater  freedom  to  the  will,  than  does  the  orthodox  statement. 

Though  this  theory  honours  God  more,  it  is  inferior  to  the  former, 
with  respect  to  the  object  for  which  it  is  introduced.  If  it  could  be 
true,  that  so  indeterminate  is  the  future  will  of  a  free  agent,  that  even 
God  cannot  know  it,  then  that  future  will  would  certainly  be  entirely 
under  the  control  of  the  free  agent,  and  He  would,  to  the  utmost  ex- 
treme, be  free.  His  will  would  be  in  absolute  equilibrium  in  the  act  of 
choosing.  Neither  would  any  motive  exist  to  influence  that  choice. 
It  would  be  thoroughly  arbitrary. 

But  the  second  theory  has  not  this  advantage,  for  it  does  not  sup- 
pose this  condition  of  equilibrium.  In  claiming,  that  God  does  not 
choose  to  know,  what  He  might  know  if  He  should  so  choose,  it  ad- 
mits that  there  are  the  same  surrounding  circumstances,  and  condi- 
tions, and  the  same  prevailing  motive,  through  foresight  of  which  God 
could  know  if  He  should  so  will.  But,  if  this  be  true,  there  can 
be  no  state  of  equilibrium.  The  certainty  of  what  will  occur  is  as 
much  fixed,  as  though  known  to  God.  It  is  not  His  knowledge  of 
these  things,  and  of  their  certain  result  in  the  act  of  the  will,  that 
makes  it  certain  what  it  will  be.  It  is  the  fact,  that  these  things 
are  such  as  they  are,  which  makes  it  possible  for  Him  to  know 
them.  If  He  barely  determines  to  permit,  what  His  knowledge 
perceives  will  surely  take  place,  the  event  is  not  made  any  more 
certain    by    that   knowledge,    than    it    was  before.     Unquestionably, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  134 

therefore,  so  far  as  the  permissive  decrees  of  God  are  involved  this 
theory  has  no  advantage  over  the  Scripture  one. 

The  same  fact  is  true  as  to  God's  effective  decrees,  for  the  fact,  that 
God  does  not  choose  to  know  the  result,  does  not  prevent  His  introduc- 
tion of  active  influences  towards  that  result.  Because  a  man  does  not 
know  the  decision  which  a  judge  will  make  in  a  case  in  court,  and 
does  not  choose,  because  of  the  impropriety  of  so  doing,  to  ascertain, 
from  the  judge,  what  will  be  his  decision,  he  does  not,  therefore,  re- 
frain from  using  all  proper  arguments  to  influence  the  judge.  There 
can  be  no  reason  why  God,  in  ignorance  of  what  will  be  the  decision, 
could  not  exert  every  influence  which  would  be  possible,  if  that  de- 
cision were  known  to  Him.  He  could  only  exert  such  influences  as, 
under  the  circumstances,  would  be  just,  and  right.  He  could  do  this 
only  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  His  creatures,  in  strict  conform- 
ity to  the  laws  of  the  human  mind.  Therefore,  it  may  be  affirmed,  as 
true,  that,  even  under  His  efficient  decrees,  when  He  knows  the  result, 
His  creatures  are  left  as  free  as  they  could  be,  were  it  unknown  to 
Him. 

(2.)  The  chief  objection,  to  this  theory,  is,  that  it  is  based  upon  a 
wrong  conception  of  the  relation  of  the  will  of  God  to  His  nature. 
That  will  does  not  confer  the  attributes  of  His  nature,  dor  does  it 
control  them,  but  is  itself  influenced  by  them.  God  knows  all  things, 
not  because  He  wills  to  know  them,  but,  because,  from  His  nature,  Tie 
has  infinite  knowledge,  knowledge  of  all  things  possible,-  and  knowl- 
edge of  all  things  certain.  If,  by  His  will,  He  could  refrain  from 
knowing,  He  would  change  His  nature.  As  well  speak  of  a  man  not 
choosing  to  see,  with  his  eyes  open,  the  objects  presented  to  his  sight, 
as  of  God  not  choosing  to  know  anything,  whether  that  be  only  some- 
thing which  is  possible,  or  something  which  in  any  way  has  been  made 
certain.  % 

3.  There  is,  beside  the  theories  already  referred  to,  the  ordinary 
Arminian  theory.  This  is,  that  God  know  all  things  that  will  come 
to  pass,  but  does  not  decree  all,  but  only  some  of  them.  The  decisions 
of  free  agents  are  among  those  things  which  He  is  supposed  not  to 
decree. 

(1.)  The  manifest  objection  to  this  theory  is,  that  it  does  not 
accord  with  the  statements  of  the  Bible,  fhis  will  be  subsequently 
shown,  by  the  passages  of  Scripture  which  will  be  advanced,  in  proof 
of  the  various  points  involved  in  the  ordinary  Calvinistic  theory. 


135  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(2.)  But  a  second  objection  will  be  found  in  the  fact  that  this 
theory  does  not  thus  secure  that  freedom  from  certainty,  in  the  decis- 
ions of  free  agents,  which  is  the  great  reason  of  the  objections  to  the 
decrees  of  God  concerning  them. 

If,  by  decreeing  such  decisions,  is  meant  effectively  causing  them, 
it  is  true  that  God  does  not  decree  all  things ;  for,  while  he  effectually 
causes  some,  He  only  permissively  decrees  others.  Hence  the  objec- 
tion to  the  word  "decree,"  and  the  previous  suggestion  of  the  words 
"purpose"  or  "plan." 

But,  if  God  knows  that  any  event  will  occur,  and  can  prevent  it, 
and  does  not,  it  is  evident  that  He  purposes  that  it  shall  exist,  and 
makes  it  a  part  of  his  plan. 

His  knowledge  of  the  futurity  of  any  event,  makes  it  as  certain  as 
any  purpose  he  could  form  effectively  to  cause  it.  That  knowledge  is 
perfect,  and  infallible.  What  He  knows  will  come  to  pass,  must 
necessarily  take  place.  Otherwise,  He  would  know  a  thing  as  future, 
which  will  not  be  future.  His  knowledge  of  it  would  be  false.  He 
would  be  Himself  deceived.  To  suppose  then,  that  He  knows  it  as 
certain,  when  it  is  not  certain,  is  to  deny  His  infinite  knowledge,  and 
to  reduce  this  theory  to  the  plane  of  one,  or  the  other,  of  those  pre- 
viously mentioned. 

(3.)  Neither  does  this  theory  accomplish  another  object  ior  which 
it  is  introduced,  namely,  to  secure  such  a  relation  of  God  to  the  free  act 
of  man  as  shall  take  away  the  influence  upon  it  exerted  by  His  decree. 

His  decree,  to  permit  it,  is  as  hidden  from  His  creatures  as  His 
knowledge  that  they  will  so  act,  and  can  have  no  other  influence 
upon  them  than  that  knowledge. 

The  only  apparent  advantage  is  that  God  is  supposed  thus  not 
to  interfere  with  their  free  agency,  so  as  to  destroy  their  account- 
ability. But  we  have  seen  that,  so  far  as  the  permissive  decree 
is  concerned,  the  knowledge  of  the  event  is  as  effective  in  making 
it  certain,  and  in  influencing  the  free  agent,  as  would  be  any  decree, 
purpose,  or  plan  of  God.  It  is  only,  when  the  decree  is  effective,  and 
introduces  means  for  its  accomplishment,  that  the  free  agency  is 
affected.  In  this  case,  God  does  not  destroy  the  free  agency,  although 
He  exerts  an  influence  towards  the  result.  But,  that  God  does  thus 
act  sometimes,  as  in  His  gracious  influences  upon  men,  is  held  as  firmly 
by  Arminians,  as  Calvinists.  In  all  such  gracious  acts,  both  parties 
claim  that  He  acts  both  mercifully  and  justly.  Calvinists  extend 
these  acts  no  farther  than  do  Arminians,  for  they  deny,  as  streneously 


Abstract  of  Theology.  136 

as  others,  that  God  acts  effectively,  to  lead  men  to  wicked  decisions, 
and  acts.  So  far  as  the  nature  of  God's  actions  upon  free  agents  is 
concerned,  both  parties  agree.  But  the  Arminian  theory,  in  asserting 
foreknowledge  without  purpose,  and  in  alleging  that  the  foreknowl- 
edge is  all  that  there  is  in  God,  is  contrary  to  the  relations  of  God's  will 
to  His  knowledge;  as  well  as  to  the  statements  of  Scripture,  about  the 
decrees  of  God;  while  it  leaves  the  event  equally  certain,  supposes 
fully  as  much  influence  over  the  will  of  the  creature,  and  has  equal 
difficulty  in  reconciling  the  free  agency,  and  consequent  responsibility* 
with  the  inevitable  certainty  of  the  event. 

The  chief  difficulty,  connected  with  the  doctrine  of  decrees,  arises 
from  the  existence  of  sin.  According  to  that  doctrine,  sin  has  not 
accidentally  occurred,  nor  was  it  simply  foreknown,  but  it  was  a  part 
of  the  plan  and  purpose  of  God,  that  it  should  exist.  The  difficulty 
is  freely  admitted.  In  this  respect,  the  dispensation  of  God  is  sur- 
rounded with  "clouds  and  darkness." 

The  following  statements,  however,  may  be  made  : 

(1.)  That,  its  being  a  part  of  the  purpose\  or  plan  of  God,  renders 
its  presence  no  more  difficult  of  explanation  than  that  He  should  have 
foreknown  its  appearance,  and  not  exerted  His  unquestioned  power  to 
prevent  it. 

(2.)  That,  amid  all  the  darkness,  we  can  yet  see  that  God  is  so 
overruling  sin,  as  to  cause  it  greatly  to  redound  to  His  glory,  and  the 
happiness  of  His  creatures. 

(3.)  That,  even  without  any  explanation  of  it,  we  can  rest  in  our 
knowledge  of  the  justice,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God. 

(4.)  That  we  cannot  see  how  its  possible  entrance  into  the 
world  could  have  been  prevented,  consistently  with  the  creation  of 
beings  with  moral  natures,  endowed  wTith  free  will,  necessarily  fallible, 
because  mere  creatures,  who  were  to  be  tried  upon  any  method  of 
probation;  while  the  right,  thus  to  put  on  probation,  without  such  in- 
fluence as  would  make  His  creatures  certainly  persevere  in  holiness,  is 
one  which  none  could  justly  deny  to  God.  But,  that  which  God  could 
possibly  (under  any  contingency,)  permit,  cannot,  if  it  has  actual 
existence,  militate  against  His  pure  and  holy  character. 

The  Scriptural  authority  for  the  doctrine  of  decrees  will  appear 
from  the  following  statements  and  references,  gathered  from  Hodge's 
Outlines,  pp.  205-213 : 


137  Abstract  of  Theology, 

1.  God's  decrees  are  eternal.  Acts  15:18;  Eph,  1:4;  .3:11; 
1  Pet,  1:20;  2  Thess.  2=13  ;  2  Tim.  1=9;   1  Cor.  2=7. 

2.  They  are  immutable.     Ps.  33=11 ;  Isa.  46:9. 

3.  They  comprehend  all  events. 

(1.)  The  Scriptures  assert  this  of  the  whole  system  in  general, 
embraced  in  the  divine  decrees.     Eph.  1:11 ;  Acts  17:26  ;  Dan.  4=34,35. 

(2.)  They  affirm  the  same  of  fortuitous  events.  Prov.  16=33 ; 
Matt.  10:29,30. 

(3.)     Also  of  the  free  actions  of  men.     Eph.  2:10,11;  Phil.  2:13. 

(4.)     Even  the  wicked  actions  of  men.     Acts  2:23 :  4=27,28;  13=29; 

1  Pet.  2:8  ;  Jude.  4;  Rev.  17=17.  As  to  the  history  of  Joseph,  com- 
pare Gen.  37:28,  with  Gen.  45=7.8,  and  Gen.  50:20.  See  also  Ps.  17:13,14- 
Isa.  10:5.15. 

4.  The  decrees  of  God  are  not  conditional.  Isa.  14:24,27  ;  46=10  : 
Ps.  33:11:   Prov.  19=21  ;  Rom.  9=11;  Eph.  3:11. 

5.  They  are  sovereign.  Isa,  40=13,14 :  Dan.  4:35  ;  Rom.  9:11,15-18  ; 
Eph.  1:5.11:  Matt.  11:25,26. 

6.  They  include  the  means.     2  Thess.  2:13  ;   1  Pet.  1:2,  Eph.  1:4. 

7.  They  determine  the  free  actions  of  men.  Acts  4:27,28  ;  Eph. 
2=10. 

8.  God  Himself  works,  in  His  people,  that  faith,  and  obedience 
which  are  called  the  conditions  of  salvation.     Phil.  2:13;  Eph.  2=8; 

2  Tim.  2=25. 

9.  The  decree  renders  the  event  certain.  Luke  18:31-33  ;  24:46  : 
Acts  2:23  ;   13:29;   1  Cor.  11:19  ;   Matt,  16:21. 

10.  While  God  has  decreed  the  free  acts  of  men,  the  actors  have 
been  none  the  less  responsible.     Gen.  50:20  ;  Acts  2:23 ;  3=18  ;  4:27,28. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  138 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XIV. 


THE  TRINITY. 

The  Scripture  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  set  forth,  in  the  abstract  of 
principles  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Theological  Seminary,  in  these  words: 

"God  is  revealed  to  us  as  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  each,  with 
distinct  personal  attributes;  but  without  division  of  nature,  essence,  or 
being."     Art.  III. 

The  peculiarity  of  this  definition  is,  that  it  is  a  mere  statement  of 
the  scriptural  facts  revealed,  while,  at.  the  same  time,  it  includes 
every  point  involved  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  as  held  by  ortho- 
dox christians  of  all  ages.  There  is  no  addition  to  the  Scripture  facts, 
but  the  complete  exhibition,  which  these  words  make  of  the  doctrine, 
shows  that  it  has  been  correctly  formulated  from  what  God  has  Him- 
self revealed.  .  As  He  alone  can  know,  and  reveal  what  He  is,  so  we 
must  accept  His  statements,  however  mysterious,  and  incomprehen- 
sible may  be  His  revelation. 

This  definition  suggests  to  us  a  method  of  treatment,  by  which,  in 
the  utmost  simplicity,  and  scripturalness,  the  whole  truth,  on  this  im- 
portant subject,  may  be  attained. 

I.  The  Relation  of  Father,  and  Son. 

God  is  revealed  to  us  as  the  Father;  not  merely,  in  the  general  way 
in  which  He  is  called  the  Father  of  all  created  beings,  and  they  His 
sons ;  nor  in  that,  in  which  He  is  the  Father  of  those  who  are  His 
sons,  in  virtue  of  the  adoption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus;  but  the  Father, 


139  Abstract  of  Theology. 

as  indicative  of  a  special  relation,  between  Him,  and  another  person, 
Christ  Jesus,  whom  the  Scriptures  call  His  only  begotten  Son.  There 
are  several  classes  of  Scripture  passages  which  reveal  this. 

1.  That  class  in  which,  in  recognition  of  this  relation,  Christ  ad- 
dresses God,  as  "Father."  Matt,  11:25.26;  Mark  14=36;  Luke  10:21; 
22:42;  23:34.36.46.  John  12:27.28 ;  17:1.5.11.24.25. 

2.  That  class,  in  which  Christ  speaks  of  Him  as  peculiarly  His  Fa- 
ther. The  expression  "our  Father"  is  never  used  by  Him,  except  in 
the  Lord's  prayer  wThen  He  is  teaching  the  disciples  how  to  pray. 
Matt.  10=32.33;  15=13;  16:17;  18:10.19;  20=23;  24:36;  25:34;  26:29. 
39.42.53.  Luke  2:49;  22=29;  24:49;  John  5:17.30.43;  6:32.65;  8:19. 
28.38.49.54;  10:17.18.25  29.30.32.37;  12:26;  14:7.12.20.21.23.28;  15:1. 
8.10.15.23;   16.10;  18:11;  20=17.21.     £ev.  2:27;  3=5. 

In  Ephesians  3:14.  Paul  calls  God,   "the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

Christ."    ' 

3.  That  class,  in  which  the  Father  is  spoken  of  as  sending,  and  as 
giving  the  Son. 

This  does  not  include  the  many  passages,  in  which  Christ  is  said  to 
be  sent,  but  only  those,  in  which  He  is  referred  to  as  sent  by  the 
Father.  John  3116.17;  5=37;  6=37-40.57;  8=16-20;  10:36;  John 
11=41.42;   12=45.49;   14:24;   17=18;  20=21. 

4.  A  fourth  class  represents  the  Father  as  knowing,  and  loving 
the  Son.         Matt.  11=27;     Lake  10=22:     John  3:35;  5:20. 

5.  There  is,  also,  a  class  in  which  Christ,  and  the  Father,  are  said 
to  be  co-workers,  or  in  which  the  works  of  Christ  are  claimed  to  be 
the  Father's  witness  to  Him.     John  5=17;  10=25.32.36.37.57. 

6.  That  class,  in  which  the  Father  is  said  to  put  special  honour  on 
the  Son.     John  3=35;  5=23.25.26.27. 

7.  There  is  yet  another  class,  in  which  peculiarity  of  relation  is 
shown  by  such  terms,  as 

(1.)  "My  beloved  Son;"  the  language  is  very  strong,  and  em- 
phatic, "my  Son,  the  beloved."  Matt,  3:17;  17:5.  Mark.  1:11. 
Luke  3:22;  2.  Pet,  1.17. 

(2.)     "Only  begotten  Son."  John  1:14.18;  3:16.18;   1.  John  4-9. 

(3.)  "His  own  son."  Rom.  8=32.  In  connection  with  this,  it  should 
be  remembered  that,  in  John  5:18,   the   charge,  made  against  Christ 


Abstract  of  Theology.  140 

by  the  Jews,  was  that  He   "called  God  His  own  Father  making  him- 
self equal  with  God."     [See  Canterbury  Revision.] 

8.  The  statements,  that  the  Son  alone  has  seen,  and  knowTn,  and 
revealed  the  Father,  also  show  peculiarity  of  this  relationship.  John 
1:18;  14:6-11;   17:25.26, 

9.  The  same  peculiarity  is  shown  by  the  manner  in  which  Christ 
speaks  of  the  works  He  does,  by  virtue  of  it.  See  His  Sabbath  day 
discourse  after  curing  the  man  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda.  John  5:19-32. 
36.37;     also,  John  14:10.11. 

II.     This  Father  is  God. 

The  relation,  pointed  out  above,  is  one  borne  by  Christ,  to  the  Su- 
preme God.  It  is  He,  whom  the  Scriptures  call  God,  in  the  true  sense 
of  that  word,  to  whom  Christ  is  said,  by  them,  to  be  Son  to  the  Father. 

1.  There  are  the  passages,  which  expressly  call  Christ  Son  of  God. 
All  are  here  omitted  where  the  name  is  given  by  devils,  or  by  the 
Centurion,  or  in  any  other  way  in  which  the  authority  of  inspired 
teaching  may  not  be  claimed  for  its  use. 

Mark  1:1;  Luke  1=35;  John  5:25;  John  10:36;  John  11:27;  Acts 
3:13;  9:20;     Gal.  4:4;     2.  Cor.  110;     1.  John  4:15;  5:5.20.21. 

2.  There  are  other  passages  in  which  the  epithet  "God"  is  ascribed 
to  the  Father  in  this  relationship. 

John  1:18;  3:16.17;  5: 18;  Acts  3:13.26;  Rom.  1=1.3.4;  8:31.32; 
2.  Pet.  1:17;     1.  John  4=9.10;     2.  John  3. 

III.     This  Son  is  God. 

1.  He  is  expressly  called  God.  It  is  not  denied  that  this  epithet, 
like  that  of  Lord  is  applied  in  an  inferior  sense  to  others.  The  mere 
use  of  these  titles,  would  not  prove  that  the  one,  to  whom  they  are 
attributed,  has  the  divine  nature.  But  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
applied  to  Christ,  and  the  frequency  of  that  application,  become,  along 
with  the  other  evidences  presented,  an  incontestable  proof,  that  He, 
as  well  as  the  Father,  is  true  God.  If  they  were  not  ascribed  to  Christ 
in  the  Scriptures,  their  absence  would  be  conspicuous,  and  well  fitted 
to  cast  doubt  on  the  other  evidence.  Matt.  1:23;  John  LI;  20:28; 
Rom.  9:5;     Titus  L3;   Heb.   1:8. 


141  Abstract  of  Theology. 

In  the  above  are  omitted,  as,  on  various  grounds,  doubtful;  Acts 
20=28;  1.  Tim.  3:16;  and  1.  John  5.20.  An  exegetical  study  of  these 
passages  will  show,  that  they  strongly  corroborate  the  doctrine  that 
Christ  is  God. 

2.  Christ  is  also  called  Lord.  This  title  is  used  in  both  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments  still  more  generally,  than  is  that  of  God.  But 
the  difference  of  its  application  is  very  manifest.  An  examination  of 
the  texts,  here  quoted  will  show  that,  in  a  peculiar  sense,  one  only 
suited  to  Christ  as  God,  is  it  applied' to  him.  Matt.  12:8;  22:41-45, 
Mark  2:28;  Luke  6=46;  2141-44;  John  13=13;  Acts  10:36;  Rom.  14=9; 
1.  Cor.  2=8;  Gal.  1:3;  6=18;  Phil.  2:11;  2.  Thess.  2:16;.  2.  John  3; 
Rev.  17  14;  19=13.16. 

3.  He  is  a  peculiar  object  of  worship.  The  worship  paid  to  him 
is,  not  merely  that  reverential  respect  offered  to  kings,  and  others  in 
authority,  but  such  worship  as  was  refused  by  the  Apostles  with' 
horror,  because  they  were  mere  men,  (Acts  14:13-15),  and  against 
which,  as  paid  to  him,  even  the  mighty  angel  (Revelation  19:10;  22=9,) 
earnestly  protested.  All  doubtful  cases  of  worship  are  here  omitted, 
even  that  of  the  wise  men,  (Matt  2:2.11,)  in  which  perhaps  divine 
worship  was  paid.     Matt.  14:33;    Luke  24:52;    Acts  7:59.60;    2.  Cor. 

'12:8.9;  Phil.  2:10;  Heb.  1:6;  2.  Pet.  3=18;  Rev.  5=8-13;  7=9.10. 

4.  He  is  to  be  honoured  equally  with  the  Father.  John  5:23; 
Eph.  2=10.11. 

5.  His  relations  to  the  Father  are  those  of  identity,  and  unity. 
John  1:18;  5=17-19;  8:16.19.20;  10:30;  12=44.45;  14:7-11;  15:24;  Heb. 
1:3;    Col.  1:15.19;  2=9;    1.  John  2=23.24;    2.  John  9. 

6.  They  are  equally  known  to  each  other,  and  unknown  to  all 
others.     Matt.  11=27;     Luke  10=22;     John  1=18;  6=46;  10=15. 

7.  He  is  the  creator  of  all  things.  John  1=3.10;  1.  Cor.  8:6; 
Eph.  3=9;    Col.  1;16;    Heb.  1:10;    Rev.  3=14. 

8.  He  upholds,  and  preserves  all    things.     Col.  1:17;    Heb.    1:3; 

9.  He  is  the  manifestation  ot  the  Divine  Being  in  this  world. 
John  1:10.14;  14=9;   16:28-30;    Col.   1:15;   1,  John  1:2;     1.  Tim.  3:16. 

10.  He  is  greater  than  all  others;  greater  than  Moses,  and  David, 
and  Solomon,  and  Jonah,  and  the  Baptist,  and  not  greater  than  man 
only,  but  than  all  the  spiritual  intelligences  of  the  universe.  Matt; 
3:11;  12:41.42;  Mark  12:37;  Luke  11:81.32;  John  1:17;  Eph.  1:21; 
Phil.  2:9;     Heb.  1:4.5;  3:3.     1.  Pet.  3=22. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  142 

11.     He  is  the  source  of  all  spiritual  blessing. 

(a.)  He  gives  the  Holy  Spirit.  Luke  2449;  John  16:7;  20:22; 
Acts  2:53. 

(b.)  He  forgives  sins.  Mark  2:5.6.7.10;  Luke  5:20.21;  747-49; 
Acts  5:31. 

(c.)  He  gives  peculiar  peace.  John  14:27;  16:33.  Is  not  he  the 
one  who  is  called  "God  of  peace".  Eom.  15:33;  16:20;  2  Cor.  13:11; 
Phil.  4:9;    1.  Thess.  5:23;     Heb:  13:20. 

(d.)  He  gives  light.  John  1:4.7.8.9;  8:12;  9:5;  12:35.46;  1.  John 
1.5-7;     Rev.  21:23;  22:5. 

(e.)     He  gives  faith.     Luke  17:5;     Heb.  12:2. 

(f.)     He  gives  eternal  life.     John  17:2. 

(g.)    He  confers  all  the  spiritual  gifts  bestowed  upon  His  churches. 
Eph.  4:8-13. 
•  12.     All  the  incommunicable  attributes  of  God  are  ascribed  to  him. 

(a.)  Self  existence.  He  has  power  over  His  own  life,  John  2:19; 
10:17.18.     He  has  life  in  himself,  as  has  the  Father.     John  5:26. 

(b.)  Eternity  of  existence.  John  1:1.2;  17:5.24;  Heb.  1:8.10-12; 
1.  John  1:2. 

(c.)  Omniscience.  Matt.  9:4;  12:25;  Mark  2:8;  Luke  6:8;  9:47; 
10:22;  20:23;  John  1:48;  2:24.25;  10:15;  16:30;  21:17;  Col.  2:3; 
Rev.  2:23. 

(d.)     Omnipresence.     Matt.  18:20;  28:20;    John  3:13;    Eph.  1:23. 

(e.)  Omnipotence.  Matt.  28:18;  Luke  21:15;  John  1:3;  10:18; 
1.  Cor.  1:24;    Eph.  1:22;     Phil.   3:21;   Col.  2:10;     Rev.    1:18. 

(f.)     Immutability.     Heb.   1:11.12;   13:8. 

13.  The  judgment  of  the  world  is  entrusted  to  him.  Matt.  7:32; 
16:27;  24:30;  25:31;  John  5:22.27;  Acts  10:42;  17:31;  Rom.  2:16; 
14:10;    2.  Cor.  5:10;    2.  Tim.  4:1;    Rev.  1 :7;  22:12. 

14.  Absolute  equality  with  the  Father  is  ascribed  to  Him.  This 
shows  that  the  unity,  and  identity,  before  referred  to,  is  not  one  of 
will,  but  of  nature,  and,  that  the  names,  and  worship,  and  attributes 
of  God,  are  not  bestowed  on  any  other  ground,  than  that  He  is  true 
God. 

(a.)     Equality  in  works.     John  5:17-23. 

(b.)     Equality  in  knowledge.     Luke  10:22;    John  10:15. 

(c.)  Equality  in  nature.  John  5:18;  10:32;  Phil.  2:6;  Col.  2:9; 
Heb.  1:3. 


143  Abstract  of  Theology. 

It  will  be  seen,  by  the  foregoing  statements,  that  the  Scriptures 
distinctly  teach  the  existence  of  God  in  the  personal  relations  of  Father, 
and  Son,  and  that  each  of  them  is  God.  No  reference  has  been  made' 
to  the  Old  Testament,  in  proof  of  the  divinity  of  Christ.  The  new 
Testament  is  the  most  natural  source  of  such  instruction,  because  it 
reveals  to  us  the  fulfilment  of  God's  purpose  in  sending  His  Son  into 
the  world,  and  teaches  us  clearly  his  nature,  and  relation,  to  the 
Father.  What  the  nature  of  this  relation,  of  Son,  and  Father,  is,  will 
be  hereafter  examined,  in  the  discussion  of  the  eternal  Sonship  of 
Christ.  What  the  Old  Testament  says  of  Christ,  will  also  be  pre- 
sented in  connection  with  his  Messiahship. 

There  remains,  however,  to  be  shown  that 

IV.     The  Father  and  Son  have  Distinct  Personal 
Attributes. 

This  fact  is  so  manifest,  from  the  manner  in  which  the  Scripture 
speaks  of  each,  as  to  need  but  brief  discussion. 

The  mere  use  of  the  names,  Father  and  Son,  points  out  a  relation 
between  two  persons.  That  to  each  of  them  is  ascribed  the  attributes  of 
character,  such  as  love,  hate,  goodness,  mercy,  truth  and  justice,  which 
can  only  exist  in,  and  be  exercised  by  persons,  shows  separate  person- 
ality. Especially  is  this  personality  seen  in  the  distinction  between 
the  will  of  the  Father,  and  that  of  the  Son,  which  is  set  forth  in  such 
passages,  as  Matt.  26:39.42;  Mark.  14:36;  Luke  22:42;  John  4;34; 
and  5:30.  Neither,  except  through  distinct  personal  relation,  can 
mutual  love  be  said  to  be  exercised,  as  by  Christ  to  the  Father.  John 
14:31;  and  by  the  Father  to  Christ,-  John  3;35;  5:20;  10;17;  14:31; 
17:24.  Manifestly,  also,  there  must  be  two  persons,  when  one  is  said 
to  send,  and  another  to  be  sent,  one  to  give,  and  another  to  be  given, 
one  to  teach,  and  another  to  be  taught,  one  to  show,  and  another  to 
be  shown,  one  to  receive  power,  and  another  to  bestow  it,  one  to  be 
declared,  as  to  another,  to  be  "the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  His  person,"  and,  that  being  in  the  form  of  that  other, 
he  "counted  it  not  a  prize  to  be  on  an  equality  with  God."  Phil.  2:6. 
[Canterbury  Revision.] 

We  have  here,  therefore,  not  the  one  God,  manifesting  Himself, 
sometimes  as  Father,  and  sometimes  as  Son,  but  a  distinction  of  per- 
sons in  the  Godhead,  in  which  we  are  taught  that,  in  that  Godhead. 


Abstract  ©f  Theology.  144 

there  exists  a  personal  relation  of  Father  to  Son,   and   Son  to  Father, 
with  the  distinct  individuality,  and  personality  of  each. 

V.     The  Holy  Spirit  a  Person. 

The  Scriptures  designate,  by  se-veral  very  similar  terms,  the  third 
form  of  personality  revealed  in  the  Godhead.  He  is  called  "the  Spirit" 
"the  Spirit  of  God,''  "the  Holy  Spirit,"  "my  Spirit,"  "the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord,"  the  Spirit  of  Christ,"  "thy  good  spirit."  "the  Spirit  of 
glory,"  '-the  Spirit  of  grace,  "the  Spirit  of  knowledge,  and  under- 
standing, the  Spirit  of  counsel,  and  might,  the  spirit  of  knowledge, 
and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  "the  holy  Spirit  of  promise,"  "the 
Spirit  of  truth,"  and  "the  Spirit  of  wisdom."  Christ  also  called  Him 
"the  Comforter,"  and  "another  Comforter." 

The  divine  Spirit,  thus  denominated,  must  either,  be  some  power,  or 
influence,  exerted  by  God,  or  a  distinct  person  in  the  Godhead.  It 
cannot  be  simply  the  spiritual  part  of  God,  as  is  the  spirit  in  man,  for 
God  is  not  compounded  of  spirit,  and  body.  This  is  manifest  from  His 
immateriality.  Neither  can  it  be  in  any  way  a  part  of  His  spiritual 
nature,  as  sometimes  a  distinction  is  made,  in  man,  between  his  mind, 
and  spirit,  or  his  soul,  and  spirit.  The  perfect  simplicity  of  God, 
which  forbids  all  composition,  makes  this  impossible.  It  is,  therefore, 
either  God  Himself  exercising  some  power,  or  influence,  or  a  person 
in  the  Godhead.  An  examination  of  the  Scripture  shows  that  it  is 
the  latter, 

1.  The  evidences  of  personal  action  show,  that  the  Spirit  is  not 
merely  a  power,  or  influence  from  God,  but  is  either  God  Himself  or 
a  divine  person. 

(1.)  The  Scriptures  speak  of  the  Spirit  in  a  state  of  activity.  Gen. 
1:2;  Matt.  3:16;  Acts  8:39.  The  language  in  these  passages  may  be 
anthropomorphic,  but  the  state  of  activity  taught  is  undoubtedly  real. 

(2.)  They  declare  that  the  Spirit  teaches,  and  gives  instruction. 
Luke  12:12;     John  14:26;  16:8.13.14;     Acts  10:19;     1.  Cor.  12:3. 

(3.)  The  Spirit  is  also  spoken  of,  by  them,  as  a  witness  of  Christ  to 
his  people.     John  15:26. 

(4.)  They  also  assert,  ihzj,  He  witnesses  to  them,  that  they  are  the 
children  of  God.     Rom.  8:16;    2.  Cor.  1:22;  5:5;    Eph.  1:13.14;  4:30. 

(5.)     He  is  spoken  of  as  leading  the  sons  of  God.     Rom.  8:14. 

(6.)  He  is  also  said  to  dwell  within  them,  in  such  a  way,  that  His 
presence  is  that  of  God.  John  14:16.17;  Rom.  8:9.11;  1.  Cor.  3:16.17; 
6:19. 


145  Abstract  of  •Theology. 

(7.)     We  are  taught  that  He  is  grieved.     Eph.  4:30. 

(8.)     Ananias  is,  charged  with  having  lied  co  Him,     Acts.  5:3. 

(9.)  Blasphemy  against  Him  is  the  unpardonable  sin.  Matt. 
12:31.32. 

(10.)     He  is  spoken  of  as  resisted  by  men.     Acts  7:51. 

(11.)     Also  as  vexed  by  them.      Isa  63:10. 

(12.)     As  striving  with  them.     Gen.  6:3;     Isa  63;10;     Acts.  7:51. 

(13.)     As  inspiring  men.     Acts  2:4;  8-29;  13;2;  15:28;    2.  Pet.  121. 

(14.)     As  interceding  for  them.     Eom.  8:26.27. 

(15.)     As  bestowing  diversities  of  gifts.     1.  Cor.   12:4-10. 

In  all  these  cases  there  is  personal  activity,  thought,  and  feeling. 
What  is  thus  declared,  cannot  be  true  of  a  mere  power,  or  influence. 
The  only  question  can  be,  whether  this  person  is  God,  distinct  from  any 
plurality  of  personal  relations,  or  whether  He  is  another  personality 
in  the  divine  nature. 

2.  The  Scriptures  show  that  He  is  a  separate  person  from  the  Fa- 
ther, and  the  Son. 

(1.)  It  is  stated  that  He  proceeds  from  the  Father.  John  1526. 
A  personal  being,  proceeding  from  a  person,  cannot  be  that  person 
himself.  The  proofs,  above  given,  therefore,  of  His  personal  action, 
and  emotion,  show,  that  this  Spirit  is  another  person. 

(2.)  He  is  given,  or  sent  by  the  Father,  Luke  40:13;  John  14:16.26; 
Acts  532,  and  by  the  Son,  John  15 26;  16:7;  Acts  233.  He  that  is 
sent  cannot  be  identical  with  Him,  that  sends. 

(3.)  He  is  called  the  Spirit  of  the  Father.  Eph.  3:16,  and  also 
the  Spirit  of  the  Son.     Rom.  8:9;    Gal.  46,  perhaps  also  2.  Thess.  2^8. 

(4.)  The  Son  is  said  to  send  the  Spirit  from  the  Father.  John 
15-26,  and  God  is  said  to  send  the  Spirit  of  the  Son,     Gal.  4-6. 

(5.)  The  Spirit  is  distinguished  from  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  in 
passages  which  directly  connect  them  with  each  other.  Matt.  316.17; 
28:19;  John  1126;  15:26;  1613;  Acts.  2:33;  Eph.  218;  1.  Cor. 
121-6;  2.  Cor.   13:14;  1.   Pet,  1;2. 

(6.)  The  personality  of  the  Spirit,  is  also  ably  argued  from  "the  use 
of  the  personal  pronouns  in  relation  to  Him",  by  Dr.  Charles  Hodge 
Sys.  Theol.  Vol.  1,  p.  524.  Not  only  are  personal  pronouns  used  by 
the  Spirit,  and  of  the  Spirit,  but  there  is  a  departure  from  gramma- 
tical rule,  in  the  use  of  a  masculine  pronoun  in  connection  with  a 
neuter  noun,  unless  the  masculine  is  warranted  by  the  fact,  that  a 
person  is  referred  to  who  may  be  called  "He." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  *  146 

VI.     The  Holy  Spirit  is  God. 

So  completely  do  the  Scriptures  identify  the  Spirit  with  the  Su- 
preme God,  that  the  fact  of  His  personality  having  been  established, 
His  essential  divinity  will  at  once  be  admitted.  In  the  discussion  of 
the  Trinity,  therefore,  the  point  of  necessary  proof,  as  to  the  Spirit,  is 
His  personality,  while,  that,  as  to  the  Son,  is  His  divinity.  The 
abundant  proof  of  the  divinity  of  the  Spirit  is  found, 

1.  In  the  passages  which  call  Him  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord,  as  well  as  those  in  which  God  calls  Him  "my  Spirit". 
These  are  conclusive,  in  like  manner,  as  is  the  divinity  of  Christ  from 
those  which  call  Him  the  Son  of  God.  The  titles  "Spirit  of  God,"  and 
"Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  are  each  used  about  twenty-five  times  in  the 
Bible.  "My  Spirit"  is  used  in  reference  to  God's  Spirit  in  Gen.  6:3; 
Prov.  1:23;  Isa  44:3;  59:2L;  Ezek.  36=27;  39:29;  Joel  2:28;  Haggai2:5; 
Zech.  4:6;  Matt.  12=18;  Acts  2:17.18. 

2.  The  writers  of  the  New  Testament  declare  that  certain  things, 
which  in  the  Old  Testament  are  ascribed  to  Jehovah,  were  said  by  the 
Spirit.  Compare  Acts  28=25-27,  and  Heb.  3=7-9,  with  Isaiah  6:9,  and 
also,  Heb.  9=8,  with  Ex.  25=1,  and  30=10. 

3.  The  sacred  writers  of  the  Old  Testament  were  the  messengers 
of  God,  and  spake  for  Him,  yet  the  influence,  by  which  they  became 
such,  is  called  in  the  New  Testament  the  Holy  Ghost.  Compare  Luke 
1=70  with  2.  Peter  1=21;  2.  Tim.  3=16,  and  Heb.  1=1  with  1.  Pet.  1=11: 
also,  Jer.  31:31.33.34,  with  Heb.  10=15-17. 

4.  The  creation  of  the  world  is  ascribed  to  the  Spirit.  Gen.  1:2; 
Job  26=13;  Ps.  104:30. 

5.  He  is  said  to  search,  and  know  even  the  deep  things  of  God. 
1.  Cor.  2=10. 

6.  He  is  spoken  of  as  omnipresent.  Ps.  139=7-10,  and  omniscient. 
Ps.  139=11;  1.  Cor.  2:10. 

7.  The  divinity  of  the  Spirit  is  peculiarly  proved  by  His  influen- 
ces over  Christ.  It  having  been  shown,  that  Christ,  the  Son,  is  God. 
the  connection  of  the  Spirit  of  God  with  Christ,  though  it  were  only 
in  His  human  nature,  is  a  convincing  proof  that  the  Spirit,  which  is 
not  a  mere  power  of  God,  but  a  person  as  we  have  seen  above,  must  be 
also  God. 

(1.)     In  His  birth.     Matt.  1:18.20;  Luke  1:31-35. 
(2.)     Mental  and  spiritual  influences,  from  the  Spirit,  were  predic- 
ted.    Isa  11:2,  and  Isaiah  61:1. 


147  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(a.)  And  these  were  fulfilled,  at  His  baptism.  Matt.  3:16;  John 
1:33. 

(b.)  At  the  time  of  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness.  Matt.  4:1; 
Mark  1:12. 

(c.)     In  His  preaching.     Luke  4:14.18-21. 

(d.)     In  His  casting  out  devils.     Matt.  12:28. 

(3.)     This  spiritual  influence  was  without  measure.     John  3:34. 

(4.)  By  the  Spirit,  also,  was  Christ  "quickened  after  He  was  put  to 
death  in  the  flesh."     1.  Pet.  3:18. 

8.  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  in  the  people  of  God,  is  said  to 
make  them  the  temple  of  God.  Compare  1.  Cor.  3:16,  and  6:19  with 
2.  Cor.  6=16,  and  Eph.  2:22. 

9.  The  Spirit  is  expressly  called  God,  in  connection  with  the  false- 
hood of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.     Acts.  5:3.4.9. 

VII.     The  Three  Revealed  Distinctly. 

The  scriptural  proofs  of  the  personality,  and  divinity  of  the  Father, 
Sou,  and  Holy  Spirit,  having  now  been  considered,  it  is  proper  to  no- 
tice a  few  passages  of  Scripture,  in  which  the  Three  are  revealed  dis- 
tinctly, by  being  mentioned,  or  manifested  together. 

1.  At  the  baptism  of  Christ  are  seen  the  Son  who  has  just  been 
baptized,  and  the  Spirit  ot  God  descending  like  a  dove,"  while  from 
heaven  above,  and  therefore,  from  the  Father,  and  not  from  the  Spirit, 
who  is  thus  manifested  distinctly  from  the  Father,  is  heard  "a  voice," 
"saying,  this  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 

2.  An  equally  plain  distinction  is  set  forth,  in  the  language  of 
Christ,  Matt.  28:19,  in  which  He  commanded  baptism  to  be  performed 
"in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
This  act  of  baptism  is  such  as  to  involve  the  divinity,  as  well  as  the 
personality  of  the  Three;  for  it  is  an  act  of  worship,  such  as  can  be 
paid  to  God  only;  it  is  a  profession  of  faith  in  God,  and  His  righteous- 
ness, which  can  be  due  to  God  only;  and  it  is  a  pledge  of  fealty,  such 
as  God  has  plainly  taught  He  will  share  with  no  other.     • 

3.  In  our  Lord's  last  discourse,  He  promises  to  send  "the  Com- 
forter," "which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,"  "from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit 
of  truth  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father."  Here  the  Son  sends, 
the  Spirit  is  sent,  and  the  Spirit  proceeds  from  the  Father.  He  is 
also  referred  to  as  one  "whom  the  Father  will  send  in  my  name.''  See 
John  14:26,  and  15:26. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  148 

4.  The  apostle  Paul  evidently  refers  to  this  same  Three,  when  He 
writes  to  the  Corinthians  of  "the  same  Spirit,"  "the  same  Lord,"  and 
"the  same  God."     1.  Cor.  12:1-6. 

5.  The  benediction,  with  which  Paul  closes  his  second  epistle  to 
the  Corinthians,  also  presents  unitedly,  yet  separately,  the  same  Three; 
certain  blessings  are  invoked,  but  with  no  apparent  distinction  of  rank 
among  those  of  whom  they  are  asked.  If  there  be  any  prominence, 
it  is  given  the  rather  to  the  Son,  than  the  Father. 

VIII.     These  Three  are  one  God. 

Our  definition  states,  that  these  Three  are  revealed  as  without  divi- 
sion of  nature,  essence,  or  being.  It  is  not  intended  to  indicate,  by  the 
use  of  these  three  words,  any  wide  distinction  between  them.  They 
are  nearly  alike.  Yet  some  distinction  exists.  By  nature  is  meant,  that 
peculiar  character  of  being,  which  makes  one  kind  of  being  to  differ 
from  another.  Thus  we  speak  of  the  divine  nature,  or  the  angelic 
nature,  or  the  human  nature,  or  the  brute  nature,  meaning  that  pecu- 
liarity of  life,  and  character,  and  personal  condition,  which  makes  a 
God,  or  an  angel,  or  a  man,  or  a  brute.  By  essence  is  meant,  that 
peculiarity,  in  the  nature  itself,  which  constitutes  what  is  necessary 
to  its  existence,  so  that  we  cannot  say,  in  the  absence  of  that  essence, 
that  such  a  nature  exists.  Take  away  from  human  nature  that 
which  is  its  essential  quality,  and  it  must  cease  to  be  human  nature. 
Being  is  the  essence  of  any  nature  becoming  actually  existent  in  that 
nature.  In  God  nature,  and  essence,  must  be  identical;  because  every 
thing,  in  the  nature  of  God,  is  necessary  to  His  existence,  and  conse- 
quently, the  nature  can  neither  be  greater,  nor  less  than  the  essence; 
indeed  they  must  be  the  same.  .  Neither  can  being  be  separated  from 
the  nature,  and  essence  of  God,  though  it  is  not  identical  with  them. 
The  necessity  of  His  actual  existence  is  something  inherent  in  His 
nature.  There  could  be  no  such  nature  without  necessarily  involving 
the  existence  of  some  person,  or  persons  in  it. 

When  it  is  affirmed,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  "division  of  nature, 
essence,  or  being,"  all  that  is  meant,  is  simply  that  there  is  but 
one  God;  that  such  is  the  divine  nature  that  it  cannot  be  multi- 
plied, or  divided,  or  distributed,  any  more  than  God  can  be  thus 
divided  in  His  omnipresence  with  all  things.  The  divine  nature 
is  so  possessed,  by  each  of  the  person's  in  the  Trinity,  that  neither 
has  His  own  separate  divine  nature,  but  each  subsists  in  one  divine 


149  Abstract  of  Theology. 

nature,  common  to  the  three.  Otherwise  the  three  persons  would  be 
three  Gods.  So  also,  in  that  divine  nature,  its  esssential  quality  is 
not  divided  in  its  relation,  through  the  nature,  to  the  persons.  Were 
this  so,  there  would  be  three  separate  parts  of  the  divine  nature. 
But  that  this  cannot  be  is  manifest  from  the  identity  in- God  of 
nature,  and  essence.  That  it  is  not  so,  is  declared  by  the  Scrip- 
tures, when  they  teach,  that  there  is  but  one  God.  In  God  there 
is  also  but  one  divine  being,  because  there  is  but  one  divine  essence, 
and  nature.  There  is  but  one  that  can  have  actuality  of  existence. 
The  being  of  person,  not  being  identical  with  that  of  nature,  a  fact 
wThich  is  true  of  all  natures,  created,  or  uncreated,  the  unity  of  the 
nature,  and  of  the  essence  does  not  forbid  plurality  of  persons.  The 
threeness  of  the  persons,  therefore,  does  not  destroy  the  unity  of 
the  nature,  or  essence,  and  consequently,  not  that  of  the  being  of 
God. 


The  Scriptures  teach  everywhere  the  unity  of  God  explicitly, 
and  emphatically.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  reveal  a  God 
that  is  exclusively  one.  But  their  other  statements,  which  we  have 
been  examining,  should  assure  us  that  they  also  teach  that  there 
are  three  divine  Persons.  It  is  this  peculiar  two-fold  teaching, 
which  is  expressed  by  the  word  ''Trinity."  The  revelation,  to  us, 
is  not  that  of  Tritheism,  or  Three  Gods;  nor  of  Triplicity,  which  is  three- 
foldness,  and  would  involve  composition,  and  be  contrary  to  the 
simplicity  of  God;  nor  of  mere  manifestation  of  one  person  in  three 
forms,  which  is  opposed  to  the  revealed  individuality  of  the  per- 
sons; but  it  is  well  expressed  by  the  word  Trinity,  which  is  de- 
clarative, not  simply  of  threeness,  but  ol  three-oneness  [Trinity.] 
That  this  word  is  not  found  in  Scripture  is  no  objection  to  it,  when 
the  doctrine,  expressed  by  it,  is  so  clearly  set  forth. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  •        150 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XV. 


Personal  Relations  in  Trinity. 

The  Scripture  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  as  we  have  seen,  presents 
three  persons  occuping  mutual  relations  to  each  other.  There  conse- 
quently arise  certain  questions  as  to  these  relations.  What  is  their 
nature  ?  What  has  originated  them  ?  When  did  they  begin  ?  In  what 
respects  do  they  differ  from  each  other?  Is  there  perfect  equality  be- 
tween the  persons  ?  If  there  be  any  kind  of  subordination,  in  what 
does  it  consist  ? 

These  questions  will  be  best  answered,  first  by  some  general  state- 
ments applicable  to  all  the  relations;  next  by  special  consideration  of 
the  Sonship  of  Christ,  and  of  the  Procession  of  the  Spirit;  followed  by 
an  examination  of  the  equality,  and  subordination  of  the  Son,  and 
Spirit. 

I.     General  Statements. 

1.  The  nature  of  these  relations,  can  be  indicated  in  no  other  forms 
than  those  set  forth  in  Scripture.  They  are  matters  of  pure  revela- 
tion. The  fact  of  their  existence,  is  beyond  the  attainment  of  reason. 
Nor,  after  the  revelation  of  the  doctrine,  has  that  fact  been  strength- 
ened by  any  philosophical  speculations,  or  its. difficulties  removed  by 
any  arguments,  or  illustrations  from  analogy.  [See  statements  of  some 
of  these  in  Hodge's  Systematic  Theology,  Vol.  1,  pp.  478 — 482.]  We 
are  constrained  to  fall  back  upon  the  simple  Scripture  statements. 
The  only  explanations  of  these,  which  are  justifiable,  are  such  as  arise 
from  recognizing  that,  as  the  persons,   transactions,  and  relations,  are 


151  Abstract  of  Theology. 

divine,  there  must  be  separated  from  them  all  that  belongs  to  human 
conditions,  and  imperfections.  But  this  must  not  lead  us  so  far  as  to 
deny  the  reality  of  these  things,  or  the  existence,  in  the  highest  de- 
gree, of  relations  of  the  nature  indicated,  of  which  our  best  concep- 
tion is  gained  from  the  terms  which  are  used.  Thus  no  physical  gen- 
eration, nor  any  that  could  begin,  or  end,  or  be  measured  by  succes- 
sion, can  be  ascribed  to  the  Divine  Father.  No  dependent  existence, 
nor  previous  lack,  and  subsequent  attainmeut  of  being,  can.  be  true  of 
a  Son  who  is  himself  God.  No  communication,  nor  reception,  of  a 
portion  of  the  divine  essence,  or  nature,  is  possible  between  two  divine 
persons.  If  the  term  "begotten"  is  intended  to  teach  a  communication 
of  the  divine  essence  to  the  Son  by  the  Father,  it  must  be  one  of  the 
whole  essence,  otherwise  there  would  no  longer  be  only  one  God,  one 
Divine  nature,  or  essence.  So  also,  when  the  Spirit" proceeds  from  the 
Father,  there  can  be  no  breathing  out  of  a  part  of  the  Divine  na- 
ture, nor  can  that  breathing  begin,  or  end,  or  exist  in  successive  mo- 
ments of  time.  These  internal  acts  in  God  necessarily  conform  to 
that  eternity,  and  unity,  of  the  nature  of  God,  which  exist  even  in  His 
purposes  towards  all  things  which  are  without.  All  human  imper- 
fections must  be  removed.  But,  this  being  done,  the  Scripture  teach- 
ings must  be  accepted,  with  unquestioning  belief  that  relations,  cor- 
responding to  these  titles,  exist  in  God,  and  that  they,  and  the  causes 
assigned  for  them,  are  duly  expressed  by  the  language  of  His  word. 
2.  These  relations  exist  in  the  nature  of  God.  They  are  not  revela- 
tions to  us  of  what  God  is  not;  but  of  what  He  is.  It  is  because  God 
is  one  in  three  persons,  and  because  the  three  persons  are  one  God, 
that  He  thus  makes  Himself  known  to  us.  Though  it  is  true  that  the 
Father  wills  to  beget  the  Son,  and  the  Father  and  Son  will  to  send 
forth  the  Spirit;  yet  the  will  thus  exercised,  is  not  at  mere  good  plea- 
sure, but  it  results  necessarily  from  the  nature  of  God,  that  the  Father 
should  thus  will  the  begetting,  and  the  Father,  and  the  Son  the  send- 
ing forth.  The  will,  thus  exercised,  is  not  like  that  of  His  purposes,  in 
which  God  acts  of  free  pleasure,  choosing  between  various  purposes 
which  He  might  form;  but,  like  that  by  which  He  necessarily  wills 
His  own  existence.  Otherwise,  these  relations  might,  or  might  not, 
have  existed;  but  if  this  were  possible,  the  Son,  and  the  Spirit,  would 
only  have  been  creatures  of  God,  however  exalted  might  have  been  their 
nature,  or  extraordinary  their  faculties.  Theirs  would  only  have  been 
contingent  existence,  until  made  certain  by  the  will  of  God.  None  of 
the  incommunicable  attributes  of  God  could  have  been  ascribed  to 
them.    In  no  sense  could  they  have  had  self  existence,  or  eternity  of  ex- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  152 

istence,  or  independent  existence,  or  immutability  of  nature.  When, 
therefore,  we  find  the  Scriptures  assigning  such  attributes  to  any  other 
persons  than  the  Father,  we  have  conclusive  evidence  that  the 
divine  nature  of  these  persons  is  perfectly  equal  to  that  of  the  Father; 
and  when  it  is  also  asserted,  that  God  is  but  one,  and  yet  that  each  of 
the  Three  is  God,  we  are  plainly  taught,  that  all  have  the  same  undi- 
vided Divine  essence,  or  nature.  That  of  the  Son,  or  of  the  Spirit,  is 
identical  with  that  of  the  Father.  It  is  not  simply  a  similar  nature, 
but  even  numerically  the  same.  Were  it  otherwise,  there  would  be 
three  Gods.  If,  however,,  this  be  true,  the  relations  belong  to  the  nature 
of  God,  and  are  not  something  superadded  to  that  nature.  The  Simpli- 
city of  God  is  a  proof  of  this.  It  could  only  be  in  a  God  compounded 
of  nature,  and  relations,  that  the  relations  would  not  be  in,  and  of, 
that  nature  itself. 

3.  These  relations  must  also  be  eternal.  The  nature  heing  eter- 
nal, so  also  must  be  the  relations  which  are  in,  and  of  that 
nature.  Moreover,  if  not  eternal,  they  must  have  had  a  begin- 
ning, and  there  must  have  been  a  time  when  they  did  not  exist. 
But  this  argues  changeableness  in  God,  in  virtue  of  which  He,  who 
once  was  one  person  only,  has  now  become  three.  It  is  no  reply 
to  this,  that  the  expressions  "begotten,"  and  "proceedeth  from," 
involve  the  idea  of  the  antecedent  existence  of  Him  who  begets, 
and  from  whom  there  is  procession.  For  these  are  terms  of  human 
language,  applied  to  divine  actions,  and  must  be  understood  suitably 
to  God.  There  is  no  greater  difficulty  here  than  in  other  cases  in 
which  this  principle  is  readily  recognized.  We  cannot  speak  of  the 
eternity  of  the  life  of  God,  without  using  language  which  implies  begin- 
ning, and  succession.  Neither  can  we  think  of  His  eternal  purpose, 
except  as  numerous  determinations  formed,  and  thought  out,  in  succes- 
sive moments,  and  following  upon  God's  infinite  knowledge;  which,  by 
placing  before  Him  all  things  possible,  has  presented  various  objects, 
and  plans  from  which  He  has  chosen.  Nor  yet  can  we  talk  of  His 
presence  divested  of  the  ideas,  and  language  that  belong  to  space,  nor 
conceive  of  His  immensity  without  the  fiction  of  infinite  space.  This 
has  not  been  done  even  by  the  inspired  authors  of  the  Scriptures. 
Dealing,  therefore,  with  the  terms  expressive  of  the  divine  relations, 
it  is  natural,  and  right,  that  we  treat  them  after  the  same  fashion,  and 
divest  them  of  those  ideas  of  time,  and  succession;  which  are  known 
to  have  no  place  in  God.  When  this  is  done,  nothing  forbids  the  belief 
that,  as  these  relations  are  in,  and  of  the  nature  of  God,  they  are 
eternal. 


153  Abstract  of  Theology. 

4.  So  far  as  true  divinity  is  involved,  the  persons  must  be 
absolutely  equal.  As  each  possesses  the  undivided  divine  essence,  so 
neither  can,  as  God,  be  superior,  or  inferior  to  the  others.  No  differ- 
ence in  the  mode,  or  order  of  subsistence  in  that  essence,  can  make  an 
inequality  in  the  divinity  of  either  of  them,  inasmuch  as  that  subsist- 
ence makes  all  of  them  partakers  of  the  same  essence,  undividedly  of 
all  of  it.  Even  if  there  be  inequality,  relative  to  each  other  as  per- 
sons, because  of  the  respective  relations,  this  would  no  more  require 
one  to  be  an  inferior  God  to  the  others,  than  the  Three  separate  per- 
sons make  necessary  such  a  threefold  distinction  in  the  Divine  nature, 
as  to  constitute  them  three  Gods. 

These  general  statements  will  shorten,  and  simplify  the  separate 
discussions  as  to  the  Sonship  of  Christ,  and  the  Procession  of  the  Spirit. 
So  far  as  these  have  elements  in  common,  a  statement,  and  explana- 
tion of  these  points  in  each  case  is  rendered  unnecessary.  They  are 
also  more  plainly  exhibited,  as  to  both  .the  relations,  than  they  could 
be  separately.  Moreover,  we  have  in  them  answers  to  most  of  the 
questions  suggested  at  the  beginning.  The  nature  of  the  relations  is 
perceived  to  be  properly  indicated  by  the  Scripture  language  which 
expresses  them  and  to  be  such  as  belongs  to  the  essence,  and  nature  of 
God.  They  have  originated  in  that  essence,  acting  through  the  Person 
of  the  Father,  and  the  Persons  of  the  Son,  and  the  Father.  The  per- 
fect equality  in  that  divine  nature  has  been  seen.  It  remains  simply 
to  inquire,  in  what  respects  they  differ  from  each  other,  and  whether 
with  the  equality,  relative  to  the  divine  essence,  there  co-exists  any 
inequality  of  Person,  or  any  kind  of  subordination.  These  points  will 
be  appropriately  presented  in  the  separate  discussions  of  the  Sonship 
of  Christ,  and  of  the  Procession  of  the  Spirit,  which  discussions  will, 
also,  throw  still  further  light  upon  the  questions  already  answered. 

II.     The  Eternal  Sonship  of  Christ. 

In  the  previous  lecture  it  was  shown  that  Christ  is  Son  of  God  in 
a  sense  peculiar  to  Himself.  The  Father  called  him,  at  his  baptism, 
"My  beloved  Son";  and  he  is  spoken  of  by  the  sacred  writers  as  God's 
"only  begotten  Son,"  and  "His  own  Son." 

The  Scripture  proofs  were  also  presented,  that  this  Son  is  not  only 
called  "God;"  but  possesses  all  the  incommunicable  attributes  of  God, 
together  with  such  unity,  and  identity  with  the  Father,  as  make 
him  truly  God;  that  He  is  equal  with   the   Father   in   his  works,  and 


Abstract  of  Theology.  154 

knowledge,  and  nature;  and,  that  not  only  to  him.  are  all  the  acts  of 
creation,  providence,  and  judgment  to  be  ascribed,  but  that  he  is  to 
be  honoured,  and  worshipped  equally  with  the  Father,  he  being  in- 
deed the  manifestation  in  the  world,  of  the  Divine  Father,  "the  image 
of  the  invisible  God,"  (Col.  1:15,)  in  whom  "dwelleth  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  bodily,"  (Col.  2:9,)  "being  the  brightness  of  His  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  His  person,"  (Heb.  1:3,)  [the  effulgence  of 
His  glory,  and  the  very  image  of  His  substance.]  [Canterbury  Revi- 
sion.] 

These  proofs  of  this  eternal  Sonship  may  be  strengthened  by  further 
reference  to  Scripture  teaching  both  as  to  the  nature,  and  eternity  of 
the  relation. 

1.  That  the  relation  is  one  of  nature,  is  additionally  shown. 

(a.)  By  passages,  which  declare  that  the  Son  is  so  "from  God," 
and  "in  God"  as  to  have  perfect  knowledge  of  Him.  John  1:18;  7:29; 
16:27-30;  17:25.  He  is  here  spoken  of  as  proceeding  from  God,  not 
merely  being  sent  as  a  messenger.  The  claim  asserted,  is  one  of  inti- 
mate fellowship  in,  and  participation  of,  the  Divine  nature.  It  is  made 
in  the  capacity  of  God's  son.  Consequently  it  betokens  a  Sonship  of 
nature,  not  one  of  mere  office,  or  name. 

(b.)  By  such  passages  as  contrast  the  Divine,  and  human  natures, 
ascribing  the  divine  nature  to  the  Son.     Rom.  1:3.4;  Phil.  2:5-11. 

(c.)  The  divine  nature  of  the  Sonship  is  plainly  taught  by  John  in 
the  1st  chapter  of  his  gospel.  "The  only  begotten  Son,"  which  "is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,"  who  alone  has  "seen  God"  and  "declared  Him," 
v.  18,  is  "the  Word"  that  "was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  men,"  v.  14, 
and  yet,  which  was  not  only  "in  the  beginning,"  but  "was  with  God," 
and  "was  God".  If  the  Word,  and  the  Son  are  identical,  the  divine 
nature,  ascribed  to  the  Word,  is  truly  the  divine  nature  of  the  Son. 

2.  Of  the  eternity  of  this  relation,  we  may  also  find  further  proof. 
(1.)     Christ's  existence  before  birth  in  this  world  is  taught. 

(a.)  In  such  passages  as  show,  that  Christ,  of  His  own  will,  as- 
sumed this  life.     John  6=38;  Phil.  2=7;  Heb.  2=14.16;   10=5.9. 

(b.)  Such  as  show  peculiar  coming  into  the  world.  John  3:13; 
6=33.38.63. 

(c.)  Where  it  is  said,  that  He  had  seen,  and  known  the  Father; 
which  implies  a  previous  state  of  existence.     John  6=46. 

(d.)  Such  passages  as  declare,  that  he,  the  Son,  was  sent  into  the 
world  by  the  Father.      See  p.  139.  3. 


155  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(2.)  His  existence  when  creation  occured,  is  announced  in  John 
1:3.10;   Col  1:16;  Heb.   1:10. 

(3.)  The  Scriptures  also  declare,  that,  he  was  in  the  beginning, 
before  all  things,  when  time  began,  which  was,  therefore,  eternal 
existence.     John  1:1;  17:5.24;  Col.  1:17;  Heb.  1:10. 

(4.)     They  expressly  state  that  it  was  eternal.     1.  John  1-4. 

In  the  general  statements  above,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  rela- 
tions, borne  by  these  two  persons,  are  to  be  learned  only  from  the  Scrip- 
ture revelations,  and  that  these  are  to  be  modified,  in  no  respect, 
except  by  removing  from  them  whatever  is  necessary  to  make  them 
conform  to  divine  transactions.  It  was  also  urged  that  all  the  divine  re- 
lations being  in,  and  of  God,  Who,  with  all  His  plurality  of  person,  is 
but  one  God,  these  relations  are  in  the  same  undivided  divine  essence, 
and,  consequently,  belong  to  the  nature  of  God,  and  must  be  eternal. 

In  applying  these  statements,  and  the  Scripture  proofs,  to  the  rela- 
tion, of  Father  and  Son,  in  God,  we  arrive  at  the  doctrine  commonly 
called  the  Eternal  Sonship  of  Christ. 

By  this  is  meant,  that  Paternity,  and  Filiation  in  God  are,  not  mere 
names  for  something  which  does  not  exist,  nor  for  some  relation,  dif- 
ferent from  that  of  Father,  and  Son,  to  which  these  titles  were  first 
applied  in  connection  with  Christ's  creation,  or  birth,  or  resurrection, 
or  exaltation;  but  are  realities  which  exist  eternally  in  His  nature, 
and  are  as  properly  described  by  the  names  which  express  them  as 
are  His  attributes  by  the  various  terms  of  wisdom,  power,  truth,  jus- 
tice, and  love. 

No  attempt  is  made  by  those  who  accept  this  doctrine  to  state  the 
nature  of  this  generation.  Some  are  even  content  to  suppose  that 
nothing  more  may  be  meant  than  to  express  by  Sonship  what  would 
be  the  result  of  such  a  relation.  As  human  sonship  is  accompanied 
by  earnest  love  between  father  and  son,  as  it  implies  likeness  of 
character,  and  similarity  of  nature;  so  they  have  been  willing  to  rest 
at  this  point,  and  accept  the  divine  Sonship,  as  meaning  no  more  than 
the  existence  of  perfect  likeness,  and  infinite  mutual  love.  .But,  man- 
ifestly, if  nothing  more  than  this  be  meant,  the  Father  might  equally 
be  called  Son,  and  the  Son  Father.  The  Scriptures,  on  the  contrary, 
indicate  that  the  likeness  is  the  result  of  the  relation,  and  not  that 
the  terms  of  the  relation  are  given  because  of  the  likeness.  It  is  not 
the  resemblance  of  Christ  to  the  Father  which  is  set  forth  as  the  rea- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  156 

son  He  is  called  the  Son,  but  it  is  because  He  is  the  Son  that  this 
resemblance  exists; 

But,  even  if  these  titles  could  be  ascribed  because  of  the  likeness, 
we  still  have  to  account  for  the  use  of  the  peculiar  word  "begotten." 
This  is  evidently  intended  to  tell  us  something  ot  a  great  mystery.  It 
proclaims  some  kind  of  activity  in  the  Divine  Father,  and  passivity  in 
the  Son.  We  cannot  tell  what  it  is,  but  it  at  least  resembles,  in  some 
way,  that  impartation  of  nature  which  occurs  in  the  act  of  human 
begetting,  and  conveys  to  us  the,  idea  of  the^  communication  of  the 
essence  of  God  by  the  Father,  through  this  act,  to  the  Son.  The  con- 
tinued unity  of  God  shows  that-  it  is  a  communication  of  the  whole 
essence,  in  which,  however,  the  Father  still  continues  to  subsist, 
while  imparting  to  the  Son  subsistence  also  in  the  same.  Such  im- 
partation must  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  "Eternal  Now",  in  God. 
It  never  began,  it  will  never  end,  it  has  no  succession,  no  past,  and  no 
future.  It  is  the  ever  present,  having  no  reference  even  to  a  past, 
or  to  a  future.  It  is  such  a  generation  as  constitutes  eternal  Son- 
ship,  and  Fatherhood. 

Many  have  rejected  this  doctrine  because  of  misconceptions  as  to 
the  nature  of  an  Eternal  Divine  Sonship. 

1.     They  have  objected  to  the  idea  of  Sonship  itself. 

(1.)  They  have  urged  that  Sonship  implies  inferiority,  and,  there- 
fore, the  Son  cannot  be  truly  God,  equal  with  the  Father. 

But  how  can  we  know  what  is,  and  what  is  not,  possible,  in  this 
matter,  with  God?  If  the  Scriptures  assert  the  Divine  generation, 
and  the  equality  of  the  Son  and  the  Father,  why  should  any  deny 
their  consistency  with  each  other  ? 

After  all,  however,  does  Sonship  imply  inferiority  of  nature?  There 
may  be  subordination  of  rank,  or  office.  But  surely  there  is  none  of 
nature.  Even  human  sonship  results  from  the  impartation  of  the 
same  nature  by  the  father ;  not  the  same  numerically,  but  the  same  in 
kind,  and  degree,  the  same  partitively.  The  son  of  any  man  partakes 
alike,  and  equally,  with  his  father,  in  human  nature.  The  divine 
communication  only  differs,  from  the  human,  in  not  so  dividing  the 
nature  that  two  Gods  result,  as  in  human  generation  do  two  men. 

That  sonship  may  imply  inferiority  of  official  rank,  and  personal 
relation,  is  readily  admitted.  It  does  not  always  do  this.  Such  sub- 
ordination of  person,  indeed,  seems  to  be  taught  of  the  Son  of  God  to 
His  Father.  But  it  is  equality,  and  sameness  of  nature,  not  of  office, 
which  makes  the  Son  truly  God.     He  is  such,  because  He  is  a  true 


157  Abstract  of  Theology. 

subsistence  in  the  Divine  essence,  He  does  not  cease  to  be  such  be- 
cause the  Father  is  officially  greater  than  He,  nor,  even,  because  the 
Father  bestows,  and  the  Son  receives  the  communication  of  the  divine 
essence. 

(2.)  It  has  also  been  objected  that  Sonship  implies  priority  of  ex- 
istence, and  that  this  is  impossible  as  between  two  divine  beings. 
But  this  is  based  upon  a  torgetfalness  of  the  nature  of  eternal  acts. 
Though  we  may  not  be  able  to  explain  how  they  are  so,  we  neverthe- 
less know,  that,  in  such*  acts,  there  is  no  beginning,  nor  end,  no  first, 
no  second,  no  antecedent,  no  consequent,  indeed,  no  succession  of  any 
kind.  Were  it  otherwise,  God  would  exist  in  successive  moments.  He 
would  have  had  a  beginning.  He  would  form  new  purposes,  and 
would  increase  in  knowledge  from  day  to  day. 

Arguing  from  the  nature  of  eternal  acts  in  God,  we,  therefore, 
judge  that  the  Eternal  Generation  of  the  Son  is  not  a  single  act,  which 
was  accomplished  at'a  definite  moment  in  the  divine  nature  ;  but  one 
ever  continuing.  With  God,  there  may  be  such  definitely  completed 
acts,  when  they  are  performed  outside  of  Himself,  as  in  creation ;  but, 
not  when  they  are  purely  within.  Such  an  act  must  be  ever  contin- 
uing, and  completed  only  in  the  sense  of  its  being  always  perfect, 
though  not  ended.  Even  the  expression  "continuing"  is  imperfect  so 
far  as  it  it  involves  the  idea  of  successive  moments  in  God.  It  is 
only  "ever  continuing"  as  viewed  by  man.  Sonship  in  God,  there- 
fore, does  not  imply  priority  of  existence.  Even  in  man  paternity 
and  filiation  are  co-existent.  One  becomes  a  father,  only,  when  an- 
other becomes  his  son.  Priority  of  existence  is  necessary,  as  a  mere 
accident  of  human  birth,  because  of  the  necesssity  of  growth,  and  ma- 
turity in  a  man  before  he  can  become  a  father.  But,  even  here, 
the  sonship,  and  fatherhood,  exist  at  the  same  moment.  In  God, 
however,  priority,  even  of  the  existence  of  one  Person  before  another, 
can  have  no  place,  since  He  is  self-existent,  and  eternal,  Who 
never  began  to  be,  and  Whose  perfect  maturity  is  not  attained  by 
growth,  or  increase. 

(3.)  Again  it  is  said,  "If  Christ  is  Son,  if  He  is  God  of  God,  He  is 
not  self  existent,  and  independent.  But  self  existence,  inde- 
pendence, etc.,  are  attributes  of  the  divine  essence,  and  not  of  one  per- 
son in  distinction  from  the  others.  It  is  the  Triune  God,  who  is  self 
existent,  and  independent.  Subordination,  as  to  the  mode  of  subsist- 
ence, and  operation,  is  a  scriptural  fact;  and  so  also  is  the  perfect, 
and  equal  Godhead  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and,  therefore,  these 
facts  must  be  consistent.     In  the  consubstantial  identity  of  the  human 


Abstract  of  Theology.  158 

soul,  there  is  a  subordination  of  one  faculty  to  another,  and  so,  how- 
ever incomprehensible  to  us,  there  may  be  a  subordination  in  the 
Trinity  consistent  with  the  identity  of  essence  in  the  Godhead." 
Charles  Hodge,  Systematic  Theology,  1.  474. 

2.  There  are  objections,  also  made  to  the  eternity  of  this  relation. 
They  are  based  upon  Scripture  statements,  and  are,  on  that  account, 
even  more  worthy  of  consideration. 

It  is.  well  to  remember,  however,  that  Christ  is  revealed  to  us,  in 
the  Scriptures,  as  one  person  in  two  natures,  by  virtue  of  which  He 
is  frequently  called  the  Theanthropos,  or  Godman.  The  doctrine  of 
his  person  will  be  hereafter  discussed.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  state 
that,  while  the  two  natures  are  distinct,  and  preserve  their  respective 
attributes,  and  qualities,  yet,  because  of  the  one  personality  in  both 
natures,  whatever  belongs  to  the  person  may  be  attributed  to  either 
nature.  Inasmuch  then,  as  the  Sonship  expresses  a  mere  personal  re- 
lation in  the  Godhead,  the  title  Son  of  God  may  be  applied  to  Christ 
in  mere  human  relations.  That  this  is  sometimes  done,  does  not  the«n 
destroy  the  force  of  its  much  more  frequent  application  to  him  in  his 
divine  nature,  and  especially  of  such  an  application,  when  it  is  accom- 
panied by  the  ascription  to  him  of  divine  titles,  attributes,  acts,  and 
worship,  together  with  assertions  of  equality,  identity,  and  unity  with 
the  Father. 

"Bishop  Pearson,  one  of  the  most  strenuous  defenders  of  eternal 
generation,  and  of  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  Nicene  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  gives  four  reasons  why  the  Theanthropos,  or  Godman  is  called 
the  Son  of  God.  (1.)  His  miraculous  conception..  (2.)  The  high 
office  to  which  He  was  designated.  (John  10:34,35.36.)  (3.)  His  re- 
surrection, according  to  one  interpretation  of  Acts  13:33,  "The  grave" 
he  says,  ''is  as  the  womb  of  the  earth;  Christ,  who  is  raised  from 
thence,  is  as  it  were  begotten  to  another  life,  and  God,  who  raised  him, 
is  his  Father."  (4.)  Because  alter  his  resurrection,  he  was  made  the 
heir  of  all  things.  (Heb.  1:2-5.)  Having  assigned  these  reasons,  why 
the  Godman  is  called  Son,  he  goes  on  to  show,  why  the  Logos  is  called 
Son.  There  is  nothing,  therefore*  in  the  passages  cited  inconsistent 
with  the  church  doctrine  of  the  eternal  Sonship  of  our  Lord."  Charles 
Hodge,  Systematic  Theology,  1.  476. 

1.  The  first  objection  to  the  eternity  of  the  Sonship,  is  that  the 
title  "Son"  is  given  because  of  his  birth. 

This  is  based  upon  Luke  1:35.  "And  the  angel  answered,  and  said 
unto  her,  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the 


159  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Highest  shall  overshadow  thee;    therefore  also  that  holy  thing  which 
shall  be  born  of  thee   shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God.'' 

Upon  this  passage  it  may  be  remarked,  as  the  foundation  of  all  just 
interpretation,  that  no  relation  to  the  Holy  Ghost  which  constitutes 
a  personal  relation  in  the  Godhead,  can  refer  to  the  Sonship,  because 
that  is  one  of  Christ  to  the  Father,  and  not  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  Some 
other  reason  then,  than  the  act  of  the  Spirit  in  his  conception,  must 
be  found  for  the  ascription  here  of  the  title  "Son  of  God." 

Again,  it  must  be  recognized,  that  the  title  of  Son  is  not  here  proph- 
esied of  in  connection  with  the  divine  nature  of  our  Lord  but  is 
declared  of  that  "holy  thing  which  shall  be  born/'  which  was  un- 
doubtedly his  human  nature,  or  himself  in  his  human  nature. 

One  interpretation  of  the  passage  affixes  to  the  term  "Power  of  the 
Highest"  a  personal  sense,  explaining  it  as  a  title  of  the  Divine  Logos. 
According  to  this,  it  is  the  overshadowing,  and  permanent  abiding  of 
the  Divine  Son,  in  union  with  the  human  nature  conceived  under  the 
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  will  cause  that  "holy  thing"  to  be 
"called  the  Son  of  God."  Instances  are  quoted  of  the  use  of  'Tower" 
in  a  divine  sense  from  Philo,  and  other  Jewish  writers.  The  early 
Christian  fathers  are  stated  to  have  applied  generally,  the  word  "power" 
to  the  divine  nature  of  Christ,  and  many  of  them  are  quoted  as  main- 
taining this  interpretation  of  this  passage.  Luke  8:10,  and  1  Cor. 
1:24  are  referred  to,  and  the  comparison  of  Luke  11:49  with  Matt. 
23:34  recommended.  [See  Treffry,  on  the  Doctrine  of  the  Eternal  Son- 
ship,  3rd  edition,  pp.  120-133,  and  142-144.] 

If  this  be  the  mterpretation,  then,  it  is  the  coming  of  the  Eternal 
Son  upon  this  human  nature,  and  his  presence  with  it,  that  causes  it 
to  be  called  the  Son  of  God. 

This  is,  therefore,  perfectly  consistent  with  both  the  require- 
ments above,  necessary  to  the  true  interpretation.  The  Spirit  is 
not  associated  with  the  ascription  of  the  title  Son  of  God,  and  that 
title  is  appropriately  given  to  the  human  nature,  and  yet  the  eternity 
of  the  divine  Sonship  is  not  affected.  If  this  use  of  the  word  "Power" 
can  be  fully  verified,  no  valid  objection  can  be  made  to  the  interpre- 
tation.    Treffry  gives  very  strong  proof  that  it  is  so  used. 

If,  however,  we  should  adopt  the  more  generally  received  interpre- 
tation, which  supposes  that  "thepowerof  the  Highest"  is  either  descrip- 
tive of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  of  the  Divine  power   wdiich  accompanied 


Abstract  of  Theology.  160 

His  coming  upon  Mary,  there  will  still  be  no  difficulty  in  ascribing  the 
title  Son  of  God,  to  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  Son,  who  in  his  Divine 
personality  "was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us."  John  .1:14.  Such 
an  explanation  of  the  tide,  would  alone  be  then  consistent  with  his  re- 
lation, both  to  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  text  would  then 
still  teach  that  the  title  Son  of  God  is  to  be  given  to  Christ  as  man, 
in  like  manner  as  that  of  Lord,  because  we  have  not  here  a  mere  hu- 
man person,  but  simply  a  human  nature,  in  which  the  Divine  Person, 
the  Son,  subsists  without  ceasing  also  to  subsist  in  the  Divine  nature. 
As  that  Divine  Person,  and  not  the  Divine  nature,  is  the  Son,  so  also 
the  Divine  Person  in  his  human  nature,  and  not  that  human  nature, 
or  a  mere  man  is  called  Son  of  God.  The  title,  therefore,  though 
given  to  him  as  man,  arises  not  from  his  birth,  but  from  his  Eternal 
Sonship. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is,  therefore,  set  forth  here  merely  as  the  origina- 
tor of  the  human  nature  of  Christ.  That  nature  is  from  God,  not  act- 
ing through  the  divine  essence,  which  is  never  affirmed  of  God  in  any 
of  His  acts,  but  through  a  Person  in  the  Godhead,  according  to  the 
usual  mode  as  revealed  to  us,  and  as  exhibited  in  Creation,  Providence, 
and  Redemption,  and  even  in  the  eternal  acts  within  the  Godhead.  The 
Scriptures  make  known  no  influence,  or  action  of  the  Spirit  on  the 
Son  in  his  Divine  relations.  On  the  contrary,  the  Son  acts  through 
the  Spirit,  but  not  the  Spirit  through  the  Son.  But  the  instances  of 
the  influence  of  the  Spirit  on  the  human  nature  are  abundant.  At 
his  birth,  at  his  baptism,  (Matt.  3=16,)  in  leading  him  to  be  tempted, 
(Matt.  4*4.)  in  the  working  of  his  miracles,  (Matt.  12*28,)  in  his  return 
from  temptation,  "in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee,"  (Luke  4:14,) 
and  in  his  giving  commandments  through  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the 
Apostles,  Acts  1*2.  we  have  express  mention  of  this  influence..  Was  it 
not  to  this  that  the  author  of  Hebrews  referred;  (Heb.  10:5,)?  "a 
body  thou  hast  prepared  me,"  [a  body  didst  thou  prepare  for  me. 
Canterbury  Revision.] 

2.  Again  it  is  objected,  that  Christ  did  not  become  Son  of  God 
until  the  day  of  his  resurrection. 

Two  passages  are  quoted  in  favour  of  this  objection. 

1,  That  in  Rom.  1:4.  "And  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with 
power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead." 


161  Abstract  of  Theology. 

The  word  translated  "declared"  in  this  passage  means  "deter- 
mined" "marked  out  as."  It  has  no  reference  to  a  new  ascription 
of  title.  All  that  is  taught  is  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
plainly,  and  distinctly  evinced,  that  "His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  our 
Lord"  (v  3.)  is  the  "Son  of  God."  Of  this  fact  the  resurrection 
from  the  dead,  of  him  who  had  constantly  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of 
God,  is  an  unquestionable  proof. 

(2.)  The  other  passage  is  Acts  13:32.33.  "And  we  declare  unto 
you  glad  tidings,  how  that  the  promise  that  was  made  unto  the 
fathers,  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their  children,  in  that 
he  hath  raised  up  Jesus  again;  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second 
psalm,  "Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotton  thee." 

Upon  this  objection,  Dr.  Charles  Hodge  says  justly:  "Here  there 
is  no  reference  to  the  resurrection.  The  glad  tidings,  which  the 
Apostle  announced,  was  not  the  resurrection,  but  the  advent  of  the 
Messiah.  That  was  the  promise  made  to  the  fathers,  which  God 
had  fulfilled  by  raising  up,  i.  e.  bringing  into  the  world  the  prom- 
ised deliverer.  Compare  Acts  2:30;  3:22.26;  7=37,  in  all  which 
passages  where  the  same  word  is  used,  the  "raising  up"  refers  to 
the  advent  of  Christ:  as  when  it  is  said,  "A  prophet  shall  the 
Lord  your  God  raise  up  unto  you  of  your  brethren,  like  unto  me." 
The  word  is  never  used  absolutely  in  reference  to  the  resurrection, 
unless,  as  in  Acts  2=32,  where  the  resurrection  is  spoken  of  in  the  con- 
text. Our  translators  have  obscured  the  meaning  by  rendering  it, 
"having  raised  up  again,"  instead  of  simply  "having  raised  up"  as 
they  render  it  elsewhere."     Sys.  Theo.  1.  475. 

The  Canterbury  Revision  has  simply  "raised  up",  omitting  the  word 
"again". 

We  might  then  rest  the  reply  to  this  objection  upon  the  denial  that 
the  Sonship  is  spoken  of  as  given  in  connection  with  the  resurrection. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  might  admit  it  to  be  thus  given,  and  yet 
the  doctrine  of  the  Eternal  Sonship  would  not  be  affected.  For,  so 
long  as  we  may  justly  confine  any  such  declaration  to  the  Theanthro- 
pos,  it  might  still  be  true  that,  to  the  Godman,  the  name  could  thus 
be  given,  and,  yet,  all  the  teachings  of  Scripture  relative  to  the  eter- 
nity, and  nature  of  the  Divine  Sonship  remain  true.  The  truth  is, 
that  the  greater  difficulty  would  be  to  establish  positively  that  the 
title  Son  of  God  ever  was  bestowed  upon  Christ,  in  consequence  of  any 
event  connected  with  his  humanity  than  that  it  is  confined  to  him  in 


Abstract  of  Theology.  162 

his  divine  relations.  At  least,  it  is  manifest  from  the  Scriptures  that, 
if  ever  applied  to  this  Divine  Person  because  of  his  birth,  or  re'surrec- 
tion,  that  was  not  the  first  period  of  such  application,  for  the  title  is 
given  to  him  in  connection  with  the  acts  of  creation,  and  he  is  said  to 
have  been  before  all  things,  their  Creator,  in  whom  they  consist,  who 
laid  the  foundations  of  the  world,  the  existence  of  which  is  perishable, 
while  his  is  eternal. 

3.  A  further  objection  is  made  by  Arians,  and  others  who  deny  the 
proper  divinity  of  Christ,  and  claim  that  he  is  but  a  creature. 
These  assert  that  the  title  Son  of  God  was  given  to  Christ  by  virtue 
of  his  creation.  The  obvious'reply  to  this  objection,  is  to  produce  the 
Scripture  teachings  which  prove  the  true  Deity  of  the  Son,  especially 
such  as  assert,  that  he  is  God  and  Lord,  and  to  be  honoured,  and  wor- 
shipped, and  that  he  performs  all  the  divine  acts  of  Creation,  Provi- 
dence, and  Redemption,  and  has  all  the  incommunicable  attributes  of 
God,  together  with  perfect  equality,  exact  resemblance,  absolute  unity, 
and  sameness  of  nature  with  the  Father. 

The  passage  in  Col.  1:15,  has  been  claimed  in  support  of  this  ob- 
jection; Christ  being  there  called  according  to  the  King  James  Version, 
"the  first  born  of  every  creature."  But  the  true  rendering  is  "the 
first  born  of  all  creation,"  and  it  is  so  translated  in  the  Canterbury 
Revision.  There  is  a  similar  passage  in  Rev.  3:14,  where  Christ  calls 
Himself  "the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."  The  word  translated 
"beginning"  in  this  passage,  means  also  "the  origin."  It  is  also  used 
for  "the  first  place,  or  power,  the  sovereignty."  The  "first  born"  in 
the  former  passage,  is  the  same  word  used  in  Heb.  1:6,  and  there  trans- 
lated "first  begotten."  The  "first  created"  would  have  been  differently 
expressed  in  the  Greek.  The  fact  that  this  is  a  begotten  Son,  and  not 
a  created  being,  and  that  he  is  not  said  to  be  born  at  the  time  of  Crea- 
tion, but  before  it,  actually,  shows  that,  the  eternal  generation  of  the 
Eternal  Son,  which  took  place  before  all  things,  is  here  spoken  of. 
Such  preexistence  is  plainly  taught  in  the  context  of  Hebrews,  but  it 
is  directly  asserted  in  that  of  Colossiatis,  v.  17. 


III.     The  Procession  of  the  Spirit. 

The  relation  of  the  Spirit,  in  the  Godhead,   differs  from  that  of  the 
Son  in  several  respects.      What  is  the  ground,   or  reason  of  this,  it  is 


163  Abstract  of  Theology. 

impossible  to  state.  The  Scriptures  give  no  information  upon  this 
point.  '  We  must  be  content,  therefore,  simply  to  point  out  what  they 
reveal  upon  this  subject. 

1.  An  obvious  distinction  is  made  between  the  names  given  to  the 
two  Persons.  While  the  one  is  called  the  Son;  the  other  is  called 
"the  Spirit,"  and  other  names  of  like  import,  as  stated  p.  145,  V. 
That  these  names  are  indicative  of  some  specific  difference,  may  be 
argued  from  the  fact,  that  they  are  never  interchanged.  The  Spirit  is 
never  called  the  Son,  nor  is  the  Son  ever  called  the  Spirit.  When  it 
is  remembered,  that  these  names  describe  persons  subsisting  in  the  same 
Divine  essence,  this  fact  becomes  very  significant  of  some  peculiar  dis- 
tinction between  them  in  the  mode  of  such  subsistence.  The  word 
"pneuma,"  which  is  the  designation  in  the  Greek  original,  means 
Spirit,  breath,  or  wind,  and  seems  to  indicate  some  influence,  or  power 
which  proceeds  from  God,  not  impersonally,  but  with  a  personal  rela- 
tion in  the  Godhead.  The  work  of  the  Spirit,  in  the  creation,  and 
government  of  the  world,  in  the  inspiration  of  the  sacred  writers,  in 
the  miraculous  conception  of,  and  gracious  influences  upon  the  human 
nature  of  Christ,  and  in  the  regeneration,  and  sanctification  of  the 
people  of  God,  points  Him  out  as  the  outwardly  operating  power  of 
the  Godhead  in  this  world. 

2.  A  distinction  is  also  revealed,  between  these  persons,  as 
to  the  mode  of  action  by  which  they  proceed  from  the  Father. 
The  Son  is  said  to  be  generated,  the  Spirit  is  simply  said  to  proceed. 
The  relation  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Divine  Father,  has  been  generally  ex- 
pressed by  the  term  "Procession."  This  is  admissible,  if  it  be  recog- 
nized as  a  term  merely  declarative  of  such  a  procession  from  the  Fa- 
ther, as  is  not  exclusive  of  a  procession  also  of  the  Son.  This  expres- 
sion is  applied  to  the  Spirit  upon  the  authority  of  Christ,  who  calls  Him 
in  John  15:26,  "the  Spirit  of  truth  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father." 
But  our  Lord  uses  a  similar  word  as  to  himself,  though  not  the  same, 
in  John  16:28,  "I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the 
world."  The  disciples  use  this  last  word  in  John  16:30.  The  verb 
in  these  two  passages  means  sometimes  "came  forth,"  and  sometimes 
"went  forth,"  and,  in  the  latter  signification,  is  precisely  equivalent 
to  the  other  verb,  which  in  a  different  tense  appears  in  John 
15:26.  From  the  "proceeding  forth"  of  the  Spirit,  therefore,  cannot 
be  argued  a  difference  in  his  mode  of  procedure  from  that  of  the 
Son.      The  terms  applied  to  both  are  general,    and  cannot  express 


Abstract  of  Theology.  164 

a  difference.  Procession,  therefore,  may  be  asserted  of  both  the  Son, 
•and  the  Spirit.  The  mode  of  the  Procession  of  the  Son,  is  specific- 
ally designated  by  the  generation  which  is  asserted  of  him.  That 
of  the  Spirit  appears  likewise  to  be  pointed  out  by  the  name  given 
to  Him.  He  is  the  breath  of  God,  which  fact,  already  expressed  in 
His  name,  was  taught  by  our  Lord  when,  on  the  evening  of  his 
resurrection,  He  breathed  upon  His  apostles,  saying  unto  them: 
"Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost."  John  20-22.  It  is  not  unlikely, 
however,  that  the  human  breath  of  the  Theanthropos  was,  on  that 
occasion,  but  a  symbol  of  the  Divine  outbreathing  of  the  Spirit  by. 
the  Divine  Son.  This  may  be  well  assumed  as  true,  if,  indeed, 
the  Spirit  proceeds  from  the  Son,  as  well  as  from  the  Father. 

This  outbreathing  of  God  is  even  more  difficult  to  interpret,  and 
the  nature  of  the  relation  thus  indicated  even  more  incomprehen- 
sible than  that  of  the  generation  of  the  Son.  In  this  therefore,  as 
in  that,  we  must  be  content  to  accept  the  statement,  just  as  it  is 
revealed,  being  only  careful  to  separate  from  it  all  ideas  inconsist- 
ent with  acts  of  God.  This  would  exclude  everything  like  a  phys- 
ical breathing,  or  several  acts  of  breathing,  at  various  times,  which 
may  be  successive.  The  Procession  of  the  Spirit,  must  therefore  be 
regarded  as  eternal  action,  completed,  only  because  perfect,  and  con- 
tinuing, only  in  the  sense  of  not  ended. 

It  seems  therefore  proper,  that  we  should  regard  the  peculiarity 
of  the  mode  of  the  procedure  of  both  these  Persons,  to  be  indi- 
cated by  the  names  given  respectively  to  each.  The  term  "Proces- 
sion" may  be  especially  appropriated  to  the  Spirit  only,  because  in 
His  case  "Spirit"  does  not  as  distinctly  point  out  the  mode  of  pro- 
cedure, as  does  Sonship,  in  that  of  the  Son. 

The  preposition,  with  which  the  verbs  are  compounded  in  each 
of  these  three  passages  of  John,  is  the  same,  and  shows  a  proces- 
sion from  within  God.  Wherever  the  terms  "Spirit  of  God,"  and 
"Spirit  of  Christ"  appear,  the  simple  genitive  is  used  without  a  pre- 
position, but  this  same  preposition  is  found  with  the  genitive  of  God, 
in  1.  Cor.  2:12  and  Rev.  11:11.  The  procedure,  is  therefore  taught 
as  being  from  within  God,  which  shows  that  the  coming  from,  and  the 
going  forth  from,  are  both  in,  and  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  are 
not  to  be  limited  to  such  action  as  occurs  when  an  ambassador  is 
sent  from  a  king,  or  one  man  simply  proceeds  from  the  presence 
of  another. 


165  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  Western  Christendom,  in  opposition  to  Eastern,  has  main- 
tained that  there  is  also  a  distinction  between  the  relations  of  Son, 
and  Spirit,  as  to  the  source.  The  Procession  of  the  Spirit  is  said,  by 
the  East,  to  be  from  the  Father  only,  as  is  the  generation  of  the  Son; 
but  by  the  West,  to  be  from  both  the  Father,  and  the  Son. 

The  Eastern  Christians  have  urged,  that  the  Scriptures  only  declare 
Procession  from  the  Father.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  this  is  true, 
inasmuch  as  there  is  but  one  passage  of  Scripture  which  speaks  of  His 
Procession,  (John  15:26,)  the  language  of  which  is  "'which  proceedeth 
from  the  Father."  But  in  1  Cor.  2:12,  and  Rev.  11:11,  the  Spirit  is  said 
to  be  from  God,  which  may  mean  from  the  Father  alone,  or,  as  from 
God,  so  from  the  Son  also.  The  Spirit  is  also  spoken  of  as  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  and  of  the  Lord,  and  of  the  Son,  (Gal.  4:6,)  as  well  as  the 
Spirit  of  the  Father,  and  the  Spirit  of  God.  Our  Lord  also  declared, 
that  he  would  send  the  Spirit.  More  than  this,  the  action  of  Christ, 
when  he  breathed  upon  the  disciples,  and  said,  "Receive  ye  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  is  very  significant,  and  strongly  indicatesthe  Procession  of  the 
Spirit  from  him.  This  act  of  Christ,  however,  may  have  been  no  more 
than  giving  the  Spirit  to  His  disciples,  without  intending  to  teach  any 
Procession  from  himself.  The  breathing,  which  in  any  event  was  sym- 
bolical, may  have  been  so  only  of  the  divine  act  of  the  Father,  from 
whom  alone  the  Spirit  may  truly  proceed.  In  this  event,  may  we  not 
also  believe,  that  the  relation  to  the  Procession  of  the  Son,  differs  from 
that  of  the  Father?  Would  it  not  be  a  more  exact  statement  of  the 
Scripture  teaching  to  say,  that  the  Son,  or  that  Christ,  sends  the 
Spirit,  and  gives  the  Spirit,  which  is  his,  because  the  right  to  bestow 
it  is  his,  either  essentially,  or  as  given  him  in  his  office  as  Messiah, 
and  that  the  Spirit  thus  sent  proceeds  from  the  Father.  In  this  event 
the  Father  would  be  the  source  of  the  procedure,  and  the  Son  the 
agent  in  sending  it  forth.  Is  not  this  bestowment  on  the  Messiah,  of 
this  right  to  send  the  Spirit,  suggested  by  Christ's  declaration,  (John 
16:7,)  "if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you,"  as 
well  as  by  the  language  (John  7=39,)  "the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet 
given,  because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified."  These  points  are  pre- 
sented for  consideration,  while  it  is  admitted,  that  the  assertion,  that 
the  Spirit  proceeds  also  from  the  Son,  is  less  objectionable  than  the 
denial.  The  Scriptures  seem  to  leave  it  so  doubtful,  as  to  forbid  any 
positive  statement  about  it.  But  the  preponderance  of  evidence  is 
in  favour  of  a  Procession  from  both  Father,  and  Son. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  166 

IV.     Subordination  between  the  Persons. 

The  absolute  equality  of  each  of  these  persons,  as  God,  has  already 
been  pointed  out  p.  153-4.  The  possibility  of  inferiority,  in  other  re- 
spects, was  then  intimated.  There  are  some  scriptural  statements  which 
seem  to  indicate  this.  Christ  said  expressly  of  himself,  k'my  Father 
is  greater  than  I."  (John  14:28.)  He  also  not  only  taught  that  the 
Father  had  sent  him,  but  compared  with  that  his  own  sending  of  his 
disciples,  (John  17:18),  and  declared  that  he  came,  not  to  do  his  own 
will  but  the  Father's,  (John  6:38);  that  he  came  not  of  himself,  (John 
7:28);  that  he  spoke  not  of  himself,  but  that  the  Father  had  given 
him  a  commandment,  what  he  should  say,  and  speak,  (John  12:49);  that 
his  teaching  was  not  his  own,  (John  7.-16);  that  the  word  they  heard 
was  not  his,  but  the  Father's,  (John  14:24;)  that  he  had  given 
them  the  words,  given  him  by  the  Father,  (John  17=8);  that  the 
Father  had  given  him  a  commandment  to  do  the  work  he  had  accom- 
plished, (John  17:4);  that  he  could  do  nothing  of  himself,  but  what  he 
saw  the  Father  doing,  (John  5:19;  8=26);  that  the  Father  was  with  him, 
and  had  not  left  him  alone,  (John  8=29);  and  that  the  Father  had 
sanctified,  (consecrated)  him,  (John  10=36).  Peter  also  preached  to 
Cornelius  that  uGod  anointed  Christ  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with 
power",  and  that  he  performed  beneficent,  and  miraculous  acts  be- 
cause "God  was  with  him."  Acts  10:38.  Christ  also  denied  the  good- 
ness of  any  but  God.  (Matt,  19=17;  Luke  18=19),  and  asserted  that  no 
man,  no,  not  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the 
Father  "knew  the  day,  and  hour  of  judgment,"  (Mark.  13:32); 
["but  my  Father  only,"  Matt.  24=36];  and,  that  to  sit  on  his  right 
hand,  and  on  his  left,  was  not  his  to  give,  but  that  these  positions 
shall  be  given  to  those  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  his  Father,  (Matt. 
20:23;  Mark.  10:40).  We  are  told  also  of  his  prayers  to  God,  of  which 
the  remarkable  statement  is  made,  that  "in  the  days  of  his  flesh,"  he 
"offered  up  prayers  and  supplications,  with  strong  crying  and  tears, 
unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  deadbh,  and  was  heard  in 
that  he  feared."  (Heb.  5=7.)  Christ  also  speaks  of  the  power  he  had 
over  all  flesh,  as  given  him  by  the  Father,  (John  17:2),  and  Paul  in 
(Eph.  1=17:20),  assigns  his  exaltation  over  all  things,  and  as  head  of 
the  church,  described  in  vv.  19-22,  to  "the  Father  of  glory,"  While  it 
is  said  that  the  Father  "hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet,"  we  are  told 
that  "He  is  excepted,  which  did  put  all  things  under  him,]'  (1  Cor. 
15=27);  that  "then  cometh  the  end,  when  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the 
kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father,"  v.  24;  and  when  all  things  shall  be 


167  Abstract  of  Theology. 

subdued  unto  him,  then  shall  the  Son  also  be  subject  unto  him,  that  put 
all  things  under  him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all,"  v.  28.  The  climax  of 
these  statements  is  reached,  when  we  find  that  not  only  did  Paul  say 
that  "the  head  of  Christ  is  God,"  (1  Cor.  11:3);  and  call  the  Father 
"the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  Glory,"  (Eph.  1:17);: 
but  our  Lord  himself,  spoke  of  Him  to  his  disciples  as  "my  Father 
and  your  Father,"  and  "my  God  and  your  God." 

An  examination  of  these,  and  all  similar  statements  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, showTs  they  are  in  no  respect  inconsistent  with  the  perfect  equal- 
ity of  the  Persons  as  to  the  Divine  nature. 

1.  Almost  all  of  them,  have  reference  to  Christ,  as  man;  or  as  the 
Son  in  his  relations  to  his  human  nature;  or  as  Messiah,  securing 
for  his  people  eternal  life,  and  bestowing  it  upon  them,  or  ruling  over 
the  universe,  and  the  church. 

2.  This  explanation  may  be  thought  by  some  insufficient  to  account 
fully  for  the  subjection  of  the  Son  referred  to  in  .  1  Cor.  15:28,  or 
for  the  superior  greatness  ascribed  to  the  Father  in  John  14^28.  But, 
if  so,  we  are  still  only  taught  an  inferiority  of  one  person  in  the  Trin- 
ity to  another,  as  a  person.  Nothing  indicates  that  it  is  of  one  of  them 
as  God,  to  another  as  God,  or  of  the  Godhead  of  one,  to  the  Godhead 
of  another.  It  is  only  of  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  not  of  God  the 
Son,  to  God  the  Father.  The  subsistence  of  each  of  the  persons  in  the 
same  divine  nature  may  still  remain  true,  as  well  as  that  partaking  of 
all  of  it  by  each,  which  makes  all  equally  God. 

3.  The  personal  inferiority  which  is  thus  made  possible,  so  far  as 
it  is  natural,  is  due  doubtless  to  the  difference  in  the  modes  of  subsist- 
ence in  the  divine  essence.  The  Father  thus  subsists  independently 
of  the  will,  or  the  action  of  any  other  person.  He  is  thus  simply  God; 
not  originated,  not  begotten,  not  proceeding  from.  The  Son  is  origin- 
ated, his  Filiation  is  willed,  though  necessarily,  by  the  Father,  and  he  is 
begotten,  and  is  "very  God"  of  "very  God."  The  Holy  Spirit  is  also 
originated;  He  is  not  however  begotten,  but  proceeds  from  the  Father, 
or  from  the  Father,  and  the  Son.  His  procession  is  also  willed, 
though  necessarily,  and  He,  likewise,  is  "very  God"  of  "very  God." 
In  this  mode  of  subsistence,  therefore,  inferiority  of  the  person  of  the 
Son  to  the  Father,  and  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Father,  and  Son,  may  be 
said  to  exist.  Without  any  superiority  as  God,  therefore,  the  Father 
may  be  said  to  be  greater  than  the  Son,  because  of  the  personal  re- 
lations in  the  Trinity. 

4.  But  there  is  also   a   subordination   of  office,   or  rank  still  more 


Abstract  of  Theology.  168 

plainly  taught.  By  virtue  of  this,  the  Father  sends  the  Son,  and  the 
Father  and  Son  send  the  Spirit.  This  could  exist  between  persons  in 
all  respects  equal  to  each  other,  both  in  nature,  and  relation.  In  God, 
however,  it  is  probable  that  the  official  subordination  is  based  upon 
that  of  the  personal  relations.  It  corresponds  exactly  with  the  rela- 
tions of  the  Persons,  from  which  has  probably  resulted  their  official 
subordination  in  works  without,  and  especially  in  the  work  of  Re- 
demption. 

The  order  of  this  subordination  is  plainly  apparent  from  the  scrip- 
tural names,  and  statements  about  the  relations.  The  Father  is  un- 
questionably first,  the  Son  second,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  third.  This  is 
their  rank,  as  well  because  of  the  mode  of  subsistence,  as  of  its  order. 
Hence  they  are  commonly  spoken  of  in  this  order,  as  the  First,  Second 
and  Third  Persons  ol  the  Trinity. 

'.'The  Inhabitation  of  the  Persons." 

"As  the  essence  of  the  Godhead  is  common  to  the  several  persons, 
they  have  a  common  intelligence,  will,  and  power.  There  are  not  in 
God  three  intelligences,  three  wills,  three  efficiencies.  The  Three  are 
one  God,  and  therefore,  have  one  mind  and  will.  This  intimate  union 
was  expressed  in  the  Greek  church  by  the  word  "perichoresis,"  which 
the  Latin  words  inexistentia,  inhabitatio,  and  intercommunio,  were  used 
to  explain.  These  terms  were  intended  to  express  the  scriptural  facts 
that  the  Son  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  the  Son;  that  where 
the  Father  is,  there  the  Son  and  Spirit  are;  that  what  the  one  does, 
the  others  do."  *  *  *  *  *  * 

"This  fact — of  the  intimate  union,  communion,  and  inhabitation  of 
the  persons  of  the  Trinity — is  the  reason  why  every  where  in  Scrip- 
ture and  instinctively  by  all  Christians,  God  as  God  is  addressed  as  a 
person,  in  perfect  consistency  with  the  Tripersonality  of  the  Godhead. 
We  can,  and  do  pray  to  each  of  the  Persons  separately;  and  we  pray 
to  God,  as  God;  for  the  three  persons  are  one  God;  one  not  only  in 
substance,  but  in  knowledge,  will,  and  power.  To  expect  that  we, 
who  cannot  understand  anything,  not  even  ourselves,  should  under- 
stand these  mysteries  of  the  Godhead,  is  to  the  last  degree  un- 
reasonable. But  as  in  every  other  sphere,  we  must  believe  what 
we  cannot  understand;  so  we  may  believe  all  that  God  has  re- 
vealed in  his  word  concerning  Himself,  although  we  cannot  under- 
stand the  Almighty  unto  perfection."  Charles  Hodge,  Sys.  Theol. 
vol.  1  pp.  461.  2. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  170 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY 


LECTURE  XVI 


Outward  Relations  of  the  Trinity. 

The  universe,  with  all  it  is,  and  all  it  contains,  is  the  result  of  the 
outward  working  of  the  Triune  God.  It  exists,  not  because  of  any 
necessity  in  God's  nature  to  create  it,  but  as  the  result  purely  of  His 
will.  It  is  the  form  in  which  the  voluntary  activity  of  God  manifests 
itself. 

Activity,  in  some  form,  is  essential  to  a  personal,  intelligent  being. 
God  must  therefore  be  eternally  active.  But  this  necessity  for  eternal 
activity  finds  ample  scope  for  its  exercise,  within  the  Godhead,  in  the 
acts  involved  in  the  mutual  relations  of  the  Persons,  and  in  the  pur- 
poses which  He  forms  relative  to  things  without.  His  outward 
workings,  are  the  results  of  those  purposes  alone,  and  therefore  pro- 
ceed purely  from  His  will.  The  universe  consequently  bears  no 
other  relation  to  God  than  that  of  a  mere  creation  of  His  wisdom,  and 
power.  It  is  not  eternal,  but  has  those  peculiarities  of  beginning, 
and  succession,  which  belong  to  time,  and  dependence,  change  and  im- 
perfection, and  which  are  naturally  found  in  that  which  is  neither 
divine,  nor  self  existent. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  divine  acts. 

1.  Immanent,  and  intrinsic  acts.  These  are  within  God,  and  have 
no  reference  to  things  without.  Such  are  the  Generation  of  the  Son, 
and  the  Spiration  of  the  Spirit. 

2.  Immanent,  and  extrinsic  acts.  These,  also,  are  within  God, 
but  have  reference  to  things  without.     Such  are  His  Decrees. 


171  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  Extrinsic,  and  transitive  acts.  These  are  outside  of  Himself 
having  no  existence  within  Him,  but  nevertheless  proceed  efficiently 
from  Him,  and  terminate  upon  His  creatures.  Such  are  Creation, 
Providence,  and  Redemption.  [See  Turretine's  Institutes,  .Book  4, 
Ques.  1,  Sec.  4.] 

The  first  kind  of  Divine  acts  is  revealed  to  us  in  what  the  Scrip- 
tures teach  of  the  personal  relations  within  the  Godhead.  The  second, 
and  especially  the  third,  are  made  known  to  us  in  what  we  are  told  of 
the  Creation  of  the  world,  of  God's  Providential  care  over  it,  and  of  His 
Redemption  of  man.  As  might  have  been  anticipated,  we  find  the  ac- 
tivity of  God  in  the  second,  and  third  kinds  of  acts  manifested  in  accord- 
ance with  the  personal  relations  revealed  in  the  first.  Each  of  the  Per- 
sons performs  such  divine  acts  as  show  that  He  is  God.  Each  demands 
and  accepts  equal  honour,  and  worship  from  man.  Each  has  his  own 
especial  relation  to  every  work.  In  it  the  same  subordination,  revealed 
in  the  personal  relations,  is  preserved.  Yet,  along  with  this,  we  find 
that  same  intercommunion  by  which  what  one  does  is  also  spoken  of 
as  done  by  each  of  the  others.  The  evidence  of  this  last  point  needs 
especially,  and  constantly  to  be  borne  in  mind,  lest  we  emphasize  too 
much  the  distinct  acts  of  the  Persons,  and  forget  that  essential  union, 
and  intercommunion,  which,  as  well  as  subsistence  in  the  same  undi- 
vided essence,  or  nature,  makes  the  three  Persons  only  One  God. 

The  method  of  this  action,  and  the  distinct  subordination  in  it,  will 
not  in  all  cases  appear  equally  plain.  We  must,  therefore,  observe 
with  caution  what  is  exactly  revealed.  Whatever,  from  other  circum- 
stances may  appear  probable,  must  be  taken  only  as  such.  This  is 
more  especially  necessary  as  this  method  will  be  seen  somewhat  to 
vary,  although  so  far  as  exhibited,  the  same  order  of  subordination 
will  be  perceived. 

I.     In  Creation. 

Creation,  as  the  first  outward  manifestation  of  God,  demands  the 
first  place  in  this  treatment. 

(1.)  Whatever  distinction  may  sometimes  appear,  it  is  generally 
attributed  to  the  One  God.  This  does  not  forbid  that  each  Person  has 
performed  His  distinctive  part,  for  it  is  also  referred  to  the  Father, 
and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Spirit.  We  have  here  only  the  evidence 
of  that  intercommunion  which,  even  through  the  distinct  action  of 
each,  still  makes  what  is  done  by  any  one  of  the  Persons  to  be  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  172 

act  of  the  whole  Godhead.  The  passages  which  teach  this  are  the 
numerous  ones  in  which  "God"'  is  spoken  of  as  the  Creator.  These 
must  refer  either  to  the  Triune'  God,  or  to  the  Father  alone.  But 
whatever  may  be  the  relation  of  the  Father  to  this  act,  the  Scriptures, 
by  revealing  that  the  Son,  and  the  Spirit  were  also  associated  with 
Him,  show  that  Creation  was  the  act  of  the  whole  Godhead. 

(2.)  The  method  of  this  act  is  revealed  in  a  few  passages.  These 
teach  that  Creation  came  from  the  Father,  as  the  source,  that  it  was 
accomplished  by,  or  through  the  Son,  as  the  efficient  instrumental 
creating  agent,  and  by,  or  through  the  Spirit,  as  the  transforming 
power.  The  first  two  of  these  facts  is  taught  in  1.  Cor.  8:6,  "yet  to 
us  there  is  one, God,  the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  unto 
Him,  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom  are  all  things,  and 
wre  through  him."  [Canterbury  Revision].  Here  the  Father  is  de- 
clared to  be  the  source  of  all  things,  and  Jesus  Christ,  the  Divine  Son. 
the  instrument  through  whom  they  exist.  We  have  the  same  truth 
in  Heb.  1=2,  ''by  whom  also  He  made  the  worlds." 

The  Creation  is  also  attributed  separately  to  the  Father  in  Acts 
4:24.  He  is  indeed  there  called  "Lord,"  but  is  shown  to  be  the  Father 
by  the  reference  to  his  "holy  child  Jesus,"  which  marks  a  distinction 
between  two  persons,  as  well  as  by  the  quotation  of  the  second  psalm. 
In  Rev.  4:1  L  it  is  manifestly  the  Father,  to  whom  the  four  and  twenty 
elders  ascribe  creation;  for  he  is  distinguished  from  the  Lamb  that 
redeemed  us.  (See  Chap.  5:8  9.)  In  Eph.  3:9,  God  is  said  to  have 
created  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  context  shows  that  it  is 
God  the  Father  who  is  spoken  of. 

That  the  creation  was  by,  or  through  the  Son,  is  also  separately  de- 
clared. John  says  of  the  Divine  Word,  "All  things  were  made  by  him, 
and  without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made."  *  *  * 
"He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by  him."  John  1:3.10. 
Paul  says,  that  "by  him  were  all  things  created,  that  are  in  heaven, 
and  that  are  in  earth,  visible,  and  invisible,  *  *  *  *  all  things 
were  created  by  him,  and  for  him,"  (Col.  1:16).     See  also  (Ps.  33:6). 

The  transforming  power  of  the  Spirit  is  shown  in  Gen.  1:2.  Here 
the  Hebrew  verb  is  in  the  Piel  form,  and  means  "to  brood  over,"  and 
Gesenius  in  his  lexicon  says,  is  used  "tropically  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
as  thus  brooding  over,  and  vivifying  the  chaotic  mass  of  the  earth." 
This  work  of  the  Spirit  seems  to  have  been  known  to  Job,  and  his 
friends.  Job  himself  says  :  "By  his  Spirit  he  hath  garnished  the  hea- 
vens," (Job  26:13),  and  Elihu  declares,  "The  Spirit  of  God  hath  made 


173  Abstract  of  Theology. 

me,  and  the  breath  (Spirit)  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life." 
(Job  33:6).  In  the  33d  Psalm  it  is  also  stated,  that  "By  the  word  of 
Lord  were  the  heavens  made;  and  all  the  host  of  them  by  the  breath 
(Spirit)  of  his  mouth."  In  Psalm  104:30  God  is  addressed  thus;  "thou 
sendest  forth  thy  Spirit,  they  are  created:  and  thou  renewest  the  face 
of  the  earth."  The  Creation  here  referred  to  is  simply  transforma- 
tion. 

The  above  statements  show  that  the  Creation  of  the  world  is 
ascribed  to  God  as  One,  yet  that  all  things  are  of  the  Father,  who  is 
thus  the  source;  that  they  were  created  by,  or  through  the  Son;  and 
that  the  Spirit  has  been  their  transforming,  and  life  giving  power. 
We  find  then  in  this  outward  action  of  the  Persons  the  same  relation, 
and  subordination  exhibited  personally  in  the  Trinity.  The  Father 
acts  through  the  Son,  (Eph.  3=19;  Heb.  1:2),  and  sends  forth  the 
Spirit,  (Ps.  104:30). 

II.     In  Providence. 

In  the  statements  made  as  to  the  acts  of  Providence,  the  subordina- 
tion of  the  Son,  and  Spirit,  is  not  distinctly  taught.  It  is  not  denied, 
however,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  it  does  not 
exist.  Still,  in  the  absence  of  specific  revelation,  we  dare  not  positively 
affirm  that  it  does.  Throughout  the  Scriptures,  however,  all  the  acts 
of  Providence  are  ascribed  to  God.  Whether  by  this  is  meant  the 
Father  alone,  or  the  Triune  God,  does  not  appear.  There  is  no  revela- 
tion as  to  the  method  by  which  this  is  done.  Buc  each  of  the  persons 
is  revealed  as  performing  acts  of  Providence.  Christ  declared  this  of 
the  Father,  (Matt,  6:25-32,  especially  verse  32,  and  10:29-31.)  The 
upholding  of  the  world  is  asserted  of  the  Son  (Heb.  1:3),  and  it  is  said 
that  "by  him  all  things  consist."  (Col.  1:17).  The  Providential  care 
of  the  Spirit  is  abundantly  exercised  in  connection  with  the  life  of 
believers  in  Christ,  who  may  well  be  said  spiritually  to  "live,  and 
move  and  have  their  being"  in  Him.  That  this  is  done  in  the  sphere 
of  Redemption  makes  it  no  less  Providential  than  if  in  that  of  Creation. 
In  this  latter,  however,  the  Spirit  is  also  spoken  of  as  engaged  in  Pro- 
vidential acts.     (Isaiah  59:10;  63:14). 

III.     In  Redemption. 

The  distinctive  action  of  the  three  Persons  is  more  plainly  exhibited 
in  connection  with  Redemption.     This  is  due,  probably,  to  the  fact, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  174 

that  upon  this  subject,  we  have  more  full  information  than  upon  the 
acts  of  Creation,  or  Providence.  God  is  also  brought  nearer  to  us, 
and  thus  is  more  clearly  revealed.  It  is  in  connection  with  this  that 
the  revelation  has  been  made  of  the  relations  within  the  Trinity,  to- 
gether with  the  equality  of  the  Persons  in  the  Divine  Nature, 
and  their  subordination  within,  and  in  the  work  without.  The  whole 
work  of  Redemption  is  ascribed  to  the  Triune  God;  but  each  of  the 
Persons  is  revealed  as  sustaining  distinct  official  relation  to  it. 

1.  All  of  this  appears  even  in  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  re- 
vealed. 

(a.)  The  Scriptures  are  explicitly  declared  to  be  from  God.  (John 
3:34;  10=35;    1  Cor.  2:9.10;    1  Thess.  2:13;    2  Tim.  3:16;    Heb.  1:1. 

(b.)  Christ  attributes  to  the  Father  his  own  power,  and  authority 
to  speak,  and  declares  Him  to  be  the  source  of.  what  was  revealed  by 
himself.  John  3:34;  7:16;  12=49;  15:15.  The  same  truth  is  taught 
in  Rev.  1:1,  where  the  distinction,  between  the  Persons,  shows, 
that  "the  Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  God  gave  unto  him,"  was 
given  by  the  Father.  It  is  from  the  Father  also,  as  a  source,  that  the 
Spirit  derives  the  truth  which  He  reveals.  It  is  as  the  Spirit  of  truth 
that  Christ  declared  that  He  proceeds  from  the  Father.  John  15:26. 
The  cause  he  assigned  for  his  subsequent  promise,  that  the  Spirit 
should  guide  into  all  truth,  was  "he  shall  not  speak  of  himself;  but 
whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak/'  John  16:13.  That 
the  truth,  thus  spoken,  should  be  from  the  Father,  through  the  Son, 
appears  from  vv.  14:15.  The  same  is  also  taught  in  1  Cor.  2:7— 11, 
in  which  the  "deep  things  of  God"  "which  the  Spirit  searcheth,"  and 
"which  God  hath  revealed  unto  us  by  His  Spirit,  is  the  hidden  wis- 
dom which  God  ordained  before  the  world  unto  our  glory,"  being 
"the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him."  The 
whole  context  shows  that  it  is  the  Father  from  whom  these  things  are 
learned. 

(c.)  But  while  the  Father  is  thus  declared  to  be  the  source  of  the 
revelation  of  Redemption,  it  is  the  Son  by  whom  He  has  made  it 
known.  He  is,  in  his  Divine  relation,  especially  called  the  Word  of 
God.  Him  we  are  commanded  by  t}ie  Father  to  hear  as  his  "beloved 
Son."  (Matt.  17:5).  In  his  own  person,  he  so  manifested  the  Father 
that  he  could  say,  "He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father." 
(John  14:9).  During  his  incarnation  he  spoke  personally  as  did  the 
prophets  of  old.  (Heb.  1:1.2).  He  was  that  prophet  whom  Moses 
foretold,  (Deut.  18:15-19;)  and  is  so  proclaimed  in  Acts  3:20-22. 
He  declared  himself  to   be  the  light  of  the  world.    (John  8:12).     He 


175  Abstract  of  Theology. 

foretold  the  future  as  to  himself,  his  disciples,  Jerusalem,  and  the 
world.  He  began  the  preaching  of  the  great  salvation.  (Heb.  2:3). 
He  gave  especial  instruction  to  his  apostles,  both  before  his  death  and 
after  his  resurrection,  not  only  as  to  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  but 
as  to  all  things  which  were  to  be  observed  by  them,  and  by  those 
whom  they  should  teach.  Especially,  during  this  latter  period,  did 
he  instruct  them  as  to  the  relation  of  his  sufferings,  and  death  to  the 
prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament. 

(d.)  In  this  work  of  Revelation,  however,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  made 
known  to  us  as  the  operating  agent.  Everywhere  it  is  the  Spirit  to 
whom  the  word  sent  by  God  is  referred.  "Holy  men  of  God  spake 
as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  2  Pet.  1:21.  This  is  spoken 
of  the  Old  Testament  writers  in  general.  It  is  specifically  declared  of 
David,  (Matt.  2243),  (Acts  1:16);  and  of  Isaiah,  (Acts  28:25),  and  of 
the  author  of  the  96th  Psalm,  in  Heb.  3:7.  These  Old  Testament 
writers  constantly  attribute  their  instructions  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  as 
for  example  David  in  2  Sam.  23=2.  Neherniah  asserts  it  of  the  pro- 
phets, by  whom  God  had  warned  his  people.  Neh.  9=30.  Isaiah,  in 
Chap.  49=17,  proclaims  "the  Lord  God  and  his  Spirit  hath  sent  me." 

The  same  is  preeminently  true  of  the  inspired  revelations  of  New 
Testament  days.  Even  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  was  subjected  to 
the  Spirit.  While,  as  the  Divine  Son,  he  works  through  the  Spirit  in 
this,  as  in  other  Divine  acts,  yet,  as  the  Godman,  he  was  fostered,  in 
his  human  nature,  by  its  influences,  and  he  was  anointed  by  the  Spirit 
for  his  work.  Our  Lord  declared  this  in  the  first  act  of  his  ministry, 
(Luke  4:16-21).  The  immeasurable  extent  of  this  influence  was 
taught  by  John  the  Baptist.  (John  3=34).  In  like  manner  also  were 
the  Apostles  of  Christ  prepared  for  their  work.  (Eph.  3:5).  The 
teaching  of  their  Lord  had  not  sufficed.  In  recalling,  and  revealing, 
that  teaching,  they  must  needs  be  made  infallible.  Other  truths  were 
also  to  be  made  known.  Therefore  the  Spirit  was  promised,  which 
promise  was  signally  fulfilled  on  the  day  of  Pentecost;  nor  then  only, 
nor  upon  those  there  alone,  but  during  all  the  period  of  New  Testament 
revelation,  and  upon  multitudes  who  spake,  as  well  as  upon  those  who 
wrote.  The  effect  of  this  influence  is  distinctly  asserted.  At  Peute- 
cost,  they  '"began  to  speak  with  other  tongues  as  the  Spirit  gave  them 
utterance."  (Acts  2:4).  The  boldness,  with  which  such  men  as  those 
could  speak  of  Christ,  is  attributed  to  their  being  filled  with  the  Spirit. 
(Acts  4:31).  Paul  claimed  that  his  preaching  was  in  "demonstration 
of  the  Spirit.and  of  power,"  (1  Cor.  2:4),  and,  that  he  spake  "not  in  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  176 

words    which    man's    wisdom    teacheth;    but   which    the  Holy  Ghost 
teacheth."     1  Cor.  2:13. 

2.  If  we  turn  now  to  the  work  of  Redemption  itself,  we  shall  still 
find  those  mutual  relations  sustained.  Salvation,  or  Redemption  is 
ascribed  everywhere  to  the  Triune  God.  Examples  of  this  are  to  be 
found  in  Luke  1=68-71;  3=6;  Acts  28:28;  Rom.  1:16;  2  Thess.  2:13; 
Tit.  2:11. 

(1.)  But  it  is  specifically  assigned,  as  to  its  source  to  the  Father.  Its 
sphere  is  within  the  Creation  which  is  from  Him,  and  under  the  Pro- 
vidential influences  which  originate  in  Him.  He  is  the  lawgiver, 
Whose  law  has  been  broken,  and  Who  exacts  the  penalty,  as  the  ad- 
ministrator of  that  law.  The  Redemption  is  the  effect  of  His  purpose. 
(1  Cor.  2:7;  Eph.  3:11;  2  Tim.  1;9).  That  purpose  flows  from  His 
benevolent  love  for  mankind.  (John  3:16).  He  has  even  sent  His 
own  Son,  "that  the  world  through  him  might  be  saved."  (John  3:17). 
It  was  His  will  that  the  Son  came  to  fulfil.  (Heb.  10:7;  John  6=38-40; 
Gal.  1:3,4).  For  this  He  delivered  him  up,  (Rom.  8:32),  according  to 
His  determinate  counsel,  (Acts  2:23),  thus  saving  men  "according  to 
His  own  purpose,  and  grace,"  (2.  Tim.  1:9),  and  thus  "hath  given  to  us 
eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son."  (1  John  5:11).  It  is  He,  also, 
who  "hath  chosen  us"  in  Christ  "before  the  foundation  of  the  world," 
and  -'hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  (Eph.  1.-4.6),  and  hath 
given  us  to  Christ,  (John  17:6-11),  "to  whom,"  says  Christ  himself, 
"no  man  can  come"  "except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  me  draw 
him"  (John  6:44);  "having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  chil- 
dren by  Jesus  Christ  to  Himself,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His 
will."  (Eph.  1:5).  That  men  may  thus  be  drawn  He  promised, 
and  gave  His  Spirit  to  Christ,  (Acts  2:33),  and  through  him  unto 
men,  that  they  might  be  regenerated,  (John  3:5),  and  "quickened," 
while  "dead  in  trespasses,  and  sins,"  (Eph.  2:1);  that  they  might 
have  faith,  (Gal.  5=22,)  and  the  Spirit  of  Sonship,  (Gal.  4:6),  and 
may  be  sealed  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  (Eph.  1:13),  which 
witnesses  to  believers  that  they  are  "the  children  of  God,  and,  if  chil- 
dren, then  heirs;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ."  (Rom. 
8:16.17.)  It  is  thus,  also,  that  God,  having  predestinated  that  they 
shall  "be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son"  sanctifies  them,  in  the 
sense  of  consecrating  them,  "through,  the  truth,"  (John  17:17),  and, 
also,  in  that  of  cleansing,  and  purifying  them  from  sin,  (Eph.  5:26; 
1  Thess.  4:7),  and  causes  them  "to  be  changed  into  the  same  image  from 
glory  to  glory."  (2  Cor.  3:18).  Throughout  all  of  this  work  the  Fa-, 
ther  is  also  the  Person  Who  is  especially   addressed  in  prayer  in  the 


177  Abstract  of  Theology. 

name  of  Jesus,  (Eph.  2:14;  3=14),  through  the  moving  of  the  Spirit, 
(Eph.  6=18;  Rom.  8:26),  and  from  Whom  comes  "every  good  and  per- 
fect gift,"  (James  1:17),  as  well  as  the  justification,  pardon,  adoption, 
and  salification  of  believers,  and  also  the  Heavenly  kingdom  He 
has  prepared  for  them. 

These  are  some  particulars,  which  show  how  completely  the  Fa- 
ther is  identified  with  the  Redemption  of  man.  They  are  not  ex- 
haustive of  what  we  are  taught.  Indeed  the  whole  is  from  Him 
as  its  source,  and  not  merely  in  a  general  way  in  the  gift  of  His 
Son,  and  Spirit,  but  as  working  by,  and  through  them  in  each 
particular.  In  Redemption,  as  in  Creation,  and  Providence,  He  is 
ever  present,  constantly  willing,  and  continually  working;  though 
not  directly  by  Himself,  but  through  the  Son  and  the  Spirit. 

Some  portions  of  this  work  of  the  Father  will  need  hereafter  more 
full  discussion,  though  not  so  much  as  those  of  the  Son,  and  the 
Spirit,,  all  of  whose  acts  must  be  more  particularly  and  minutely 
examined. 

A  short  statement  here  is,  however,  necessary  as  a  summary  of 
what  will  be  discussed  as  to  each  hereafter,  and  also  that  the  offi- 
cial subordination  may  be  shown. 

(2.)  The  action  of  the  Son  in  Redemption  is  briefly,  yet  almost 
fully  described  in  Phil.  2:6-11.  We  are  there  taught  of  that  official 
subordination  to  the  Father  which  he  willingly  assumed  for  the 
discharge  of  this  work,  which  corresponds  with  the  statement  else- 
where that  he  was  sent  by  the  Father.  We  are  also  told  of  that 
act  of  condescension,  by  which  he  assumed  our  nature,  and  became 
man  in  his  incarnation;  of  his  voluntary  humiliation  to  the  death 
of  the  cross;  and  of  that  honour,  bestowed  upon  him,  in  that  nature, 
by  which  in  his  exaltation  he  has  been  made  an  object  of  universal 
worship,  "to  the  glory    of   God  the  Father." 

We  learn  elsewhere,  that  in  the  period  of  his  earthly  residence 
he  became  our  example  as  man,  as  he  likewise  in  it  set  forth  in  his 
own  person  the  image  of  his  Father.  By  his  active  obedience  to 
the  law  he  fulfilled  for  his  people  the  righteousness  due  by  them. 
By  his  sufferings,  and  death,  he  paid  the  penalty  of  their  sin.  As 
the  reward  of  his  work,  he  received  the  promised  Spirit  which  he 
sends  forth  for  the  salvation  of  those  whom  God  has  given  him.  All 
power  has  also  been  bestowed  upon  him,  that  his  gospel  may  be 
preached  with  success,  and  he  is    now*  made  king  in  Zion,  and  in- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  178 

vested  with  Mediatorial  dominion  over  all  things.  Sitting  at  the  right' 
hand  of  God,  he  exercises  the  dominion  thus  conferred,  and  at  the 
same  time  makes  intercession  for  his  people.  Thence  shall  he  come  to 
judge  the  world,  and  to  assign  to  the  righteous,  and  the  wicked  their 
everlasting  portions. 

The  subordination  of  office,  in  all  the  positions  thus  occupied,  is 
plainly  revealed.  Speaking  prophetically,  when  the  hour  had  come 
for  his  betrayal  and  crucifixion,  as  though  already  the  work  were; 
over,  Christ  himself  declared  of  all  that  he  had  done,  thus  contem- 
plated ak  finished,  that  it  was  the  work  the  Father  gave  him  to  do. 
(John  17=4).  So  also,  had  he  said,  that  he  came  to  do  the  Father's 
will,  (John  6:38),  and  to  '-work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  him 
(John  9.4).  It  was  the  Father  whose  law  he  honoured  in  the  fulfil- 
ment of  all  its  demands,  and  unto  whom,  "though  He  were  a  Son,  he 
yet  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered."  (Heb.  5:8). 
The  rewards  he  received  were  ali  given  by  the  Father;  namely,  the 
Spirit,  (Acts  2=33),  his  people,  (John  17=9).  and  his  exaltation,  (Acts 
2:33.36).  Even  the  future  judgment  of  the  world  is  to  be  his  office,, 
because  of  the  ordination  of  God,  (Acts  1042;  17:31;  Rom.  2:16),  and 
has  been  committed  to  him  by  the  Father.     (John  5:22.) 

(3.)  The  works  of  the  Spirit  in  Redemption  are  even  more  numerous 
than  those  of  the  Son,  and  bring  Him  into  the  most  intimate  relations 
to  the  people  of  God. 

It  was  by  Him  that  the  human  hody  of  Christ  was  prepared  for  the 
indwelling  of  the  Divine  Person,  (Luke  1:35),  and  by  His  gracious  in- 
fluences, that  the  mind  and  heart  of  Christ  were  fitted  for  his  work. 
(Isa  11:1-5;  John  3:34;  Luke  4:14).  Likewise  he  prepares  the  Church 
which  is  the  spiritual  body  of  Christ  "for  an  habitation  of  God." 
(Eph.  2:22).  It  is  He,  in  whom  they  are  so  baptized  as  to  be  thor- 
oughly overwhelmed  by  the  flood  of  His  divine  influences,  (Matt.  3:ll)t 
and  "washed  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  (Titus  3:5.)  Through  Him,  they  are  born  again. 
(John  3:5-8).  It  is  He,  that  "strives  with  man,"  (Gen.  6:3),  and  "con- 
vinces of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment,"  (John  16:8),  and  gives 
repentance,  (Acts  5:31.32),  (compared  with  Acts  2:33),  so  warring 
against  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  bringing  forth  spiritual  fruit  in  them, 
(Gal.  5;16-25),  that  they  "walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the 
Spirit,"  (Rom  8  2-4).     He  also  produces  faith,  (Eph.  3:17),  and  "all 


179  Abstract  of  Theology. 

joy,  and  peace  in  believing  that'5  they  -'may  abound  in  hope,''  (Rom. 
15:13),  and  knowledge  of  "the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
them  that  love  Him."  1  Cor.  2:9.10).  "Through  Him  we  have  ac-* 
cess  unto  the  Father,"  (Eph.  2:18),  praying  always  with  all  prayer, 
and  supplication  in  the  Spirit,"  (Eph.  6=18),  since  we  '-have  received 
the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby,  we  cry,  Abba,  Father,"  and  "the  Spirit 
itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirits,  that  we  are  the  children  of 
God."  (Rom.  8:15.16).  Thus  does  He  become  to  us  the  author  of  jus- 
tification, (by  the  faith  produced),  and  sanctification,  (both  cleansing 
and  consecration),  (1  Cor.  6:11),  and  adoption.  (Gal.  4:6).  Likewise 
He  reveals  the  glory  of  Christ  to  the  believer,  and  changes  him  into 
the  same  image.  (2  Cor.  3:18).  This,,  as  the  context  shows,  is  done 
through  the  word  of  God,  which  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  (Eph.  6:17). 
It  is  also  effected  through  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  so  far  as  they 
are  symbolical  of  his  cleansing,  and  nourishing  work,  as  well  as  of  the 
death,  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  (Rom.  6=3.4;  Eph.  6:26;  Titus  3:5.6; 
1  Cor.  11:26;  John  6:48-63.) 

■  In  all  of  these,  and  His  other  works,  the  Spirit  comes  into  the  most 
intimate  fellowship  with  the  people  of  God.  As  the  Father  attains 
nearness  by  the  endearing  relation  of  the  Fatherhood  to  sons  who  cry 
unto  Him  with  the  spirit  of  adoption,  and  as  the  Son  becomes  an  ob- 
ject of  supreme  affection  because  of  his  loving  sacrifice,  and  sufferings, 
so  the  Spirit,  seeks  the  intimacy  of  an  indweller  in  believers,  that  He 
may  develop  their  graces,  and  become  to  them  a  present  Witness, 
and  Comforter  in  the  bodily  absence  of  their  incarnate  Lord.  (1  Cor. 
3=16  17). 

The  subordination  of  the  Spirit  in  this  work,  is  revealed,  in  general, 
in  the  statements  that  He  is  sent  by  the  Father,  and  the  Son.  (John 
14:16.17;  15:26).  But  it  is  taught,  also,  more  particularly.  It  is 
Christ  that  is  to.  baptize  in  the  Spirit,  (Matt.  3:11),  and  thus  through 
.Him  to  produce  the  results  of  his  work.  It  is  the  Father  unto  whom 
men  come  through  the  Spirit  in  prayer.  (Eph.  6:18).  It  is  the  Fa- 
ther who  justifies,  and  adopts,  though  through  the  influences  of  the 
Spirit.  It  is  the  image  of  Christ,  not  of  Himself,  into  which  He  trans-: 
forms  believers.  The  ordinances  also  are  of  Christ's  appointment,  and 
are  especially  fitted  to  set  forth  his  work,  and  only  that  of  the  Spirit 
in  a  secondary  way.  Even  the  indwelling  is  that  believers  may  be 
"builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God."    .     .. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  180 

We  have  thus  seen,  that  in  the  various  works  of  the  Trinity  with- 
out, the  same  subordination  of  office  appears  as  is  found  in  the  mode 
of  subsistence  within.  This  subordination,  in  both  respects,  should  be 
recognized  because  taught  in  God's  word.  Atthe  same  time  it  must 
never  be  forgotten,  that  the  same  word  as  distinctly  declares  the 
perfect  equality  of  the  Three  Persons  in  the  Divine  Nature,  which 
allows  no  inferiority  of  any  one  of  them  as  God. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  182 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XVII. 


CREATION. 

It  is  natural  that  the  origin  of  the  universe  should  have  been  one 
of  the  most  prominent  subjects  of  inquiry  among  men.  Various  theo- 
ries have  been  presented,  not  only  by  those  who  have  been  guided  by 
Reason  only,  but  even  by  others  to  whom  Revelation  has  been  known, 
but  not  accepted  as  authoritative.  All  theories,  however,  may  be 
generally  reduced  to  four. 

1.  That  which  asserts  that  matter  is  the  one  eternal,  self  existent 
substance  from  which  all  else  proceeds. 

2.  That  which  regards  it  as  an  emanation  from  God. 

3.  That  which  maintains  that  matter  is  itself  eternal,  but  has  been 
acted  upon  by  God,  who  has  used  its  substance  in  the  construction 
of  all  things,  thus  giving  to  them  form,  and  life. 

4.  That  which  accords  with  the  Scripture  teaching,  that  the  uni- 
verse has  been  made  absolutely  out  of  nothing,  by  the  active  exercise 
of  the  will,  and  power  of  God. 

It  is  the  duty  of  Theology  to  examine  each  of  these  theories,  and  to 
set  forth  the  reasons  for  believing  that  matter  is  neither  self  existent, 
and  independently  eternal,  nor  an  emanation  from  God,  nor  mere  ma- 
terial used  by  Him;  but  has  been  created  out  of  nothing. 

1.  Matter  is  not  the  one  eternal,  self  existent  substance  from  which 
all  else  proceed. 

(1.)  If  it  is;  then  mind  is  the  product  of  matter,  and  not  mat- 
ter that  of  mind. 

The  universe  presents  to  us  both  mind,  and  matter.  Each  of 
these  must  exist  independently  of  each  other,  or  the  one  must  have 


183  Abstract  of  Theology. 

been  the  production  of  the  other.  Which  then  has  been  the  produc- 
ing cause  ?  Have  the  mental  powers  which  are  exhibited  by  man 
been  the  development  of  forces  inherent  in  matter,  which  through 
various  processes  have  finally  attained  to  self  consciousness,  and 
thought,  and  purpose,  such  as  we  find  in  man  ?  or  is  there  some  infi- 
nite mind,  which  has  originated  all  things,  both  mind,  and  matter  ? 

The  greater  reasonableness  of  the  supposition  that  mind  has  origin- 
ated matter  is  ably  set  forth  by  Dr.  Hovey  in  his  Manual  of  Theology, 
pp.  28-39.  He  contends  that  it  is  more  reasonable  to  suppose,  (1.) 
that  there  is  one  original,  and  self-existent  Force,  or  Being  than  more 
than  one;  (2  )  that  Matter  is  a  product  of  Mind  rather  than  Mind  of 
Matter;  (3.)  that  the  order  of  the  universe  is  due  to  a  Supreme  Mind 
rather  than  to  forces  co-operating  together  without  purpose ;  (4.) 
that  the  vegetable  world  is  a  product  of  Mind  organizing  Matter, 
rather  than  of  Matter  organizing  itself;  (5.)  that  the  animal  world  is 
a  product  of  Mind,  imparting  a  higher  organizing  principle  to  vege- 
table elements,  rather  than  of  vegetable  forces  acting  alone;  (6.) 
that  man  as  a  rational  being,  is  a  product  of  Mind,  giving  a  higher 
principle  of  life  to  animal  being,  rather  than  of  mere  vital  forces  act- 
ing without  reason ;  (7.)  that  man  as  a  moral  being,  is  a  product  of 
the  Supreme  Mind,  itself  moral,  rather  than  of  vital  forces  that  have 
no  moral  insight;  (8.)  that  man,  as  a  religious  being,  is  a  product  of  the 
Supreme  Mind  rather  than  of  mere  vital  forces. 

The  above  are  simply  condensed  statements  of  the  mere  propositions 
laid  down  by  Dr.  Hovey.  His  full  argument  shows  conclusively  how 
utterly  unreasonable  is  the  idea  that  Mind  should  have  proceeded 
from  Matter,  and  not  produced  it.  But,  if  so,  it  is  equally  unreason- 
able that  matter  should  be  the  one  originating   cause  of  the  universe. 

(2.)  The  same  fact  appears  from  the  existence  of  the  laws  which 
control  matter.  Matter  has  fixed  limitations  within  which  alone  it 
can  act.  Its  movements,  its  changes  of  form,  its  developments,  and 
indeed  all  things  connected  with  it,  are  governed  by  fixed,  and,  so  far 
as  we  can  see,  unchangeable  laws.  These  laws  can  be  examined,  and 
known,  and  made  the  basis  of  the  action  of  men.  Now  these  laws  can 
be  accounted  for  only  in  one  of  three  ways.  Either  they  belong  to 
matter  as  a  necessity  of  its  nature,  or  it  must  have  the  power  to  give 
to  itself  laws,  or  they  have  been  imposed  upon  it  by  a  superior  intelli- 
gence. But  if  the  first  be  true,  then  that  necessity  of  nature  would 
not  only  make  these  laws  unchangeable,  for  whatever  exists  of  neces- 
sity exists  without  possibility  of  change,  but  would  likewise  make  it 
impossible  for  men  to  conceive  of  change  in  them  in  any  respect.    But, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  184 

the  fact,  that  there  is  such  great  diversity  among  the  scientific  theories 
which  attempt  to  develop  the  laws  controlling  nature  in  many  of  its 
aspects,  and  that  there  seems  no  absurdity,  or  natural  impossibility 
that  the  law  should  accord  with  any  one  of  these  theories,  or  be  dif- 
ferent from  it,  evinces  that  there  is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  that 
the  material  universe  might  have  been  placed  under  very  different 
laws  from  those  which  exist. 

But  the  second  of  these  suppositions  cannot  be  true,  because  Matter 
■must  then,  in  some  aspect,  have  had  intelligence  to  understand,  and 
establish  law  before  the  existence  of  Mind  in  any  form ;  for  science 
teaches  that  created  mind,  which,  upon  the  supposition,  is  the  only 
kind  of  existent  mind,  comes  forth  in  connection  with  the  higher 
organisms  of  existence,  and  long  after' apparent  operation  of  the  laws 
which  regulate  matter. 

It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  the  laws  of  matter  have  been  imposed 
by  a  Superior  Intelligence,  and,  consequently,  that  Matter  cannot  be 
the  Eternal,  Self  Existent  substance,  from  which  all  else  proceeds. 

(3.)  The  incapacity  of  Matter  to  create  anything  shows  that  it  is 
not  self-existent,  and  eternal.  All  that  is  claimed  for  matter  is  the 
power  to  develop  one  form  into  another.  It  is  even  denied  that  there 
has  been  any  increase  in  its  original  materials  since  it  first  began  to 
be.  But  it  is  evident,  that  whatever  cannot  be  the  cause  of  existence 
to  others,  cannot  be  the  cause  of  its  own  existence,  or  be  self-existent. 
The  latter  is  a  far  higher  power  than  the  former. 

»  (4.)  That  matter  is  not  eternally  self-existent  is  also  manifest  from 
the  fact  that  it  exists  in  time.  The  laws  of  time  require  succession  of 
moments,  and  limits  of  duration.  Matter  could  not  be  eternal  in 
any  other  way  than  through  the  existence  of  an  infinite  series  of 
finite  periods,  which  is  absurd. 

2.     Matter  is  not  an  emanation  from  God. 

That  which  goes  forth  from  God  must  either  be  from  His  nature,  or 
from  His  mere  will,  and  power.  But  the  latter  would  be  a  mere 
creation  out  of  nothing  since  it  would  not  be  something  produced  out 
-of  Himself.  An  emanation  from  God  must,  therefore,  proceed  from 
•His  nature.     But  it  cannot  be  of  this  character. 

-•  (a.)  Because,  if  from  His  nature,  .it  must  possess  the  attributes  of 
that  nature,  and  must  exist  in  the  same  mode  of  existence  with  it. 
But' matter  has  none  of  the  attributes  which  belong  to  God.  Nor  is 
the  mode  of  its  existence  like  His.  It  has  neither  self-existence,  nor 
eternity  of  existence,  nor, infinity  of  space,  for  it  is  composed  of  finite 


185  Abstract  of  Theology. 

parts,  nor  of  time,  because  it  exists  in  successive  moments  which  are 
finite,  and  measureable.  It  has  not  intelligence,  nor  purposing  power, 
nor  can  it  have  wisdom,  or  goodness,  nor  can  it  exercise  justice,  nor 
experience  love. 

(b.)  An  emanation  from  the  nature  of  God  would  be  opposed  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  Unity  of  God.  That  which  thus  proceeds  would 
be  as  truly  God  as  that  from  which  it  comes  forth.  We  should,  there- 
fore, have  two  Gods.  Indeed,  as  matter  itself  is  capable  of  indefinite 
division,  there  would  be  an  indefinite  number  of  Gods.  The  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity  gives  no  support  to  such  an  emanation  as  Matter  would 
necessarily  be,  because  it  does  not  teach  an  emanation  from  the  nature 
of  God,  for  the  Divine  Nature  remains  One  only,  and  is  not  divided 
among  the  Three  Persons,  but  is  the  common  substance  in  which  they 
subsist.  In  order  that  Matter  should  subsist  in  God  in  like  manner, 
it  must  itself  have  a  conscious  personal  existence,  and  have  all  the 
attributes  of  God,  and  have  the  same  mode  of  existence. 

3.  Neither  is  matter  a  substance  upon  which  God  has  simply  acted 
in  the  production  of  the  Universe. 

(a.)  The  evidence  that  it  is  not  eternal  shows  that  it  was  not  thus 
present  of  itself  with  God  furnishing  material  for  His  workmanship. 
If  it  existed  at  any  time  in  an  unorganized  condition,  it  must  either 
have  been  first  created  in  that  condition,  or  permitted  to  lapse  into  it 
from  its  original  form. 

(b.)  The  power,  and  right  thus  to  act  upon  matter  must  either  have 
been  conferred  upon  God,  as  it  is  on  us,  or  it  must  have  arisen  from 
His  having  created  it.  But  as  there  was  no  one  to  confer  this  power 
upon  God,  the  Universe  must  have  been  created  by  Him. 

4.  The  theory,  then,  of  a  creation  out  of  nothing,  by  the  mere  will, 
and  power  of  God,  is  the  only  reasonable  supposition  upon  which  to 
account  for  the  existence  of  the  Universe.  It  is  not  an  objection  to 
this  reasonableness,  that  it  was  first  made  known  by  Revelation. 
Being  thus  revealed,  it  appears  to  reason,  not  only  to  be  fully  accord- 
ant with  all  the  facts  and  phenomena  of  matter,  but  to  be  the  only 
theory  which  can  account  for  them.  That  this  theory  has  been  sug- 
gested by  the  language  of  God's  word  makes  it  no  less  reasonable  than 
if  suggested  by  some  mere  man.  It  is  at  once  seen  not  to  be  an  im- 
possibility. It  is  not  a  creation  out  of  nothing  in  the  sense  that  it 
has  no  cause,  nor  that  it  has  been  produced  without  the  existence 
of  forces  adequate  to  the  end.  The  cause,  and  the  forces  are  in 
God;  in  His  will,  and  wisdom,  and  power,  and  goodness.     It  cannot 


Abstract  of  Theology.  186 

be  said  to  come  from  nothing,  for  it  comes  from  God.  The  mind 
readily  rests  in  such  a  theory.  It  fully  answers  all  the  demands  of 
the  problem  to  be  solved.  It  is  accompanied  with  none  of  the  diffi- 
culties which  press  against  the  theories  based  upon  the  Eternity  of 
Matter.  The  manner  in  which  God  works  is  indeed  unknown  to  us; 
but  that  He  may  so  work  is  highly  accordant  with  reason. 

The  creation  of  the  world  out  of  nothing  is  the  plain  teaching*  of 
Scripture.  It  is  true,  that  the  phrase  to  create  from  nothing  is  not 
found,  except  in  one  of  the  apocryphal  books  of  the  Old  Testament. 
(2  Maccabees  7:28),  But  the  fact  itself  is  taught  expressly  in  Heb. 
11:3.  "Through  faith  we  understand,  that  the  worlds  were  framed 
by  the  word  of  God;  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of 
things  which  do  appear."  The  account  of  the  general  creation  in 
Genesis  conveys  the  same  idea,  and  a  like  impression  is  produced  by 
the  Scriptures  generally.  It  has  been  argued  from  the  verbs,  used  to 
declare  the  creation,  both  in  Genesis  and  elsewhere;  but  the  argument 
is  doubtful  as  these  words  are  also  applied  to  acts  of  creation  out  of 
preexistent  matter. 

This  creation  out  of  nothing  seems  essential  to  the  power  of  God 
over  matter.  If  He  did  not  create  it,  it  exists  independently  of  Him; 
but  if  it  is  His  creation,  then  He  has  absolute  control,  not  only  over 
the  forms  into  which  He  has  shaped  it,  and  over  the  laws  He  has  given 
it,  but  over  matter  itself  in  every  respect. 

A  distinction  is  made  between  immediate,  or  primary  creation,  or 
that  act  by  which  God  acts  directly  without  the  use  of  preexistent 
materials,  and  mediate,  or  secondary  creations,  or  those  acts  by  which 
out  of  preexistent  materials,  He  produces  His  creatures.  The  uni- 
verse of  matter  was  an  immediate  creation.  The  body  of  Adam 
was  a  mediate  one,  and  so  also  are  those  of  all  His  posterity. 

Several  objections  have  been  presented  against  the  full  inspiration 
of  the  account  of  the  Creation  given  in  the  first  chapters  of  Genesis. 

(1.)  It  is  claimed  that  the  general  account  which  concludes  with 
the  third  verse  of  the  second  chapter  cannot  be  an  inspired  writing, 
because  it  was  evidently  taken  from  some  other  source,  and  incorpor- 
ated in  this  book. 

In  reply  it  may  be'said. 

(a.)     That  this  has  not  been,  and  cannot  be  established. 

(b.)     That  if  it  were,  it  would  not  affect  its  inspiration. 


187  Abstract  of  Theology. 

It  is  much  more  probable  that  the  genealogies  of  Christ,  given  by 
Matthew,  and  Luke,  were  from  the  records  of  the  family  of  David. 
The  inspiration  of  Matthew,  and  Luke,  and  Moses  does  not  depend 
upon  these  having  been  made  as  direct  revelations  to  them;  but  upon 
the  fact  that  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  insert  them  in  the 
books  they  were  writing ;  such  moving  of  the  Spirit  being,  however, 
an  evidence  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  records.  If,  therefore,  it  could 
be  *proved  that  this  account  existed  long  before  the  days  of  Moses,  this 
proof  would,  in  no  respect,  militate  against  its  inspiration. 

(2.)  Another  objection  is  that  Genesis  represents  the  Creation  as 
occurring  in  six  literal  days  of  twenty -four  hours  each,  and  that  geo- 
logical science  has  proved  that  the  world  was  created  in  periods  of 
time  much  longer. 

But  the  account  does  not  necessarily  teach  that  this  work  was  done 
in  six  such  days. 

(a.)  Because  the  word  "day"  is  sometimes  an  indefinite  term,  the 
true  meaning  of  which  must  be  ascertained  by  the  context.  It  is  ap- 
plied to  each  of  these  periods  in  the  first  chapter,  and  also  to  all  of 
them  unitedly  in  Gen.  2:4.  The  Scriptures  frequently  use  it  very 
indefinitely,  as  the  "day  of  trouble,"  "of  wrath,"  "of  temptation,"  "of 
vengeance,  etc."  It  even  embraces  the  whole  period  of  a  captivity,  as 
the  day  of  Jerusalem,  Ps.  137:7;  of  Egypt,  Ezek.  30:9.  These,  and 
many  other  applications,  show  that  frequently  it  means  merely  a 
period,    and  the  length  of  that  period  must  be  ascertained  otherwise. 

(b.)  Because  the  Hebrew  words  translated  "evening",  and  "morn- 
ing", while  almost  always  used  for  those  portions  of  the  day,  do  not 
necessarily  indicate  a  day  of  twenty-four  hours  duration,  but  may 
denote  only  the  changes  which  occur,  periodically,  in  any  cyclical 
period.  The  root  ideas  of  these  words  are  "the  mingling"  (evening) 
and  "the  bursting  forth"  (morning).  They  are  thus  beautifully  de- 
scriptive of  a  time  of  intermingling  of  the  elements,  followed  by  a 
period  of  darkness,  and  that  by  the  bursting  forth  of  the  appearance 
of  a  new  creation,  the  whole  forming  one  cyclical  period.  The  length 
of  the  period  is  not  necessarily  indicated  by  them.  The  use,  also,  of 
these  words  before  the  appearance  of  the  Sun,  and  Moon,  on  the  fourth 
day,  very  decidedly  confirms  the  idea  that  the  periods  need  not  be 
those  of  an  ordinary  day. 

(c.)  While  it  is  admitted  that  the  resting  of  God  upon  the  seventh 
day,  in  connection  with  the  language  of  the  commandment  respecting 
the  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  favours  the  idea  of  days  of  twenty  four 
hours;  even  this  does  not  make  necessary  such  days.    We  know  not  what 


Abstract  of  Theology.  188 

is  exactly  meant  by  God's  resting  on  the  seventh  day.  There  is  cer- 
tainly something  figurative,  or  anthropomorphic  about  it.  The  "rest" 
of  this  first  chapter  may  represent  the  ceasing  from  creative  work  in 
this  world,  and  the  seventh  day  of  rest,  to  which  man  is  called,  may 
be  commemorative,  and  typical  of  it ;  the  latter  being  brief,  and  in- 
ferior, in  comparison  with  it,  as  man  is  but  an  atom  in  the  creation  of 
the  Great  God  of  this  greater  Sabbath. 

From  these  facts  it  is  manifest  that  we  are  not  compelled  to  main- 
tain that  the  creation  was  limited  to  six  ordinary  days.  This  is  all  that 
is  necessary.  If  science  can  show  the  impossibility  of  such  a,  six  day 
creation,  we  can  reply  that  the  Scriptures  do  not  necessarily  teach  it. 
And  the  fact  of  its  possible  concurrence  with  scientific  discoveries, 
heretofore  so  unlooked  for,  becomes  strong  evidence  of  the  inspiration 
of  the  account. 

3.  Another  objection  is,  that  according  to  any  Scripture  chronol- 
ogy which  we  have,  man  has  been  on  the  earth  only  six,  or  eight 
thousand  years,  and  yet  that  fossil  remains  of  men  have  been  found 
who  must  have  existed  fifty  thousand  years  ago,  or  more. 

(a)  But  satisfactory  proof  of  this  has  not  yet  been  afforded. 
Scientific  men  themselves  are  not  agreed  about  it. 

(b.)  But  if  true,  the  Scriptures  are  not  necessarily  wrong,  nor  un- 
inspired. The  chronology  of  the  different  forms  in  which  the  Old 
Testament  has  come  down  to  us  is  known  to  vary.  This  is  attribut- 
able to  mistakes  in  copying,  which  can  more  easily  occur  in  the  repre- 
sentations of  numbers,  than  of  any  other  ideas.  It  may  be  that  Adam 
was  created  more  than  eight  thousand  years  ago,  and  that  the  original 
chronology  of  the  Scriptures  so  taught.  It  may  be,  that,  in  connection 
with  that  greater  antiquity,  if  all  were  known  about  it,  would  appear 
explanations  of  the  great  age  to  which  many  of  the  Patriarchs  are  said 
to  have  arrived.  Nor  is  it  impossible,  that  other  races  of  men  existed 
before  Adam,  either  such  as  he  himself  was,  with  both  spiritual,  and 
animal  life,  or  they  with  animal  life  only,  and  he  with  the  specially 
added  endowment  of  a  spiritual  nature. 

While  these  various  objections  thus  seem  not  to  render  impossible 
the  absolute  verity  of  this  Genesis  account  of  Creation,  there  are  other 
facts  which  ought  to  be  remembered  which  support  the  narrative. 

(1.)  That  it  is  natural  that  the  Scripture  should  use  phenomenal 
language  only  as  to  scientific  matters.  We  do  this  every  time  we 
speak  of  the  sun  rising,  and  setting,  and  no  one  misunderstands,  or  is 
deceived.     This  is  the  only  method  in  which  a  book  for  all  ages  could 


189  Abstract  of  Theology. 

*. 

refer  to  scientific  matters.      Had  the   Bible   used    language   exactly 

suited  to  the  science  of  to-day,  embracing  all  its  best  established 
theories,  in  less  than  fifty  years,  it  would  have  to  be  admitted  that  it 
could  not  be  from  God,  because  of  its  lack  of  truth.  Had  it  been 
written  in  the  language  of  true  science  originally,  age  after  age  would 
have  rejected  it  as  false.     It  could  only  treat  science   phenomenally. 

(2.)  But,  while  thus  written,  it  often  gives  underlying  evidence  that 
God  its  author  knew  truths  of  science,  that  could  not  have  been  known 
to  the  science  of  that  day.  This  is  peculiarly  shown  in  this  account 
of  Creation.  Light  here  appears  before  the  Sun,  and  the  Moon.  The 
order  of  the  creations  accord  generally  with  that  taught  by  Geology 
from  an  examination  of  the  stratifications  of  the  rocks.  Man  is  made 
after  all  other  creations,  and  his  body  is  made  of  the  dust  of  the  earth. 
Even  the  universe  was  not  made  as  it  now  appears,  for,  while  the 
first  verse  of  the  first  chapter  states  the  creation  of  both  heavens  and 
earth,  the  second  teaches  that,  before  the  formative  process  began, 
the  earth  was  in  a  chaotic  condition.  The  truth,  is,  that,  so  generally, 
and  yet  so  accurately,  are  the  statements  made,  that,  even  if  it  could 
be  proved  that  the  World  is  the  production  of  original  concurrent 
atoms,  or  of  a  universal  Fire  Mist,  or  the  development  of  molecules, 
there  is  nothing  in  this  Genesis  account  to  commit  it  to  the  contrary. 
Even  the  creation  of  animal  life,  including  that  of  man  is  from  the 
earth,  which  is  directed  to  bring  forth.  The  soul  of  man  is  the 
only  living  thing  which  is  declared  to  have  been  a  direct  creation 
of  God. 

Several  theories  have  been  presented  for  the  full  reconciliation 
of  Genesis,  and  Geology.  It  is  not  necessary  to  state  them  here. 
It  is  enough  that  there  are  possible  means  of  such  reconciliation, 
and  that  any  one,  or  more  of  them,  may  be  true.  The  veracity  of 
the  Scriptures  is  otherwise  abundantly  proved.  Here  it  is  charged 
that  they  speak  falsely.  Were  a  man  of  well  known  probity,  and 
honour,  thus  assailed,  and  facts  however  strong,  or  cumulative,  pre- 
sented against  him,  it  would  suffice  to  support  his  denial  by  show- 
ing that  there  are  possible  circumstances  which  may  explain  all 
seeming  falsehood.  So  with  the  Scriptures.  They  are  charged 
with  error.  It  is  enough  to  show  one  possible  explanation.  But, 
in  this  case,  we  can  show  several.  This  would  suffice.  But  we 
are  justified  in  challenging  those  who  deny  inspiration  to  account 
for  the  many  coincidences  with  the  scientific  teaching,  found  in 
this  narrative. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  190 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XVIII. 


Creation  of  Angels. 

In  the  last  lecture  reference  was  made  only  incidentally  to  the 
creation  of  intelligent,  moral,  and  spiritual  beings.  There  are  several 
matters  connected  with  such  creations  which  deserve  special  consider- 
ation. The  creation  of  angels  will  be  first  treated  because  of  their 
probable  earlier  existence,  and  superior  nature,   and   position. 

I.  Some  have  denied  the  utility  of  this  inquiry  because  men  owe 
angels  no  duty  of  homage,  or  worship,  and  because  their  usual  in- 
visibility forbids  that  their  presence  for  good,  or  evil,  should  be  known. 
But  it  is  surely  important  to  know  something  of  beings  who 
have  been  so  intimately  associated  with  the  past  history  of  man,  both 
for  weal,  and  woe.  [See  Article  of  Moses  Stuart  in  Bib.  Sacra,  Vol. 
O,  p.  88.] 

II.  It  is  said  by  some  that  reason  decides  against  the  existence  of 
such  beings,  or  at  least  against  their  appearance  to  man.  But  on  the 
contrary  nothing  can  be  more  rational  than  the  belief  that  the  God , 
whose  animal  creatures  in  this  world  are  of  so  many  kinds,  and  grada- 
tions, should  not  stop  with  the  first  creation  of  moral,  and  intellectual 
beings,  but  should  extend  upward  his  creative  skill,  and  power, 
throughout  numerous  classes  of  similar,  or  superior  nature  to  man. 
Nor  is  there  anything  unreasonable  in  the  supposition  that,  while  or- 
dinarily these  may  be  confined  to  the  exercise  of  influences  under  the 
laws  of  mind,  and  spirit,  at  times,  at  God's  will,  they  should  appear 
in  bodily  forms  recognizable  by  the  senses.  [Stuart  in  Bib.  Sacra, 
Vol.  0,  pp.  90-93.] 


19.1  Abstract  of  Theology. 

III.  But  the  Scriptures  plainly  teach  that  there  are  angels,  and 
that  they  visit  the  inhabitants  of  this  world. 

Its  general  tenor  teaches  it.  Even  superficial  readers  of  the  Word 
of  God  must  be  convinced  that  it  reveals  the  existence,  and  presence 
with  man,  of  personal  beings  of  another  sphere,  through  whom  God 
communicates  to  him,  and  aids,  and  protects  him;  as  well  as  of  other 
angels  whose  influence  is  for  evil,  and  is  destructive  of  happiness. 

There  are  some,  however,  who  declare  that  all  such  teachings  are 
purely  figurative,  and  that  the  good  angels  of  the  Word  are  "no  more 
than  the  kindness,  and  mercy  of  God,  and  the  evil  angels  His  afflict- 
ive punishing,  or  chastising  acts." 

Such  interpretations  deserve  the  charge  of  "handling  the  Word  of 
God  deceitfully."  But  even  if  they  were  admitted  to  be  correct,  as  to 
much,  or  most  of  the  language  used  as  to  angels,  there  are  some  in- 
stances of  their  appearance  which  cannot  thus  be  explained  away. 
The  interview  between  the  angel  and  Hagar.  (Gen.  16;7-14),  is  one 
of  these,  That  with  the  wife  of  Manoah  is  another.  (Judges  13:2-21). 
Signal  instances  also  are  those  with  Zacharias,  (Luke  1:5-20),  and 
with  Mary,  (Luke  1=26-38,)  and  with  Mary  Magdalene,  and  the 
other  women,  (Matt.  28:1-7).  Those  statements  are  especially  conclu- 
sive which  are  made  in  Mark  12:25,  and  Luke  20:36,  in  which  it  is 
declared  as  to  the  saints,  that,  "when  they  shall  rise  from  the  dead, 
they  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage;  but  are  as  the  angels 
which  are  in  heaven."  There  is  also  no  meaning  in  Hebrews  1:4.  if 
there   are   no  angels.     [See   Kitto's  Ency.  Art.  Angels.] 

IV.  Various  names  are  given  to  angels  as  expressive  either  of 
their  nature,  or  offices. 

1.  The  chief  of  these  is  descriptive  of  their  office.  Angel  means 
a  messenger.  It  is  a  word  not  confined  to  them,  nor  to  any  other 
kind  of  messengers  of  God.  (1.)  It  is  used  of  ordinary  messengers 
among  men,  1  Sam.  11:3;  Job  1:14;  Luke  9:52;  (2)  of  prophets, 
Mai.  3:1 ;  (3.)  of  priests,  Mai.  2:7 ;  (4.)  of  ministers  of  the  gospel, 
Rev.  1:20;  (5.)  of  impersonal  agents,  as  of  pestilence,  2  Sam.  24:16.17. 
Plagues,  likewise,  are  denominated  "evil  angels,"  Ps.  78:49.  Paul 
also  calls  his  "thorn  in  the  flesh"  "an  angel  of  Satan,''  2  Cor.  12:7. 
(6.)  It  is  also  applied  to  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity,  as  "the 
angel  of  His  presence,"  Isa.  63:9,  and  "the  angel  of  the  covenant," 
Mai.  3:1.  (7.)  The  name,  however,  is  generally  applied  to  the  angels 
of  God  as  spiritual  beings.     See  Kitto's  Ency.  Art,  Angels. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  192 

a  2.     The  name  Spirit  is  also  given  to  them,  Ps.  104:4;  Mark  1:27; 
Heb.  1:7.     This  name  is  descriptive  of  their  nature. 

3.  They  are  called  "Sons  of  God,"  Job  1:6  ;  2:1 ;  38:7. 

4.  They  are  called  "Gods,"  Ps.  8=5.  The  Hebrew  for  angels  here 
is  Gods.     Compare  also  Ps.  97:7,  with  Heb.  1=6. 

5.  They  are  called  "servants  of  God,"  Job  4:18  ;  Ps.  103:21. 

6.  They  are  called  "Holy  ones."     Job  4=18  ;15:15  ;  Dan.  4:13.17. 

7.  They  are  called  "Watchers"  and  "Watchmen."     Dan.  4:13.17, 

8.  They  are  called  "Thrones,  Dominions,  Principalities,  Powers, 
and  Mights."     Eph.  1:21 ;  Col.  1:16. 

9.  There  are  other  names  which  are  probably  applied  to  them,  as 
"Cherubim,"  "Seraphim,"  and  "Hosts,"  as  when  God  is  called  the 
"Lord  of  Hosts."  See  Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith,  First  Lines,  p.  328.  Also 
Kitto's  Ency.  Art.  Angels. 

V.  We  know  very  little  of  the  nature  of  angels.  They  are  spoken 
of,  but  not  described  in  the  Scriptures.  Yet  some  facts  plainly 
appear.  #  » 

1.  They  are  spiritual  beings.  This  is  indicated  by  the  only  name 
derived  from  their  nature. 

Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith  attributes  to  them  corporeal  powers,  analogous  to  the 
substance  of  light,  or  of  the  electric  fluid,  and  claims  that  thus  light 
is  cast  upon  such  Scripture  passages  as  speak  of  their  relations  to 
space,  and  of  their  locomotion,  as  Luke  2=9  ;  Matt.  28:2;  Acts  1:10; 
12:7.     [First  Lines,  p,  329.] 

Moses  Stuart,  on  the  contrary,  maintains  that  "angels  are  incor- 
ruptible, immaterial,  immortal,  and,  in  their  proper  nature,  impalpable 
to  the  senses."     [Bib.  Sac.  vol.  0,  p.  99.] 

This  seems  to  be  the  most  correct,  and  Scriptural  view;  as  it  is  also 
the  one  most  generally  held.  All  the  difficulties  it  encounters  may 
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  we  have  to  speak  of  angels  as  we  do  of 
God  in  the  language  of  man,  which  cannot  always  convey  exact,  and 
adequate  ideas  of  them.     [See  Stuart  in  Bib.  Sacra,  vol.  0,  pp.  94-98.] 

The  declarations  that  "a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,"  Luke 
24:39,  that  "God  is  a  spirit,"  John  4:24,  that  the  children  of  the 
resurrection  will  "neither  marry  nor  be  given  in  marriage,"  and  that 
"they  cannot  die  any  more  because  they  are  made  like  to  the  angels." 
Luke  20=35.36;  Matt.  22:30,  indicate  that  the  nature  of  angels  is 
truly  spiritual.  [Moses  Stuart,  Bib.  Sac.  vol.  0,  p.  100.]  The  abode 
of  the  angels  in  heaven,  and  the  offices  they  perform  confirm  this  idea. 


193  Abstract  of  Theology. 

After  all,  however,  it  is  unimportant  to  decide  whether  they  are 
simply  spirits,  or  have  some  spiritual  body,  such  as  will  belong  to  the 
saints  after  the  resurrection.  Either  view  maintains  all  that  is  essen- 
tial to  the  spirituality  of  their  nature. 

2.  They  are  intelligent  beings.  This  seems  to  follow  necessarily 
from  their  being  spirits.  But  it  is  plainly  taught  in  the  Scriptures. 
See  Eph.  3=10;  1  Pet.  1:12;  2  Pet.  2:11.  These  passages  imply  that 
they  are  superior  to  men  in  this  respect. 

3.  They  possess  moral  natures.  They  are  not  only  made  capable 
of  knowing  God's  excellence,  and  of  worshipping  Him;  but  are  also 
spoken  of  as  being  under  moral  obligation,  so  that  they  are  rewarded 
for  obedience,  and  punished  for  disobedience.  It  may  also  be  argued 
from  the  fact,  that  their  ministry  in  this  life  seems  confined  to  moral 
and  spiritual  things.     Heb.  1=14. 

There  are  certain  facts  which  result  from  the  nature  of  angels, 

1.  As  spiritual,  and  intelligent  beings,  they  must  possess  freedom 
of  will. 

2.  They  are  not  subject  to  the  restrictions,  and  conditions  of  the 
world  of  sense.  They  do  not  occupy  space,  because  they  have  no 
bodily  form.  Nevertheless,  they  are  not  omnipresent  as  is  God,  but 
they  have  location.  Neither  do  they  attain  knowledge  through  the 
senses,  nor  are  they  affected  by  bodily  appetites,  or  desires, 

3.  While  in  their  original  innocent  condition  they  must  be  happy. 
It  is  believed  from  the  general  tenor  of  Scripture,  that  the  angels 
that  kept  their  first  estate  have  been  confirmed  in  their  happiness. 
Such  confirmation,  however,  results  from  the  promises  of  God  as  a 
reward  for  their  obedience,  and  is  bestowed  by  Him  not  as  an  act  of 
justice,  but  in  accordance  with  His  veracity.  No  obedience  can  bring 
God  under  obligation  to  confirm. 

4.  They  must  also  be  possessed  of  great  power. 

Christ  intimates  that  their  power  is  greater  than  that  of  man,  (Matt. 
26:53,  and  this  fact  is  plainly  taught  in  2.  Pet.  2:11.  See  also  2  Thess. 
1:7,  and  Eph.  1:21.  This  power  is  seen  also  in  their  performance  of 
supernatural  works,  as  in  the  rolling  away  of  the  stone  at  the  sepul- 
chre of  Christ,  and  in  the  opening  of  the  prison  door  of  Peter. 
Perhaps  it  was  most  wonderfully  exhibited  in  the  strengthening  of  the 
Saviour  in  Gethsemane  by  the  angel  which  appeared.     Luke  22:43. 

Dr.  A.  D.  C.  Twesten  makes  the  following  five  valuable  suggestions 
as  to  the  exercise  by  angels  of  power  over  man. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  194 

1.  "Whatever  may  be  the  efficiency  attributed  to  the  angels,  their 
relation  to  us  can  only  be  that  of  one  finite  to  another  finite  cause; 
and  is  never  to  be  imagined  as  similar  to  the  relation  which  God,  or 
Christ,  or  the  Holy  Ghost  sustains  to  us." 

2.  "The  efficiency  of  the  angels  is,  therefore,  always  to  be  repre- 
sented in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  reciprocal  action  established 
between  finite  beings;  hence  it  never  excludes  our  counter-action,  or 
reaction,  and  can  neither  annul  the  power  of  nature,  nor  the  freedom 
of  the  will." 

3.  "All  action  of  angels  upon  the  world  of  sense  can  take  place 
only  under  the  following  conditions;  that  they  enter  into,  or  become 
one  of  the  series  of  causes  there  at  work;  and  that  they  themselves 
act    by   means  of   these    causes,  or   in  the   same  mode  with  them." 

4.  "This  entrance  into  the  series  of  causes  at  work  in  the  world  of 
sense,  may  be  looked  upon  as  an  original,  a  primitive,  perhaps  also  a 
transient  influence;  but  it  can  leave  behind  it  effects  which  will  pro- 
pagate the  primitive  influence,  and  which  may,  therefore,  be  con- 
sidered as  parts  of  the  angelic  efficiency.  Thus,  for  example,  the 
temptation  of  the  first  man  by  Satan  continues  to  operate  in  the  law 
of  sin,  and  death,  which  was  thus  introduced  into  the  world." 

5.  "The  original  entrance  of  angels  into  the  world  of  sense,  seems  not 
to  depend  upon  their  own  good  pleasure  alone  ;  but,  if  we  may'judge 
from  its  infrequency,  to  be  limited  to  narrow  bounds.  In  this  respect, 
and  in  its  very  nature,  it  is  analogous  to  miracles,  and  hence  like 
these,  appears  to  be  specially  attached  to  certain  periods  of  divine 
revelation,  or  of  the  development  of  God's  kingdom  in  this  world." 
[See  the  translation  in  the  Bib.  Sacra,  Vol.  1,  pp.  774-775.] 

VI.  Our  final  inquiry  will  be  into  the  offices  discharged  by  these 
beings. 

1.  Their  chief  duty  is  to  attend  upon  God,  and  perform  His  com- 
mands. This  may  be  said  indeed  to  include  all  that  they  do.  They 
are  God's  messengers. 

2.  They  are  brought  into  contact  with  men  by  these  commands. 
They  are  represented  as  present  at  the  Creation,  at  the  giving  of  the 
Law,  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  after  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness, 
during  the  agony  in  Gethsemane,  and  at  Christ's  resurrection,  and 
ascension.  They  are  deeply  interested  in  the  economy  of  Redemp- 
tion, and  are  constantly  seeking  to  penetrate  into   its  mysteries,  and 


195  Abstract  of  Theology. 

know  its  depths.  They  feel  a  deep  interest  in  man,  and  become  the 
medium  of  messages  to  him.  They  rejoice  over  his  repentance,  and 
are  made  the  means  of  comfort,  protection  and  guidance.  "They  are 
ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  that  are  heirs  of 
salvation."  They  are  also  made  the  messengers  of  God's  vengeance 
to  execute  his  wrath  upon  the  sinful.  Thus  was  it  with  the  angels 
who  visited  Lot,  and  those  who  smote  the  first  born  of  the  land  of 
Egypt.  This  punitive  office  belongs' to  good,  as  well  as  bad  angels, 
and  it  is  more  signally  seen  in  the  events  predicted  of  the  Judgment 
day. 

3.  From  the  intimate  connection,  thus  existing  between  angels,  and 
men,  other  offices  have  been  assigned  to  them.  Guided  by  the  fables 
of  the  Rabbins,  and  led  off,  by  the  peculiar  views  of  Oriental  philos- 
ophy, some  have '  conceived  that  on  each  person  in  this  life  an  angel 
attends  to  guard,  and  protect  him  from  evil. 

This  theory  of  a  guardian  angel  has  been  held  in  various  forms. 
Some  have  confined  his  presence  to  the  good;  some  have  extended  it 
also  to  the  wicked;  some  to  the  elect  before,  or  after  conversion;  some 
to  all  men  alike;  some  have  supposed  two  angels  instead  of  one;  the 
one  good,  the  other  bad.  In  like  manner  has  the  theory  been  held  of 
guardian  angels  over  nations;  some  confining  that  also  to  good  nations, 
others  extending  it  to  all.  That  such  views  existed  among  the  Jews, 
and  that  they  were  also  prevalent  among  the  earlier  Christians  may 
be  admitted;  but  the  scriptural  authority  for  them  is  wanting. 

The  passages  supposed  to  favour  them  may  be  readily  explained 
otherwise.  This  idea  of  guardian  angels  is  earnestly  advocated  by 
Prof.  Stuart,  in  Vol.  0,  of  the  Bibliotheca  Sacra.  He  claims  that  they 
attend  the  good  only. 

The  strongest  points  that  he  makes  are  based  upon  the  attendance  of 
angels  upon  the  footsteps  of  Christ.  That  attendance  is  readily  grant- 
ed; but  they  were  attendants,  not  guardians.  This  is  seen  from  the 
fact,  that,  although  they  strengthened  Him  while  here  on  earth,  as 
His  agony  seemed  to  require,  that  attendance  is  not  confined  to  Christ 
in  this  life,  but  is  spoken  of  as  to  be  continued,  even  after  the  time  of 
His  ascension.  Besides  this,  that  which  is  fatal  to  the  theory  is,  that 
it  was  not  one  special  angel  that  was  present,  but  several  at  one 
time,  and  probably  different  ones  at  different  times.  The  sacred 
Scriptures  never  speak  of  any  one  of  these  as  his  angel,  or  as  the 
angel,  but  only  refer  to  an  angel,  or  to  angels.  This,  however,  is 
but  the  general  sense  in  which  God  is  said  to  send  his  angels,  that 


Abstract  of  Theology.  196 

they  might  be  ministering  spirits  which  fact  is  not  questioned,  but 
is  very  different  from  the  supposition  of  the  one  angel,  who  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  life,  is  ever  present  to  watch  over  every 
man. 

The  Scripture  references,  by  which  Prof.  Stuart  would  prove  this  of 
individual  men,  do  not  at  all  sustain  him.*  They  are  Gen.  31:1.2; 
2  Kings  6;1-17;  Ps.  34:7;  Zech.  3:4-10;  Matt.   18:10;  Acts  12:7-15. 

There  are  indeed  but  two  passages  which  at  all  make  likely  the 
idea  of  guardian  angels  to  individuals.  One  of  these  is  Acts  12:7-15, 
in  which,  we  are  told  that  when  Peter  knocked  at  the  door  of  the 
house,  in  which  were  the  disciples,  on  his  deliverance  from  prison, 
they  were  led  to  say  "it  is  his  angel." 

Of  this  passage  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  refer- 
ence was  not  made  to  the  spirit  of  Peter ;  but  even,  if  not,  the 
language  is  simply  that  of  the  disciples,  expressing  a  sentiment  that 
commonly  prevailed,  and  one  for  which  inspiration  is  not  all  re- 
sponsible, except  as  correctly  reporting  the  language  used.  It  is 
evidently  not  language  which  was  of  faith. 

The  other  passage  is  Matt.  18:10.  This  is  well  paraphrased  by 
Knapp.  "As  we  are  careful  not  to  offend  the  favourites  ol  those  who 
stand  high  in  the  favour  of  earthly  kings,  we  should  be  still  more 
careful  not  to  offend  the  favourites  of  Divine  Providence."  'The 
humbly  pious,  are  those  entrusted  to  the  special  care  of  those  who 
stand  high  in  the  favour  of  God,  (who  behold  his  face)."  Knapp's 
Theology,  p.  212. 

The  Scriptures  that  seem  to  sustain  the  notion  of  guardian  angels 
over  nations  are  Dan.  10=13-70;  Dan.  12*1.  But  here  "Oambysesand 
Alexander  seem  to  be  meant,  and  Michael  is  probably  the  Messiah." 
J.  Pye  Smith,  First  Lines,  p.  331. 

The  following  passages  seem  to  be  opposed  to  the  idea  of  one  angel 
to  one  man,  or  nation.  Gen.  28:12;  32:12;  2  Kings  6:16.17;  Luke 
16:22. 

It  is  further  objected, 

1.  That  this  notion  seems  unworthy  of  the  rank  and  office  of  such 
beings.  But  it  is  replied  that  God  watches  over  us.  This,  however, 
is  very  different  from  the  constant  daily  attendance  upon  us  of  one 
being  of  such  superior  intelligence. 

2.  It  is  rendered  needless  by  the  watchful  care  of  God. 

3.  It  has  led,  and  is  apt  to  lead  to  worship  of  angels. 


197  Abstract  of  Theology. 

4.  It  is  apt  to  derogate  from  the  mediatorial  glory  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith,  p.  331. 

VII.  The  number  of  the  angels  is  unknown,  but  that  it  is  very 
great  is  shown  by  the  following  passages.  Dan.  7:10;  Matt.  26:53; 
Heb.  12:22. 

VIII.  As  to  their  dwelling  place  nothing  definite  can  be  said. 
They  dwell  with  God.  But  is  this  in  one  place,  or  in  many?  There 
own  spiritual  nature,  and  that  of  God  makes  it  probable  that  it  is  in 
many  places. 


Abstract  of  Theology,  198 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XIX. 


FALLEN  ANGELS. 

Superior  spiritual  beings  have  heretofore  been  referred  to  almost 
as  though  there  were  none  except  those  who  yet  retain  their  position 
as  sons  of  God.  Only  a  hint  or  two  has  been  given  which  would  lead 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  others.  But  the  important  rela- 
tion's which  the  angels  bear  to  us,  and  the  great  power  over  us  which 
they  excercise,  render  important  the  consideration  whether  evil  an- 
gels actually  exist,  and  in  what  position  to  us  they  may  be  supposed 
to  stand. 

The  belief  of  eyil  spirits  has  been  almost  universal  in  the  world. 
.  The  exceptions  may  indeed  be  said  to  be  only  the  few  who,  in  more 
"modern  times,  have  supposed  this  universal  opinion  to  be  simply  the 
result  of  superstition. 

The  Jews  undoubtedly  held  this  faith.  It  is  not  disputed  that  it 
is  taught  in  their  later  books,  and  that  in  the  time  of  Christ  the  belief 
in  such  spirits  was  universal.  But  it  has  been  denied  that  such  views 
can  be  traced  prior  to  the  time  of  the  Babylonish  Captivity.  If  by 
this  is  simply  meant  that,  prior  to  that  time  the  Jews  knew  not  of  the 
fall  of  angels  formerly  pure,  it  is  only  equivalent  to  declaring  that 
they  knew  not  in  what  manner  evil  angels  had  come  into  existence. 
But  if  it  is  meant,  as  seems  to  be  the  case,  that  they  did  not  know  of 
the  existence  of  evil  angels,  the  position  may  be  easily  refuted  from 
the  Scriptures.  That  this  is  the  opinion  of  these  objectors,  is  plain 
from  the  fact  that  they  suppose  the  origin  of  these  ideas  was  the  Per- 
sian belief  of  the  two  principles  of  good  and  evil,  which  they  had  met 


199  Abstract  of  Theology^. 

with  in  Chaldea.  That  faith  taught  indeed  the  origin  of  evil  in  this 
world,  but  not  among  the  spiritual  intelligences  above.  Besides  it  at- 
tributed the  existence  of  evil  to  an  antagonistic  principle  to  the  great 
good,  perhaps  equally  powerful,  yet  constantly  contending,  perhaps 
finally  to  be  vanquished. 

The  fact  that  the  existence  of  these  beings  is  taught  at  all,  either  in 
the  Old,  or  the  New  Testament  would  be  sufficient  to  make  it  an  ar- 
ticle of  our  faith.  Yet,  as  this  charge  has  been  made,,  it  is  best  to  refer 
to  it,  and  to  show  from  the  Scripture  proofs  that  it  is  untenable. 
The  truth  is  that  with  the  exception  of  Zechariah  3;1.2,  (where  the 
high  priest  Joshua  is  standing  before  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  Satan 
standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  him),  there  is  no  passage  in 
all  the  post  Babylonish  Scriptures  by  which  the  doctrine  of  evil  an- 
gels could  be  proved,  while  there  are  numerous  passages  in  the 
earlier  books. 

In  that  book,  supposed  of  all  others  to  be  the  oldest,  and  by  many 
ascribed  to  Moses,  the  book  of  Job,  Satan  is  represented  as  presenting 
himself  among  the  Sons  of  God  before  the  Lord.     Job.  1:6. 

This  may  be  said  to  be  a  merely  dramatic  work ;  yet  scarcely  can 
it  be  denied,  that  the  conception  of  such  beings  must  have  existed 
prior  to  a  dramatic  use  of  them. 

In  1  Chron.  21-1,  however.  Satan  is  said  to  have  provoked  David 
to  number  Israel.  In  Ps.  109=6,  the  Psalmist  says:  "Set. thou  a 
wicked  man  over  him,  and  let  Satan  stand  at  his  right  hand".  The  use 
of  the  word  "devil"  also  teaches  the  existence  of  evil  spirits.  The  child- 
ren of  Israel  are  directed  to  offer  no  more  their  sacrifices  unto  devils. 
Lev.  17=7.  In  Deut.  32=17,  they  are  charged  with  this  crime.  In  2. 
Chron.  11:15,  Rehoboam  is  said  to  have  ordained  priests  for  the  high 
places,  and  for  the  devils,  and  calves  he  had  made.  In  Ps.  106:37, 
the  Israelites  are  said  to  have  sacrificed  their  sons,  and  daughters 
unto  devils. 

Evil  angels  are  also  spoken  of  by  the  name  of  "evil  spirits."  In 
Judges  9=23,  God  is  said  to  have  sent  an  evil  spirit  between  Abimelech 
and  the  men  of  Shechem.  In  1  Sam.  16:14,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is 
said  to  have  departed  from  Saul,  and  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord 
to  have  troubled  him  ;  in  verse  15,  Saul's  servants  recognize  this 
fact  in  addressing  Saul,  and  verse  16,  propose  to  send  for  a  skilful 
player  on  the  harp,  through  whom  he  should  be  made  well,  and  in; 
verse  23,  this  device  is  spoken  of  as  successful. 

When  we  turn  now  to  the  New  Testament,  we  find  the  proofs  even 
more  abundant.     No  one  questions  that  this  is  the  apparent  language 


Abstract  of  Theology.  200 

.of  this  part  of  Scripture,  whatever  explanations  are  resorted  to  for 
escaping  its  plain  meaning.  The  passages  are  not  here  given  because 
they  will  be  presented  in  connection  with  other  points,  and  enough 
of  them  will  then  be  given  to  prove  this  a  New  Testament  doc- 
trine. The  word  Satan  is  used  thirty-eight  times  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment; the  word  devil  twenty-five  times;  the  words  "evil  spirit" 
four  times. 

The  commonly  received  doctrine,  as  to  the  original  state  of  evil 
angels,  is  that  they  were  once  pure,  and  holy,  such  as  are  now  the 
angels  of  heaven,  though  not,  as  they,  confirmed  in  holiness.  This  is 
founded  upon  the  supposition  that  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  create 
beings  otherwise  than  free  from  sin.  It  is  rendered  certain  by  the 
expression  of  Scripture  "the  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate." 

The  only  objection  which  can  be  made  to  this  is  suggested  in  such 
questions  as  these ;  how  can  a  being  perfectly  holy  be  led  to  the  com- 
mission of  sin?  how  would  a  being  realizing  the  character  and  power 
of  the  Supreme  Being  ever  be  so  unwise  as  to  revolt  against  it? 

But  these  questions  present  only  metaphysical  difficulties  which 
must  vanish  before  actual  facts.  The  existence  of  such  beings  is 
plainly  taught;  we  are  told  in  Scripture  that  they  kept  not  their  first 
estate ;  and  all  argument  of  this  kind  is  merely  an  argument  from 
our  ignorance. 

It  might  be  supposed  that  appeal  might  be  made  to  the  case  of 
Adam ;  but,  while  this  is  true  to  some  extent,  this  difference  must  be 
observed,  that  there  was  preseut  with  our  first  parents  an  evil  one  to 
suggest  the  sin.  Yet,  even  then,  the  suggestion  might  have  arisen 
within  the  mind  of  either  Adam,  or  Eve,  as  the  result  of  desire,  in  any 
way  awakened,  which,  when  fostered,  may  have  become  too  strong. 
And,  if  this  be  psychologically  possible  with  them,  why  may  it  not 
have  been  so  with  Satan  and  his  angels? 

It  has  been  because  of  the  difficulties  which  thus  have  seemed  to 
perplex  this  question,  that  on  the  one  hand  the  very  existence  of 
such  beings  has  been  questioned ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  theory  has 
been  advanced,  that  Satan,  either  as  created,  or  uncreated,  has  always 
had  a  sinful  nature,  and  been  filled  with  enmity  to  God.  Both  theories 
are  readily  dispelled  by  the  one  Scriptural  expression  :  "the  angels 
that  kept  not  their  first  estate." 

Despite  this  plain  teaching  of  Scripture, however,  efforts  have  been 
made,  even  by  Christian  men,  to  explain  away  this  language,  and 
especially  that  of  the  New  Testament.     They  have  claimed  that  all 


201  Abstract  of  Theology. 

that  Christ  and  his  Apostles  said  upon  this  subject  is  to  be  ac-. 
counted  for  upon  the  principle  of  accommodation.  It  is  said  that 
they  knew  the  prejudices  of  the  Jews,  and  that,  not  wishing,  upon 
an  unimportant  matter,  to  excite  these  prejudices,  they  accommodated 
the  language  of  their  teachings  to  Jewish  ideas,  and  used  such  words 
as  seemed  to  imply  belief  in  such  beings. 

(1.)  But  the  principle  here  assumed  is  dangerous.  How  can  we 
know  that  Christ  taught  anything,  if  we  be  allowed  thus  to  strip  his 
language  of  its  natural  force  ? 

(2.)  The  object  of  Christ  was  not  to  accommodate  himself  to  prej^ 
udices ;  but  to  remove  them.  What  instance  can  be  given  of  such 
conformity?  None  can  be  justly  claimed.  On  the  contrary,  he  said 
that  he  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword,  and  to  preach,  not  a 
gospel  of  accommodation,  but  one  of  contention,  and  exclusiveness. 
He  drove  out,  with  a  whip  of  small  cords,  those  who  defiled  the 
temple.  He  persisted  in  healing  upon  the  Sabbath  day.  He  inveighed 
against  the  traditions  of  the  elders.  He  attacked  the  hypocrisy  of 
the  Scribes,  and  Pharisees,  who  were  reputed  most  holy.  Does  any 
of  this  conduct  look  like  that  of  one  who  would  have  shrunk  from 
declaring  the  non-existence  of  Satan  ?  was  not  the  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection,  as  against  the  Sadducees,  and  of  the  salvation  of  publi- 
cans, and  sinners,  and  the  adoption  of  the  Gentiles,  as  against  the 
Pharisees,  even  more  unpalatable  than  would  have  been  the  denial  of 
the  existence  of  evil  spirits? 

(3.)  The  idea  of  mere  accommodation  to  the  Jews  would  not  have 
involved  the  language  upon  this  point  used  to  his  disciples  in  private. 
The  time  of  the  return  of  the  seventy  was  peculiarly  suitable  to 
remove  these  prejudices  from  their  minds.  They  came  to  Christ  say- 
ing: "Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  unto  us  through  thy  name." 
And  Christ  only  teaches  more  plainly  the  existence  of  such  beings, 
declaring  that  he  beheld  Satan,  as  lightning,  fall  from  heaven,  at  the 
same  time  assuring  them  that  even  the  power  to  cast  out  devils  was 
no  subject  of  joy  in  comparison  with  the  fact  that;,  their  names  were 
written  in  heaven. 

(4.)  A  still  stronger  objection  may  be  drawn  from  the  circum- 
stances of  the  temptation.  There  the  devil  is  said  to  have  tempted 
Christ.  In  cases  of  human  temptation,  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  the 
principal  of  evil  in  the  heart  that  moves  the  man  to  do  wrong,  and 
that  thus  he  is  tempted.  But  what  principle  like  this  was  there  in 
Christ?  Upon  what  ground  can  he  be  said  to  have  been  tempted 
except  by  the  personal  solicitation  of  the  evil  one  ? 


Abstract  of  Theology.  202 

Another  question  of  interest  has  been  as  to  the  cause  of  the  sin  of 
angels.  Some,  because  of  a  misconception  of  the  meaning  of  Gen.  6:2, 
have  attributed  it  to  lust.  But  this  is  not  only  contrary  to  the  nature 
of  angels,  but  also  places  the  fall  of  man  before  that  of  the  devil. 
Some  have  held  that  it  consisted  in  the  temptation  of  man.  But  he 
who  tempted  with  evil  intent,  and  falsehood,  must  himself  have  sinned 
beforehand.  Besides,  this  tempter  was  one  only,  and  the  evil  angels 
are  many.  Others  think  that  it  was  envy  of  angels  superior  to  them. 
This  was  the  theory  of  the  Jews,  who,  holding  that  of  guardian  angels 
over  nations,  supposed  that  some  of  them  aspired  to  higher  positions 
than  were  allotted  to  them.  But  the  more  common  opinion  is  that  it 
was  a  sin  of  pride.  The  apostle  says  of  a  bishop  (1  Tim.  3:6,)  that  he 
must  not  be  "a  novice,  lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride,  he  fall  into  the 
condemnation  of  the  devil."  From  this  it  appears  probable  that 
pride  was  the  sin  of  Satan,  and  that  for  this  he  was  condemned.  See 
Kitto'sCyc:  Art.  Satan.  Dick's  Theology,  vol.  1,  p.  377.  Knapp, 
p.  218. 

Yet  another  question  has  been  raised,  as  to  their  relation  to  each 
other  in  this  sin.  In  the  fall  of  man  we  recognize  both  a  natural,  and 
federal  head.  From  these  we  see  that  all  are  made  sinners.  But  did 
the  angels  have  a  federal  head,  or  did  they  sin  individually,  each  one 
for  himself.  There  is  a  difficulty  in  either  hypothesis.  On  the  one 
hand,  how  could  a  federal  head,  when  he  had  sinned,  infuse,  by  that 
sin,  an  unholy  nature  into  those  whom  he  represented ;  on  the  other 
hand,  as  we  recognize  the  first  beginnings  of  sin  to  be  in  the  desire, 
how  could  so  many  simultaneously  have  revolted  against  God? 

In  favour  of  the  federal  theory,  may  be  stated  the  fact  of  the  head- 
ship of  one  over  the  others,  and  the  nature  of  the  sin,  pride,  which 
may  have  arisen  from  the  occupancy  of  a  position  of  such  power.  Yet 
these  do  not  necessarily  imply  it.  Supreme  position  may  have  existed 
without  federal  relation. 

In  favour  of  the  other  theory  may  be  adduced,  (1.)  the  coexistence 
at  that  time  of  all  these  angels  that  sinned;  this  was  not  true  of  all 
mankind,  and  is  a  reason  why  they  may  have  acted  differently.  (2.) 
The  immediate  intercourse,  because  of  their  nature,  which  all  may 
have  had  with  God,  to  know  His  will,  and  to  perform  it.  In  man 
this  existed  only  in  Eve,  and  may  account  for  her  personal  sin  be- 
fore that  of  her  representative.  (3.)  The  greater  lack  of  excuse 
that  would  exist  in  a  fall  as  the  result  of  individual  probation.     (4.) 


203  Abstract  of  Theology. 

The  fact  that  no  provision  of  salvation  has  been  made  for  them,  either 
in  the  representative  Saviour  of  man,  or  in  one  for  angels. 

The  main  difficulty  in  the  way  of  this  theory  may  be  removed  by 
the  natural  supposition,  that  all  the  angels,  or  a  portion  of  them  to 
which  all  of  these  belonged,  were  put  at  one  time  upon  probation, 
just  as  Adam  was.  In  that  probation  some  kept  their  first  estate, 
and  some  kept  it  not.  The  fall  of  all,  may,  therefore,  have  been  in- 
stantaneous. That  one  of  them  may  have  been  the  instantaneous  in- 
stigator of  this,  is  not  improbable.  That  he  may  have  held  rank  over 
them  before,  is  in  accordance  with  what  is  taught  of  the  rank  of  all 
angels.  That  he  might  in  this  act  have  attained  this  position  is  also 
not  improbable. 

For  the  sin  which  they  have  thus  committed,  they  are  held  account- 
able by  God.  They  seem  to  have  been  already  punished  by  being  re- 
served in  everlasting  chains  under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day.  But  on  that  day  their  punishment  will  be  probably  con- 
summated. 

In  the  meantime  they  are  permitted  access  to  this  world.  Satan  is 
called  the  God  of  this  world.  2  Cor.  4;4.  This  access  is  evident  from 
the  history  of  the  fall,  from  that  of  the  temptation  of  Christ,  from  the 
warnings  given  to  believers  against  him  as  their  adversary,  and  from 
the  declarations  made  as  to  the  power  he  exercises  to  blind  the  minds 
of  them  that  believe  not. 

As  a  finite  being,  Satan  must  be  limited  in  his  approaches  to  man. 
The  doctrine  of  Satan  is  often  objected  to,  upon  the  ground  that 
thus  we  make  out  a  being  of  almost  equal  power  with  God,  and  every 
where  present.  But  this  power  of  constant  approach  arises  not  prob- 
ably from,  personal  contact,  but  from  the  multitude  of  inferior  agents 
which  he  thus  controls.  By  these  he  is  every  where  operating  ;  per- 
haps not  operating  always  thus  directly  upon  each  one ;  but  al- 
ways keeping  in  progress  the  influences  which  he  dispenses  among 
men. 

What  then,  we  may  inquire,  is  the  extent  of  the  power  of  evil 
spirits. 

1.  Undoubtedly  they  have  great  power  over  the  minds  of  men. 
They  may  tempt,  deceive,  darken  the  minds  of  men,  pervert  the  judg- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  204 

ment  of  men,  excite  them  to  pride,  anger,  and  other  evil  passions.  It 
was  Satan  that  instigated  the  Jews  to  put  Christ  to  death.  The  old 
phraseology  of  the  courts  of  justice  in  indictments  for  murder  recog- 
nize his  power.  It  is  not  confined  to  the  subjects  of  his  kingdom;  but 
over  the  people  of  God  also,  even  after  they  have  been  rescued  from 
their  slavery  to  Satan,  does  he  maintain,  and  exercise  the  power  to 
tempt,  though  not  to  destroy. 

2.  Satan  also  exercises  power  over  the  bodies  of  men.  In  Job  2:7 
he  is  said  "to  have  smote  Job  with  sore  boils  from  the  sole  of  his  foot 
unto  his  crown."  In  Luke  13:16,  a  woman  is  spoken  of  who  had 
been  bound  by  Satan  for  eighteen  years  by  disease.  In  Acts  10:38, 
one  of  the  works  of  Christ  is  said  to  have  been  the  healing  of  all  who 
were  oppressed  with  the  Devil.  In  1  Cor.  5:5  excomunication  is 
spoken  of  as  the  delivering  over  of  one  to  Satan  for  the  destruction  of 
the  flesh.  Satan  is  also  said  in  some  sense  to  have  the  power  of  death. 
Heb.  2:14. 

It  is  here  that  naturally  arises  the  question  of  demoniacal  influence 
as  proving,  if  true,  the  existence,  and  number  of  such  beings.  Have 
Satan  and  his  messengers  the  power  thus  to  enter,  and  afflict  the  bodies 
of  men. 

The  most  serious  objection  to  the  idea  of  such  possessions  is  that 
they  have  been  confined  to  the  age  of  Christ,  and  the  Apostles. 

(1.)  But  this  is  not  certain.  We  even  have  declarations  to  the 
contrary.  The  Jews  of  the  second  century  professed  that  there  were 
such  in  their  day.  This  was  true,  also,  of  the  Christians  of  the  third 
century.  But  the  evidence  of  such  possessions  at  these  periods  is  not 
conclusive. 

(2  )  Dr.  Macknight,  quoted  by  Dr.  Dick.  Theol.,  vol.  1,  p.  403,  says 
"that  the  possessions  mentioned  may  have  been  diseases  carried  to  an 
uncommon  height  by  the  presence,  and  agency  of  demons."  And,  if 
this  is  allowed,  there  have  probably  been  such  in  all  ages. 

(3.)  But  this  difficulty  must  yield  before  the  direct  testimony  of 
Scripture.  A  reason  may  be  given  for  their  especial  prevalence  in  the 
time  of  Christ.  The  great  struggle  was  about  to  take  place  between 
Christ,  and  Satan;  and  uncommon  freedom  was  doubtless  granted 
to  him,  and  his  assistants. 

The  following  points  show  that  the  idea  of  demoniacal  possessions 
is  Scriptural. 

(a.)  The  actions  of  the  daemons  are  expressly  separated  from  those 
of  the  persons  possessed.     See  Mark  1:32;  Luke  6:17.18;  Matt.  10:8. 


205  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(b.)  The  actions,  and  language  show  the  personality  of  some  evil 
being,  or  beings,  within  the  sufferer.  They  beseech  Christ  not  to 
torment  them  before  their  time;  they  answer  his  questions;  they  come 
out  of  the  possessed,  and  enter  into  the  swine ;  they  know  Christ,  and 
call  upon  him  as  the  Son  of  God. 

(c.)  The  writers  mention  facts  connected  with  them  needless  to  be 
mentioned  which  favour  this.  The  number  of  demons  cast  from 
Mary  Magdalene  is  given.  In  Matt.  12:43.44,  Jesus  says  of  a  demon, 
"this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer,  and  fasting." 

(d.)     Jesus    addresses  the   demons.     Matt.   8:32.     He   orders  the 

daemons  to  come  out,  and  permits  them  to  go  into  the  swine.    Mark. 

,9:25.     Christ   rebukes   the    foul   spirit.      See  also,   Luke  4:35.      In 

Mark.  1:25.  Christ  orders  the  daemon  to  hold  his  peace  and  come  out. 

These  are  sufficient  to  prove  the  scripturalness  of  this  doctrine,  and 
to  show  that  Christ  did  not  speak,  and  act  merely  from  a  spirit  of  ac- 
commodation. 

3.     As  to  their  power  over  the  laws  of  nature,   and  natural  causes. 

They  have  no  power  to  change  the  laws  of  nature.  These  are  es- 
tablished by  God,  and  are  beyond  the  power  of  any  of  his  creatures. 
He  upholds,  and  preserves  with  the  same  almighty  power  with  which 
He  created. 

But,  from  Satan's  superior  wisdom,  from  his  spiritual  nature,  and 
from  his  numerous  emissaries,  he  has  great  power  within  the  circle  of 
those  laws.  It  is  thus  that  he  performs  the  lying  wonders  by  which, 
were  it  possible,  he  would  deceive  the  very  elect.  It  is  thus  that,  in 
connection  with  his  power  over  the  mind,  he  has  aided  to  establish 
false  religions,  to  vitiate  certain  forms  of  the  true  religion,  and  to 
work  as  the  great  power  of  Antichrist  in  the  world. 

The  connection  held  by  him  with  the  ancient  heathen  oracles  is  a 
subject  worthy  of  study,  and  eminently  suggestive  of  the  extent  of  the 
power  he  exercises.  Those  oracles  failed  precisely  where  Satan's 
knowledge  failed ;  the  want  of  power  to  predict  the  future.  Answers 
that  affected  present  knowledge  were  abundant.  Ambiguous  replies 
that  could  bear  various  interpretations,  were  frequent.  "Undoubtedly," 
says  Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith,  "fraud  was  practised."  *  *  *  Still  there  appears 
satisfactory  reason  for  believing  that  in  some  degree,  and  occasionally 
there  was  a  real  diabolical  influence."  [First  Lines,  p.  337.]  The  case 
of  divination  spoken  of  in  Act  16:10-18  seems  conclusive  upon  this 
point;  "a  certain  damsel"  says  Luke,  "possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divina- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  206 

tion,  met  us  which  brought  her  masters  much  gain  by  soothsaying. 
The  same  followed  Paul,  and  us,  and  cried,  saying  these  men  are  the 
servants  of  the  Most  High  God,  which  show  unto  us  the  way  of  sal- 
vation. And  this  she  did  many  days.  But  Paul  being  grieved, 
turned,  and  said  to  the  Spirit,  I  command  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  come  out  of  her,  and  he  came  out  the  same  hour." 

Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith  presents  in  his  First  Lines  of  Theology  some  val- 
uable points  in  reply  to  the  objections  that  may  be  made  to  the  doc- 
trine of  wicked  spirits,  and  also  on  the  practical  uses  of  the  doctrine. 
[See  pp.  337-340.] 


Abstract  of  Theology.  208 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XX. 


CREATION  OF  MAN. 

I.    The  Scripture  Account. 

The  Scripture  account  of  the  creation  of  man  is  given  in  four  placeg 
in  Genesis,  The  first  in  Gen.  1=26-28,  is  of  both  male,  and  femata 
The  second  is  of  Adam  only,  in  Gen.  2=7.  The  third  is  of  the  creation 
of  the  woman  whom  Adam  at  that  time  called  Isba,  (woman),  because 
she  was  taken  out  of  Man,  (Ish).  Gen.  2*18-23.  Subsequently  Ch. 
3:20,  he  called  her  Eve  because  she  was  "the  mother  of  all  living.'' 
The  fourth  is  found  in  Gen.  5:1.2,  and  states  that  God  called  them 
Adam.  There  are  allusions  to  the  statements  thus  made  in  two  other 
places  in  this  book,  namely,  Ch.  3:19.23;  and  Oh.  9:6.7.  The  other 
Scriptures,  both  of  the  Old,  and  New  Testaments,  endorse  the  correct- 
ness of  all  the  facts  stated  in  Genesis  by  frequent  allusions  to  one,  or 
another  of  them  as  undoubted  truths.  See  Ps.  100:3.14  ;  Ecc.  7:29  ; 
12:7;  Isa.  64:8;  Mai.  1:10;  2:15;  Matt.  19:4.5;  Mark  10:6.7;  Acts 
17:25-29;  Rom.  9:20 ;  1  Cor.  11:7-9 ;  15:45-47 ;  Col.  3:10.  The 
Scripture  doctrine,  thus  revealed,  is  that  man  was  created  by  God, 
being  formed,  as  to  his  body,  from  earthy  material,  and  as  to  his  soul, 
by  direct  creation;  that  he  was  made  male,  and.  female,  one  Adam,  in 
the  image,  and  likeness  of  God.  The  Adam  thus  made,  the  Scriptures 
also  teach,  was  the  progenitor  of  all  the  present  race  of  man.  Indeed, 
they  appear  to  allude  to  him  as  the  embodiment  of  that  race.  Adam 
is  not  given  as  a  proper  name  as  are  Cain,  and  Abel,  and  Noah,  but 
is  used  to  express  the  creature  God  proposed  to  make,  (Gen.  1;26),  as 
both  male,  and  female.  Gen.  5:2.     "In  all  the  other  instances  in  the 


209  Abstract  of  Theology. 

second,  and  third  chapters  of  Genesis,  which  are  nineteen,  it  is  put 
with  the  article,  the  man,  or  the  Adam.  It  is  also  to  be  observed, 
that,  though  it  occurs  very  frequently  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
though  there  is  no  grammatical  difficulty  in  the  way  of  its  being  de- 
clined by  the  dual,  and  plural  terminations,  and  the  pronominal  suf- 
fixes, (as  its  derivative  dam  blood  is),  yet  it  never  undergoes  those 
changes;  it  is  used  abundantly  to  denote  man  in  the  general,  and  col- 
lective sense, — mankind,  the  human  race,  but  it  is  never  found  in  the 
plural  number.  When  the  sacred  writers  design  to  express  men  dis- 
tributively,  they  use  either  the  compound  term  sons  of  men,  (benei 
adam),  or  the  plural  of  enosh,  or  ish."  [Kitto's  Cyc.  Art.  Adam, 
par.  3.]  The  importance  of  this  fact  will  hereafter  be  seen.  It  is  con- 
firmed by  the  title  of  "the  second  Adam"  given  to  Christ. 

II.     The  Unity  of  the  Race. 

The  expression  above,  "the  present  race  of  men,"  was  not  intended 
to  intimate  a  belief  that  there  have  been  more  races  of  men  than  one. 
This,  however,  has  been  contended  for;  but,  while  the  possibility  of 
other  races  before,  or  contemporaneous  with  Adam,  may  be  admitted, 
the  unity  of  the  present  race,  and  its  common  descent  from  Adam, 
must  be  maintained. 

The  idea  of  a  Prseadamite  race,  "was  first  raised  to  notice  by  Isaac 
Peyrere,  who  in  1655  published  his  book  styled  "Prseadamitse."  He 
pretended  to  find  his  Praeadarnites  in  Rom.  5=12-14.  The  heathen, 
according  to  him,  are  the  Praeadarnites,  being,  as  he  supposed,  created 
on  the  same  day  with  the  beasts,  and.  those  whose  creation  is  men- 
tioned in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis.  Adam,  the  father  of  the  Jews, 
was  not  created  until  a  century  later,  and  is  the  one  who  is  mentioned 
in  the  second  chapter.  Since  the  time  of  Peyrere,  this  hypothesis  has 
been  exhibited  more  connectedly;  and  has  been  asserted  independ- 
ently of  the,  authority  of  Moses  ;  or  in  other  words  it  has  been 
asserted  that  the  human  race  is  older  than  Moses  represents  it." 
[Knapp's  Chris.  Theol.  p.  185.]  ■ 

So  far  as  this  hypothesis  is  confined  to  the  past  existence  of  other 
races  of  men,  who  had  passed  away  when  Adam  was  created,  or  who 
were  at  least  destroyed  before,  or  at  the  flood,  it  may  be  admitted  as 
a  possibility.  There  is  no  direct  statement  of  Scripture  to  the  con- 
trary. Any  proof  which  would  make  it  certain,  or  even  probable,  may 
be  admitted.      But  while  this  is  possibly,   it  is  not   probably  true. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  210 

Nothing  in  Scripture,  not  even  with  great  violence,  can  be  wrested  to 
its  support,  The  account  of  Creation,  and  the  manner  in  which  the 
Adam  there  created  is  spoken  of,  is  contrary  to  any  idea  that  the 
creations  in  the  first,  and  second  chapters  of  Genesis  are  of  any  but 
the  one  race.  The  scientific  evidence  as  to  the  method  of  God's  crea- 
tions concurs  with  the  Biblical  in  furnishing  no  proof  that  God  has 
ever  created  the  same  animals  at  different  periods,  or  from  any. other 
than  one  original  source  of  each  species.  While  these  facts,  there- 
fore, are  not  conclusive  against  the  possibility  of  more  than  one 
creation  of  human  beings,  it  renders  it  highly  improbable.     , 

But  so  far  as  this  is  intended  to  deny  the  unity  of  the  present  race, 
and  to  declare  that  any  portion  of  it  is  not  of  Adamic  origin,  it  is  di- 
rectly contrary  to  the  Word  of  God. 

1.  Because  the  Scriptures  trace  the  race  of  man  now  existing  back 
to  Noah,  and  through  him  to  Adam. 

2.  Because  they  teach  also  that  all  others,  except  the  eight  saved 
in  the  Ark,  were  destroyed  by  the  flood.  It  any  other  races  of  men 
existed  before  that  time,  which  is  not  probable,  they  must  then  have 
been  destroyed  with  the  others  of  the  Adamic  race. 

3.  They  not  only  speak  of  all  mankind  in  general  as  though  of  this 
one  race,  but  declare  expressly,  that  God  "made  of  one  every  nation  of 
men  for  to.  dwell  on  all  the  faie  of  the  earth,  having  determined  their 
appointed  seasons,  and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation."  [Canterbury 
Revision.  King  James  has  "made  of  one  blood."]  Acts  17:26. 
This  is  especially  emphatic  because  spoken  to  the  Athenians  who 
claimed  a  special  separate  origin   from  others. 

4.  The  Scriptures  account  for  the  universal  sinful  condition  of  men, 
which  they  assert,  by  not  only  a  representative,  but  natural  relation 
to  Adam. 

5.  Salvation  from  sin  is  offered  through  Christ  as  the  second  Adam, 
whose  fitness  for  his  work  was  secured,  not  only  by  his  representative 
relation,  but  also  by  his  assumption  of  the  same  nature  with  man. 
Therefore  his  genealogy  in  Luke  is  traced  back  to  Adam.  It  was  also 
to  "the  whole  creation,",  (Mark  16=15),  that  Christ  commanded  his 
gospel  to  be  preached,  and  "of  all  the  nations,"  (Matt.  28=19),  that  he 
ordered  disciples  to  be  made. 

Science  accords  with  Revelation  in  teaching  the  unity  of  the  race. 
1.     It  shows  that  among  all  men  are  the  same  essential  character- 
istics which  make  a  man.     This  is  denied  by  none.     There  is  the  same 


211  Abstract  of  Theology. 

outward  form,  and  inward  structure,  and  also  like  mental,  and  moral 
characteristics. 

2.  While  variations  in  each  of  these  respects  unquestionably  exist, 
they  are  all  within  the  limits  of  a  single  species. 

The  science  of  Comparative  Zoology  shows : 

(1.)     That  species  are  capable  of  great  variations. 

(2.)     That  the  variations  may  become  permanent. 

(3.)  That  under  favourable  circumstances,  with  the  lapse  of  time, 
this  permanence  becomes  more,  and  more  fixed,  and  incapable  of  re- 
turn to  the  original  type. 

(4.)  That,  however,  there  is  after  all  a  tendency  to  return,  which, 
under  similar  conditions  with  those  of  the  original  state,  develops 
itself. 

(5.)  That  while  offspring  from  parents  of  different  species  is  pos- 
sible, that  offspring  is  itself  either  altogether  unfruitful,  or  as  Dr. 
Cabell  says,  "the  fertility  is  partial  and  temporary,  rarely  if  ever 
extending  through  more  than  two  generations."  [Unity  of  Mankind, 
p.  77]. 

(6.)  That  the  variations  in  man  are  at  least  equalled  by  those  in 
other  species. 

Dr.  Bachman  asserts  that  "every  vertebrated  animal,  from  the 
horse  down  to  the  canary  bird,  and  gold  fish,  is  subject,  in  a  state 
of  domestication,  to  very  great,  and  striking  varieties,  and  that 
in  the  majority  of  species  these  varieties  are  much  greater  than  are 
exhibited  in  any  of  the  numerous  varieties  of  the  human  race." 
[Ductrine  of  the  Unity  of  the  Human  Race,  p.  181,  quoted  by  Dr. 
Cabell  in  Unity  of  Mankind,  p.  34.]  "Blumenbach"  says,  Cabell,  p.  33. 
"long  ago  pointed  out  the  great  difference  between  the  cranium  of  the 
domestic  swine,  and  that  of  the  primitive  wild  boar,  and  remarked 
that  this  difference  is  quite  equal  to  that  which  has  been  observed 
between  the  skull  of  the  Negro,  and  the  European." 

(7.)  That  the  various  races  of  men,  when  they  intermarry,  pro- 
duce offspring  which  is  itself  continuously  fruitful. 

(8.)  That  while  the  Negro  type  of  man,  the  most  distinct,  and 
showing  the  greatest  variety  from  the  Caucasian  or  white  race,  may 
be  traced  far  back  in  the  monumental  history  of  Egypt,  there  is  no 
delineation  of  it  in  the  earliest  records  for  nearly  fifteen  hundred 
years.  This  is  admitted  by  Nott  and  Gliddon  in  their  Types  of  Man- 
kind, p.  259,  though  these  writers,  speak  of  the  Negro  "as  contem- 
porary with  the  earliest  Egyptians.     [See  Cabell,  p.  91-92.] 


Abstract  of  Theology.  212 

3.  The  science  of  Comparative  Philology  also  supports  the  doctrine 
of  the  unity  of  the  human  race.  This  science  is  as  yet  in  its  infancy, 
but  has  grown  vigorously  during  the  short  period  of  its  existence. 
Already  the  languages  of  men  have  been  reduced  by  some  to  four,  by 
others  to  three,  and  yet  by  others  to  two  different  forms,  and  the 
tendency  is  to  connect  all  language  with  some  one  common  source. 
Whether  this  can  be  done,  or  not,  is  uncertain.  The  position  is,  at 
least,  conceded  that  variety  in  languages  does  not  militate  against  the 
unity  of  mankind.  It  may  be  impossible  to  establish  absolute  unity 
of  speech.  The  confusion  at  Babel  renders  this  not  improbable.  But 
the  investigations  of  this  science  show  that  the  ideas  of  several  separate 
physical  origins  of  the  race  are  not  true,  because  the  grouping  of  men, 
as  to  physical  race,  does  not  correspond  with  the  grouping  rendered 
necessary  by  their  different  languages. .  Prof.  Whitney,  who  believes 
that  the  science  of  philology  cannot  now,  or  ever,  decide  either  for, 
or  against  this  unity,  says  "it  does  not  seem  practicable  to  lay  down 
any  system  of  physical  races  which  shall  agree  with  any  possible 
scheme  of  linguistic  races.  Indo-European,  Semitic,  Scythian,  and 
Caucasian  tongues  are  spoken  by  men  whom  the  naturalists  would 
not  separate  from  one  another  as  of  widely  diverse  stock ;  and  on  the 
other  hand,  Scythian  dialects  of  close,  and  indubitable  relationship, 
are  in  the  mouths  of  people  who  differ  as  widely  in  form,  and  feature, 
as  Hungarians,  and  Lapps;  while  not  less  discordance  of  physical  type 
is  to  be  found  among  the  speakers  of  various  dialects  belonging  to 
more  than  one  of  the  other  great  linguistic  families."  [Language 
and  the  Study  of  Language,  p.  370.]  The  fact  of  this  intermingling 
of  dialects,  and  races  shows  a  common  origin  beyond  the  time  of  phys- 
ical, and  linguistic  changes.  Thus  do  the  two  sciences,  which  were 
once  so  antagonistic  to  the  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  mankind,  com- 
bine with  each  other  to  establish  its  truth. 

III.    The  Nature  of  Man. 

The  nature  of  man  is  composite.  It  is  usually  considered  as  a 
union  of  body  and  soul. 

The  body  is  material,  and  is  the  highest  form  in  this  world  of  mate^ 
rial  existence. 

Matter  is  presented  in  creation  in  different  forms.  It  is  impossible 
to  say  whether  it  exists,  or  has  ever  existed  without  special  form,  and 
substance.  Science  only  knows  it  as  found  in  different  materials,  which 
are  called  primary,  because  we  cannot  reduce  them  to  any  more  simple 


213  Abstract  of  Theology. 

form,  common  to  more  than  one.  Of  these  materials,  all  things  that  we 
know  are  composed.  Matter  is  called  inorganic  in  these  simple  forms, 
and  yet  there  is  a  kind  of  organism  even  here.  Some  of  this  so  called 
inorganic  matter  attains  to  living  organism  in  plants,  which  have  what 
is  called  vegetable  life.  It  exists  in  a  still  higher  form  in  conscious 
sentient  being,  known  as  animal  life.  The  highest  organism  is  in 
man  as  an  animal.  He  partakes  wTith  other  animals  of  bodily 
form,  appetites,  desires,  and  passions.  His  bony  structure  is  analo- 
gous to  theirs,  which  approaches  it  closely,  and  yet  with  marked  dis- 
tinctions which  manifest  his  yet  higher  life,  with  nobler  capabilities. 
So,  also,  with  his  muscular  covering,  or  flesh  with  its  nervous  system, 
especially  culminating  in  a  brain  of  superior  size,  and  weight. 
Through  the  latter  man  has  capacity  for  superior  intellectual  powers 
over  other  animals,  for  the  exercise  of  which  his  bodily  shape  is  pecu- 
liarly fitted.  In  their  mere  animal  life,  the  instincts  of  the  lower 
animals  are  much  stronger  than  in  man,  and  more  reliable.  In  man 
instinct  is  feeble  because  its  place  is  more  than  supplied  by  his  higher 
intellectual  nature.  It  is  only  when  his  moral  nature  is  involved,  that 
instincts  appear  which  approach  in  strength,  and  unerring  guidance 
this  peculiarity  of  the  brute  creation. 

The  personality  of  man,  by  which  is  meant  his  individual  conscious 
existence,  is  distinctly  associated  with  his  higher  nature,  the  intellec- 
tual, and  the  moral.  The  brute  evidently  lives  in  itself,  and  is  what 
it  is  solely  because  of  its  animal  life.  It  cannot  go  beyond  it.  There 
is  no  outward  development  in  it  of  itself,  and  even  the  utmost  train- 
ing by  man  can  carry  it  no  farther  than  to  the  development  of  memory, 
and  obedience  through  fear,  which  belong  to  this  animal  existence, 
and  in  which  only  such  faint  resemblances  to  man's  higher  faculties 
can  be  attained,  as  are  reached  by  man  himself  through  self  training 
in  the  realms  of  animal  instinct. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  higher  nature  of  man,  so  far  from 
being  a  part  of  his  animal  life,  really  takes  its  place,  and  dwells  in  the 
body,  using  it  as  a  means  of  contact  with  the  external  world,  in  which 
man  as  a  spiritual  being,  is  thus  enabled  to  live,  and  exercise  the 
faculties  of  his  higher  nature. 

We  have  already  learned  the  existence  of  spiritual  beings,  which,  if 
they  have,  or  can  have,  form,  and  body  at  all,  have  only  one  of  a 
spiritual  nature.  Man  alone  is  possessed  of  both  spirit,  and  body. 
He  is,  therefore,  the  link  which  binds  together  the  world  of  spirit, 
and  that   of  matter.     His   existence   is  not   one    only,    but    twofold. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  214 

Nor  is  it  made  so  by  such  a  composition  as  confounds  the  two  elements 
by  mingling  them  into  a  third  substance  differing  from  each  of  these 
two,  but  such  as  makes  a  union  in  one  personality  of  both  the 
natures,  so  that  he  is  as  truly  animal  as  though  he  were  not  spirit, 
and  as  truly  spiritual  as  though  he  were  not  animal.  Each  nature 
retains  in  a  mysterious  union  its  own  attributes,  and  properties, 
absolutely,  so  that  one  is  merely  animal,  and  the  other  purely 
spiritual,  and  the  one  personal  conscious  being  is  personal,  and 
conscious  in  each,  in  different,  or  in  the  same  moments,  and  is 
also  conscious  of  being  at  the  same  time  Man,  or  all  that  is  involved 
in  the  united  possession  of  both  natures.  The.  consequence  of  this 
also  is  a  peculiar  possession  by  Man  of  all  the  results  of  a  communica- 
tion of  the  properties  of  one  nature  to  the  other  without  any  actual 
communication.  Thus  matter,  which  in  itself  is  without  motion, 
without  feeling,  and  only  becomes  so  in  animal  life,  and  in  that  life  is 
without  capacity  for  self  training,  and  skilful  manipulation  through 
self  imposed  habits,  and  which  especially  is  not  capable  of  sinful,  or 
holy  acts,  or  habits,  attains  to  each  of  these  through  the  union  with  a 
spiritual  person  and  in  a  peculiar  way,  otherwise  not  possible,  becomes 
receptive  of  punishment,  or  reward,  for  right,  or  wrong  doing.  So 
also  a  personal  spirit,  which  cannot  through  his  spiritual  nature  be 
affected  by  matter,  and  cannot  act  upon  it,  or  use  it,  is  through 
this  union  operative  in  it,  and  by  means  of  the  bodily  powers  is 
brought  into  contact  with  the  world  of  material  forces,  and  becomes  a 
voluntary  force  in  connection  with  the  mechanical  laws,  and  forces  of 
the  universe.  Thus  is  it,  that  through  this  union  man  probably  alone 
except  God,  introduces,. and  accomplishes  results  of  conscious  purpose 
in  the  material  universe.  Good,  or  evil  angels,  who  would  there 
operate,  must  do  it  through  the  influences  they  can  exert  upon  man. 
The  union  of  both  body  and  soul  are  necessary  to  constitute  man 
Of  necessity  his  conscious  individuality  is  inseparably  associated  with 
his  spiritual  nature,  for  in  him  there  is  no  separate  animal  life  in  the 
body  from  that  of  the  spirit  which  is  united  with  it.  Without  that 
spirit,  therefore,  the  body  is  but  a  form  of  clay.  But  the  spirit  alone 
is  but  a  spirit.  It  has  not  all  of  human  nature.  It  is  not  a  man.  To 
make  man',  the  body  is  necessary,  not  necessarily  the  same  body 
always,  neither  of  the  same  size,  nor  with  all  its  parts  perfect,  nor  of 
the  same  ever  continuing  materials,  nor  without  change,  but  such  a 
body  as  belongs  to  human  nature,  and  is  fitted  for  the  contact  of  the 
conscious  personal  spirit  with  the  world  of  matter.  If,  at  any  time, 
therefore,  the  spirit  and  body  shall  be  separated,  the  spirit  will  not 


215  Abstract  of  Theology. 

properly  be  called  man  until  a  subsequent  reunion.  Until  then  it 
would  be  known,  and  spoken  of  as  the  spirit  of  the  man,  or  the  soul 
of  the  man,  but  not  as  the  man  himself.  Accordingly  the  Scriptures 
speak  thus  of  all  men  during  the  period  intervening  between  death, 
and  the  resurrection  of  the  judgment  day.  See  Rev.  6;9;  20:4; 
Heb.  12:23,  and  according  to  the  interpretation  which  supposes  Christ 
preached  to  departed  spirits,  1  Pet.  3:19.  It  is  thus,  also,  that  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  and  its  reunion  with  the  soul  becomes  neces- 
sary to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  God,  both  as  to  the  rewards,  and 
the  punishments  of  the  eternal  future. 

A  question  here  naturally  arises  as  to  the  nature  of  the  contact 
between  the  personal  spirit,  and  the  body.  This  we  have  no  means  of 
answering.  It  is  a  mystery  which,  as  a  fact,  is  both  known  and  re- 
vealed, but  of  the  manner  of  which  we  have  no  revelation,  and  no 
knowledge.  All  must  be  conjecture.  Dr.  J.  Pye  Smith  gives  in  his 
"First  Lines,"  p.  342,  three  theories:  "(1.)  That  it  is  through  phys- 
ical influence  materially  of  mental  volitions,  and  cerebral,  and  ner- 
vous action,  producing  muscular  motion;  (2.)  that  it  is  due  to  occa- 
sional cause  by  which  God's  omnipotent,  and  universal  agency  pro- 
duces all  the  motions  of  the  body  to  correspond  with  the  volitions  of 
the  mind;  and,  (3.)  that  it  results  from  preestablished  harmony  by 
which  it  is  arranged  that  they  take  place  at  the  same  time,  and  space, 
without  any  influence  upon  each  other."  But  these  are  all  objection- 
able. The  last  makes  the  body  and  soul  entirely  without  connection 
with  each  other.  The  second  makes  God,  and  not  man,  operate  the 
body,  and  that  too  without  the  soul's  agency  in  any  respect.  The 
first  is  no  explanation  for  it  accepts  the  physical  connection,  but  does 
not  state  how  it  arises. 

Both  body,  and  soul  are  by  nature  pure  in  their  original  condition, 
sin  being  found  essentially  neither  in  the  one,  nor  in  the  other. 
There  is  nothing  in  matter  that  is  corrupting,  as  the  Manichaeans 
taught,  and  nothing  in  the  lower  nature  which  of  itself  begets  sin  in 
an  innocent  soul.  On  the  contrary,  while  temptation  may  present  it- 
self through  the  body,  the  actual  sin  is  committed  by  .the  soul  either 
separately,  or  in  union  with  the  body.  The  sinfulness  of  the  soul  in 
its  original  state  has  been  universally  admitted. 

Each  of  these  constituents  of  man  is  a  unit.  The  body  is  one, 
though  composed  of  several  members,  and  is  affected  through  one  sense 
pnly,  namely,  contact,  though  because  ofi  ts  different  forms,  it  is 
usually,  and  conveniently  divided  into  five.     The  soul  also  is  one,  and 


Abstract  of  Theology.  216 

itself  brings  the  man  into  contact  with  the  world  of  mind,  and  spirit. 
Its  powers,  likewise,  though  many,  are  not  separate  and  independent 
faculties,  but  it  is  the  soul  that  thinks,  that  feels,  that  purposes,  and 
that  loves.  For  convenience  these  powers  are,  in  Intellectual  Philo- 
sophy, divided  into,  and  discussed  under  the  three  heads  of  the  Under- 
standing, the  Will,  and  the  Affections.  These  are  exercised  about 
all  mental,  and  moral  truths.  Even  the  knowledge  of  what  is  right 
and  wrong,  is  not  attained  by  a  different  power  from  that  by  which 
we  learn  what  is  wise,  and  great.  What  is  called  conscience,  or  the 
moral  faculty,  is  concerned  only  with  impressing  upon  us  our  duty  to 
do  the  right,  and  not  to  do  the  wrong.  But  even  this  is  simply  the 
vsoul  recognizing  the  nature  of  obligation  to  God. 

Some  have  supposed  that  man  has  more  than  the  twofold  elements 
of  body,  and  soul.  "Pythagoras,  and  after  him,  Plato,  and  subse- 
quently the  mass  of  Greek,  and  Roman  philosophers,  maintained  that 
man  consists  of  three  constituent  elements,  the  rational  spirit,  (nous 
or  pneuma),  the  animal  soul  (psuche),  and  the  body.  Hence  this 
usage  of  words  became  stamped  upon  the  Greek  popular  speech. 
And,  consequently,  the  apostle  uses  all  three,  when  intending  to  ex- 
press exhaustively  in  popular  language  the  totality  of  man,  and  his 
belongings.  "I  pray  God  that  your  whole  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body, 
be  preserved  blameless."  1  Thess.  5:23;  Heb.  4.12;  1  Cor.  1544-46. 
Hence,  some  theologians  conclude  that  it  is  a  doctrine,  given  by  di- 
vine inspiration,  that  human  nature  is  constituted  of  three  distinct 
elements.'' 

''The  use,  made  of  these  terms  by  the  apostles,  proves  nothing  more 
than  that  they  used  words,  in  their  current  popular  sense,  to  express 
divine  ideas.  The  word  "pneuma"  designates  the  one  soul,  emphasizing 
its  quality  as  rational.  The  word  "psuche"  designates  the  same  soul, 
emphasizing  its  quality  as  the  vital,  and  animating  principle  of  the 
body.  The  two  are  used  together  to  express  properly  the  entire 
man." 

"That  the  pneuma,  and  psuche,  are  distinct  entities  cannot  be  the 
doctrine  of  the  New  Testament,  because  they  are  habitually  used 
interchangeably,  and  often  indifferently.  Thus  psuche,  as  well  as 
pneuma,  is  used  to  designate  the  soul  as  the  seat  of  the  higher  intel- 
lectual faculties.  Matt.  16:26;  1  Pet.  1:22;  Matt.  10:28.  Thus  also 
pneuma,  as  well  as  psuche,  is  used  to  designate  the  soul  as  the  anima- 
ting principle  of  the  body.  James  2:26.  Deceased  persons  are  indif- 
ferently called  psuchai,  Acts  2:27.31;  Rev.  6:9;  20:4;  and  pneumata, 
Luke  24:37.39;  Heb.  12:23."     [Hodge's  Outlines,  pp.  299,  300.] 


217  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Other  passages,  not  mentioned  above,  upon  which  light  is  supposed 
to  be  thrown  by  this  distinction,  are  1  Cor.  2:14.15;  James  3:15,  and 
Jude.  19. 

Others,  which  show  a  promiscuous  use  of  these  words,  and  thus  that 
the  distinction  is  incorrect  are  Matt.  27:50  ;  Mark.  15:37;  Luke  23:46; 
John  19:30;  Acts  7:59. 

This  apparent  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  is  also  that  of  the 
Old.  The  account  of  man's  coming  into  a  living  condition  is  given  in 
Gen.  2:7;  "And  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground, 
and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a 
living  soul."  The  word  "nephesh"  here  translated  "living  soul" 
means  ordinarily  mere  animal  life.  It  is  the  same  word  that  occurs 
in  Gen.  1:20,  translated  "creature  that  hath  life,''  in  1:24  "living 
creature,"  in  1:30  "life,"  in  2:19  "living  creature,"  in  9:12.15.16, 
"living  creature."  Gen.  2:7,  therefore  teaches  that  man  attained  his 
animal  life  by  the  inbreathing  of  God.  But  Deut.  4:29  uses  this  same 
word  for  the  rational  spiritual  part  of  man.  So  also  does  Deut.  30:10. 
See  also  Job  16=4,  and  1  Sam.  1:15.  Gesenius  Lexicon,  Sec.  3,  says: 
"To  it  are  ascribed  love,  Isa  42:1;  Cant.  1:7;  3:1-4;  Gen.  34:3;  joy; 
Ps,  864;  fear;  Isa  15:4;  Ps.  6=4;  piety  towards  God,  Ps.  86.4;  104:1; 
143:8,  and  confidence,  Ps.  57:2.  *  *  *  The  soul  is  said  to  weep,  Ps. 
119:28,  to  be  poured  out  in  tears,  Job  30:16;  to  cry  for  vengeance,  Job 
24:12;  and  also  to  invoke  blessings,  Gen.  27.4:25.  More  rarely  things 
are  attributed  to  the  soul,  or  mind,  (nephesh,)  which  belong,  (a)  to 
the  mode  of  feeling,  and  acting,  as  pride,  Prov.  28=25;  patience,  and 
impatience,  Job.  6:11;  (b)  to  the  will,  or  purpose,  2  Kings  9:15;  1 
Chron.  28:9,  (c)  to  the  understanding,  or  faculty  of  thinking,  Ps. 
139:14;  Prov.  19=2;  1  Sam.  20;4;  Deut.  4:9;  Lam.  3:20."  Also,  Sec. 
5,  he  says:  "with  suffixes  it  is  put  very  frequently  for:  I  myself, 
thou  thyself,  &c."  In  Sec.  2,  par.  3,  he  had  already  said  as  to  the 
relation  between  this  word  and  ruach,  that  "they  are  sometimes  op- 
posed, so  that  nephesh  is  ascribed  to  brutes,  and  ruach  to  men,  Job 
12=10;  but  ruach  is  also  ascribed  to  beasts  in  Ecc.  3:21."  This  word 
ruach  is  that  which  is  especially  used  of  the  spirit  of  God ;  but  it  is 
also  "spoken  both  of  man  and  beasts.  Ecc.  3:19.21;  8:8;  12:7;  Job 
12.10  *  *  *  *."  Once  the  human  spirit  is  called  the  ruach  of  God," 
Job  27=3  as  being  breathed  into  man  from  God,  and  again  returning 
to  God.  Gen.  2=7;  Ecc.  12:7;  Ps.  104:29."  Gesen.  Lex.  under  Ruach 
Sec  2. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  218 

It  is  manifest  from  these  facts  that  the  two  words  are  both  used  in 
the  Old  Testament,  to  express  both  animal  life,  and  the  higher  spiritual 
nature,  and  therefore,  that  no  radical  distinction  exists  between  them. 
The  same  word,  which  expresses  the  animal  life  of  the  beasts,  is  ap- 
plied to  man  as  a  rational,  and  moral  being,  as  well  as  to  his  animal 
life.  And  the  same  which  usually  expresses  the  higher  spiritual  na- 
ture is  also  used  even  of  the  brutes.  It  is  also  plain  that  the  same 
act,  by  which  the  spiritual  nature  was  conferred  upon  man,  brought 
his  animal  life  into  being.  In  man,  therefore,  it  would  seem  that  the 
spirit  becomes  the  actual  living  animating  principle,  and  needs  not  to 
have  superadded  to  it  the  mere  animal  life,  but  embraces  it  within  the 
life  which  is  that  of  the  spirit.  The  doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament  on 
this  subject,  therefore,  corresponds  with  that  of  the  New.  The  con- 
stituent parts  of  man  are  simply  body,  and  soul.  When  the  animal 
life  is  the  predominant  idea,  nephesh,  and  psuche  are  most  apt  to  be 
used,  because  the  spiritual  man  is  regarded  especially  in  that  aspect. 
When  the  idea  of  the  higher  nature  is  the  main  feature,  ruach  and 
pneuma  are  used  because  reference  to  that  peculiarity  of  it  is  most  prom- 
inent. But  the  use  of  all  of  the  words  for  either  aspect  shows  that  it 
is  after  all  the  one  principle  in  man  simply  differently  contemplated. 

The  powers  of  both  soul  and  body  are  unlimited  within  their  re- 
spective spheres;  the  word  unlimited  being  taken,  not  in  the  sense  of 
infinite,  but  in  the  greatly  more  restricted  one  of  indefinite.  Whatman 
can  physically  accomplish,  either  as  an  individual  over  his  own  per- 
son, or  over  others,  or  by  combination  with  others  over  the  world  of 
matter,  is  so  great,  that  no  one  can  ever  say  the  limit  has  been 
reached.  This  is  even  more  true  of  the  soul  in  its  intellectual,  and 
moral  nature,  in  the  exercise  of  thought,  and  reason,  and  in  the  per- 
ception of  moral  truths,  and  the  attainment  of  holy  perfection. 

The  soul  of  man,  as  a  true  spirit,  possesses  all  the  qualifications  which 
belong  to  spirit.  It  has  individual  personality,  consciousness,  intel- 
lectual powers,  free  agency,  capacity  of  moral  action,  is  subject  to 
law,  is  capable  of  voluntary  sin,  and  is  accountable  to  God  for  its  ac- 
tions, and  for  any  self  caused  spiritual  condition  of  sin.  It  has  natural 
ordained  immortality,  by  which  is  meant,  not  that  God  could  not  have 
deprived  it  of  life  had  He  chosen  so  to  have  ordained,  for  no  created 
nature  can  have  of  itself  any  power,  much  less  any  right,  of  continued 
immortality,  but  that  God  has  conferred  immortality  upon  the  nature 
of  spirits,  and  that  they  are  thus  immortal  through  His  ordination. 


219  Abstract  of  Theology. 

IV.     The  Origin  of  Souls. 

As  the  soul  of  the  first  man  was  a  direct  creation  of  God,  the  in- 
quiry naturally  arises,  are  the  souls  of  all  his  descendants  thus  created, 
or  whence  come  they?  This  question  becomes  a  difficult  one  because 
of  the  immateriality  and  unity,  and  simplicity  of  the  soul,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  on  the  other,  because  of  the  participation  of  the  spirits  of 
all  men  in  sin. 

I.  To  avoid  these  difficulties  some  have  believed  in  the  preexist- 
ence  of  the  souls  of  men,  which,  either  voluntarily,  or  as  the  punish- 
ment of  previous  sin,  enter  the  bodies  of  men.  In  this  manner  their 
existence  in  a  sinful  condition  may  be  accounted  for,  without  propa- 
gation of  souls  on  the  one  hand,  or  the  creation  of  the  souls  of  sinful 
men  on  the  other. 

This  theory  of  preexistence  has  been  held  in  three  forms.  The  first 
supposes  that  all  the  souls  of  men  were  created  at  the  same  time  with 
that  of  Adam,  each  for  his  respective  body,  with  which  it  either  volun- 
tarily, or  necessarily  unites  itself  at  some  fixed  period  in  its  earliest 
existence.  Relations  to  Adam  somewhat  similar  to  those  of  the  body, 
or  rather  relations  which  involve  the  whole  man,  both  soul,  and  body, 
may  cause  a  sinful  condition  under  which  each  man,  both  as  to  soul, 
and  body  is  born  sinful.  The  second  form  maintains  that  these  souls, 
or  spirits  are  unfallen  angels,  which,  of  their  own  accord,  assume  this 
union  with  the  body,  that  through  it  they  may  attain  to  the  higher 
relationships  to  God,  and  the  state  of  greater  glory  which  belong  to 
His  Redeemed.  The  third  affirms,  that  they  are  angels  who  had  fallen 
in  another  sphere,  unto  whom  God  affords  this  additional  probation, 
or  upon  whom  He  has  imposed  this  position  as  a  punishment  of  their 
sin. 

The  first  of  these  forms,  to  be  any  explanation  at  all  of  the  difficul- 
ties, must  recognize  an  actual  existence  of  the  souls  of  all  men  at  the 
same  time  with  that  of  Adam.  To  say  that  the  mere  idea  of  these 
beings  was  present  with  the  Divine  mind,  in  the  sense  in  which  Plato, 
and  his  followers  believed  the  whole  creation  to  exist  in  the  Divine 
mind,  as  a  model  in  accordance  with  which  all  things  have  been 
made,  or  that  all  things  were  present  with  God  in  the  purpose  which 
according  to  the  Scriptures  He  eternally  formed  of  their  future  exist- 
ence, through  which  he  knows  them,  and  they  are  eternally  coexistent 
with  Him,  is  to  suppose  an  actual  creation  afterwards,  and  to  leave 
unremoved  every  objection  which   may   be  pressed  against  the  direct 


Abstract  of  Theology.  220 

creation  of  each   soul   at   the  time  of  its  entrance  into  the  body,  and 
to  render  useless  any  theory  of  preexistence  at  all. 

But,  if  these  souls  actually  existed,  they  must  at  their  creation  have 
had  conscious  life  with  intelligence,  and  moral  character. 

The  chief  objections  to  the  theory  in  this  aspect  are, 

(1.)  That  no  man  has  ever  had'  consciousness  of  a  preexistent  state 
or  memory  of  things  which  occurred  therein.  This  fact  ought  to  be 
conclusive  against  this  theory,  for  that  consciousness  in  the  soul  is  not 
affected  by  its  union  with,  or  separation  from  the  body,  is  plain  from 
our  consciousness  in  our  present  existence,  and  from  what  the  Script- 
ures teach  of  the  condition  of  man  between  the  hour  of  death,  and 
the  resurrection. 

(2.)  The  Scriptures  give  no  hint  of  any  creation,  or  existence  of 
the  spirit  of  any  man,  prior  to  its  connection  with  the  body. 

(3  )  No  facts  in  the  human  life,  or  in  the  constitution  of  man  sup- 
port the  theory;  nor  does  reason  in  any  way  suggest  or  sustain  it.  It 
has  originated  entirely  in  an  attempt  to  escape  difficulties. 

(4.)  It  undertakes  no  explanation  of  the  condition,  or  position  of 
these  spirits,  regarded  either  as  innocent,  or  guilty,  while  awaiting 
the  period  of  their  union  with  the  body. 

Against  the  second  and  third  forms,  the  same  objection  of  lack  of 
consciousness,  and  memory  exists.  Against  the  second,  especially, 
may  be  urged  the  impossibility  for  any  purpose  of  a  holy  being  volun- 
tarily choosing  a  sinful  condition,  for  such  choice  would  itself  be  sin, 
which  the  theory  supposes  is  rewarded  by  God  by  granting  to 
these  spirits  their  sinful  desire.  Against  both  the  second,  and  the 
third,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Scriptures  nowhere  ascribe  the  origin  of 
sin  in  any  of  the  human  race  to  any  other  source  than  that  of  Adam, 
and  that  Heb.  2:1.6,  expressly  excludes  angels  from  the  benefits  of 
Christ's  redemption.  The  King  James  text  is,  "For  verily  he  took 
not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham." But  the  more  correct  translations  of  the  Canterbury  Revisers, 
and  of  their  American  Committee  are  still  stronger.  The  former  is, 
"For  verily  not  of  angels  doth  he  take  hold,  but  he  taketh  hold  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham."  The  latter  is,  "For  verily  not  to  angels  doth  he 
give  help,  but  he  giveth  help  to  the  seed  of  Abraham." 

2.  Another  theory  as  to  the  origin  of  souls,  which  has  very  exten- 
sively prevailed,  is  that  the  souls  of  men,  as  well  as  their  bodies,  are 
derived  from  their  parents.  According  to  this,  it  is  man  as  the  whole 
man  that  begets,  and  is  begotten  ;  and  as  body  produces  body,  so  it  is 


221  Abstract  of  Theology. 

thought  that  soul  produces  soul.  It  is  commonly  known  as  Tradu* 
danism  from  the  Latin  traducere,  to  lead,  or  bring  over,  as  the  layer 
of  a  vine,  for  the  purpose  of  propagation.  This  theory  is  based  upon 
several  grounds. 

(1 )  Its  advocates  claim  that  it  is  not  wholly  unsupported  by  the 
Scriptures.  While  Gen.  5*1,  declares  that  God  created  man  "in  the 
likeness  of  God,"  in  v.  3,  it  is  said  that  "Adam  begot  a  son  in  his  own 
likeness,  and  image,  and  called  him  Seth."  But  this  passage  "only 
asserts  that  Seth  was  like  his  father.  It  sheds  no  light  on  the  mys- 
terious process  of  generation,  and  does  not  teach  how  the  likeness  of 
the  child  to  the  parent  is  secured  by  physical  causes."  [Hodge  Sys. 
Theol.  vol.  2,  p.  68.]  The  fact  that  God  breathed  into  Adam  the 
breath  of  life  but  did  not  into  Eve,  is  also  adduced  as  proof  of  the  de- 
rivation of  her  soul  from  his,  as  well  as  of  her  body.  But  this  is  an 
argument  from  ignorance.  We  know  not  how  Eve  was  animated  into 
life,  but  surely  in  her  case  there  was  no  begetting  of  any  kind,  and 
therefore  from  it,  even  allowing  that  her  soul  came  from  Adam,  no  light 
could  be  thrown  upon  that  of  others  subsequent  to  it.  The 
language  of  Christ  to  Nicodemus,  (John  3r6),  "that  which  is  born 
of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is  born  of  the  spirit  is  spirit," 
can  have  no  application,  because  the  spiritual  birth,  or  soul-be- 
getting, here  spoken  of,  is  that  of  the  new  nature  in  man  produced 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  this  theory 
has  not  any  real  support  from  any  direct  teaching  of  Scripture. 

(2.)  But,  while  this  fact  is  admitted  by  many  of  its  advocates,  it 
is  claimed  that  this  theory  accounts  better  than  any  other  for  the 
transmission  of  a  sinful  nature,  and  is  thus  especially  supported  by 
the  Scripture  doctrine  of  Original  Sin.  The  Bible  as  well  as  experi- 
ence teaches  that  men  are  born  with  a  corrupt  nature,  and  that  the 
corruption  is  no  less  in  the  soul  than  in  the  body.  This  theory  denies 
that  God  can  directly  create  a  sinful  soul,  and  challenges  a  just  ex- 
planation of  the  sinful  state  of  man  even  in  infancy  unless  it  is  due, 
as  is  the  sinful  body,  to  its  connection  with  that  of  the  parent.  It  is 
unquestionably  difficult,  though  not  impossible,  to  give  such  an  ex- 
planation as  shall  be  satisfactory,  and  hence  this  is  a  strong  argument 
in  favour  of  this  theory.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  improper,  and 
dangerous  to  say  that  the  doctrine  of  original  sin  is  not  true,  if  there 
be  no  propagation  of  souls.  That  doctrine  is  plainly  revealed,  and  is 
derived  from  unquestionable  facts.  Its  correctness  does  not  depend 
upon  any  theory  which  may  be  presented  for  its  explanation.  All 
that  is  justifiable  is  to  show  that  this  theory,  if  in  no  other  respect 


Abstract  of  Theology.  222 

objectionable,  will  account  for  it.  But  the  universal  sinfulness  of 
man  may  have  otherwise  arisen,  and  whether  or  not  we  know  the 
manner  in  which  it  has  come  to  pass,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  say  that 
its  truth  depends  upon  the  correctness  of  any  theory  which  Scripture 
has  not  distinctly  connected  with  it. 

(3.)  It  is  also  argued  in  favour  of  .Traducianism  that  the  account 
of  Creation  in  Genesis  represents  God  as  resting  after  the  creation  of 
man,  both  male  and  female.  It  is  said,  that  this  rest  is  evidently  one 
from  direct  creation,  because  God  is  constantly  creating  mediately 
through  the  powers  of  reproduction  conferred  on  plants,  and  animals; 
that,  therefore,  if  the  souls  of  men  are  produced  from  the  parent  with 
the  body,  there  is  only  in  each  case  an  instance  of  this  mediate  creation; 
but,  that,  if  directly  created  by  God,  there  appears  to  be  no  sense  in 
which  he  has  ceased  from  creation,  or  can  be  said  to  have  rested  "from 
all  His  work  which  He  had  made."  But  nothing  can  be  argued  con- 
clusively from  these  statements.  We  know  not  exactly  what  is  meant 
by  this  Sabbath  day  rest  of  God.  But  that  it  was  not  a  perpetual 
rest  in  all  direct,  and  immediate  acts,  as  well  as  mediate,  is  seen 
in  various  well  known  instances  of  God's  direct  action;  as  in  the  con- 
ception of  Christ  by  the  Holy  Ghost;  in  the  working  of  miracles;  and 
in  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  regeneration  of  the  souls  of 
men. 

(4.)  Traducianism  receives  strong  support  from  the  transmission 
of  the  mental,  and  moral  characteristics  of  men  from  parent  to  child. 
These  become  equally  fixed,  and  permanent  with  those  of  the  body. 
They  may  be  traced  throughout  the  various  branches  of  any  one  race. 
•  They  are  found  as  national  peculiarities  which  distinguish  one  people 
from  another.  They  appear  in  families,  though  not  so  plainly 
manifested  because  of  the  many  intermarriages  with  other  families, 
and  of  the  tendency  to  reproduce  the  spiritual  as  well  as  the  bodily 
trails  of  remote  ancestors.  They  are  often  very  strongly  marked 
between  parent,  and  child,  and  the  transmission  is  so  plain,  that  the 
general  law  has  been  laid  down  that  generally,  though  not  univers- 
ally the  sons  follow  the  mental,  and  moral  features  of  the  mother,  and 
the  daughters  those  of  the  father.  This  argument  would  be  very  de- 
cisive could  we  entirely  separate  the  spiritual  man  from  the  influence 
of  the  corporeal.  "But,  "says  Dr.  Hodge"  this  argument  is  not  con- 
clusive, because  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  determine  to  what  proximate 
cause  these  peculiarities  are  due.  They  may  all  be  referred,  for  what 
we  know,  to  something  peculiar  in  the  physical  constitution.  That 
the  mind  is  greatly  influenced  by  the  body  cannot  be  denied.     And  a 


223  Abstract  of  Theology. 

body  having  the  physical  peculiarities  belonging  to  any  race,  nation, 
or  family,  may  determine  within  certain  limits  the  character  of  the 
soul."     Sys.  Theol.  vol.. 2,  p.  70. 

(5.)  The  advocates  of  this  theory  also  urge  that  only  thus  can  we 
account  for  such  an  incarnation  of  Christ  as  would  make  him  truly  of 
the  race  of  man.  His  human  soul  must  like  his  human  body  have 
proceeded  from  his  mother.  But  the  incarnation  is  a  mystery  as  to 
the  manner  of  which  we  cannot  dogmatize,  and  from  which  especially 
we  can  draw  no  conclusions  as  to  others  of  mankind.  We  know 
not  even  the  connection  with  his  mother  of  the  human  body  of  the 
Son  whom  she  conceived.  All  that  we  know  is  that  Jesus  was 
truly  her  child,  and  that  as  such  he  was  of  our  nature.  How  he 
became  such  is  not  revealed  fully.  But,  if  it  be  true  of  all  others 
that  their  souls  are  direct  creations  of  God,  and  yet  that  they  are 
of  the  human  race,  then  the  fact  that  the  soul  of  Christ  was  not 
derived  from  his  mother  would  make  him  no  less  a  man  than  all 
others.  The  incarnation  of  Christ  indeed  the  rather  favours  the 
theory  of  Creationism  ;  for  if  his  soul,  and  his  body  were  both  de- 
rived from  his  mother,  it  is  impossible  to  see  how  sin  was  not 
transmitted  to  him  as  it  is  to  others.  On  the  theory  of  Creationism 
we  can  understand  how  he  could  be  born  sinless,  as  a  pure  soul 
might  then  have  been  united  with  the  body  miraculously  prepared 
for  him,  which  body  itself  because  produced  by  direct  divine  agency, 
would  also  be  pure,  and  sinless. 

The  chief,  and  almost  the  only  objection  to  this  theory  of  any 
weight,  is  that  the  idea  of  propagation  of  souls  involves  their  ma- 
teriality. If  this  be  true  the  theory  must  be  rejected,  even  if  we 
are  left  without  any  satisfactory  explanation.  That  we  cannot  solve 
the  problem  otherwise,  does  not  show  that  it  has  no  solution. 

Any  explanation  of  the  transmission  of  souls  must  recognize  in 
the  soul  something  different  from  the  body,  and  something  that 
has  all  the  elements  necessary  to  a  true  spirit.  To  suppose,  there- 
fore, that  the  spirit  in  man  is  only  a  higher  form  of  the  animal 
life,  to  which  have  been  added  intelligence,  and  moral  capabilities, 
is  to  suppose  the  soul  to  be  incapable  of  any  separate  existence  from 
that  animal  life,  and  therefore,  to  be  dispelled  into  non-entity  with 
the  death  of  the  body.  This  is  so  contrary  to  what  the  Scriptures 
teach  of  its  separate  and' continued  existence  after  death,  as  not  to 
be  admissible  for  a  moment.       It  is  because  this  has  been  believed 


Abstract  of  Theology.  224 

to  be  necessarily  true  of  it,  if  in  any  way  material,  and  because 
propagation  of  souls  has  seemed  to  involve  their  materiality,  that 
this  theory  has  been  so  generally  rejected. 

But  it  may  be  questioned  whether  any  such  materialism  is  essen- 
tial to  a  propagation  of  souls.  It  is  claimed  that  extension  belongs  to 
matter  alone,  and  that  only  through  extension  can  there  arise  the  ca- 
pacity for  increase  in  number.  But  this  argues  a  knowledge  of  the 
nature  of  created  spirits  which  we  do  not  possess.  Because  the  unity 
of  nature  and  attributes  in  God  as  the  Great  Spirit,  the  Father  of 
Spirits,  involves  actual  simplicity  in  Him,  does  not  prove  that  the 
same  is  necessarily  true  of  the  spirits  He  has  created.  It  is  not  cer- 
tain that  they  may  not  have  some  kind  of  spiritual  bodies.  Is  it  not 
more  than  possible  that  He,  Who,  though  a  simple  spirit,  can  create 
spirit  like  Himself  though  not  of  His  own  substance,  may  be  able  to 
confer  upon  such  spirits  such  a  power  of  multiplication,  that,  what  He 
does  by  direct  agency  in  the  first  creation,  He  also  may  do  through 
them  in  the  mediate  creations  of  other  spirits?  It  is  not  affirmed  that 
this  is  true ;  but  is  it  possible  to  affirm  that  it  cannot  be  true? 

Besides  we  should  be  careful  how  we  dogmatize  as  to  what  can,  and 
cannot  be  true  of  spirits,  when  we  now  know  so  much  to  be  true 
which  a  priori  we  should  have  judged  to  be  impossible.  Thus  we 
now  know  through  the  creation  of  man  that  spirit  can  be  so  associated 
with  matter  as  to  give  it  a  fixed  location  in  space,  as  to  bring  it  into 
such  contact  with  matter  as  to  be  able  to  act  through  it,  and  upon  it, 
and,  more  than  this,  that  it  is  affected,  by  the  condition  of  the  material 
organism  with  which  it  is  connected,  that  its  powers  are  weakened  or 
strengthened  through  that  organism,  and  its  moral  faculties  influenced 
towards  sin,  or  holiness.  These,  and  many  similar  facts,  we  now  know 
to  be  true,  which,  without  experience  and  Scripture  teaching,  we 
should  have  denied  to  be  possible  because  of  the  substantial  differences 
of  Spirit,  and  Matter.  Even  in  the  Divine  Spirit  we  are  taught  that 
forms  of  multiplication  and  division  exist,  which,  without  the  instruc- 
tions of  the  Word  of  God,  we  might  have  denied  to  be  possible  of  His 
Spirituality,  and  Simplicity,  yet  which,  as  now  revealed,  are  seen  to 
be  in  no  respect  inconsistent  with  these  necessary  peculiarities  of  the 
One  God. 

These  facts  are  not  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  maintain  this  theory  of 
Tr^ducianism  as  true,  but  only  as  possible;  but  they  at  least  suffice  to 
keep  us  from  asserting  that  descent  of  one  spirit  from  another  can 
only  come  through  some  material   substance  in  the  soul,  and  from  ac- 


225  Abstract  of  Theology. 

cepting,  as  the  only  possible  solution,  any  other  theory  which  may  be 
accompanied  with  objections  equally  insuperable. 

3.  The  more  prevalent  theory  as  to  the  origin  of  souls  is  known  as 
Creation-ism.  It  maintains  that  the  soul  of  each  man  is  directly  cre- 
ated by  God  at  the  time  of  its  union  with  its  body. 

The  arguments  in  its  favour  are  thus  presented  by  Dr.  Hodge. 

(1.)  "That  it  is  more  consistent  with  the  prevailing  representations 
of  the  Scriptures.  In  the  original  account  of  the  creation  there  is  a 
marked  distinction  made  between  the  body  and  the  soul.  The  one 
is  from  the  earth,  the  other  from  God.  This  distinction  is  kept 
up  throughout  the  Bible.  Body  and  soul  are  not  only  represented 
as  different  substances,  but  also  as  having  different  origins.  The 
body  shall  return  to  dust,  says  the  wise  man,  and  the  spirit  to 
God  who  gave  it.  Here  the  origin  of  the  soul  is  represented  as 
different  from  and  higher  than  that  of  the  body.  The  former  is 
from  God  in  a  sense  in  which  the  latter  is  not.  In  like  manner  God 
is  said  to  form  ''the  spirit  of  man  within  him"  (Zech.  12:1);  to  give 
"breath  unto  the  people  upon  the  earth,"  "and  spirit  to  them  that 
walk  therein."  (Isa  42:5).  This  language  nearly  agrees  with  the  ac- 
count of  the  original  creation,  in  which  God  is  said  to  have  breathed 
into  man  the  breath  of  life,  to  indicate  that  the  soul  is  not  earthy  or 
material,  but  had  its  origin  immediately  from  God.  Hence  he  is 
called  "God  of  the  Spirits  of  all  flesh."  (Num.  16:22).  It  could  not 
well  be  said  that  He  is  God  of  the  bodies  of  all  men.  The  relation  in 
which  the  soul,  stands  to  God  as  its  God  and  Creator  is  very  different 
from  that  in  which  the  body  stands  to  Him.  And  hence  in  Heb.  12:9, 
it  is  said,  "We  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected  us,  and 
we  gave  them  reverence  :  shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in  subjection 
unto  the  Father  of  Spirits,  and  live?"  The  obvious  antithesis  here 
presented  is  between  those  who  are  fathers  of  our  bodies  and  Him 
who  is  the  Father  of  our  spirits.  Our  bodies  are  derived  from  our 
earthly  parents,  our  souls  are  derived  from  God.  This  is  in  accord- 
ance with  the  familiar  use  of  the  word  flesh,  where  it  is  contrasted, 
either  expressly  or  by  implication,  with  the  soul.  Paul  speaks  of 
those  who  had  not  "seen  his  face  in  the  flesh,"  of  "the  life  he  now  lived 
in  the  flesh."  He  tells  the  Philippians  that  it  was  needful  for  them 
that  he  should  remain  "in  the  flesh;"  he  speaks  of  his  "mortal  flesh." 
The  Psalmist  says  of  the  Messiah,  "my  flesh  shall  rest  in  hope," 
which  the  apostle  explains. to  mean  that  his  flesh  should  not  see  cor- 
ruption. In  all  these,  and  in  a  multitude  of  similar  passages,  flesh 
means  the  body,  and  "fathers  of  our  flesh"  means  fathers  of  our  bodies. 


Abstract  of  Theology;  226 

So  far,  therefore,  as  the  Scriptures  reveal  anything  on  the  subject, 
the  authority  is  against  Traducianism  and  in  favour  of  Creationism." 
.  (2.)  "The  latter  doctrine,  also,  is  clearly  most  consistent  with  the 
nature  of  the  soul.  The  soul  is  admitted,  among  Christians,  to  be  im- 
material and  spiritual.  It  is  indivisible.  The  Traducian  doctrine 
denies  this  universally  acknowledged  truth.  It  asserts  that  the  soul 
admits  of  "separation  or  division  of  essence."  On  the  same  ground 
that  the  Church  universally  rejected  the  Gnostic  doctrine  of  emana- 
tion as  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  God  as  a  Spirit,  it  has,  with 
nearly  the  same  unanimity,  rejected  the  doctrine  that  the  soul  admits 
a  division  of  substance.  This  is  so  serious  a  difficulty  that  some  of 
the  advocates  of  the  ex-traduce  doctrine  endeavour  to  avoid  it  by 
denying  that  their  theory  assumes  any  such  separation  or  division  of 
the  substance  of  the.  soul.  But  this  denial  avails  little.  They  main- 
tain that  the  same  numerical  essence  which  constituted  the  soul  of 
Adam  constitutes  our  souls.  If  this  be  so,  then  either  humanity  is  a 
general  essence  of  which  individual  men  are  the  modes  of  existence, 
or  what  was  wholly  in  Adam  is  distributively,  partitively,  and  by  se- 
paration, in  the  multitudes  of  his  descendants.  Derivation  of  essence, 
therefore,  does  imply,  and  is  generally  admitted  to  imply,  separation 
of  division  of  essence  And  this  must  be  so  if  numerical  identity  of 
essence  in  all  mankind  is  assumed  to  be  secured  by  generation,  or 
propagation." 

(3  )  "A. third  argument  in  favour  of  Creationism,  and  against  Tra- 
ducianism is  derived  from  the  scriptural  doctrine  as  to  the  person  of 
.Christ.  He  was  very  man  ;  he  had  a  true  human  nature  ;  a  true  body 
and  a  rational  soul.  He  was  born  of  a  woman.  He  was,  as  to  his 
flesh,  the  Son  of  David.  He  was  descended  from  the  fathers.  He 
was  in  all  points  made  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  This  is  ad- 
mitted on  both  sides.  But,  as  before  remarked  in  reference  to  realism, 
this,  on  the  theory  of  Traducianism,  necessitates  the  conclusion  that 
Christ's  human  nature  was  guilty  and  sinful.  We  are  partakers  of 
Adam's  sin  both  as  to  guilt  and  pollution,  because  the  same  numer- 
ical essence  which  sinned  in  him  is  communicated  to  us.  Sin,  it  is 
said,  is  an  accident,  and  supposes  a  substance  in  which  it  inheres,  or 
to  which  it  pertains.  Community  in  sin  supposes,  therefore,  com- 
munity of  essence.  If  we  were  not  in  Adam  as  to  essence  we  did  not 
sin  in  him,  and  do  not  derive  a  corrupt  nature  from  him.  But,  if  we 
were  in  him  as  to  essence,  then  his  sin'  was  our  sin  both  as  to  guilt, 
and  pollution.  This  is  the  argument  of  Traducianists  repeated  in 
every  form.     But  they  insist  that  Christ  was  in  Adam  as  to  the  sub- 


227 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


stance  of  his  human  nature  as  truly  as  we  were.  They  say  that  if 
his  body  and  soul  were  not  derived  from  the  body  and  the  soul  of 
his  virgin  mother  he  was  no  true  man,  and  cannot  be  the  redeemer 
of  men.  What  is  true  of  other  men  must,  consequently,  be  true  of 
him.  He  must,  therefore,  be  as  much  involved  in  the  guilt  and  cor- 
ruption of  the  apostasy  as  other  men.  It  will  not  do  to  affirm  and 
deny  the  same  thing.  It  is  a  contradiction  to  say  that  we  are  guilty 
of  Adam's  sin  because  we  are  partakers  of  his  essence,  and  that  Christ 
is  not  guilty  of  his  sin,  nor  involved  in  its  pollution,  although  he  is  a 
partaker  of  his  essence.  If  participation  of  essence  involve  commun- 
ity of  guilt  and  depravity  in  the  one  case,  it  must  also  in  the  other. 
As  this  seems  a  legitimate  conclusion  from  the  Traducian  doctrine, 
and  as  the  conclusion  is  anti-christian  and  false,  the  doctrine  itself  can- 
not be  true."  [Sys.  Theol.  vol.  2,  pp.  70-72.  See  the  whole  discus- 
sion, pp.  65-76,  especially  the  concluding  remarks,  pp.  72-76.] 


There  are  two  objections  chiefly  made  to  the  theory  of  Creationism; 
(1.)  that  God  is  thus  supposed  by  a  direct  originating  act  to  create  a 
pure  soul  to  inhabit  a  sinful  body  and  thus  to  partake  necessarily  of 
its  sin,  or  to  create  a  soul  for  that  purpose  already  sinful,  and  (2.)  that 
direct  creation  is  not  accordant  with  His  present  relations  to  the 
world  and  manner  of  acting  in  it.  To  this  latter  it  has  already  been 
replied,  that  we  have  instances  of  God's  direct  creations  which  forbid 
the  assertion  that  He  acts  only  through  secondary  means.  But  it  was  not 
intended,  then,  to  assert  that  God  acts  in  the  creation  of  souls,  any' 
more  than  in  their  regeneration,  entirely  apart  from  all  connection  with 
physical  circumstances,  and  causes.  His  action  may  occupy  some  re- 
lation to  them,  though  it  may  not  be  through  them. 

In  the  first  section  of  this  lecture  also,  in  discussing  the  account  of 
man's  creation,  attention  was  called  to  the  fact  that  the  Scriptures 
appear  to  allude  to  Adam  as  the  embodiment  of  the  race  of  man,  and 
it  was  added  "the  importance  of  this  fact  will  hereafter  be  seen."  It 
would  seem  from  that  statement,  that  in  some  form  there  is  a  certain 
unity  in  human  nature.  Those  who  hold  the  theory  of  Traducianism 
believe  that  "the  souls  of  children,  as  well  as  their  bodies  exist  in  their 
parents  in  Adam,  either  as  real  beings,  like  the  seeds  in  plants,  and 
so  have  been  propagated  from  Adam  through  successive  generations, 
which  is  the  opinion  of  Leibnitz,  in  his  "Theodicee,"  or  they  exist  in 
their  parents  merely  potentially,  and  come  from  them  by  propagation, 
or  transference."  [Knapp's  Christian  Theol.  p.  201-]    Now,  while  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  228 

theory  of  propagation  may  be  rejected,  the  fact  of  the  unity  of  human 
nature  still  exists.  The  recognition  of  that  existence  will  aid  in  solving 
many  difficulties  in  theology,  and  among  others  may  afford  a  probable 
solution  of  a  direct  creation  of  God  which  does  not  involve  responsibility 
on  His  part  for  the  guilt  of  a  newly  created  soul.  If  it  be  true  that 
human  nature  is  one,  and  yet  that  men  are  many,  it  follows  that  a 
man  is  only  "a  manifestation  of  the  general  principle  of  humanity  in 
connection  with  a  given  human  body,"  [Hodge,  vol.  2,  p.  75,]  and 
that  thus  he  becomes  a  conscious  individual  person  of  that  humanity. 
This  is  analogous  to,  but,  yet,  quite  dffferent  from  the  threefold  per- 
sonal relations  in  the  Trinity  of  the  Godhead.  The  latter  is  a  three- 
fold separate  personal  subsistence  in  one  common,  undivided,  and  in- 
divisible Divine  nature,  or  essence.  The  former  embraces  many  se- 
parate individual  personal  manifestations  of  one  human  nature,  his 
appropriate  part  of  which  is  possessed  by  each  person  who  thus  be- 
comes an  embodiment  in  himself  of  the  common  humanity.  If,  then, 
it  be  accordant  with  God's  general  method  of  working,  and  with  His 
purpose  to  produce  this  personal  existence  under  proper  conditions, 
new  souls  may  be  thus  created  whose  connection  with  the  common 
humanity  may  be  as  intimate  as  though  they  were  originally  contained 
in  Adam  for  propagation,  and  who  are  therefore  created  sinful  without 
any  more  relation  of  God  to  their  creation  than  would  have  existed 
had  they  been  propagated. 

That  the  common  method  of  God,  in  the  production  of  life  of  any 
kind,  may  be  of  this  nature  is  ably  set  forth  by  Dr.  Hodge  in  answer 
to  the  declaration  of  Delitszh  that  the  continued  creation  of  souls  is 
inconsistent  with  God's  present  relation  to  the  world,  and  that  He 
now  produces  only  mediately  i.  e.  through  the  operation  of  second 
causes. 

"This"  says  Dr.  Hodge,  "is  a  near  approach  to  the  mechanical 
theory  of  the  universe,  which  supposes  that  God,  having  created  the 
world  and  endowed  His  creatures  with  certain  faculties  and  proper- 
ties, leaves  it  to  the  operation  of  these  second  causes.  A  continued 
superintendence  of  Providence  may  be  admitted,  but  the  direct  exer- 
cise of  the  Divine  efficiency  is  denied.  What,  then,  becomes  of  the 
doctrine  of  regeneration?  The  new  birth  is  not  the  effect  of  second 
causes.  It  is  not  a  natural  effect  produced  by  the  influence  of  the 
truth  or  the  energy  of  the  human  will.  It  is  due  to  the  immediate 
exercise  of  the  almighty  power  of  God.  God's  relation  to  the  world 
is  not  that  of  a  mechanist  to  a   machine,   nor  such  as  limits  Him  to 


229  Abstract  of  Theology. 

operating  only  through  second  causes.  He  is  immanent  in  the  world. 
He  sustains  and  guides  all  causes.  He  works  constantly  through 
them,  with  them,  and  without  them.  As  in  the  operations  of 
writing  and  speaking  there  is  with  us  the  union  and  combined 
action  of  mechanical,  chemical,  and  vital  forces,  controlled  by  the 
presiding  power  of  mind;  and  as  the  mind,  while  thus  guiding 
the  operations  of  the  body,  constantly  exercises  its  creative  energy 
of  thought,  so  God,  as  immanent  in  the  world,  constantly  guides 
all  the  operation  of  second  causes,  and  at  the  same  time  exercises 
uninteruptedly  His  creative  energy.  Life  is  not  the  product  of 
physical  causes.  We  know  not  that  its  origin  is  in  any  case  due  to 
any  cause  other  than  the  immediate  power  of  God..  If  life  be  the 
peculiar  attribute  of  immaterial  substance,  it  may  be  produced  agree- 
ably to  a  fixed  plan  by  the  creative  energy  of  God  whenever  the  con- 
ditions are  present  under  which  He  has  purposed  it  should  begin  to 
be.  The  organization  of  a  seed,  or  of  the  embryo  of  an  animal,  so  far 
as  it  consists  of  matter,  may  be  due  to  the  operation  of  material  causes 
guided  by  the  providential  agency  of  God,  while  the  vital  principle  it- 
self is  due  to  His  creative  power.  There  is  nothing  in  this  derogatory 
to  the  divine  character.  There  is  nothing  in  it  contrary  to  the  Scrip- 
tures. There  is  nothing  in  it  out  of  analogy  with  the  works  and  working 
of  God.  It  is  far  preferable  to  the  theory  which  either  entirely  banishes 
God  from  the  world,  or  restricts  His  operations  to  a  concursus  with. 
second  causes.  The  objection  to  Creationism  that  it  does  away  with 
the  doctrine  of  miracles,  or  that  it  supposes  God  to  sanction  every  act 
with  which  His  creative  power  is  connected,  does  not  seem  to  have 
even  plausibility.  A  miracle  is  not  simply  an  event  due  to  the  im- 
mediate agency  of  God,  for  then  every  act  of  conversion  would  be  a 
miracle.  But  it  is  an  event,  occurring  in  the  external  world,  which 
involves  the  suspension  or  counteracting  of  some  natural  law,  and 
which  can  be  referred  to  nothing,  but  the  immediate  power  of  God. 
The  origination  of  life,  therefore,  is  neither  in  nature  nor  design  a 
miracle,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.  This,  exercise  of  God's  cre- 
ative energy,  in  connection  with  the  agency  of  second  causes,  no 
more  implies  approbation  than  the  fact  that  He  gives,  and  sustains 
the  energy  of  the  murderer  proves  that  He  sanctions  murder."  [Sys. 
Theol.  vol.  2,  pp.  74,  75. 

I  close  the  consideration  of  this  question  by  adopting  the  language 
with  which  Dr.  Hodge  closes  his  discussion. 

"The  object  of  this  discussion  is   not  to   arrive   at   certainty   as  to 


"Abstract  of  Theology.  230 

what  is  not  clearly  revealed  in  Scripture,  nor  to  explain  what  is,  on 
all  sides,  admitted  to  be  inscrutable,  but  to  guard  against  the  adoption 
of  principles  which  are  in  opposition  to  plain  and  important  doctrines 
of  the  word  of  God.  If  Traducianisrn  teaches  that  the  soul  admits  of 
abscission  or  division;  or  that  the  human  race  are  constituted  of 
numerically  the  same  substance;  or  that  the  Son  of  God  assumed  into 
personal  union  with  himself  the  same  numerical  substance  which 
sinned  and  fell  in  Adam  ;  then  it  is  to  be  rejected  as  both  false  and 
dangerous.  But  if,  without  pretending  to  explain  everything,  it 
simply  asserts  that  the  human  race  is  propagated  in  accordance  with 
the  general  law  which  secures  that  life  begets  life;  that  the  child  de- 
rives its  nature  from  its  parents  through  the  operation  of  physical 
laws,  attended  and  controlled  by  the  agency  of  God,  whether  directive 
or  creative,  as  in  all  other  cases  of  the  propagation  of  living  creatures, 
it  may  be  regarded  as  an  open  question,  or  matter  of  indifference. 
Creationism  does  not  necessarily  suppose  that  there  is  any  other  exer- 
cise of  the  immediate  power  of  God  in  the  production  of  the  human 
soul  than  such  as  takes  place  in  the  production  of  life  in  other  cases. 
It  only  denies  that  the  soul  is  capable  of  division,  that  all  mankind 
are  composed  of  numerically  the  same  essence,  and  that  Christ  as- 
sumed numerically  the  same  essence  that  sinned  in  Adam."  [Sys. 
Theol.  vol.  2,  pp.  75,  76. 

V.     The  Image  and  Likeness  of  God. 

In  the  hrst  account  of  creation  God  is  represented  as  saying  :  "Let 
us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness."  Gen.  1:26.  A  na- 
tural question  has  arisen  whether  there  is  any  difference  between  the 
words  "image,"  and  ''likeness."  It  has  been  earnestly  contended  that 
there  is  some  distinction  to  be  made  between  them,  and  various  con- 
flicting opinions  have  been  expressed  as  to  what  that  distinction  is.  But 
it  is  not  probable  that  any  was  meant,  or  can  be  established.  None 
is  apparent  between  the  original  Hebrew  words  ;  and  the  Scriptural 
use  of  them  elsewhere  seems  to  imply  that  none  exists.  In  Gen.  1:27, 
the  first  of  these  is  used  alone,  and  is  twice  used.  In  Gen.  9-*6,  we 
have  the  first  word  alone,  while  in  Gen.  5:1,  the  second  alone  appears, 
although  in  Gen.  5:3,  both  are  employed  in  stating  the  image,  and 
likeness  of  Adam  in  which  Seth  was  begotten.  The  New  Testament 
equally  fails  to  make  any  distinction.  In  1.  Cor.  11:7,  image  (eikon), 
and    glory    (doxa),    are    used;,  in    Col.    3:10,    image    (eikon)    alone 


231  Abstract  of  Theology. 

and  James  3:9,  likeness  (omoiosis).  The  assumption,  therefore,  that 
there  is  any  distinction  between  the  words  is  entirely  gratuitous.  The 
two  are  merely  synonymous,  and  are  used  in  accordance  with  a  com- 
mon Hebrew  mode  of  speech. 

A  more  important  question  is  to  what  is  meant  by  that  image,  or 
likeness. 

1.  There  is  probably  no  reference  to  the  bodily  form  of  man.  God, 
as  pure  spirit,  has  no  body,  in  the  likeness,  or  image  of  which  man 
could  be  created.  The  body  of  man,  although  in  many  respects  su- 
perior to  that  of  the  brutes,  is  in  a  great  measure  like  theirs.  The 
analogy  between  man  and  animals  generally,  but  especially  those 
which  are  nearest  to  him  in  the  stage  of  being,  is  very  striking.  But 
there  can  be  no  analogy  between  him  and  God  in  this  respect.  In  no 
way  even  could  special  honour  be  put  on  man  in  his  physical  nature, 
except  as  that  nature  .gives  evidence  of  the  existence  with  it  of  those 
spiritual  powers  which  elevate  man  above  the  brutes.  It  is  as  the 
dwelling  place  of  that  spirit,  and  because  of  its  intimate  association 
with  the  life  existent  in  that  body,  that  any  sacredness  can  be  attached 
to  the  bodily  form.  It  is  this  therefore,  that  is  doubtless  meant  by 
Gen.  9^6,  where  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  man  is  made  punishable 
on  the  ground  that  "in  the  image  of  God  made  He  man/' 

2.  That  image  and  likeness  consists  in  the  possession  of  a  spiritual 
nature.  It  is  in  this  respect  that  man  is  like  God,  Who  is  called 
"the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,"  (Num.  16:22;  27:16;);  and  the 
Father  of  spirits,  (Heb.  12:9).  The  spirits  of  men  are  also  spoken  of 
as  peculiarly  the  works  of  his  hands,  (Ecc.  12:7;  Isa  57:16;  Zech. 
12=1),  and  it  was  to  Him  that  our  dying  Lord  commended  his  spirit. 
(Luke  23:46). 

As   thus  spiritual,  man  has  all  the  peculiarities  of  a  true  spirit. 

(1.)  He  is  a  personal  being  with  individual  conscious  existence, 
and  action. 

(2.)  He  has  the  intellectual  powers  by  which  he  knows  all  things 
within  the  sphere  of  his  being. 

(3.)  He  has  that  power  of  contrary  choice  which  constitutes  him  a 
free  agent,  although  controlled  in  that  choice  by  the  prevailing  motive; 
by  which  is  meant  the  motive  which  most  pleases  him,  and  which  is, 
therefore,  that  to  which  his  own  nature  gives  prevalence. 

(4.)  He  has  a  moral  nature,  or  a  nature  with  reference  to  which 
we  can  say,  "ought,"  and  "ought  not." 


Absteact  of  Theology.  232 

(5.)  This  moral  nature  as  orginally  existent  must  have  been  (a.) 
not  only  without  taint  of  sin,  and  (b.)  without  tendencies  to  sin,  and 
(c.)  not  merely  in  a  condition  of  such  equipoise  between  sin  and  holi- 
ness, as  would  make  the  soul  indifferent  to  the  one  or  the  other, 
but  (d.)  must  have  been  entirely  inclined  towards  the  right,  with  a 
holy  taste  for  the  holiness  of  God,  ha.ving  capacity  to  discern  its 
beauty,  and  inclination  to  love  Him  as  its  possessor,  accompanied  by 
readiness  to  obey  the  law  of  God,  and  perception  of  man's  duty  to 
serve  Him. 

That  such  was  the  original  condition  of  man's  moral  nature  is  evi- 
dent from  Eph.  4:24,  "And  that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after 
God  is  created  in  righteousness,  and  true  holiness."  These  elements, 
which  belonged  to  the  image  of  God  in  which  man  was  created,  have 
been  lost.  They  are  restored  again  in  the  renewing  of  man  when 
created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  That  the  whole  image  was  not  de- 
stroyed by  the  sin  of  Adam,  appears  from  the  fact  that  man  is  spoken 
of,  as  in  that  image,  subsequent  to  the  tall,  and  before  the  renewal. 
See  Gen.  9=6;  James  3:9;  1  Cor.  11:7.  But,  that  there  was  a  loss, 
not  merely  of  innocence,  but  of  original  righteousness,  is  evidently  to 
be  inferred  from  the  above  mentioned  passage  in  Ephesians. 

(6.)  Perpetuity  of  existence  also  belongs  to  the  nature  of  created 
spirit,  and  is  another  point  of  similarity  between  all  spirits,  and  God. 
This  is  commonly  called  immortality.  But  created  spirits  have  not  an 
immortal  spiritual  life.  The  soul  may  die.  The  death  of  the  soul, 
however,  is  not  the  cessation  of  conscious  personal  existence.  It  is 
simply  the  destruction  of  its  spiritual  life  by  its  contamination  by  sin, 
and  its  separation  from  the  favour  of  God.  What  the  Scriptures  teach 
of  the  death  of  the  soul,  shows,  therefore,  that  natural  immortality 
should  not  be  affirmed  of  man's  spiritual  nature,  But  perpetual  ex- 
istence has  been  given  by  God  to  the  nature  of  created  spirits.  He 
might  have  made  that  nature  otherwise.  But  He  has  chosen  that  it 
shall  be  ever  existent.  This  perpetuity  of  existence  is  not,  however, 
merely  in  His  purpose.  He  could  have  willed  otherwise.  No  crea- 
tion of  God  could  have  such  a  nature  as  of  itself  to  be  imperishable. 
It  has  been  argued  from  the  simplicity  of  the  soul  that  it  cannot  be 
destroyed  by  God.  But,  evidently,  He  who  created  without  com- 
pounding, could  also  destroy  without  dividing.  But  He  has  chosen 
to  give  such  a  nature  to  spirit,  that  to  that  nature  belongs  perpetuity 
of  existence.  It  is,  however,  not  self  existent,  as  is  God,  for  it  has 
not  in  itself  the  power  of  self  existence.  Without  God  it  could  no 
longer  be.     It   must   be   ^reserved,  in  the   conferred  nature,  bv  that 


233 


Abstract  of  Theology, 


same  power  which  created  it.  But  God  has  given  this  nature  to 
spirits,  which  He  purposes  ever  to  preserve,  and,  through  that  gift 
and  that'preservation,  they  have  an  endless  existence. 

3.  When  God  purposed  to  make  man,  He  also  said,  "and  let  them 
have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air, 
and  over  the  cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creeping 
thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth."     Gen.  1:26. 

Because  of  this  language  some  have  supposed  that  this  dominion 
was  also  a  part  of  the  image,  and  likeness  of  God. 

But,  evident^,  this  was  an  office  conferred  upon  the  man  made  in 
God's  image,  and  not  a  part  of  that  image.  The  Scripture  presents  it 
as  something  that  wTas  to  follow  after  the  nature  was  conferred  upon 
man.  The  resemblance  between  him,  and  God,  in  this  respect,  is  very 
striking-  That  becomes  more  so,  when  we  recognize  the  fulfilment  of 
this  purpose  in  its  highest  sense  in  the  mediatorial  dominion  of  the 
Godman.  But  this  position  is  one  of  office,  and  not  of  nature,  and  the 
image  of  God  declared  of  man  is  manifestly  an  image  of  His   nature. 

Nor  does  dominion  belong  essentially  even  to  God  Himself.  Were 
it  thus  His,  the  outward  creation  over  which  it  is  exercised  must  have 
been  eternal.  It  arises  in  connection  with  that  Creation.  He  has 
this  right  over  it,  because  not  only  its  creation,  but  even  its  preser- 
vation is  due  to  Him  alone.  His  relation  to  it  is,  therefore,  one  of 
office  only,  and  not  of  nature.  Hence  there  can  be  no  such  connection 
of  His  nature  with  the  dominion  He  exercises,  as  to  make  the  domin- 
ion conferred  on  man  a  part  of  the  image  of  God  in  which  he  was 
created. 

VI.     Man  perfect  but  not  infallible. 


It  was  after  the  creation  of  man  that  God  saw,  as  to  everything  that 
He  had  made,  that  it  was  "very  good,"  literally  "exceedingly  good." 
Gen.  1:31.  On  the  previous  days  we  are  only  told  that  He  saw  it 
was  good.  There  seems  here  a  special  emphasis,  therefore,  as  to  the 
perfection  of  man's  entire  nature.  The  points  of  that  perfection  have 
been  exhibited  in  showing  that  man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God. 
But,  that  it  did  not  include  perpetual  continuance  in  it,  we  know 
from  the  fact  that  man  fell  from  it  in  sinning  against  God.  His  na- 
ture, therefore,  was  fallible.  In  this  respect  he  was  not  peculiar,  for, 
as  we  have  heretofore  seen,  there  have  been  angels  also  who  kept  not 
their  first  estate.  Indeed  fallibility  belongs  to  the  nature  of  created 
spirits.     It  is  involved  in  their  possession  of  the  power  of  contrary 


Abstract  of  Theology.  234 

choice,  that,  whenever  good  and  evil  are  presented,  the  latter  may  be 
chosen,  and  thus  the  spiritual  creature  may  fall.  Any  idea  of  a  pro- 
bation implies  the  presentation  of  such  choice.  The  fall  of  a 
spiritual  being  may  be  prevented,  either,  by  not  appointing  to  it  a  pro- 
bation, or  presenting  the  trial  under  such  circumstances  as  will  leave 
no  temptation  to  choose  the  wrong,  or  by  God's  so  influencing  the 
mind  as  to  counteract  all  the  power  of  such  temptation.  But,  that 
God  has  a  right  to  test  his  creatures  is  unquestionable,  as  well  as,  that 
He  is  not  bound  to  surround  them  with  such  circumstances,  or  so  to 
counteract  the  power  of  all  temptation,  as  to  make  sinning  impossible. 
But,  if  He  should  thus  protect  or  decline  to  test,  the  natural  fallibility 
of  the  creature  would  still  be  a  fact.  He  is  not  liable  to  fall  simply 
because  God  protects  him  from  that  liability.  He  has  not  an  infal- 
lible nature.  The  holy  angels  are  often  spoken  of  as  confirmed  in 
holiness;  but  this  is  not  due  to  any  change  of  nature,  but  must  either 
be  known  from  a  knowledge  of  God's  purpose,  or  perhaps  of  His  pro- 
mise, even  if,  in  part,  or  altogether,  accomplished  by  what  they  have 
seen  of  the  fearful  evil  of  sin  in  the  other  angels,  or  in  man.  Yet 
without  such  promise,  or  declared  purpose  of  God,  there  is  no  as- 
surance that  they  may  not  yet  fall. 

The  perfection,  therefore,  of  any  created  being  does  not  consist  in 
infallibility.  The  fact  that  man  has  fallen,  argues  nothing  against 
his  original  perfection.  For  this,  he  needed  only  to  have  truly  the 
nature  which  God  gave  him.  God  could  not  give  him  an  infallible 
nature,  though  He  could  preserve  him  infallible  in  whatever  nature 
He  might  choose  to  bestow.  But  He  was  under  no  obligation  to  do 
this;  none  to  man;  none  to  His  own  righteous  nature.  He  had  the 
right  to  test  man  at  His  will,  and,  thus  testing,  to  leave  him  to  him- 
self, without  constraint  to  the  contrary,  to  choose  as  he  might  see  fit. 
This  He  did,  and  man  fell;  but  his  fall  was  not  due  to  the  lack  of  any 
natural  perfection.  * 


Abstract  of  Theology.  236 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXI 


PROVIDENCE. 

Intimately  associated  with  the  doctrine  of  Creation  is  that  of  Pro- 
vidence, which  is,  however,  a  distinct  method  of  Divine  activitv-  By 
acts  of  Creation,  God  brings  into  existence  the  things  which  He 
makes,  and  confers  upon  them  their  respective  natures,  qualities,  pro- 
perties, modes  of  existence,  and  laws  of  being,  thought  and  action. 
By  acts  of  Providence,  He  simply  preserves  these  creations,  or  permits, 
or  causes  decay,  or  change  in  them,  to  such  an  extent,  and  within  such 
limits  as  He  has  purposed;  and,  at  the  same  time,  in  fulfilment  of  like 
purpose,  He  directs,  controls  and  guides  them  in  accordance  with 
the  natures  He  has  given  them,  and  the  laws  He  has  imposed  upon 
them. 

Providence  is  also  closely  allied  to  Predestination,  or  Purpose  ;  but 
the  distinction  between  these  two  is  also  equally  clear.  The  Purpose 
of  God  is  His  predetermined  plan  as  to  what  shall  be  done  in  His 
Creation  by  Himself,  or  by  others.  It  fixes  the  events  which  shall 
happen,  and  the  methods  and  agency  by  which  they  will  take  place. 
But  Providence  is  the  actual  doing,  or  permitting  the  things  thus 
purposed,  and  securing  the  ends  thus  designed.  The  purpose  also  is 
formed  in  eternity  ;  the  Providential  acts  are  performed  in  time. 

But,  despite  these  very  obvious  distinctions,  Providence  has  been 
confounded  both  with  Purpose  and  Creation;  some  holding  that  there 
is  no  other  Providence  except  what  is  involved  in  Purpose;  and  others 
going  to  the  other  extreme,  and  maintaining,  that  Providence  is  after 
all  only  a  continual  creation,  and  that  there  is  no  other  connection 
between  antecedent,  and  consequent  events  than  exists  in  the  Divine 


237  Abstract  of  Theology. 

efficiency  giving  every  moment  renewed  existence  by  acts  of  direct 
creative  power.  Each  of  these  views  is  opposed  both  to  reason,  and 
Scripture,  which  teach  that  there  is  a  divine  efficiency  operating  in 
this  world  differing  in  many  respects  essentially  from  that  exercised 
in  creation.  This  efficiency  is  displayed  both  in  the  Preservation  and 
Government  of  the  universe,  and  of  the  things  which  are  contained 
wTithin  it. 

I.     Providential  efficiency  now  operating/ 

1.  In  presenting  the  proof  that  Providential  efficiency  is  now  oper- 
ating in  the  world,  it  is  natural  that  attention  should  first  be  called 
to  the  almost  universal  belief  in  the  Providential  action,  and  care  of 
God.  This  is  based  upon  the  same  feeling  of  self  dependence  in  man 
to  which  reference  has  been  made  in  the  proofs  of  the  existence  of 
God.  It  is  the  witness  to  us  which  God  gives,  not  only  that  He 
exists,  but  that  He  supports,  and  sustains  us  in  every  moment  of 
being. 

2.  A  second  proof  may  be  drawn  from  the  world  about  us.  Every 
argument  it  has  afforded  for  the  Being  of  a  God  becomes  equally  con- 
clusive of  his  Providential  care.  The  argument  from  causation,  in 
tracing  back  all  causes  to  some  being  who  has  the  cause  of  His  exist- 
ence in  Himself,  forces  us  to  find  in  the  present  efficiency  of  such  a 
being,  the  final  ground  for  all  things  that  now  occur.  That  from  de- 
sign leads  us  constantly  to  trace  the  purpose  God  has  had  in  view  in 
each  event  of  life,  and  thus  proclaims  the  presence  and  efficiency  of 
Him  who  is  seen  to  be  working  out,  even  now,  the  purposes  He  has 
eternally  formed.  Moreover,  the  evidence  that  the  world  affords,  that 
it  is  not  self  existent,  and  independent,  proves  the  presence  and  effi- 
cient energy  of  one  upon  whom  it  depends  for  the  properties,  qualities 
and  life  of  its  varied  forms,  and  for  their  continued  existence. 

3.  The  fact,  which  we  have  learned,  of  a  creation  out  of  nothing, 
shows  that  the  whole  Universe  exists  only  through  the  will,  and 
power  of  God.  Since  it  could  only  thus  come  into  being,  so  it  could 
only  thus  remain  in  being.  Any  contrary  doctrine  could  only  be 
held  by  those  who  deny  a  creation  out  of  nothing.  The  history  of 
philosophical  opinions  shows  that  this  is  true.  The  doctrine  of  Pro- 
vidence has  only  been  denied  by  those  who  have  believed  in  the 
Eternity  of  Matter.  It  is  possible  to  conceive,  in  the  absence  of  other 
proofs  to  the  contrary,  that,  as  man  can  construct  machines,  and  leave 
them  to  work  through  the  laws  of  nature,  so,  if  nature  were  self  exist- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  238 

ent,  and  eternal,  and  if  it  possessed  of  itself  all  its  attributes  and 
qualities,  the  mere  fact  that  God  has  given  it  form  would  not  necessi- 
tate His  continued  presence:  He  would  be  acting  then,  as  man  does, 
in  subordination  to,  and  in  the  use  of  the  properties  and  quali- 
ties of  matter.  But,  however  God  may  use  these  things  in  mat- 
ter, He  does  not  use  them  in  subordination,  but  as  the  Sovereign 
Lord.  He  has  given  these  qualities.  He  could  take  them  away. 
He  could  counteract  them.  He  can  destroy  them  They  exist  only 
because  He  wills  and  causes.  But  such  "will"  and  "cause"  is  only 
His  Providential  operation  by  which  He  preserves  them,  and  uses 
them,  as  their  Lord,  for  His  own  purpose.  His  is  the  exercise  of  pre- 
sent divine  efficiency  in  them,  and  through  them. 

4.  The  nature  of  God  Himself  also  furnishes  indubitable  testimony 
to  His  providential  operations.  This  arises  in  opposite  directions  ; 
from  the  limitations  of  His  nature  on  the  one  hand,  and  its  infinity 
on  the  other.  As  heretofore  seen,  there  are  some  things  which  God 
cannot  do.  He  cannot  do  impossibilities.  He  cannot  confer  His  own 
incommunicable  attributes  upon  another.  This  limitation  arises  from 
the  fact  that  He  is  God,  and  beside  Him  there  can  be  none  else. 
It  is  this  limitation  which  makes  it  impossible  to  create  a  world  which 
shall  be  self  existent,  and  independent,  and  which,  as  being  such,  will 
not  need  His  efficient  action  for  its  support  and  care.  To  do  so  would 
be  to  confer  on  it  His  own  nature.  But  the  nature  of  God  cannot  be 
given  to  any  creature. 

On  the  other  hand  the  illimitable  nature  of  God's  attributes  makes 
it  impossible  that  he  should  not  be  efficiently  present  always  with  His 
creation.  His  omnipresence  does  not,simply  make  Him  capable  of 
being  everywhere,  but,  by  virtue  of  it  Tie  absolutely  is  everywhere. 
He  cannot  be  absent  from  His  creation.  He  cannot  withdraw  Him- 
self even  if  He  will.  His  knowledge  of  all  events  within  His  crea- 
tion is  also  a  necessity  of  His  being.  He  cannot  be  ignorant  of  them 
if  He  would.  The  fact  that  He  does  not  know  of  the  existence  of 
anything,  is  of  itself  not  only  proof  that  it  does  not  exist,  but  that  it 
cannot  exist.  Because  of  His  goodness,  also,  He  must  wish  the  hap- 
piness of  His  creatures,  and  must  make  provision  for  that  happiness. 
This  arises  not  from  any  obligation  to  them,  but  from  another  necessity 
of  His  nature.  He  must  be  benevolently  good.  He  must  beneficently 
bestow  wherever  there  are  obj  ects  for  such  bestowal.  The  omnipresence, 
infinite  knowledge,  and  goodness  of  the  Almighty  God,  therefore,  render 
necessary  His  Providential  care  over  His  creation.  There  can  be  but 
one  thing  that  can  hinder  this  benevolent  care,  and  that  is  sin;  which,  by 


239  Abstkact  of  Theology. 

demanding  the  punitive  exercise  of  God's  justice,  may  change  into 
punishment,  and  misery  that  which  otherwise  would  be  happiness  and 
joy.  But  this,  so  far  from  destroying  Providence,  only  introduces 
God  as  Providentially  acting  in  the  form  of  government  also,  instead 
of  preservation  alone.  He  does  not  withdraw  Himself  because  of  this 
sin.  He  is  still  present  with  the  sinner.  He  continue?  to  know  his 
ways.  He  exercises  Providential  care,  and  even  sends  blessings  still 
upon  him.  He  modifies  His  action  only  to  correspond  with  the  mod- 
ified relation  sin  has  introduced,  Therefore,  as  the  Ruler,  and  Gov- 
ernor of  the  Universe,  He  inflicts  the  punishment  which  sin  has  made 
necessary.  Sin  alone  has  brought  into  existence  this  restraining  and 
punishing  rule,  and  government.  But  for  it,  all  would  be  merged  into 
that  fatherly  care  which  seeks  only  to  bless,  and  protect,  and  guide. 
The  fact  that  there  would  be  rewards  does  not  prove  any  other  kind 
of  government ;  for  the  rewards  of  God  are,  after  all,  but  gracious 
gifts,  utterly  undeserved,  in  no  respect  due  except  as  sovereign  boun- 
ties, and  given  under  no  other  obligation  than  arises  from  His  own 
truth  which  binds  Him  to  His  purposes,  and  leads  Him  to  fulfil  His 
promises. 

5.  The  Scriptures  abound  in  testimony  to  God's  Providential  effi- 
ciency in  the  world.  It  is  given  in  every  imaginable  form.  General 
statements  are  made,  as  in  Nehemiah  9:6,  where  the  Lord  is  said  to 
have  made  the  heavens  and  their  hosts,  and  the  earth  and  seas  and  all 
that  is  therein,  and  to  preserve  them.  Specific  rule  is  declared  over 
all  the  phenomena  of  nature;  such  as  clouds,  wind,  rain,  hail,  snow, 
ice,  cold,  frost,  thunder,  lightning,  storm,  earthquakes,  and  all  other 
natural  events;  many  of  which,  formerly  deemed  accidental,  are  now 
seen  to  be  governed  by  inexorable  laws  of  God.  The  beasts  of  the 
field,  and  the  birds  of  the  air,  are  said  to  be  carefully  watched  over 
by  Him.  It  is  even  He  that  clothes  the  flowers  with  their  beauty  by 
encircling  them  with  His  own  shining  garment  of  light.  But  men  are 
His  especial  care.  He  provides  the  food  of  their  bodies,  and  in  a 
peculiar  way,  watches  and  rules  over  their  souls  and  lives.  This  He 
does  with  respect  to  the  wicked  as  well  as  the  good.  His  care  ex- 
tends to  individuals,  to  families,  to  nations,  and  throughout  the  world. 
It  appears  not  in  great  events  only,  but  in  those  exceeding  small ; 
even  to  the  numbering  of  the  hairs  of  each  one's  head.  So  minute  is 
the  supervision,  asserted  that  some  have  even  thought  that  the  language 
of  Scripture  partakes  of  hyperbole.  But  the  investigations  of  the 
microscope  have  shown  that  even  to  insects  the  most  minute  and  in- 
visible to  the  human  eye,  has  God  given  most  beauteous  forms  and 


Abstract  of  Theology.  240 

perfect  outward  coverings.  His  creative  care  has,  therefore,  descended 
to  things  most  minute.  Thus  has  the  way  been  opened  to  the  belief 
that  the  Scriptures  even  cannot  tell  us  how  minute  is  the  Providential 
care  which  God  is  now  exercising  over  His  whole  creation. 


II.     Providence  is  not  continuous  creation. 

The  evidences  of  continuous  divine  action  within  the  wTorld  have 
been  so  manifest,  that  many  have  been  led  to  the  opposite  extreme  of 
deeming  them  actually  creations  renewed  at  every  moment. 

So  far  as  the  intention  has  been  only  to  magnify  the  extent  and  in- 
dividual number  of  the  Providential  acts  of  God,  there  is  no  especial 
harm  in  thus  loosely  talking  of  them  as  continuous  creations.  It 
might  well  be  said  that  the  power,  necessary  to  continue  all  things  in 
existence,  is  as  great  as  that  which  would  bring  them  each  moment 
out  of  nothingness  into  existent  life;  and  that  the  particularity  with 
which  each  of  these  innumerable  existences  is  looked  after,  and  cared 
for,  is  as  minute  as  if  each  were  at  the  moment  endowed  with  exist- 
ence, nature,  qualities  and  powers.  So  long  as  we  look  at  the  mere 
glory  to  God's  creative  energy  and  power,  there  appears  no  other  ob- 
jection to  the  term  continuous  creation,  than  its  loose  inaccuracy. 
But,  viewed  in  other  aspects,  this  doctrine  is  seen  to  be  not  only  in- 
accurate, and  false,  but  extremely  dangerous 

1.  It  takes  away  all  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  No  cause 
and  its  effect  can  have  any  relation  to  each  other  if  both  be  separate 
Creations  of  God  The  former  is  not  productive  of  the  latter,  nor  the 
latter  the  result  of  the  former.  The  one  is  not  a  cause,  nor  the  other 
an  effect.  But,  if  this  be  true,  what  confidence  can  we  have  in  any  of 
the  phenomena  of  nature.  I  determine  to  accomplish  some  end.  I 
put  forth  the  energy  I  perceive  necessary.  The  end  is  attained.  I  be- 
lieve it  to  be  due  to  my  action,  and  purpose.  But,  according  to  this 
theory,  the  result  is  an  act  of  God  which  occurs  at  the  moment.  It 
is  not  my  action.  It  is  not  the  result  of  my  effort,  or  powTer ;  but  it 
is  only  something  which  God  creates,  and  which  seems  to  have  a  con- 
nection with  my  purpose,  and  effort,  but  has  not.  All  reality  is  thus 
taken  from  life.  If  I  find  that  I  am  mistaken  here,  I  can  have  neither 
belief  nor  confidence  in  anything.  If  there  be  no  real  cause  here, 
then  my  mind  deceives  me,  when  it  urges  me  to  seek  a  cause  for  all 
things,  and  not  to  rest,  as  to  the  universe,  except  in  the  belief  of  an 
uncaused  First  Cause.     The  tendency  of  such  a  theory  is,  therefore,  to 


241  Abstract  of  Theology. 

actual  atheism.     It  seems   to   begin    with  a  most  credulous  confidence 
in  the  Almighty,  only  to  end  in  absolute  disbelief  of  everything. 

2.  If  any  are  not  driven  to  actual  atheism,  they  necessarily  accept 
essential  pantheism.  Every  efficiency  here  is  God  Himself  act- 
ing. It  is  He  that  everywhere  is  alone  the  actor.  The  phenomena 
which  accompany  His  action  are  only  phantoms,  not  realities.  The 
acorn  is  not  the  fruit  of  the  tree.  It  is  His  direct  production.  It  is 
a  new  creation  of  His  hands.  When  it  is  planted,  it  is  neither  the 
acorn,  nor  the  soil,  nor  the  seasons,  nor  the  air,  nor  anything  else 
which  causes  a  tree  to  come  forth  and  grow.  It  is  God,  who  at  each 
moment,  makes  a  new  creation  different  from  what  has  preceded, 
though  apparently  its  successor.  God  thus  becomes  the  animating 
soul  of  the  universe,  and  acts  in  it  as  the  souls  of  men  do  in  their 
bodies. 

3.  It  absolutely  takes  away  all  responsibility  for  sinful  acts,  and 
all  virtue  in  those  that  are  holy.  These  are  no  longer  the  acts  of  the 
individual.  He  is  deceived  when  he  thinks  that  he  wills  them,  or 
does  them.  There  are  no  actions  but  those  of  God.  Besides  there  is 
no  one  to  be  responsible.  If  the  creation  is  a  new  one  at  each  mo- 
ment, the  creature  who  did  the  act  is  gone.  There  is  no  one  to  be 
punished.  The  curious  phenomenon  of  multiplied  contradictions  is 
therefore  presented  here.  There  is  no  action  of  a  man,  for  it  is  God 
that  has  acted.  There  is  no  man  that  has  acted,  because  the  one  be- 
fore us  is  another  creation ;  and,  while  we  have  been  speaking,  he  too 
has  disappeared,  and  another  has  taken  his  place.  The  deed  has  no 
character  in  its  relation  to  man  ;  for  the  man  has  not  done  it.  God 
alone  is  responsible  for  it;  for  it  is  His  act  alone,  into  which  has 
flowed  neither  the  will,  nor  the  power,  nor  the  purpose,  nor  the  activ- 
ity of  man,  but  only  those  of  God. 

4.  It  takes  away  all  the  evidences  of  an  outward  creation,  and  in- 
troduces pure  idealism.  We  believe  in  an  outward  creation  because 
of  the  effects  which,  through  the  senses,  it  produces  upon  our  minds. 
But,  if  everything  is  a  direct  creation,  these  impressions  on  our  minds 
are  themselves  direct  creations  made  by  God,  and  not  by  the  outward 
world.  They  give  no  evidence,  therefore,  of  the  existence  of  anything 
except  of  that  of  God  and  of  the  individual  who  is  conscious  of  receiv- 
ing them.  If  they  come  from  God  alone,  there  is  no  necessity  for 
something  outwardly  corresponding  to  them.  God  and  each  indivi- 
dual, therefore,  may  be  all  that  exists.  Certainly  they  are  all,  of  the 
existence  of  which  any  one  can  have  any  knowledge. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  242 

III.     The  Method  of  God's  Providence. 

It  is  impossible  for  us  to  comprehend,  much  less  to  explain  the 
manner  of  God's  Providential  action.  We  know  no  more  of  this  than 
of  the  manner  in  which  He  has  created.  Ignorance  of  the  method  of 
either  action  is  however,  no  reason  for  believing  that  it  does  not  exist; 
We,  who  cannot  tell  how  our  own  spirits  act  upon,  and  through  our 
own  bodies,  may  well  accept  the  fact  of  the  action  of  the  universal 
Spirit,  as  everywhere  operating,  though  much  of  the  mysterious,  and 
incomprehensible  is  therein'  involved.  A  few  statements  may  how- 
ever be  made,  upon  this  subject,  of  facts  which  may  be  known. 

1.  That  this  action  is  universal.  It  is  not  limited  to  certain  kinds 
of  creation,  but  extends  to  all. 

2.  That  it  is  not  the  same  on  each  but  accords  with  the  na- 
ture of  what  is  governed.  The  action  upon  the  material  universe  is 
more  purely  mechanical,  and  governed  by  the  operation  of  physical 
law.  So  far  as  life  of  any  kind,  whether  vegetable,  animal,  or  spiri- 
tual, is  connected  with,  or  composed  of  matter,  these  mechanical  laws 
must  also  be  actively  enforced.  But  we  know  not  how  far  even  vege- 
table life  is  inseparable  from  mere  mechanical  law.  Certainly  not  en- 
tirely so,  since  it  is  also  dependent  in  some  degree  upon  the  action  of 
voluntary  force,  and  labour  in  man,  who  is  an  instrument  under  God 
of  such  life.  In  animal  life  we  have  the  phenomena  of  instinct, 
as  well  as  of  self  acting  and  voluntary  powers.  The  Providence  of 
God  must  here  differ  from  its  relation  to  mere  material  substances 
which  are  inert,  and  without  senses,  or  volitions.  But  we  can  form  no 
idea  of  the  nature  of  the  specific  action  thus  rendered  necessary.  In 
man  the  Providential  action  of  God  is  further  complicated  by  the  ex- 
tent of  his  reasoning  powers,  by  the  freedom  of  his  will,  by  his  self 
control  over  his  affections,  by  his  original  capacity  to  do  right  or 
wrong,  and  especially  by  his  fallen  condition.  The  most  difficult  pro- 
blems as  to  God's  Providence  naturally  .arise  here.  That  we  cannot 
solve  them  does  not  disprove  Providence.  That  the  action  of  Provi- 
dence is  in  accord  with  the  nature  of  man,  and  is  consonant  with  the 
holiness,  justice,  and  goodness  of  God,  we  feel  assured.  It  is  well  for 
us  to  rest  in  such  assurances  in  matters  which  we  cannot  penetrate. 
It  is  wise  always  to  recognize  that  God  acts  according  to  His  nature, 
in  acting  upon  all  things  according  .to  theirs.  His  own  character, 
therefore,  must  characterize  His  actions,  which  must  consequently  be 
holy,  just,  wise,  and  good. 


243  ,      Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  God's  action  must,  therefore,  fully  accord  with  the  free  agency  of 
man.  Free  agency  belongs  to  the  nature  of  an  intelligent  moral  crea- 
ture. He  must  have  freedom  or  choice,  or  would  not  be  responsible 
for  his  action.  The  very  essence  of  responsibility  consists  in  the 
power  of  contrary  action,  had  one  so  pleased.  God's  Providential  ac- 
tion cannot,  therefore,  be  such  as  to  destroy  man's  freedom  of  will,  or 
the  power  of  this  contrary  choice. 

But  this  does  not  forbid  the  use  of  inducements  to  any  specific  ac- 
tion, nor  the  placing  of  man  in  circumstances  which  would  influence,  or 
control  his  acts.  Were  these  influences  compulsory,  so  as  to  force  to 
action  against  his  will,  the  freedom  of  man  would  be  destroyed,  and 
with  it  responsibility.  But,  wherever  they  are  only  persuasive,  so  as 
to  lead  him  to  delight  in,  or  to  choose  a  specific  course  of  action, 
through  his  own  good  pleasure,  liberty  is  preserved,  and  man  is  ac- 
countable for  his  choice.  The  Providential  influences  of  God  are  of 
this  nature  only.  Experience  so  teaches,  and  the  Scriptures  so  de- 
clares. Man  is  conscious,  at  every  moment,  that  he  could  have  chosen 
differently,  and  acted  differently,  and  that  his  act  was  the  outcome  of 
his  own  good  pleasure.  We  could  have  no  stronger  proof  that  God 
has  Providentially  acted  in  accordance  only  with  our  nature,  except 
the  word  of  God  Himself.  This  testimony  is  added,  when  He  not  only 
ascribes  our  sinful  acts,  to  our  own  will,  but  deolares  that  He  holds 
man  responsible,  and  will  punish  him  for  them. 

4.  God  may,  however,  originate  action  in  man,  by  producing  some 
such  change  as  is  the  result  of  the  exercise  of  direct  power.  The 
man  may  be  conscious  of  this  fact,  and  may  feel  assured  that  this 
change  is  not  due  to  himself.  In. other  ways,  also,  God  may  directly 
introduce  controlling  influences  which  forcibly  originate  new  purposes 
in  man,  and  so  direct  his  will,  that  it  finds  that  which  is  pleasing  to 
itself  far  different  from  the  past.  But  this  action  of  God  is  of  the 
nature  of  creative  acts,  and  not  of  Providential.  The  Scripture  so 
speaks  of  them,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  they  belong  to  the 
realm  of  Providence.  Thus  the  words  "creation,"  and  "creature,"  are 
constantly  applied  to  those  who  are  vitally  connected  with  Christ,  be- 
cause of  the  new  heart  which  God  has  given,  and  of  their  renewal  in 
the  image  of  God. 

But  whether  these  acts  are  to  be  regarded  as  creative  only,  or  as 
Providential  also,  it  is  evident  that  in  them  the  restrictions,  arising 
from  His  nature,  as  to  creative  acts,  appear.  The  compulsion  is  to- 
wards holiness,  not  towards  sin.  The  new  heart  is  one  fitted  for  God's 
service,    and    it    loves    Him,    and    desires    to    obey    His    statutes. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  244 

He  could  not  change  a  heart  of  holiness  to  one  of  sin,  without  its  own 
voluntary  action,  any  more  than  He  could  create  a  sinful  being.  He 
cannot  directly  tempt  to  sin,  any  more  than  He  could  make  a  man 
with  original  sin.  His  own  righteous  and  holy  nature  is  the  guar- 
anty of  this,  and  forbids  that  He  should  act  otherwise. 

5.  We  are  thus  led  to  perceive  what  is  the  method  of  God's 
Providential  action  as  to  the  sins  of  men,  and  what  are  His  relations 
to  them. 

One  question,  as  to  His  connection  with  sin,  no  man  can  answer; 
namely,  why  He  has  allowed  its  existence  at  all.  We  can  have  no 
doubt  that  He  could  have  prevented  it.  He  can  do  anything  not 
contrary  to  His  own  nature ;  and  in  that  nature  can  be  found  no 
necessity  for  its  existence.  We  can  see  many  ends  which  He  has  had 
in. view  in  allowing  it  in  His  universe.  But,  with  all  this,  with  our 
present  knowledge  of  His  will,  we  are  compelled  to  confess  that 'we 
cannot  tell  why  He  saw  that  it  was  better  to  admit,  than  to  exclude  it. 

On  the  other  hand,  however,  no  reason  can  be  justly  given  why  He 
should  not  have  done  so  when  He  so  purposed.  There  is  nothing  in 
its  existence  which  makes  Him  its  author,  or  shows  any  unholy  action 
on  His  part  in  its  introduction.  Nor  is  there  any  evidence  of  any 
lack  of  power  to  prevent  its  origination,  nor  of  any  want  of  benevolent 
love  to  His  creatures  in  permitting  it. 

Of  the  origin  of  sin  in  the  universe  our  information  is  very  meagre. 
We  have  already  seen  this  as  to  the  fall  of  angels.  That  of  man,  to 
be  hereafter  considered,  gives  us  little  information  beyond  a  few  facts. 
,But,  even  in  these  brief  statements,  we  are  taught  explicitly  that  sin  is 
.-not  due  to  any  creative  act  of  God,  but  that  it  came  into  existence 
entirely  under  His  Providential  government.  The  dealings  of  God 
with  it,  at  present  under  that  Providence,  show  the  truth  of  the  above 
statements.  The  Scripture  and  our  own  experience  are  the  sources 
of  our  information.     From  these  we  learn  : 

(1)  That  sin  exists  only  in  accordance  with  the  purpose  of  God. 
Had  He  not  seen  fit  it  could  never  have  appeared  in  the  Universe. 
Its  presence  proceeds  from  no  necessity  of  His  nature,  nor  from  any 
antagonistic  power  which  He  could  not  resist. 

:  (2)  It  cannot  occur  at  any  time,  nor  in  any  form  without  His  per- 
mission. While  He  does  not  actively  originate  it,  He  holds  such 
absolute  control,  over  it,  that  no  single  event,  in  connection  with  it, 
can  take  place  without, His  permission. 


245  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(3)  It  cannot  attain  any  end,  however  naturally  operative  towards 
it,  which  He  has  not  designed  shall  be  attained. 

(4)  It  cannot  go  any  farther  than  the  limits  He  has  assigned. 

(5)  Through  it  He  works  out  His  own  righteous  purposes,  and  not 
the  sinful  designs  of  those  who  are  comm.itting  the  sin  which  He  thus 
overrules. 

(6)  In  any  one  act,  the  ends  of  Himself  and  of  the  sinner  may 
greatly  differ. 

(7)  Likewise,  the  same  act  may  be  sinful  in  the  sinner,  and  not 
sinful  in  God.  This  is  due  to  the  difference  of  relations  borne  to 
persons  and  things  by  God  and  man.  God  has  supreme  control  over 
life,  and  property.  Man  has  not.  God  may  take  away  life  or 
property  by  the  hand  of  the  assassin  or  the  thief.  He  only  does  what 
it  is  His  right  to  do.  But  it  is  sin  in  the  man  because  He  has  not  the 
right  to  do  either  of  these  things. 

(8)  The  sinful  actions  of  men  may  be  sinful,  either  from  the  mo- 
tives which  prompt  them,  the  ends  in  view,  or  the  means  by  which 
they  are  accomplished.  God  may  concur  in  such  acts,  from  motives, 
with  ends,  and  in  the  use  of  means  which  are  altogether  most  holy. 

(9)  The  concurrence  of  God  with  the  sinner  is  limited  to  the  sup- 
port of  the  natural  faculties  ;  in  which  support  there  is  neither  sin 
nor  innocence  ;  sin  consisting  not  in  their  use,  but  in  the  intention 
with  which  they  are  used,  and  the  object  sought  by  that  use. 

(10)  The  concurrence  of  God  according  to  the  regularity  of  general 
laws  seems  eminently  desirable.  If  whenever  man  acted  virtuously, 
his  powers  of  action  were  sustained,  but  not  so,  when  acting  other- 
wise, there  would  really  be  no  free  agency  in  man  ;  for  he  would  not 
have  the  power  of  contrary  choice  and  action.  On  the  other  hand 
there  would  no  longer  be  such  regular  action  of  the  Universe  as  seems 
necessary  for  the  happiness  and  comfort  of  mankind.  The  action  of 
nature  would  every  day  be  suspended  in  thousands  of  instances,  and 
confusion  would  everywhere  exist. 

IV.     Distinctions  in  Providence. 

There  have  been  several  distinctions  made  as  to  the  Providence 
of  God. 

1.  The  most  common  is  that  of  General,  Common,  or  Universal 
Providence,    and   Special,    Singular  or    Particular    Providence.     By 


Abstract  of  Theology.  246 

general  Providence  is  meant  the  general  care  which  God  takes  of  the 
Universe,  and  all  it  contains,  in  preserving,  and  upholding  it  under 
the  general  administration  of  the  laws  He  has  given  it.  By  special 
Providence  is  meant  the  minute  care  by  which  some  events  are  sup- 
posed to  take  place  immediately  under  His  supervision,  or  by  His 
direct  Providential  action. 

It  is  unquestionally  true  that  the  acts  of  Providence  extend  to 
minute  objects,  and  specially  marked  events.  But  this  is  no  reason 
for  making  this  distinction,  which  would  seem  to  imply  an  indifferent 
careless  Providence  about  all  things  else.  The  truth  is  that  Provi- 
dence is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  reach  every  natural  event  by  the 
operation  of  general  laws.  It  is  a  marked  proof  of  the  wisdom  of 
God,  that  He  can  so  direct  all  the  affairs,  of  the  Universe  that,  without 
need  of  special  action,  He  can  accomplish  all  the  events  He  chooses. 
All  Providence,  therefore,  is  general,  because  operated  through 
general  laws.  It  is  also  special,  because  every  individual  event  comes 
to  pass  under  God's  own  inspection,  and  through  His  own  will  and 
work. 

"A  general  and  a  special  Providence,"  says  Dr.  A.  A.  Hodge,  "can- 
not be  two  different  modes  of  divine  operation.  The  same  Provi- 
dential administration  is  necessarily  at  the  same  time  general  and 
special  for  the  same  reason,  because  it  reaches  without  exception 
equally  to  every  event  and  creature  in  the  world.  A  General  Pro- 
vidence is  special  because  it  secures  general  results  by  the  control  of 
every  event,  great  and  small,  leading  to  that  result.  A  Special 
Providence  is  general  because  it  specially  controls  all  individual 
beings  and  actions  in  the  Universe.  All  events  are  so  related  together 
as  a  concatenated  system  of  causes,  and  effects,  and  conditions,  that  a 
general  Providence  that  is  not  at  the  same  time  special  is  as  incon- 
ceivable as  a  whole  which  has  no  parts,  or  as  a  chain  which  has  no 
links."     [Outlines  of  Theology  p.  266.] 

2.  A  second  distinction  is  into  ordinary,  and  extraordinary  Prov- 
idences. By  the  ordinary  are  meant  those  acts  which,  according  to 
general  law,  commonly  occur  in  every  day  life,  and  which  are  supposed 
to  display  no  extraordinary  action,  or  purpose.  By  the  extraordinary 
are  meant  any  acts,  such  as  miracles,  or  prophecies,  which  are  not 
naturally  to  be  expected,  and  are  due  to  extraordinary  divine  inter- 
vention. 

3.  Another  distinction  is  into  mediate  and  immediate.  This  is 
similar  to  the  last  except  that  this  looks  at  Providence  from  the  agency 
of  the  divine  act,  whether  done  directly   and  without  means,  or  me- 


247  Abstract  of  Theology. 

diately  by  means.  The  other  viewed  these  acts  according  to  their 
frequency  and  the  impression  thus  produced  by  evident  divine 
interposition. 

4.  A  fourth  distinction  is  into  physical  or  real,  and  spiritual  or 
moral.  The  former  regards  Providence  as  exercised  about  natural 
objects  or  things,  the  latter  about  persons^  especially  in  their  moral 
and  spiritual  relations. 

V.     The  unequal  distribution  of  good  and  evil. 

The  most  serious  objection  to  the  doctrine  of  Divine  Providence  is 
deduced  from  the  unequal  distribution  of  good  and  evil  in  the  world. 
Blessings  are  not  apparently  bestowed  proportionately  upon  the  good, 
and  afflictions  upon  the  wicked.  It  has  been  claimed  that  this  is  an 
evidence  that  God  does  not  watch  over  and  govern  the  world.  Dr.  J. 
Pye  Smith  ably  answers  this  objection.  [See  his  First  Lines  pp. 
162 — 164.]     The  following  is  an  abstract  of  his  argument. 

1.  "A  man  who  would  reason  fairly  cannot  but,  on  the  very  thres- 
hold of  this  argument, '  attend  to  the  sinful  condition  of  the  whole 
human  race.     The  sin  of  man " 

(1)  " Merits  the  experience  of  penal  evils,  in  all  their  variety." 

(2)  "This  sin  is  the  cause  and  occasion,  sometimes  directly,  at  other 
times  more  indirectly  and  remotely,  of  human  sufferings. " 

2.  "Upon  the  broad  scale  of  observation  and  history,  many  exam- 
ples of  retribution  are  to  be  observed." 

3.  "This  distribution  of  good  and  evil  is  by  no  means  sb  unequal 
as  appears  to  superficial  observation." 

4.  "Even  good  men  are  the  chief  occasions  of  their  own  sufferings." 

5.  "Their  sufferings  are  made  in  the  highest  degree  beneficial  to 
them  ;   as  means  of  religious  improvement.     (Heb.  12  ;  4 — 11.)" 

6.  ''The  piety,  virtue,  and  good  moral  conduct  of  upright  persons, 
procure  to  them,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,  a  considerable  meas- 
ure of  esteem,  regard,  kindness,  and  service  from  their  fellow  men  ; 
and  consequently  a  much  higher  degree  of  personal  and  social  enjoy- 
ment than  they  would  have,  if  they  were  not  religious  characters." 

7.  "The  objects  which  men  commonly  regard  as  good  in  themselves 
and  for  their  own  sakes,  are  in  reality  not  so.  They  are  good  only  as 
they  are  used;  only  when  they  are  made  the  means  of  moral  im- 
provement." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  248 

8.  "We  are  very  far  from  being  competent  judges  of  the  state  of 
the  heart,  and  the  degree  of  real  holiness  possessed  by  the  subjective 
individuals  :  but  we  know  enough  to  be  assured  that  the  reality  in 
these  important  matters  is  far  from  being  in  accordance  with  the 
obvious  and  superficial  appearance.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that,  in 
many  instances,  men  acquire  credit  with  the  public  for  great  religious 
excellence  which  is  by  no  means  justly  imputed,  as  to  either  the 
degree  or  the  sincerity  of  it ;  and  that  deep  and  humble  piety  exists 
in  some  instances  where  extraordinary  and  unfavorable  circumstances 
surround  its  possessors  as  with  a  dark  cloud." 

9.  "The  afflictions  of  real  Christians  are  instruments  of  the  greatest 
internal  blessings.  They  are  also  means  of  benefit  to  others,  by  their 
exhibition  of  the  most  edifying  examples,  and  by  the  weight  which 
instruction  and  admonition  thus  receive." 

10.  "But  we  cannot  judge  of  this  question  with  any  approach  to 
completeness,  without  bringing  into  the  account  the  future  state.  The 
present  state  is  but  the  imperfect  and  preparatory  condition  of  our 
existence,  r.he  period  during  which  all  must  be  done  that  is  to  fit  us 
for  eternity.  All  temporal  things  are  as  nothing,  compared  with  this 
great  issue  of  all  our  labours  and  trials." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  250 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXII. 


The  Fall  of  Man. 

The  lecture  on  the  creation  of  Man  presented  him  in  all  the  sinless 
perfection  with  which  God  can  create  an  intellectual  and  moral 
spiritual  being.  It  was  there  shown  that  this  consisted,  as  the  Scrip- 
tures declare,  not  merely  in  an  innocent  sinlessness,  which  left  him 
without  taint  or  tendency  to  sin,  but  in  original  righteousness,  which 
comprised  a  love  of  holiness  and  natural  choice  of  good  rather  than 
of  evil. 

The  excellence  of  such  a  nature  is  seen  in  the  difficulty  which  men 
have  had  in  explaining  the  possibility  of  its  fall.  The  value  of  this 
fact,  as  testimony  to  the  goodness  of  God,  is  not  to  be  overlooked. 
To  escape  this  difficulty,  some  have  even  maintained  that  there  was 
originally  in  man  a  mere  condition  of  equilibrium,  in  which  it  was 
as  easy  to  choose  the  wrong  as  the  right.  Nor  can  it  be  shown  that, 
if  this  had  been  true,  a  trial  upon  probation,  in  which  was  given  a 
choice  of  good  and  evil  with  consequent  reward  and  punishment, 
would  have  been  unjust  to  man,  or  derogatory  to  the  character  of 
God.  But  the  plain  teaching  of  Scripture  is  that  man  was  not 
created  in  perfect  equilibrium;  but  with  a  holy  nature,  the  whole 
tendency  of  w'hich  was  naturally  towards  the  good  and  the  holy.  In 
thus  fitting  him  for  his  trial,  God  is  seen,  by  special  endowment,  to 
have  given  him  most  graciously  all  the  powers  possible  to  fit  him  for 
a  wise  choice,  in  any  instance  in  which  he  should  be  left  to  act  accord- 
ing to  his  good  pleasure. 


251  Abstract  of  Theology. 

i.     how  could  man  fall  ? 

In  reply  to  the  question  how  a  being  thus  endowed  could  fall,  the 
following  suggestions  may  be  made.  While  they  may  not  be  entirely 
satisfactory,  they  must  be  recognized  as  at  least  constituting  a  possible 
explanation  of  a  subject  so  completely  environed  with  difficulties. 

1.  The  excellent  nature  thus  bestowed  was  after  all  only  that  of 
a  mere  creature.  The  perfection,  as  such,  could  be  only  natural  and 
bestowed,  not  essential  and  inalienable.  Therefore,  unless  preserved 
by  the  purpose  and  acts  of  God  it  might  be  lost. 

2.  It  was  that  of  a  creature,  the  excellence  of  whose  action  con- 
sisted in  always  choosing  the  right  and  rejecting  the  wrong;  but  which 
had  the  power,  should  the  inclination  arise,  of  making  and  pursuing  a 
contrary  choice.  No  natural  or  compulsory  necessity  existed  to 
prevent  such  choice.  The  right  would  only  be  chosen,  so  long  as 
the  motive  to  do  so  should  be  the  prevailing  one.  While,  therefore, 
the  nature  wholly  inclined  to  the  right  would  naturally  and  certainly 
act  in  that  direction;  if  that  nature  could  be  so  affected  as  to  incline 
towards  the  wrong,  there  would  be  no  hindrance  to  its  sinful  action. 

3.  Under  such  circumstances,  against  any  gross  violation  of  the 
law  of  God,  or  sinful  rebellion  against  Him,  the  heart  would  so 
naturally  revolt  as  that  the  beginning  of  sin  in  this  direction  would 
be  almost  impossible.  But,  if  any  desire  should  be  awakened,  in  itself 
sinless  when  duly  exercised,  that  desire  might  so  increase  as  ultimately 
to  acquire  sufficient  strength  to  overcome  the  right  tendency  of  the 
nature,  and  to  lead  finally  by  undue  exercise  to  wrong  action  for  its 
gratification. 

4.  The  foundation  for  such  desire  might  be  found  in  the  wish  to 
gratify  the  lower  appetites,  or  to  attain  higher  exercise  of  the  intel- 
lectual faculties. 

5.  The  cause  of  its  springing  up  would  naturally  be  the  denial  of 
some  means  by  which  it  would  appear  that  either  or  both  of  these 
wishes  could  be  attained.  This  accords  with  the  principle  stated  by 
the  Apostle  Paul.  "I  had  not  known  lust  except  the  law  had  said 
thou  shalt  not  covet."     Rom.  7:7. 

6.  The  natural  result  would  be,  not  immediately  to  determine  to 
do  the  wrong,  but  to  question  the  justice  with  which  the  act  was 
forbidden. 

7.  This  doubt  of  God  would  so  lead  the  nature  towards  sin  that 
the  act  would  then  be  done  from  the  motive  arising  from  the  desire 
of  gratifying  either  the  sensual  or  the  spiritual  appetite. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  252 

ii.     how  did  man  fall  ? 

We  have  the  account  of  the  fall  in  Glen.  3:1 — 7.  The  statement  is 
very  brief  yet  complete.  This  is  a  proof  of  its  inspiration;  which  also 
appears  from  its  accurate  agreement  with  the  best  thoughts  men  have 
been  able  to  attain  as  to  how  such  an  event  could  take  place. 

The  narrative  shows  that  the  attack  upon  man  had  to  be  made  in 
a  most  subtle  manner.  The  fortress  of  "Mansoul"  was  not  easily  to  be 
breached. 

1.  We  have  the  occasion;  in  God's  forbidding  man  to  eat  of  the  fruit 
of  a  certain  tree,  called  "the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil."     Gen.  2:17. 

2.  We  have  that  love  of  wisdom,  natural  and  proper  in  an  intelli- 
gent being,  excited  by  the  idea  that  through  its  increase  would  be 
given  elevation  in  the  scale  of  existence. 

3  Led  by  this  desire  to  think  of  its  possible  gratification,  the 
very  name  of  the  tree  whose  fruit  was  forbidden  seemed  to  confirm 
the  language  of  the  tempter. 

4.  The  good  thus  attainable  appeared  to  be  one  which  God  would 
so  naturally  wish  to  bestow,  that  it  created  doubt  whether  God  could 
really  have  meant  to  forbid  its  use,  and  particularly  whether  He 
would  fulfil  His  threats,  or  even  intended  them  to  be  effective  to 
prevent  the  proposed  action. 

5.  Then  followed  the  result,  the  statement  of  which  shows  the 
processes  through  which  the  mind  of  the  woman  had  gone  ;  "when 
the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and  that  it  was  plea- 
sant to  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise,  she  took 
of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  did  eat,  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with 
her,  and  he  did  eat."     Gen.  3:6. 

The  vScriptures  say  but  little  of  the  difference  between  Adam  and 
Eve  in  this  transaction.  The  narrative  of  Genesis  simply  relates  that 
the  woman  was  the  first  tempted,  and  the  first  to  sin,  and  that  through 
her  the  fruit  was  given  to  the  man.  The  only  other  allusion  is  that 
in  which  Paul  states  that  "Adam  was  not  deceived,  but  the  woman 
being  deceived  was  in  the  transgression."  1  Tim.  2:14.  This  may 
mean  only  that  the  woman  was  tempted  by  Satan,  while  the  man  was 
not ;  or  that  Eve  believed  the  tempter,  and  did  not  perceive  the  con- 
sequences of  transgression,  while  Adam  acted  in  full  knowledge  of 
them. 


253  Abstract  of  Theology.. 

As  to  the  reality  of  an  external  agent  in  the  temptation,  there  has 
been  no  little  dispute.  .  Some  have  held  that  there  was  no  actor,  but 
that  the  temptation  was  the  result  merely  of  the  emotions,  and  desires 
of  the  woman.  But  the  Scriptures  say  distinctly  that  there  was  a  ser- 
pent present,  and  active.  Temptation  through  a  serpent  might  have 
occurred  in  several  ways. 

1.  A  serpent  might  innocently,  and  alone  have  been  the  occasion 
of  the  suggestion  of  the  thoughts  to  Eve. 

2.  Some  evil  being  might  have  accompanied  the  innocent  acts  of 
the  serpent  to  suggest  to  her  mind  the  thoughts  by  which  he  would 
tempt  her  to  sin. 

3.  This  evil  Spirit,  in  the  form  of  a  serpent,  or  taking  possession 
of  an  actual  serpent,  might  have  used  and  uttered  the  language,  or 
suggested  the  thoughts  attributed  to  him  in  the  narrative. 

4.  A  fourth  explanation  has  been  suggested,  and  is  somewhat 
advocated  by  Turner  in  his  Commentary  on  Genesis,  p.  187.  This 
supposes  that  the  devil  was  the  only  agent,  and  that  all  reference  to 
the  serpent  is  allegorical. 

The  Scriptures  seem  to  accord  more  nearly  with  the  third  of  these 
theories.  There  appears  to  be  no  valid  objection  to  the  acceptance 
of  this  their  most  obvious  import. 

(1)  It  is  surely  not  inconsistent  with  the  power  ascribed  to  Satan 
that  he  should  thus  enter  the  form  of  a  creature  already  existent,  or 
even  assume  the  appearance  of  such  a  creature.  "For  even  Satan 
fashioneth  himself  into  an  angel  of  light."  2  Cor.  11:14.  [Canter- 
bury Revision.]  The  temptation  of  Jesus  shows  that  he  can  assume 
bodily  form.  Mere  mental  suggestion  cannot  account  for  all  that  then 
occurred.  It  is  necessary  to  believe  that  he  appeared  in  bodily  form 
to  our  Lord  and  addressed  him  in  words  uttered  with  the  voice.  This 
is  involved  in  the  offer  recorded  in  Luke  4:7.  "If  thou  therefore  wilt 
worship  me  all  shall  be  thine." 

(2)  The  force  of  the  objection  from  the  curse  against  the  serpent, 
as  against  an  innocent  animal,  vanishes  with  the  light  thrown  by 
modern  science  upon  creation.  This  shows  that  the  serpent  has  al- 
ways had  its  present  form.  The  curse,  therefore,  so  far  as  uttered 
against  the  animal  is  merely  equivalent  to  an  assertion  of  the  con- 
tinuance of  what  had  always  been,  and  only  places  before  man  a 
constant  and  dreaded  memorial  of  the  first  sin.  This  is  consistent  with 
God's  method  of  cursing  and  blessing  as  seen  in  the  bow  of  Noah,  Gen. 
9:8 — 17,  and  Jacob's  language  as  to  Simeon  and  Levi  in  Gen.  49:5 — 7. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  254 

This  third  theory  is  favoured  by  the  following  facts. 

(1)  The  title  serpent  and  dragon  is  given  elsewhere  in  Scripture 
to  Satan.  See  Rev.  12:3.  4.  12.  13.  16.  17;  Rev.  13:4.  14,  especially 
Rev.  12:9 — "that  old  serpent  called  the  Devil  and  Satan." — See  also 
Matt.  3:7,  where  John  calls  the  Pharisees  a  "generation  of  vipers," 
and  compare  it  with  John  8:44,  our  Lord's  language:  "Ye  are  of  your 
father  the  devil." 

(2)  The  narrative  in  Genesis  demands  more  than  mental  sug- 
gestion through  a  mere  animal. 

(a)  A  character  of  special  subtilty  is  ascribed  to  the  serpent,  which 
is  not  appropriately  to  be  said  of  a  mere  animal  of  this  kind. 

(b)  The  thoughts  suggested  could  not  have  originated  in  the 
mind  of  the  woman  alone,  nor  in  that  of  the  woman  through  any  mere 
act  of  the  serpent.  These  are,  (aa)  That  death  would  not  ensue, 
(bb)  That  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  would  elevate  them  to  be 
Gods  (mighty  ones.) 

(3)  The  subsequent  references  in  the  Scriptures  to  this  transaction 
show  that  this  was  the  beginning  of  the  great  struggle  of  Satan  for  the 
ruin  of  man,  which  was  to  end  in  his  destruction  by  the  man  Christ 
Jesus,  the  seed  of  the  woman. 

4.  "In  the  New  Testament  it  is  both  directly  asserted,  and  in 
various  forms  assumed,  that  Satan  seduced  our  first  parents  into  sin. 
In  Rev.  12:9,  it  is  said,  "The  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  that  old 
serpent,  called  the  Devil,  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole 
world."  And  in  20:2,  "He  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  old  Serpent, 
which  is  the  Devil  and  Satan."  In  2  Cor.  11.3,  Paul  says,  "I  fear  lest 
*  *  *  *  ag  j. j^  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  his  subtilty,  so  also 
your  minds  should  be  corrupted  from  the  simplicity  that  is  in  Christ." 
But  that  by  the  serpent  he  understood  Satan,  is  plain  from  v.  14 
where  he  speaks  of  Satan  as  the  great  deceiver;  and  what  is  said  in 
Rom.  16:20,  "The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet," 
is  an  obvious  allusion  to  Gen.  3:16.  In  John  8:44,  our  Lord  calls  the 
Devil  a  murderer  from  the  beginning,  and  the  father  of  lies,  because 
through  him  sin  and  death  were  introduced  into  the  world." 
[Hodge's  Syst.  Theol.  vol.  2  p.  128.] 

III.     This,  a  fall  under  the  Covenant  of  Works. 

The  fall  of  Man  occurred,  when  on  probation,  under  the  Covenant 
of  works. 


255  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Theologians  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  two  especial  covenants,  the 
one  of  works,  the  other  of  grace.  These  do  not  embrace  all  the  co- 
venants between  God  and  man,  which  indeed  are  very  numerous.  The 
most  prominent  others  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  are  that  with 
Noah,  Gen.  9:11—15;  with  Abraham,  Gen.  17:2—14;  (repeated  to 
Isaac,  Gen.  26:2—5;  and  to  Jacob,  Gen.  28:13—15;)  with  Israel  in 
giving  the  law,  Ex.  24:7;  Deut.  5:2.  3;  with  Moses  and  Israel,  Ex.  34:27;* 
with  David,  2  Sam.  7:12—16;  with  Solomon,  2  Chron.  7:12—22;  and 
that  of  Nehemiah  and  the  Israelites  with  God,  Neh.  9:38,  to  10:39. 
The  two  covenants,  of  works  and  grace,  are  spoken  of  in  Gal.  4:22 — 31, 
and  are  called  "the  two  covenants"  in  verse  24.  That  of  grace  is  the 
covenant  of  redemption  made  by  God  with  His  elect,  or  more  properly 
with  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  as  their  representative.  That  of  works 
is  the  covenant  of  the  law  which  is  one  between  God  and  all  man- 
kind through  the  first  Adam,  their  natural  head  and  appropriate  and 
appointed  representative. 

[Upon  the  Scripture  use  of  the  word  covenant,  see  Hodge's  Out- 
lines of  Theology,  pp.  309  and  367—369.] 

A  covenant  is  an  agreement  between  two  or  more  parties  by  which 
any  one  or  more  things  are  to  be  done  under  the  sanctions  of  rewards 
and  penalties. 

This  is  the  ideal  form  of  a  covenant.  Some  parts  of  it  may  be 
wanting,  and  still  it  may  be  a  covenant.  Thus  there  may  be  penal- 
ties and  no  reward,  or  reward  and  no  penalties.  Also,  the  agreement 
may  arise,  not  from  mutual  consultation,  but  from  a  command  given 
and  accepted.  This  may  take  place  at  the  time  it  is  given,  and  with 
the  person  to  whom  it  is  spoken,  or  the  command  may  be  given,  or 
promise  made,  to  be  accepted  and  acted  upon  by  any  who  may  at  any 
time  choose.  Thus,  between  a  government  and  its  responsible  sub- 
jects, law  becomes  a  covenant.  Rewards  also  are  promised,  as  for  the 
killing  of  dangerous  or  destructive  animals,  or  for  the  capture  of 
criminals  ;  or  threats  are  uttered,  for  violation  of  the  rights  of  others, 
either  as  to  life,  liberty,  or  property. 

These  preliminary  statements  may  remove  the  difficulties  sometimes 
felt  as  to  the  existence  of  a  covenant  of  works.  Law  prescribed  by 
God  as  lawgiver  is  admitted  to  exist  together  with  its  sanctions  and 
penalties;  and,  as  in  human  law,  so  here,  no  excuse  can  be  made  of 
want  of  formal  agreement;  because  of  the  natural   obligation  to  obey. 

These  facts  are,  however,  more  fully  applicable  to  the  covenant  of 
works,  regarded  as  the  general  law  of  obtaining  and  maintaining  spirit- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  .  256 

ual  life,  given  to  all  mankind,  and  still  held  forth  to  them,  than  to  the 
transactions  under  that  covenant  connected  with  Adam's  fall. 
In  this  latter  the  elements  of  a  covenant  more  distinctly  appear. 

1.  There  are  here  the  two  parties  to  a  covenant,  God  and  man; 
the  one  prescribing  what  was  to  be  done,  or  left  undone  ;  the  other 
receiving  the  command  to  do  or  not  to  do  it. 

If  it  be  objected  to  the  parties,  that  God  enjoined  an  act  through 
His  sovereign  and  supreme  power  and  dominion,  to  which  man  dared 
not  object;  the  sufficient  reply  is  that  God  was  no  more  sovereign  Lord 
than  man  was  willing  subject.  The  holy  constitution  of  his  nature, 
rendered  his  ready  acceptance  absolutely  certain. 

2.  Here  also  we  find  the  subject  matter  of  a  covenant;  the  forbid- 
ing  under  penalty  the  eating  of  a  certain  fruit.  That  which  made 
this  properly  a  part  of  the  covenant,  was  that  man  knew  that  he  was 
commanded  not  to  eat;  that  he  recognized  God's  right  to  command, 
and  his  duty  to  obey;  that  he  had  a  natural  inclination  towards  obe- 
dience ;  and  that,  accepting  the  command  of  God,  he  proceeded  to 
submit  himself  to  it. 

Both  the  knowledge  and  assent  of  man,  however,  may  be  absent 
from  the  general  covenant  of  works,  where  it  appears  under  the  especial 
form  of  law,  or  duty,  whenever  that  absence  is  the  result  of  man's  sin- 
fulness. Their  presence,  however,  in  an  innocent  being  is  essential  to 
responsibility.  That  very  innocence,  however,  from  the  holiness  of 
the  creature's  nature,  secures  such  assent  to  these  things,  where  he  is 
present,  as  make  the  more  formal  covenant. 

3.  The  third  element  of  the  covenant  is  the  penalty,  death, 
the  meaning  of  which  will  be  hereafter  examined.  The  threat  of 
God  "thou  shalt  surely  die",  (Gen.  2:17),  was  known  not  only  to 
Adam,  but  to  the  woman  also  as  appears  from  her  conversation  with 
the  serpent.     Gen.  3:1-3. 

4.  The  promises  made  or  applied  constitute  a  fourth  element. 
It  is  questioned  whether  promises  were  added  to  the  covenant.  None 
appear  in  the  narrative.  None  were  necessary  to  make  this  a  cov- 
enant. None  are  necessarily  involved  except  such  as  are  implied  as 
attendant  upon  the  result  of  obedience.  These,  therefore,  may  be 
first  stated  as  being  thus  implied,  and  such  considerations  may  be 
added  as,  from  our  further  information,  suggest  that  others  were 
actually  expressed. 

Those  implied  are : 

(1.)     Continuance  of  God's  favour,  which  having  been  bestowed  on 


257  Abstract  of  Theology. 

them  as  innocent  creatures,  would  continue  to  be  shown  if  they  should 
not  disobey  His  commands. 

(2.)  Continuance  of  their  happy,  holy,  condition,  until,  by  their 
own  act  they  should  forfeit  it. 

(3.)  Continuance,  therefore,  unless  in  like  manner  forfeited,  of  the 
immortality  natural  to  their  souls ;  and,  as  to  their  bodies,  contin- 
uance of  their  then  existent  condition  ;  or,  if  any  change  should 
occur,  a  change  into  higher  forms,  bestowed  for  their  greater  happi- 
ness. 

(4.)  To  this  may  be  added  that  their  children,  so  long  as  this 
state  of  innocence  should  continue,  would  be  born  with  like  innocent 
and  holy  natures. 

These  results  of  obedience  are  implied, 

(1.)  In  the  benevolent  holiness  and  justice  of  God's  nature.  Even 
if  never  stated  to  Adam  as  promises,  they  would  be  naturally  inferred 
by  him  from  his  knowledge  of  God. 

(2.)  They  are  also  implied  in  the  very  threat  against  disobedience, 
if,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  that  threat  involved  not  merely  natural 
death,  but  also,  and  chiefly  that  absence  of  God's  favour  and  com- 
munion, which  is  the  death  of  the  soul. 

If  death  would  follow  disobedience,  then  life  ought  to  follow  obedi- 
ence— life  in  all  the  opposites  to  death,  and,  therefore,  life  both  of  the 
body  and  the  soul. 

It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  there  ought  to  be  no  question  that 
these  blessings  were  believed  by  Adam  to  have  been  made  dependent 
upon  his  obedience  to  God's  commands. 

The  fact  that  life  was  thus  promised  "is  clearly  taught  in  other  pas- 
sages of  Scripture.  Lev.  18:5;  Neh.  9;29  ;  Matt.  19:16.17  ;  Gal.  3:12; 
Rom.  10:5."     [Hodge's  Outlines,  p.  311.] 

There  are  three  further  points  of  inquiry  as  to  the  probation  upon 
which  Adam  was  thus  placed. 

1.  How  long  was  the  probation  to  last  if  they  continued  innocent? 

2.  Was  there  to  be  but  this  one  test  of  obedience? 

3.  Was  confirmation  in  holiness,  and  happiness,  promised  our  first 
parents,  in  any  way,  as  a  reward  of  obedience? 

We  may  answer  these  by  saying  that,  while  we  have  no  means  of 
knowing  how  long  man  was  to  be  tried  under  this  particular  form  of 
covenant,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  there  was  to  be  but  the  one 
form  of  test,  and  that,  after  a  period  which  could  not  be  very  long, 
confirmation  in  spiritual  life  was  to  be  attained  if  man  continued 
obedient. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  258 

In  favour  of  but  one  form  of  test  is: 

1.  The  fact  that  the  simple  purpose  was  to  test  man's  confidence 
in  God,  and  obedience  to  His  will.  So  long  as  a  sufficient  test  was 
presented,  no  multiplication  of  them  was  necessary. 

2.  God  knew  whether  his  purpose  was  to  allow  man  to  fall,  or  not, 
and  knowing  this,  knew  what  test  would  be  sufficient.  He  needed  to 
try  man,  not  to  show  to  Himself  but  to   others   what   man   would  do. 

3.  In  a  case,  like  that  of  Job,  when  His  purpose  is  to  exhibit  his 
grace  in  His  creature,  he  may  allow  many  tests,  one  after  another, 
but,  when  the  creature  will  finally  fall,  it  is  probable  that  He  would 
not  allow  the  hopes  of  His  creature  to  be  raised  after  successive 
trials,  to  result  only  in  final  and  more  embittered  disappointment. 

As  to  confirmation  in  spiritual  life  as  resulting  from  continuance  in 
holy  obedience,  it  may  be  remarked  that 

1.  The  fact  that  God  selected  this  one  thing  to  forbid,  and  granted 
indulgence  in  all  others,  indicates  that  it  was  for  a  special  test.  That 
test  would  naturally  be  accompanied  by  a  promise  as  well  as  by  a 
threat. 

2.  A  further  evidence  of  such  a  promise,  as  well  as  of  its  nature, 
is  to  be  found  in  the  statements  about  the  tree  of  life.  Its  suggestive 
name,  its  prominent  position  "in  the  midst  of  the  garden,"  Gen.  2:9, 
its  conspicuous  character,  such  that  it  is  one  of  the  only  two  mentioned, 
its  power  of  confirmation  in  life,  which  Gen.  3:22  shows  to  have  been 
known  to  Adam  — all  of  these  indicate  that  the  idea,  not  only  of  life, 
but  of  confirmation  in  life,  had  been  conveyed  to  Adam. 

3.  The  fact  of  the  fall  shows  that  God's  purpose  in  causing  that 
tree  to  grow  there,  was  not  to  use  it  in  the  confirmation  of  Adam,  for 
no  such  confirmation  was  to  occur.  We  must  find  its  use,  therefore,  in 
something  prior  to  the  fall.  But  in  what,  save  to  place  constantly 
before  Adam  the  promise  of  confirmed  spiritual  life  when  the  period 
of  this  probation  had  been  passed. 

4.  The  necessity  of  his  removal  from  the  garden  shows  that  some 
promise  of  confirmation  in  immortality  had  been  attached  to  this 
tree,  to  be  fulfilled  when  man  should  be  permitted  to  partake  of  it. 
Gen.  3:22. 

Three  objections  have  been  made  to  this  transaction. 
1.     That  it  made  so  much,  even  all,  to  depend  upon  a  single  act. 
But  this  arises  (1)  from  the  nature   of  sin  as  guilt  demanding  pun- 
ishment for  any  one,  even  the  least,  transgression,  and   as  corruption, 


259  Abstract  of  Theology. 

which  renders  incapable  of  subsequent  acts  of  holiness  ;  and  (2)  from 
the  nature  of  God's  justice,  which  cannot  pardon  sin  unatoned  for. 
Any  one  sin  must,  therefore,  necessarily  terminate  probation. 

2.  That  the  test  was  in  so  unimportant  a  matter  as  the  eating  of 
a  piece  of  fruit.  But  the  more  trifling  the  prohibition  the  easier  was 
the  act  of  obedience,  and  the  more  flagrant  that  of  disobedience. 

3.  That  the  precept  was  a  positive,  and  not  a  moral  injunction. 

But  this  very  fact  made  it  a  better  test  of  obedience,  (a)  as  testing 
the  whole  man;  not  his  love  of  holiness  only,  nor  his  reverence  for  God, 
nor  the  tendencies  of  his  holy  nature,  nor  those  of  his  will  only;  but  all; 
(b)  as  making  a  well  and  sharply  defined  test  of  his  confidence,  and 
obedience  towards  God;  and  (c)  as  plainly,  manifesting  to  the  guilty 
the  sin  they  had  committed,  and  the  condition  into  which  they  had 
brought  themselves. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  260 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXIII 


Effects  of  Adam's  Sin. 

The  immediate  effects  of  Adam's  sin,  as  indicated  in  the  narrative  in 
Genesis,  were  (1)  shame,  or  fear  of  God's  presence,  and  (2)  making  excuse 
for  his  sin  and  casting  the  'blame  upon  the  woman  and  his  maker. 
Gen.  3:7—13. 

The  immediate  curse  uttered  against  the  woman  was  (1)  danger  to 
her  and  her  seed  from  the  serpent  and  his  seed,  (2)  multiplied  pain 
and  sorrow  in  childbirth,  and  (3)  a  condition  of  subservience  to  her 
husband.     Gen.  3:15—16. 

That  against  the  man  was  (1)  that  thorns  and  thistles  should  hinder 
the  cultivation  of  the  ground,  (2)  that  by  hard  labour  in  the  sweat  of 
his  brow  should  he  eat  his  bread,  and  (3)  a  positive  declaration  of  the 
return  of  the  man  to  the  dust  whence  he  had  been  taken.  Gen.  3:17 — 19. 

The  evils  thus  threatened  have  not  been  confined  to  Adam  and 
Eve,  but  have  fallen  also  upon  all  their  posterity.  Whatever  may  be 
the  connection  between  Adam  and  that  posterity,  it  is  generally 
admitted  that  the  latter  share  with  him  all  these  evils. 

In  seeking  then  into  the  effects  of  Adam's  sin  we  shall  find  them 
in  connection  with  the  evil  condition  of  his  posterity,  as  well  as 
himself. 

The  curses  uttered  in  the  garden  are  not  to  be  taken  as  exhaustive 
of  the  curse  threatened.  They  are  such  only  as  were  immediately 
suggested  by  the  peculiar  attendant  circumstances  of  Adam's  sin,  and 
are  to  be  regarded  merely  as  examples  of  its  evil  effects.  Still  even 
they  have  not  been  confined  to  Adam,  but  have  come  equally  upon 
the  race  at  large. 


261  Abstract  of  Theology. 

All  the  evil  effects  of  Adam's  sin  are  comprised  under  the  word 
"death."     This  was  the  threatened  penalty.     But  what  is  meant  by  it  ? 

I.  Natural  death  is  included.  By  this  is  meant  the  separation  of 
the  soul  and  the  body,  and  the  consequent  decay  of  the  body. 

1.  It  has  been  objected  that  this  is  not  a  result  of  Adam's  sin, 
because  the  very  nature  of  the  body  (dust)  made  it  necessary  that  it 
should  return  to  dust. 

To  this  it  may  be  replied : 

(1)  That  it  is  not  certain  that  there  were  in  man's  body  before  his 
sin  any  elements  of  decay  which  would  naturally  lead  to  separation 
from  the  soul  and  to  corruption. 

(2)  But,  even  if  we  admit  that  the  body  is  naturally  mortal  and 
liable  to  corruption,  it  does  not  follow  that  had  man  not  sinned  he 
would  have  died.  God  might  have  continued  forever  to  preserve  his 
powers  unimpaired,  either  by  direct  preservation,  or  by  some  remedial 
means.  Some  think,  not  without  reason,  that  this  would  have  been 
done  through  the  tree  of  life. 

(3)  The  objection  overlooks  the  fact  that,  from  the  nature  of  God's 
foreknowledge  and  purpose,  things  in  themselves  natural  are  made  the 
punishments  of  others  with  which  they  are  associated,  and  in  like 
manner  is  it  also  with  blessings.  The  whole  narrative  of  the  fall  is 
full  of  examples  of  this  principle.  Of  this  kind  is  the  serpent's 
curse,  "upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the 
days  of  thy  life,"  Gen.  3:14;  of  this  also  that  connected  with  the  na- 
tural injury  which  men  and  serpents  would  inflict  on  each  other,  Gen. 
3:15;  that  of  the  rule  of  the  husband  over  the  wife,  Gen.  3:17;  and  that 
of  the  thorns  and  thistles  in  the  ground  and  the  sweat  and  the  labour 
for  the  means  of  life,  Gen   3:18.19. 

2.  A  second  objection  against  regarding  natural  death  as  part  of 
the  penalty  is  that  the  threatened  penalty  was  a  death  which  should 
occur  on  the  very  day  the  fruit  should  be  eaten. 

(1)  This  might  be  an  objection  if  it  were  claimed  that  the  penalty 
of  natural  death  was  the  only  penalty,  or  if  it  could  be  shown  that 
the  death  thus  threatened  was  so  exclusive  as  to  forbid  that  natural 
death  should  be  in  any  way  associated  with  it. 

(2)  It  is  even  doubtful  whether  the  corrupt  tendency  to  death 
and  its  beginnings  may  not  be  ascribed  to  the  very  hour  of  Adam's 
sin.  If  that  sin  removed  all  hope  of  God's  counteracting  the  natural 
mortality,  this  would  be  so;  whether  it  was  to  be  counteracted,  as  Lange 
quotes  Knobel  as  supposing  [Comm.  on  Genesis,  p.  239],  "through  the 
tree  of  life,"  or  by  some   other   means.     It  would  also  be  true,  if  as 


Abstract  of  Theology.  262 

Lange  thinks,  the  threatened  penalty  "death,  here  corresponding 
to  the  biblical  conception  of  death,  must  be  taken  primarily  to  mean 
moral  death,  which  goes  out  of  the  soul  or  heart,  and,  through  the 
soul-life,  gradually  fastens  itself  upon  the  physical  organism." 
Comm.  on  Gen.,  p.  207. 

(3)  ■'  It  may  also  be  true,  even  without  this,  if  there  be  this  ad- 
ditional and  higher  meaning  of  death  as  the  primary  one,  and  this 
gradual  tendency  towards  decay  accompanying  it,  though  not 
caused  by  it. 

In  favour  of  the  idea  that  natural  death  is  included  in  the  penalty, 
there  is  : 

1.  The  probability  that  while  spiritual  death  does  come  upon 
man,  the  outward  event,  the  name  of  which  is  used  to  express  this 
evil  result  in  the  soul,  would  itself  also  constitute  a  part  of  that  which 
is  indicated  by  its  name. 

Hence  it  is  that,  to  one  who  does  not  carefully  study  the  Scripture 
statements,  the  most  obvious  idea  is  that  the  death  threatened  was 
chiefly  natural  death. 

2.  This  probability  is  rendered  certain  by  the  specific  curse 
uttered  in  the  garden  after  the  transgression  "Dust  thou  art  and  unto 
dust  shalt  chou  return."     Gen.  3:19. 

3.  It  is  confirmed  by  other  passages  of  Scripture.  Lange,  Gen.  p. 
239,  thinks  that  the  teaching  of  the  90th  Psalm  is  undoubtedly  that 
death  belongs  solely  to  the  punishment  of  sin.  But  whether  so,  or  not, 
it  is  unquestionably  the  teaching  of  Romans  5:12 — 14;  also  of  1.  Cor. 
15:21.22.53.56.  [See  some  valuable  remarks  on  this  point  in  Edwards' 
Works,  vol.  2,  p.  373.] 

II.  Spiritual  death  was  also  an  effect  of  Adam's  sin.  Our  inquiry 
into  natural  death  as  a  penalty  leads  us  to  look  for  some  other,  and 
higher  evil,  as  resulting  from  sin.  It  must  be  something  which  oc- 
curred at  the  very  time  of  eating,  which  affected  that  part  of  man  that 
was  naturally  immortal,  and  which  was  also  connected  with  that  part 
with  which  conscious  personality  is  inseparably  associated. 

1.     It  must  therefore  be  the  death  of  the  soul. 

The  Scriptures  present  this  in  several  aspects,  showing  it  in  each 
case  not  only  by  statements  of  what  it  is,  but  by  contrasting  it  with 
the  life  of  the  soul.  It  is  presented  as  (1)  Alienation  from  God. 
(2)  Loss  of  God's  favour.     (3)  Loss  of  acceptance  with  Him. 

It  is  contrasted  with  life  in  many  passages,  as  Lev.  18:5  ;  Deut.  8:3  ; 
30:15—19;  Ps.  119:17.77.116  ;  Matt.  4:4 ;  John  5:24. 


263  Abstract  of  Theology. 

That  this  death  has  come  upon  mankind  is  evident  from  the  fact 
that  the  Scriptures  speak  of  man,  in  his  fallen  state,  as  being  "without 
God  in  the  world,"  Eph.  2:12  ;  as  "alienated  from  the  life  of  God," 
Eph.  4:18.  It  says  that  "all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory 
of  God,"  Rom.  3:23.  Also  that  "the  wicked  and  him  that  loveth 
violence  his  soul  hateth,"  Ps.  11:5.  God  is  said  to  be  "angry  with  the 
wicked  every  day,"  Ps.  7:11.  "His  wrath  is  revealed  from  heaven 
against  all  unrighteousness  and  ungodliness  of  men,"  Rom.  1:18.  It 
is  not  only  said  that  he  who  believes  not  is  condemned  already;  but  that 
the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.     John  3:18.  36. 

It  is  also  evident  from  the  work  of  Christ,  which  was  to  reconcile 
man  to  God,  and  propitiate  his  good  will.  Hence  Christ  speaks  of 
himself  as  giving  living  water.     We  are  said  to  live  in  Christ. 

2.  This  spiritual  death  was  not  only  the  death  of  the  soul,  as  seen 
in  the  various  aspects  of  alienation,  loss  of  God's  favour  and  of  accept- 
ance with  Him,  referred  to  above  ;  but  it  also  consisted  in  a  corrupt 
nature.     The  Scripture  statements  as  to  the  corruption  show. 

(1)  Its  universal  extent.  It  is  found  in  every  man. — "There 
is  no  man  that  sinneth  not,"  1  Kings  8:46.  "There  is  none  that  doeth 
good,"  Ps.  14:1 ;  and  this  is  emphasized  in  v.  3  by  adding  "no  not  one." 
See  also  Rom.  3:10  and  the  argument  of  the  context.  Also  Ps.  53:1 — 3; 
130:3;  Prov.  20=9  ;  Ecc.  7:20;  Isa.  53:6;  64:6;  Rom.  3:23  ;  5:12.14; 
Gal.  3:22;   1  John  1:8—10;  5:19. 

To  the  above  passages  might  be  added  arguments  for  the-universal- 
ity  of  sin  from  the  declared  necessity  of  regeneration  in  each  man; 
from  the  direction  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  ;  and  the 
assertion  that  there  is  no  salvation  for  any  man  except  in  the  name 
of  Christ. 

(2)  Its  early  appearance  in  man's  life  is  another  proof  that  cor- 
ruption is  the  effect  of  Adam's  sin.  Certain  passages  of  Scripture  are 
supposed  to  refer  to  young  children  as  though  innocent  of  guilt. 
These  are  such  as  Matt.  19:13—15,  Mark  10:13—16  and  Luke 
18:15 — 17  "of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Also  Matt.  18:3 
"Except  ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children."  Also  1  Cor. 
14:20  ",be  not  children  in  understanding,  howbeit  in  malice  be  ye 
children  ;  but  in  understanding  be  ye  men."  [See  Gill's  Body  of 
Divinity  I.  474.] 

But  these  passages  do  not  teach  freedom  from  corruption.  On  the 
other  hand  corruption  in  iearly  infancy  is  plainly  taught.  "The 
wicked  are  estranged  from  the  womb,  they  go  astray  as   soon  as  they 


Abstract  of  Theology.  264 

be  born  speaking  lies."  Ps.  58:3.  "Behold  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity 
and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  Ps.  51=5.  "Foolishness 
(wickedness)  is  bound  in  the  heart  of  a  child."     Prov.  22=15. 

(3)  The  fact  of  this  corruption.  Before  the  flood  it  is  said;  "And  God 
saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth  and  that  every 
imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually." 
Gen.  6:5.  "Every  one  of  them  is  gone  back,  they  are  altogether  become 
filthy,"  Ps.  53:3;  see  also  Ecc.  8:11  ;  Matt.  15:19  ;  Rom.  1st  chapter 
at  length,  as  to  the  heathen,  in  connection  with  Paul's  question,  Rom. 
3:9.  Similar  descriptions  appear  in  Isa.  59:3 — 14  ;  in  Gal.  5:19 — 21 ; 
Titus  3=3  ;  2  Pet.  2:13—18. 

(4)  "This  corruption  extends  to  every  affection  of  the  heart  and 
mind",  says  Mr.  Goodwin  in  the  Lime  St.  Lectures,  p.  128.  "The  soul 
is  corrupted  with  all  its  faculties  ;  the  mind  with  darkness  and  ignor- 
ance, Eph.  5:3  ;  being  subject  to  the  sensitive  part,  and  strongly  prej- 
udiced against  the  things  of  God,  1  Cor.  4=24  ;  the  conscience  with 
stupidity  and  insensibleness,  Titus  1:15;  the  will  with  stubbornness 
and  rebellion,  Rom.  8=7  ;  the  affections  are  become  carnal  and  placed 
either  upon  unlawful  objects,  or  upon  lawful  in  an  unlawful  manner 
or  degree,  Col.  3=2  ;  the  thoughts  and  imaginations  are  full  of  pride, 
and  vanity,  and  disorder,  Gen.  6=5.  And,  as  for  the  body,  that  is  be- 
come a  clog,  instead  of  being  serviceable  to  the  soul,  and  all  its  mem- 
bers and  senses  instruments  of  unrighteousness  to  sin,  Rom.  7=19. 
It  is,  I  say,  in  general,  a  universal  deprivation  of  every  part  in  man 
since  the  fall ;  and  more  particularly  it  consists  in  a  privation  of  all 
good,  in  an  enmity  to  God,  and  the  things  of  God,  and  in  a  propensity 
to  all  evil."  See  also  Hodge,  vol.  2,  p.  255  and  Gill  s  Divinity, 
vol.  1,  p.  474. 

(5)  This  corruption  has  not  been  equally  developed  in  all.  The 
doctrine  of  total  depravity  does  not  mean  such  development.  The 
Scriptures  recognize  degrees  of  wickedness  as  well  as  of  hardening  of 
the  heart,  and  blinding  of  the  mind  of  some.  But  they  also  represent 
that  the  lack  of  this  development  is  due  to  differing  circumstances 
and  restraints  by  which  some  men  are  providentially  surrounded. 

(6)  This  corruption  does  not  destroy  accountability  or  respons- 
ibility for  present  sins. 

(a)  The  Scriptures  universally  recognize  man's  liability  to  pun- 
ishment for  all  the  thoughts  of  his  mind,  and  the  desires  of  his  heart, 
or  the  emotions  of  his  physical  nature  as  well  as  for  his  acts.  These 
are  characterized   by   more  or  less  of  heinousness  according  to  their 


265  Abstract  of  Theology. 

nature,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  they  are  committed.     The 
more  intense  the  corruption  the  more  guilty  is  the  man  regarded. 

(b)  The  conscience  of  mankind  approves  these  teachings  of  Script- 
ure. We  do  not  excuse  men  because  of  any  state  of  moral  corruption. 
The  evidence  of  this  is  seen  in  the  immediate  difference  which  is 
made  whenever  physical  compulsion,  or  physical  disease  (insanity) 
leads  to  an  act  which  otherwise  would  be  regarded  as  sinful  and 
blameworthy. 

(7)  This  corruption  does  not  destroy  the  freedom  of  the  will. 
This  is  the  ground  upon  which  men  are  held  responsible  by  God  and 
by  human  law  and  conscience.  The  condition  of  man  is  indeed  such 
"that  he  cannot  not  sin,"  but  this  is  due  to  his  nature  which  loves  sin 
and  hates  holiness  and  which  prefers  self  to  God.  "When  man  sins 
he  does  so  of  his  own  choice,  freely,  without  compulsion. 

(8)  "The  inability  which  is  thus  admitted",  says  Dr.  Hodge,  "is 
asserted  only  in  reference  to  the  things  of  the  spirit.  It  is  asserted 
in  all  the  confessions  above  quoted,  (he  has  been  quoting  various 
Protestant  confessions,)  that  man  since  the  fall  has  not  only  the  liberty 
of  choice  or  power  of  self-determination,  but  also  is  able  to  perform 
moral  acts,  good  as  well  as  evil.  He  can  be  kind  and  just,  and  fulfil 
his  social  duties  in  a  manner  to  secure  the  approbation  of  his  fellow- 
men.  It  is  not  meant  that  the  states  of  mind  in  whioh  these  acts  are 
performed,  or  the  motives  by  which  they  are  determined,  are  such  as 
to  meet  the  approbation  of  an  infinitely  holy  God  ;  but  simply  that 
these  acts,  as  to  the  matter  of  them,  are  prescribed  by  moral  law. 

Theologians,  as  we  have  seen,  designate  the  class  of  acts  as  to  which 
fallen  man  retains  his  ability,  as  ,4jnstit,ia  civilis",  "things  external." 
And  the  class  as  to  which  his  inability  is  asserted,  is  designated  as 
"the  things  of  God,"  "the  things  of  the  Spirit,"  "things  connected 
with  salvation."  "The  difference  between  these  two  classes  of  acts, 
although  it  may  not  be  easy  to  state  it  in  words,  is  universally  recog- 
nized. There  is  an  obvious  difference  between  morality  and  religion; 
and  between  those  religious  affections  of  reverence  and  gratitude 
which  all  men  more  or  less  experience,  and  true  piety.  The  difference 
lies  in  the  state  of  mind,  the  motives,  and  the  apprehension  of  the 
objects  of  these  affections.  It  is  the  difference  between  holiness  and 
mere  natural  feeling.  What  the  Bible  and  all  the  Confessions  of  the 
churches  of  the  Reformation  assert  is,  that  man,  since  the  fall,  cannot 
change  his  own  heart ;  he  cannot  regenerate  his  soul;' he  cannot  repent 
with  godly  sorrow,  or  exercise  that  faith  which  is  unto  salvation. 
He  cannot,  in  short,  put  forth  any  holy  exercise,  or  perform  any  act 


Abstract  of  Theology.  266 

in  such  a  way  a.«  to  merit  the  approbation  of  God.  Sin  cleaves  to  all 
he  does  .and  from  this  dominion  of  sin  he  cannot  free  himself." 
[Hodge's  Syst.  Theol.,  vol.  2,  pp.  263— 4.J 

(9)  This  total  corruption  does  not  involve  equality  of  sinfulness  in 
all  men.  On  the  contrary  sin  is  increased  by  cherishing  sinful 
thoughts ;  by  indulgence  in  sinful  habits  ;  by  throwing  off  the 
restraints  of  society  ;  and  is  affected  by  circumstances  of  birth,  edu- 
cation, &c.  It  is  also  true  that  by  natural  inheritance  some  are 
more  prone  to  sin  than  others. 

III.     Eternal  death  is  also  the  consequence  of  Adam's  sin. 

1.  Without  any  actual  sentence  to  Eternal  death,  it  would  follow 
that  the  present  alienated  and  corrupted  condition  of  mankind  would 
be  forever. 

(a)  Condemnation  can  only  be  removed  by  proof  of  innocence  ;  by 
legal  justification ;  or  by  voluntary  pardon.  But  the  justice  of  God  for- 
bids Him  to  pardon  sin  without  atonement.  By  the  deeds  of  the  law 
can  no  man  be  justified  ;  and  above  all,  innocence  can  never  be  proved. 
Hence  the  Scriptures  represent  all  men,  not  pardoned  and  justified 
through  Christ,  as  condemned  to  everlasting  death. 

(b)  Corruption  can  only  be  removed  by  a  cleansing  of  human  nature 
sufficient  to  root  out  all  taint  of  sin  and  to  restore  a  holy  disposition 
and  habits.  This  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  people  of 
Christ.  All  not  thus  sanctified  by  Him  are  left  forever  corrupt.  The 
Scriptures  show  such  to  be  man's  condition  that  he  cannot  cleanse 
himself. 

Dr.  Dagg  says  "The  Scripture  representations  of  men's  inability  are 
exceedingly  strong.  They  are  said  to  be,  without  strength,  captives, 
in  bondage,  asleep,  dead,  &c.  The  act,  by  which  they  are  delivered 
from  their  natural  state,  is  called  regeneration,  quickening,  or  giving 
life,  renewing,  resurrection,  translation,  creation  ;  and  it  is  directly 
ascribed  to  the  power  of  God,  the  power  that  called  light  out  of  dark- 
ness, and  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead."  [Bagg's  Manual  of 
Theology,  p.  171.]  " 

The  following  Scriptures  distinctly  assert  this  corruption  and 
inability.  "Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin  or  the  leper  his 
spots?  then  may  ye  also  do  good  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil." 
Jer.  13:23.  So  also  Jno.  1:13;  3=3;  Rom.  5=6 ;  7=5.21;  8=3;  9=16; 
and  Eph.  2=1.5.  Such  being  the  condition  of  man  it  is  seen 
to  be  impossible  for  him  to  be  delivered  by   his  own  acts  even  if  he 


267  Abstract  of  Theology. 

had  the  will  to  perform  them.     But  for  God's  action,  there  would  be 
no  deliverance  even  if  man  had  the  will  to  deliver  himself. . 

(3)  But  men  have  not  the  will  to  be  released.  This  is  evidenced  by 
the  statements  of  Scripture  about  their  love  of  sin,  and  the  delight  they 
take  therein,  as  specially  leading  to  the  rejection  of  the  gospel. 
Jno.  3:19—21. 

If,  therefore,  the  doctrine  of  eternal  death  were  no  more  than  the 
natural  continuance  of  the  alienation  and  corruption  of  men,  we  see, 
that  in  the  absence  of  the  means  to  remove  these  they  must  continue 
forever. 

2.  But  this  doctrine  goes  farther  and  teaches  (a)  the  confirmation 
of  men  beyond  future  escape  in  this  condition  of  sin  and  misery,  and 
(b)  its  aggravation,  or  at  least  a  farther  development  of  it,  which  is  res- 
trained in  this  life,  and  only  slightly,  and  in  a  few  instances  indicated. 

This  is  taught  by  showing  :  1.  That  the  day  of  judgment  has  been 
postponed  and  that  men  are  in  an  intermediate  state  of  probation. 
2.  That  at  that  time  the  wicked  sha-11  be  judged  and  their  final  doom 
assigned  to  them.  3.  That  that  doom  shall  be  as  eternal  as  the  bliss 
of  the  righteous.  The  strongest  words  of  the  Greek  language  are 
used  to  express  the  eternity  of  that  condition.  4.  That  beyond  that 
period  there  shall  be  no  change  of  state,  nor  opportunity  of  redemption. 
5.  That  the  condition  of  punishment,  into  which  they  will  enter,  is  that 
of  the  devil  and  his  angels  ;  an  entirely  depraved  and  corrupted  state 
of  bitter  enmity  to  God,  and  to  holy  beings,  and  things;  a  state  without 
restraints  in  which  the  soul  is  wholly  given  up  to  sin.  The  1st  Chap- 
ter of  Romans  teaches  us  what  the  removal  of  such  restraints  will 
produce.  6.  Some  intimation  of  what  that  state  shall  be  is  given  in 
the  devil-blinded,  self-hardened  condition  attained  even  in  this  life  by 
the  worst  of  men,  who,  in  their  wilful,  blasphemous,  and  highhanded 
opposition  to  God  and  holiness  show  that  they  are  spiritually  possessed 
by  the  devil. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  26S 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXIV. 


The  Headship  of  Adam. 

The  Scriptures  teach  that  the  fall  of  Adam  involved  also  that  of  his 
posterity.  In  the  covenant,  under  which  he  sinned,  he  acted,  not 
merely  as  an  individual  man,  the  sole  one  of  his  kind,  or  one  isolated 
from  all  others  of  his  kind,  but,  as  the  head  of  the  race,  for  his  posterity 
as  well  as  himself.  The  condition  of  mankind  shows  that  they  have 
all  participated  with  him  in  the  evils  which  resulted.  The  Scriptures 
teach  that  this  is  due,  not  merely  to  his  natural  headship,  but  to  a 
representative,  or  federal  headship,  because  of  which  his  acts  of  sin 
may  justly  be  considered  as  theirs,  and  they  may  be  treated  as  though 
they  had  themselves  done  that  act,  each  man  for  himself. 

In  order  that  a  proper  comparison  may  be  made  between  the  in- 
nocent and  afterwards  the  sinful  condition  of  Adam,  and  that  which 
universally  is  found  in  his  descendants,  it  will  be  well  to  recall  the 
facts  as  to  Adam  in  these  respects,  and  those  also  which  are  seen  to  be 
true  of  mankind  in  general.  The  consideration  of  these  will  prepare 
the  way  for  that  of  the  relation  between  the  parties  to  which  the  pres- 
ent condition  of  man  is  due. 

I.     The  facts  as  to  Adam. 

These  may  be  briefly  stated  as  they  have  already  been  set  forth, 
and  the  present  statement  is  only  an  epitome  of  that  already  given. 

1.  Adam  was  created  perfect  ;  because  of  which  perfection  he  was 
not  only  without  sin,  but  had  a  strong  and  controlling  inclination  to 
holiness,  and  obedience  to  God.  Such  must  be  the  nature  of  every 
being  that  is  innocent,  and  uncorrupted. 


269  Abstract  of  Theology. 

2.  This  nature  did  not  make  him  incapable  of  committing  sin,  but 
only  made  it  very  improbable  that  he.  would  choose  to  do  so.  Such 
improbability  naturally  belongs  to  a  nature  whose  whole  inclinations 
are  towards  that  which  is  good.  But  improbability  is  far  from  being 
impossibility. 

3.  The  possibility  of  sinning  necessarily  inheres  in  every  creature 
endowed  with  a  moral  nature,  and  permitted  freedom  of  choice  bet- 
ween good  and  evil.  This  is  no  more  than  saying  that  a  creature  is 
fallible,  because  he  is  not  God,  who  alone  is,  through  His  own  nature, 
infallible. 

4.  Adam,  in  the  trial  to  which  he  was  subjected,  did  fall,  not  ac- 
cidentally, nor  ignorantly,  but  deliberately,  knowingly,  and  of  his 
own  free  will. 

5.  Prior  to  this  fall,  there  were  exhibited  in  him  the  nature,  and 
condition  which  belong  to  an  innocent  and  holy  man,  and  which 
must  be  found  in  any  of  mankind  who  have  not  been  affected  by  his 
sin.  Subsequent  to  it,  he  possessed .  the  nature  and  condition  of  a 
corrupt  and  guilty  man,  which  likewise  must  appear  in  all  of  those- 
who  have  been  affected  by  that  sin. 

6.  The  result  of  that  sin  was  inability  to  continue  in  the  state  in 
which  Adam  was  originally  created,  or  to  return  to  it. 

7.  This  inability  was  not  merely  natural,  but  also  penal.  It  was 
due  to  the  corruption  of  his  nature  through  the  defiling  taint  of  sin, 
which  was  a  part  of  that  threatened  death,  which,  not  confined  to,  nor 
chiefly  consisting  in  the  death  of  the  body,  included  this  corruption 
and  consequent  inability  of  the  whole  man,  together  with  the  loss  of 
the  complacent  love  of  God,  and  of  communion  or  fellowship  with  Him. 

II.     Facts  as  to  Adam's  descendants. 

The  facts  as  to  the  descendants  of  Adam  show  that  they  have  uni- 
versally partaken  of  his  corrupted  nature,  and  that,  not  even  in  their 
earliest  years,  have  any  had  the  innocent  nature,  with  its  strong  pro- 
clivities to  holiness,  which  constituted  his  original  condition. 

1.  They  are  born  with  the  corrupted  nature  which  he  acquired, 
together  with  all  the  other  evils  set  forth  as  the  penalties  of  his  sin. 
This  was  true  even  of  his  first  children,  Cain  and  Abel,  as  it  has  been, 
also,  equally  true  of  all  others,  even  to  the  present  time. 

2.  No  one  of  these  descendants  has  been  able  to  recover  the  na- 
ture possessed  by  Adam  before  the  fall.  In  each  of  them  the  same 
inability  has  existed  which  fell  upon  him. 


Abstract"  of  Theology.  270 

3.  No  one'  has  been  able  to  escape  the  complete  fulfilment  of  the 
penalty  of  death,  in  all  its  meanings, 'except  through  the  work  of 
Christ 

4.  No  other  reason  for  this  universal  condition  has  been  assigned 
than  the  one  sin  by  which  Adam  fell,   and  it  has,  consequently,  been 

l  generally  recognized   as,   in  some  way,  the  result  of  that  one  trans- 
'  gression. 

5.  The  conscience  of  mankind  has  universally  taught  that  this 
condition  of  their  natures' is  sinful,  and  as  fully  worthy  of  punishment 
as  the  personal  transgressions  which  proceed  from  it. 

6.  The  Scriptures  plainly  assume  and  declare  that  God  righteously 
punishes  all  men,  not  only  for  what  they  do,  but  for  what  they  are. 
Men  are  indeed  represented  as  more  guilty  and  sinful  than  they  know 
themselves  to  be,  because,  through  the  restraints  with  which  God  sur- 
rounds them,  their  natures  have  not  been  fully  developed  into  all  the 
sin  towards  which  they  tend.  This  is  the  argument  of  the  first  part 
of  the  Epistle  to  the  Komans  the  turning  point  of  which  is  Rom.  2:1. 
It  is  also  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Hazael.     2  Kings  8:12.13. 

7.  It  follows,  from  the  facts  in  these  last  two  statements,  that  a 
corrupt  nature  is  to  be  regarded  as  equally  sinful,  and  guilty,  and 
liable  to  punishment,  as 'actual  transgressions.  Consequently,  at  the 
very  moment  of  birth,  the  presence  and  possession  of  such  a  nature 
causes  even  the  infant  sons  of  Adam  to  be  born  under  all  the  penalties 
which  befell  their  ancestor  in  the  day  of  his  sin.  Actual  transgression 
subsequently  adds  new  guilt  to  guilt,  already  existing,  but  does  not 
substitute  a  state  of  guilt  for  one  of  innocence. 

8.  Not  the  judgment  of  God  only,  but  that  of  man  also,  regards  a 
sinful  nature  as  deserving  punishment  equally  with  a  sinful  act. 
The  law  of  man  is  necessarily  confined  to  the  punishment  of  the  acts, 
because  these  alone  give  such  testimony  to  the  condition  of  the  heart 
as  man  can  correctly  apprehend ;  but  the  character  of  any  act  is 
regarded  as  alleviated,  or  aggravated,  by  the  character  of  the  actor  ; 
and  men  are  shunned,  or  courted  as  they  are  deemed  to  be  good,  or 
bad,  without  any  other  reference  to  their  acts  than  as  they  testify  to 
character. 

From  the  above  points  it  will  be  seen  that  men,  as  descendants  of 
Adam,  are  invariably  born,  not  with  his  original,  but  with  his  fallen 
nature,  and,  more  than  this,  not  only  receive  that  nature  as  a  part  of 
the  penalty  of  his  sin,  but  with  it,  all  the  other  penalties  inflicted 
because  of  that  sin.     It  is  also  plain,  that  a  condition  of  sinfulness  is 


271  Abstract  of  Theology. 

regarded  worthy  of  punishment,  not  only  by  the  Scriptures,  and  by 
personal  conviction  of  conscience,  but  by  the  universal  sense  of  man- 
kind; and  consequently  that  men  may  be  punished  for  the  corrupt 
nature  thus  inherited,  although  they  may  not  have  been  personally 
guilty  of  a  single  transgression.  This  naturally  leads  to  the  inquiry 
into  the  nature  of  the  connection  between  Adam  and  his  posterity 
through  which  such  sad  and  serious  results  have  occurred. 

III.     The  Connection  between  Adam  and  his  posterity. 

1.  Manifestly  the  universal  sinfulness  of  mankind  is  due  to  some 
kind  of  connection  with  Adam.  Being  thus  universal,  it  cannot  be 
accidental,  nor  without  some  controlling  cause.  Unless  some  change 
was  made  in  human  nature  at  large,  or  it  became  liable  to  new  con- 
ditions, or  there  was  a  connection  of  the  life  and  state  of  all  with  that 
of  the  one,  no  reason  can  be  assigned  for  the  fact  that  invariably  the 
fallen  condition,  and  not  the  original  one  is  found  in  every  man. 
Yet  it  is  manifest  that  while  Adam's  was  the  first  sin,  and  while  that 
was  not  committed  according  to  the  tendencies  of  his  nature,  all  of 
his  posterity  have  been  born  with  the  corrupt  nature  which  thence 
ensued,  with  all  its  tendencies  and  its  actual  development  in  due  time, 
Into  personal  transgressions. 

2.  This  has  not  resulted  from  the  mere  imitation  of  an  example; 
but  is  a  deep  rooted  evil  inherent  in  their  natures.  It  is  found  there 
before  they  can  perceive  the  example,  much  less  imitate  it. 

3.  Such  is  the  natural  relation,  borne  by  all  men  to  Adam,  as 
their  common  father,  that  nothing  but  his  death  before  the  birth  of 
posterity,  or  some  such  miraculous  influence  as  goes  against  nature,  or 
at  least  acts  apart  from  it,  and  is  believed  to  have  existed  in  the  birth 
of  Jesus,  could  have  prevented  all  the  evils  which  befell  Adam  from 
coming  in  like  manner  upon  his  posterity.  By  natural  generation 
they  must  be  born  with  sinful  natures  such  as  his,  and  must,  therefore, 
be  corrupt  and  guilty,  eternally  destitute  of  God's  complacent  lovte, 
and  liable  to  natural  death. 

4.  While  the  above  would  follow  from  mere  natural  law,  the 
Scriptures  teach  us  that  Adam  was  not  merely  the  natural,  but  also 
the  federal  head  of  the  race.  This  is  done  not  only  in  express  lan- 
guage but  especially  by  teaching  that  the  relation  borne  to  Christ,  our 
federal  head  in  salvation,  is  similar  to  that  borne  to  Adam  in  our  sin. 

5.  This  shows  that  the  mass  of  mankind  proceeding  from  Adam 
by  natural  generation  sinned  in  him,  not  consciously,  but  representa- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  272 

tively,  and,  therefore,  are  justly  treated  as  though  tbey  had  consciously 
sinned,  because  they  are  responsible  for  the  act  of  their  representative. 

6.  This  adds  nothing  to  the  penalty  which  must  have  been  suffered 
nor  to  the  guilt  which  would  have  accrued  from  natural  headship  ; 
for  guilt  is  simply  just  liability  to  punishment. 

7.  In  each  case,  that  of  federal,  or  that  of  natural  headship  the 
same  difficulties  appear. 

(1)  In  each  we  are  dealt  with  for  an  act  with  which  we  had  no 
conscious  connection. 

(2)  In  each  we  are  made  sinful,  and,  therefore,  sinners,  by  that  act; 
for  the  inherent  corruption  is  spoken  of  and  treated  by  God  as  sin  in 
the  highest  degree  to  be  ^reprobated,  and  punished. 

(3)  In  each  the  consequences  of  sin  are  equally  beyond  escape. 

If  it  be  contended  that  under  natural  headship  we  could  not  be 
punished  until  we  had  actually  sinned,  it  may  be  replied  : 

(1)  That  this  does  not  appear  to  be  the  fact,  for  at  least  some  of 
the  penalties,  namely,  corruption  and  natural  death,  and  we  believe 
all,  are  inflicted  before  actual  sin. 

(2)  That  there  is  no  more  equity,  or  justice  in  God,  or  any  advan- 
tage to  us,  but  rather  disadvantage,  that  our  probation,  upon  which  the 
infliction  of  these  penalties  depends,  should  have  taken  place  in  the 
weakness  of  infancy,  and  under  the  disadvantages  of  an  already 
corrupted  nature,  rather  than  in  the  personal,  and  intelligent  act  of 
the  one  perfect  man  connected  with  us  by  natural  generation. 

8.  But  while,  under  the  natural  headship,  every  evil  would  befall 
which  could  arise  under  the  representative,  or  federal  headship  ; 
under  the  latter  would  come  blessing,  in  the  event  that  Adam  should 
maintain  his  integrity,  because,  as  represented  in  him,  we 
should  have  been  confirmed  with  him  according  to  the  gracious 
promises  and  power  of  God. 

9.  It  would  also  appear  that  only  through  the  representative 
headship  could  blessing  come  in  the  event  of  the  fall.  Had  our  fall 
been  through  merely  natural  headship  we  can  see  no  way  for  recov- 
ery. But  to  the  fall  under  the  federal  headship  of  Adam  corresponds 
our  salvation  under  the  federal  headship  of  Christ. 

10.  In  support  of  the  Scriptural  theory,  therefore,  we  can  not  only 
adduce  the  facts  that  the  headship  of  Adam  was  just,  and  right,  be- 
cause duly  constituted  by  God,  and  that  too  in  the  fittest  person  of 
the  whole  race,  but  that  it  was  an  act  of  special  mercy  and  grace,  not 


273  Abstract  of  Theology. 

only  in  itself,  as  involving  the  blessing  of  participation  in  the  good  as 
well  as  the  evil,  but  as  making  a  way  for  restoration  in  Christ  the 
second  Adarn. 

IV.     The  Scriptures  teach  a  federal  headship. 

The  Scriptures  recognize  both  a  natural  and  federal  headship  of 
Adam.  The  natural  headship  would  have  sufficed  to  account  for  all 
the  effects  of  Adam's  sin.  The  federal  relationship  becomes  necessary, 
however,  in  connection  with  salvation  through  Christ.  It  is' on  this 
account  that  it  is  more  prominently  set  forth  in  the  New  Testament 
as  the  common  relationship  of  both  the  first,  and  second  Adam.  The 
establishment  of  it  as  to  the  first  Adam  is,  therefore,  to  be  regarded 
as  a  special  act  of  the  grace  of  God,  conferring  the  privileges  of  success 
where  the  evils  of  failure  would  not  be  increased,  and  preparing  the 
way  for  the  future  grace  in  the  representation  in  Christ.  The  prin- 
ciple, however,  upon  which  it  is  based,  is  a  general  one  of  nature,  and 
one  constantly  recognized  in  the  Scriptures. 

1.  It  is  natural  and  common  for  men  to  deal  with  each  other  on 
this  principle  of  representation.  Blessings  are  bestowed,  and  injuries 
inflicted  in  accordance  with  it.  Men  become  heirs  to  the  noble,  or 
base  characters  of  their  ancestors,  as  really  as  to  their  property.  The 
friendship  and  affection,  entertained  for  a  father,  and  no  less  the 
dislike  and  aversion,  are  renewed  as  to  the  son.  A  similarity  is 
presumed  to  exist  between  them,  which  is  deemed  a  proper  basis  for 
such  action,  until  the  conduct  of  the  child  shows  a  difference 
of  nature,  and,  by  destroying  this  presumption,  causes  him  to  be 
differently  treated.  Nor  is  this  confined  to  those  who  are  connected, 
like  father  and  son,  in  direct  succession.  The  taint  of  a  committed 
crime  soils  and  stains  a  whole  family,  even  in  its  collateral  branches. 
A  remote  relationship  with  the  guilty  one  is  deemed  a  disgrace,  and 
the  one  thus  connected  realizes  himself  to  be  shunned,  even  if  pitied, 
by  those  free  from  such  misfortune.  On  the  other  hand,  the  most 
distant  connection  with  one  distinguished  for  wisdom,  or  virtue,  for 
great  deeds  or  for  high  position,  is  thought  to  be  a  matter  of  congrat- 
ulation, not  alone  for  any  supposed  substantial  benefits  that  may 
accrue,  but  for  the  simple  connection  itself. 

The  same  principle  extends  itself  throughout  all  the  circumstances, 
and  ramifications  of  the  life  of  each  man.  Each  takes  pride,  or  shame, 
in  the  place  of  his  birth,  in  his  early  or  late  companions,  in  the  com- 
munity, or  state,  or  country  in  which  he  lives,  in  its  progress  or  back- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  274 

wardness,  in  its  good  or  bad  character,  in  its  power  or  weakness,  in  its 
knowledge  or  ignorance, — in  short,  in  any;  qualities  of  excellence,  or  of. 
inferiority  which  are  attached'  to  anything  to  which  he  belongs. 
Every  man  is  in  some  measure  represented,  though  not  of  his  own 
choice,  perhaps  by  bare  accident,  perhaps  even  against  his  own  will, 
in  all  the  circumstances  and  persons  which  surround  him. 

This  principle  only  gains  strength  when  connected  with'  a  duly: 
appointed  representative.  The  President  or  the  King  appoints  an 
ambassador  to  a  foreign  court,  and  each  citizen,  though  he  had  no 
hand  in  the  appointment,  is  affected  by  the  action  of  this,  his  repre- 
sentative. A  representative  to  Congress  is  elected,  against  whom  one 
has  voted,  and  whose  whole  discharge  of  his  duties  is  disapproved,  and 
yet, that  person  is  bound  by  these  very  acts  of  the  one  whom  he 
wished  not  as  his  representative. 

2.  The  representative  relation,  thus  seen. in  mankind  in  general, 
is  recognized  in  the  same  forms  in  the  Scriptures  as  existing  in  man's 
life  with  God. 

(1)  It  is  distinctly  declared  in  the  aspect  of  love  and  hate  towards 
the  children  of  those  who  love  and  hate  him  in  Ex.  20:5.  and  is  even 
more  prominently  brought  to  view  in  Ex.  34:7.  See  also  Deut.  4:40; 
7:7—9;  Lev.  20:5;  26:39;  Nam.  14:18.33;  Job  21:19;  Ps.  89:29.36  ; 
109:12—16;   Isa.  14:19—22;  65:6.7;  Jer.  32:18;   Rom.  11:28. 

(2)  For  the  fact  that  different  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  children 
shall  counteract  the  blessing  or  curse  which  comes  because  of  the 
parent,  see  Lev.  26:40—42  ;  Neh.  9:2  ;  Ezek.  18:10—23  ;  Dan.  9:4. 
5.6.21—27;  2  Cor.  3:16. 

(3)  That  all  of  a  nation  suffer  and  are  punished  for  the  sins  of 
their  rulers  and  representatives  is  taught  throughout  the  whole  history 
of  God's  dealings  with  Israel.  A  signal  instance  of  this  was  the 
punishment  of  all  Israel  because  of  the  sins  of  Eli  and  his  sons.  Com- 
pare 1  Sam.  3:11 — 14  with  1  Sam.  4:10 — ;22.  Another  was  in  the 
pestilence  sent  because  David  numbered  the  people.  2  Sam.  24:2 — 17. 
The  punishment  of  all  who  had  killed  the  prophets  is  announced  by 
Christ  as  concentrated  on  that  one  generation.  Matt.  23:34 — 39.  The 
death  of  Christ,  which  had  been  brought  about  by  the  rulers  of  the 
Jews,  is  charged  upon  the  people  themselves.  Acts  2:23  ;  3:13 — 15. 
It  is  charged  upon  the  rulers  themselves.     Acts  5:30. 

(4)  On  the  other  hand,  how  often  was  the  anger  of  God  turned 
away,  or  modified  by  the  intercessory  prayers  of  Moses,  and  for  the 
sake  of  Moses,  as  in  the  battle  with  the  Amalekites,  Ex.  17:9 — 12,  and 


275  Abstract  of  Theology. 

when  the  golden  calf  had  been  made,  Ex.  32:9 — 14,  and  in  his  coven- 
ant with  Moses  after  the  renewal  of  the  tables  of  the  law,  Ex.  34:9 — 
28,  also  after  the  report  of  the  spies,  Num.  14:15 — 21,  and  numerous 
other  instances.  The  case  of  Elijah  and  the  woman  of  Zarephath  is 
another  illustration.  Favour  is  shown  to  her  because  of  the  prophet's 
sojourn  with  her.  1  Kings  17:20 — 22.  It  was  because  of  the  grace 
that  Noah  found  with  God  that  he  and  his  family  were  saved  in  the 
ark.  Gen.  7:1.  Abraham's  prayer  secured  from  God  the  promise  to 
save  Sodom,  if  it  contained  ten  righteous  ones,  Gen.  18;32.  God 
promised  to  save  Jerusalem  if  one  just  man  could  be  found,  Jer.  5=1. 
These  are  but  few  of  the  instances  which  show  this  to  be  a  prevalent 
principle  in  the  divine  government. 

3.  The  doctrine  of  representation  was  especially  set  forth  in  a 
religious  aspect  under  the  Old  Testament  economy  in  the  sacrifices 
under  the  ceremonial  law. 

These  sacrifices  were  anticipated  under  some  more  general 
law  of  sacrifice  which  was  given  to  mankind  in  general.  This  was 
exemplified  from  the  earliest  times.  This  is  supposed  to  have  been 
the  source  of  the  coats  of  skins  with  which  the  Lord  God  clothed 
Adam  and  his  wife  immediately  after  the  fall.  Gen.  3:21.  Itismore 
plainly  seen  in  the  superiority  of  the  sacrifice  offered  by  Abel  over 
that  of  Cain.  Gen.  4:1 — 8.  Noah  also  offered  burnt  offerings.  Gen. 
8:20.21.  Abraham  also  built  altars  to  the  Lord,  calling  upon  His 
name.  Gen.  12:7.8;  13:3.4.18;  21:33.  The  idea  of  the  burnt  offer- 
ing was  familiar  to  Isaac,  as  appears  from  his  question  to  his  father, 
and  the  ram  was  actually  there  offered  as  a  burnt  offering  in  the  stead 
of  Isaac.  Gen.  22:7 — 9.13.  Isaac  also  built  an  altar  at  Beersheba  and 
called  upon  the  Lord.  Gen.  26:23 — 25.  Jacob  did  the  same  at 
Shalem,  Gen.  33:18—20,  and  at  Bethel,  Gen.  35:7,  and  at  Beersheba, 
Gen.  46:1.  Moses  also  offered  sacrifices  before  the  ceremonial  law 
was  given.  Ex.  17:15.16.  We  are  told  that  this  was  even  done  by 
Jethro.  Ex.  18:12.  In  Gen.  20:24—26,  God  prescribes  to  Moses 
that  an  altar  to  him  must  be  of  earth,  or  of  unhewn  stone,  and  without 
steps  for  its  ascent. 

It  is  almost  certain  that  these  more  ancient  sacrifices  taught  at  least 
partially  the  same  truths  as  those  of  the  ceremonial  law.  But  the  cere- 
monies attached  to  the  latter  explicitly  set  forth  the  fact  of  represent- 
ation, including  the  ideas  of  substitution,  imputation,  and  sacrifice. 
These  are  the  constituent  elements  of  any  doctrine  of  representation 
which  releases  from  sin.  They  are  fully  exhibited  in  the  representation 
of  men  in  Christ.     In   that  in  Adam  the   sacrifice   does   not  appear? 


Abstract  of  Theology.  276 

because  his  was  a  representation  which  involved  guilt,  and  not  atone- 
ment. While  these  sacrifices,  therefore,  illustrate  all  that  is  involved 
in  the  representation  in  Adam,  they  are  properly  types  of  that  in 
Christ,  by  which  guilt  was  removed,  and  atonement  made  to  God 
for  sin. 

(1)  In  them  we  have  the  sinner,  and  the  Victim  substituted  for 
that  sinner.  The  offered  animal  becomes  his  representative.  What 
is  due  to  the  man  is  inflicted  upon  that  substitute.  The  act  of  the 
latter  thus  becomes  that  of  the  former,  and,  upon  the  supposition  that 
the  victim  is  authorized  and  adequate,  there  is  a  full  discharge  of 
further  penalty  or  obligation. 

(2)  There  is  not  only  a  substitution  of  one  for  another,  but  an  actual 
transfer  to  this  one  from  that  other  of  his  sins,  trespasses,  uncleanness, 
on  whatever  else  unfits  him  for  acceptance  with  God.  After  this  transfer 
the  man  is  treated  as  though  he  had  never  been  thus  defiled,  and  the 
victim  dealt  with,  as  though  he  alone  had  offended.  This  transfer  is 
what  is  commonly  known  as  imputation.  By  it  the  sin  of  Adam  is 
transferred  to  us,  or  in  other  words  so  reckoned  to  us,  or  put  to  our 
account  that  we  are  treated  as  though  it  were  ours.  In  like  manner 
the  sin  of  man  was  transferred  to  Christ  who  bore  it,  though  he  knew 
no  sin  personally,  and  he  was  made  sin,  (or  a  sin  offering)  for  man, 
and  was  treated  as  though  he  were  a  sinner.  On  the  same  principle 
the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  also  imputed  to  man,  who  though 
personally  sinful,  is  treated  as  though  he  were  righteous. 

(3)  The  third  element  is  the  sacrifice,  by  which  satisfaction  is 
rendered  to  the  broken  law,  and  God  can  be  just  and  yet  justify  the 
ungodly.  This  was  shown  by  the  death  of  the  victim,  whose  life  was 
thus  given,  through  its  blood,  in  behalf  of  those  whom  it  represented, 
as  was  that  of  Christ  upon  the  cross. 

The  whole  attainment  of  salvation  through  Christ  was  thus  symbol- 
ized through  these  Mosaic  sacrifices.  The  antitype  as  well  as  the  type 
depends  upon  the  principle  of  representation.  This  forms  the  connect- 
ing link.  The  Mosaic  sacrifices  were  not  offered  in  general,  but  for 
specified  persons.  It  was  not  sin  in  the  abstract  that  was  confessed 
but  the  sins  of  special  individuals.  The  fact  of  representation  has 
thus  been  distinctly  involved,  in  the  whole  religious  life,  set  forth  in 
the  Scriptures.  It  was  only  through  the  act  of  a  duly  appointed 
representative  that  guilt  could  be  removed,  and  salvation  obtained. 


277  Abstract  of  Theology. 

4.  The  Scriptures  represent  this  as  the  method  by  which  guilt 
was  incurred  through  Adam.  This  is  chiefly  done  in  the  well  known 
passage  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  Romans.  The  apostle  is  here  arguing 
for  the  possibility  of  justification  through  the  act  of  Christ.  He  does 
this  by  drawing  a  parallel  between  Christ  and  Adam,  and  the  effects 
of  Adam's  sin  and  Christ's  meritorious  work.  This  parallel  could  be 
drawn  only  on  the  ground  of  federal  representation.  Only  thus,  could 
it  be  in  connection  with  Christ,  as  it  had  been  in  connection  with 
Adam.  Christ  could  in  no  sense  be  a  natural  head  of  man.  He  could 
only  be  a  constituted,  or  appointed  representative  head.  He  is  thus 
everywhere  set  forth.  So  the  parallel  made  between  him  and  Adam 
shows  that  the  headship  of  the  latter  was  representative  as  well  as 
natural.  The  same  truth  is  also  taught  in  1  Cor.  15:45 — 49,  not  only 
in  the  names  given  of  the  first  and  second  Adam,  but  by  the  contrast 
between  their  natures  and  the  effects  produced  by  each.  In  these 
two  chapters  from  Romans  and  Corinthians  we  find  ascribed  to  men, 
because  of  the  connection  with  Adam,  and  as  punishments  of  his  sin, 
almost  all  the  penalties,  which  were  inflicted  upon  Adam  in  the 
threatened  penalty  of  death.  There  is  the  all-comprising  word 
"death,"  declared  to  have  come  by  sin,  and  that,  the  sin  of  one  man, 
Rom.  5:12  ;  death,  which  came  upon  all,  even  over  those  who  had  not 
sinned  like  Adam.  In  what  respect  "not  after  the  similitude  of 
Adam's  transgression"  if  reference  be  not  made  to  the  fact  there  was 
no  personal  sin,  as  there  is  none  in  infants  ?  This  seems  clearly  sug- 
gested by  the  interjected  expression  "who  is  the  figure  of  him  that 
was  co  come;"  for  Adam  was  only  a  figure  of  Christ  by  virtue  of  this 
representative  headship.  "Judgment  to  condemnation,"  another 
penalty  of  Adam's  sin  is  also  declared  to  have  come  through  one, 
v.  16.18.  The  death  of  the  soul,  as  the  opposite  ot  its  spiritual  life,  is 
also  asserted  to  have  resulted  from  one  man's  offence,  v.  17.  The 
controlling  power  of  this  sin,  whioh  causes  the  inability  to  return  to 
God,  and  serve  Him,  is  shown  by  the  declaration  that  "sin  reigned 
unto  death,"  v.  21,  which  is  a  result  of  the  one  man's  disobedience 
mentioned  in  v.  19.  If  natural  death  is  not  included  in  the  word 
"death"  in  this  chapter,  and  the  denial  that  it  is  so  included  is  hardly 
possible,  that  fact  is  certainly  connected  with  representation  in  Adam 
in  1.  Cor.  15:22.  These  two  chapters,  therefore,  show  this  representative 
relation  of  Adam,  and  that,  because  of  it,  all  men  have  sinned  in  him 
and  are  justly  treated  as  sinners. 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


278 


The  discussion  of  this  representative  relation  of  Adam  has  rendered 
necessary  a  reference  to  that  of  Christ.  It  will  be  appropriate, 
therefore,  to  present  in  a  tabular  form  the  parallel  between  the 
consequences  of  these  relations,  as  a  further  proof  of  the  representative 
character  of  each  of  these  persons. 


Those  represented  in  Adam. 


Sin  is  imputed. 

Treated  as  though  sinners. 

Not  thus  personally  sinners. 

Not  regarded  as  guilty  of  Adam's 
sin. 

But  only  sinners  representatively. 

Though  not  personally  sinners  in 
Adam,  yet  horn  sinful,  and  naturally 
hecoming  actual  sinners. 

Condemned  to  all  the  penalties  of 
death  because  of  Adam's  sin. 


Voluntarily  accepting  the  relation  to 
Adam,  and  persevering  in  the  life  of 
sin  inaugurated  by  him. 


Those  represented  in  Christ. 

Righteousness  is  imputed. 

Treated  as  though  righteous. 

Not  thus  personally  righteous. 

Not  regarded  as  meritoriously  pos- 
sessed of  Christ's  righteousness. 

But  only  righteous  representatively. 

Though  not  personally  holy  in  Christ, 
yet  born  again  unto  holiness,  and 
graciously  becoming  more  and  more 
holy  until  finally  sanctified. 

Released  from  penalty,  and  attain- 
ing to  spiritual  life  and  immortality, 
because  of  Christ's  active  and  passive 
obedience. 

Voluntarily,  though  by  God's  help 
and  grace,  accepting  the  relation  to 
Christ,  and  persevering  in  the  holy  life 
into  which  he  has  brought  them. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  280 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXV. 


Christ  in  the  Old  Testament. 

The  Old  Testament  furnishes  an  early  promise  of  the  deliverer  from 
sin  in  the  "seed  of  the  woman."  That  prophecy  was  not  fulfilled  until 
the  birth  of  Christ.  But  throughout  the  ancient  inspired  writings 
there  occur  frequent  manifestations  of  Jehovah,  some  of  them  even  in 
human  form,  and  numerous  prophecies  of  the  future  appearance  of  the 
Messiah.  Before  proceeding  to  the  discussion  of  the  Person  of  Christ 
it  is  proper  that  these  should  be  considered.  In  accordance,  therefore, 
with  the  promise  (p.  143.)  that  they  should  be  presented  in  con- 
nection with  the  Messiahship  of  Christ  they  are  here  given. 

From  Genesis: 

3:15.  The  seed  of  the  woman  is  predicted,  a  human  being,  who  is 
to  suffer  through  his  conflict  with  the  serpent,  but  who  shall  finally 
destroy  him. 

4:1.  Eve  shows  that  she  had  supposed  that  this  was  to  be  fulfilled 
by  the  birth  of  one  who  was  Jehovah.  "I  have  gotten  a  man,  the 
Jehovah."  Though  she  was  mistaken  as  to  the  person,  this  fact  is  not 
to  be  overlooked. 

16:7.     The  angel  of  the  Lord  appears  to  Hagar; 
:9.     orders  her  to  return  to  her  mistress  ; 
:10.     assumes   divine  power  by  promising  to  multiply   her  seed 
exceedingly  so  that  it  shall  not  be  numbered  for  multitude. 

In  v.  13.     This  angel  is  called:  The  Lord  and  God. 


281  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Chap.  18:1.  The  introductory  verse  tells  that  the  Lord  appeared 
unto  Abraham  in  the  plains  of  Mamre. 

v.  2.  Begins  the  narrative  and  tells  how  this  was;  "he  lifted  up 
his  eyes  and  looked,  and  lo  three  men  stood  by  him/' 

v.  3  ,  4.  and  5.  Abraham  thus  addresses  these:  (3)  "My  Lord,  if 
now  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  pass  not  away,  1  pray  thee, 
from  thy  servant.  (4)  Let  a  little  water.  I  pray  you,  be  fetched,  and 
wash  your  feet,  and  rest  yourselves  under  the  tree.  (5)  And  I  will 
fetch  a  morsel  of  bread,  and  comfort  ye  your  hearts ;  after  that  ye 
shall  pass  on  :  for  therefore  are  ye  come  to  your  servant. 

v.  10.  The  same  divine  power  of  creation  is  asserted  as  to  Sarah 
which  in  Chap.  16:10  was  asserted  as  to  Hagar  :  "I  will  certainly  return 
unto  thee  according  to  the  time  of  life  ;  and,  lo,  Sarah  shall  have  ason." 

In  v.  13.  Upon  Sarah's  laughter  it  is  said:  "'The  Lord  spoke  to 
Abraham." 

v.  14.     Claims  omnipotence.     "Is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the  Lord?" 

v.  17.  He  is  again  called  the  Lord  and  speaks  of  his  purpose  and 
asks:   "."Shall  I  hide  it  from  Abraham." 

v.  19.  Declares  he  will  not  do  so,  because  Abraham  will  command 
his  children  and  household  to  "keep  the  way  of  the  Lord;  that  the 
Lord  may  bring  upon  Abraham  that  which  he  hath  spoken  of  him." 

v.  20.     The  Lord  declares  to  Abraham  his  purpose. 

v.  22.  The  other  two  leave  and  go  towards  Sodom,  (and,  chap.  19:1, 
arrive  there ;)  but  Abraham  stood  yet  before  the  Lord. 

v.  23.  to  33.  The  conversation  between  Abraham  and  the  Lord 
shows  the  following  facts  :  1.  That  He  had  absolute  control  over  the 
fate  of  the  cities  of  the  plain.  2.  That  He  was  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth  ;  He  is  called  so  in  verse  25.  3.  Abraham  speaks  of  himself  as 
in  comparison  but  dust  and  ashes. 

v.  26  and  33.     He  is  again  called  Lord. 
-    Chap.  19.     The  two  angels  now  come  to  Sodom,   but   claim  no  such 
names  or  privileges. 

Though  they  performed  the  miracle  of  blinding  the  men  of  the  city, 
(v.  11);  yet  in  verse  13  when  declaring  their  intention  to  destroy  the 
city,  they  declare  that  it  is  the  Lord  whom  they  have  offended,  and 
that  "the  Lord  hath  sent  us  to  destroy  it." 

v.  24.     After  Lot's  escape ;    "Then    the  Lord   rained  upon  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah,  brimstone  and  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven." 
"^Chap.  21:17.     At  the  time  that  Hagar  and  Isbmael  were  cast  out ; 
God  is  said  to  have  heard  her,  and  the  angel  of  God  to  have  called  to 


Abstract  of  Theology.  282 

her  out  of  heaven.     These   names  seem   to   be   interchangeable,   (yet 
this  passage  is  most  doubtful  of  any.) 

*"  In  Chap.  22.  We  have  the  trial  of  the  faith  of  Abraham,  in  the 
command  to  offer  up  Isaac.     This  is  done  by  the  command  of  God. 

In  verse  11.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  calls  to  Abraham  to  stay  his 
hand. 

verse  12.  Assigns  as  a  reason  :  Thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son, 
thy  only  son  from  me. 

verse  14.     Abraham  calls  the  name  of  the  place  :  Jehovah-Jireh. 

verse  15  and  16.  "The  angel  of  the  Lord  called  unto  Abraham  the 
second  time  and  said,  By  myself  have  I  sworn  saith  the  Lord,  &c,  going 
on  to  promise  on  this  account  the  exercise  of  the  same  creative  power. 

Chap.  24:3.  The  person  that  has  been  spoken  of  as  the  Jehovah  is 
called  the  God  of  heaven. 

verse  7.  The  Lord  God  of  heaven  is  spoken  of  as  the  one  who,  had 
taken  Abraham  from  his  father's  house,  and  had  made  him  the 
various  promises. 

Chap.  31:11.  Jacob  tells  of  an  angel  of  God  that  spake,  unto  him, 
and  in 

verse  13.     He  is  called  the  God  of  Bethel.     Compare  with  this  the 
language  in  reference  to  the  being  whom  Jacob  met   at   Bethel,   when 
the  angels  ascended  and  descended   the  ladder,  as  found  in  Chap.  28., 
v.  13—22,  and  in  Chap.  32:9. 
-     Chap.  32;24 — 32.     Jacob  wrestles  with  a  man,  in 

verse  28.  Jacobs  name  is  changed  because  he  has  power  with  God, 
and  with  men,  and  has  prevailed. 

verse  30.  Jacob  calls  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel  because  there 
he  had  seen  God  face  to  face. 

,  In  Chap.  35:9 — -15.  The  same  event  is  again  related,  and  there  it 
is  said  that  the  one  who  thus  appeared  said,  verse  11,  *T  am  God 
Almighty." 

In  Chap.  48:15.16.  -Jacob  blessing  Joseph  through  his  two  sons, 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  says,  "God,  before  whom  my  fathers  Abraham 
and  Isaac  did  walk,  the  God  which  fed  me  all  my  life  long  unto  this 
day,  the  angel  which  redeemed  me  from  all  evil,  bless  the  lads."  The 
names  of  God,  the  God,  and  the  Angel,  indicate  the  identity  between 
God  and  the  angel.  There  is  but  the  one  verb  bless,  common  to  all  of 
these  nominatives. 


!S3 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


Prom  Exodus. 


Chap.  3:2.     The  angel  of  the  Lord  appears  to  Moses  in  a  flame  of 

fire  in  the  bush. 

v.  4.     This  angel  is  called  the  Lord  and  God. 

v.  6.  He  speaks  thus,  "I  am  the  God  of  thy  father,  the  God  of 
Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob. 

v.  7.     He  is  again  called  the  Lord. 

v.  8.     Tells  that  he  has  come  to  deliver  Israel. 

v.  10.     Calls  them  "my  people." 

v.  11—13.     He  is  called  God. 

v.  14.     Declares  himself  by  his  name,    "I  am  that  I  am,"  and  tells 
\  Moses  to  say  to  the  children  of  Israel,  "I  am  hath  sent  me  to  you." 

v.  15.16.  Speaks  of  himself  in  each  as  "the  Lord  God  of  your 
father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob." 

v.  18.  Commands  Moses  to  say  Pharaoh,  "The  Lord  God  of 
the  Hebrews  hath  met  with  us.  and  now  let  us  go,  we  beseech  thee, 
three  days'  journey  into  the  wilderness,  that  we  may  sacrifice  to  the 
Lord  our  God." 
- —  Chap.  6.  Moses  has  another  interview  with  the  Lord  after  his  ap- 
plication to  Pharaoh  had  resulted  in  heavier  burdens.     In  this 

v.  3.  God  uses  this  language  :  "I  appeared  unto  Abraham, 
unto  Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob,  by  the  name  of  God  Almighty,  bat 
by  my  name  Jehovah  was  I  not  known  to  them."'  This  language 
implies  a  peculiar  reason  for  assuming  the  name  of  Jehovah.  With  the 
exception  of  the  Jewish  idea  of  the  Self  Existent  Unchangeable  Being 
no  other  can  be  assigned  which  is  not  applicable  to  Christ.. 
r->  Chap.  13:21.  "And  the  Lord  went  before  them  by  day  in  a  pillar 
of  a  cloud,  to  lead  them  the  way  ;  and  by  night  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  to 
give  them  light."  And  in 
_^.     Chap.  14:19.     It  is  said  that  it  was  the  angel  of  God  who  thus  went 

before  Israel. 
^-     Chap.  23:21.     The  name  of  the  Lord  is  said  to  be  "in  the  angel"  which 
he  sends  before  the  Israelites,    and  he  is   said  to  have  the  power  of 
pardoning  sin.     And  in 

v.  25.  This  angel  seems  to  be  the  one  spoken  of  as  the  Lord  God, 
and  no  distinction,  seems  to  exist  between  him  as  thus  to  be  worshipped, 
and  the  God  by  whom  he  has  been  sent.  "Ye  shall  serve  the  Lord 
your  God,  and  he  shall  bless  thy  bread,  and  thy  water  ;  and  I  will 
take  sickness  away  from  the  midst  of  thee."  This  passage  is  remark- 
able because  in  the  whole  context  the  sin  of  idolatry  is  forbidden. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  284 

—  Chap.  32:33.  The  divine  character  of  the  Angel  that  is  thus  said 
to  be  sent  before  Israel  is  distinctly  seen  also  in  the  contrast  presented 
in  the  language,  in  Chapter  32:34  and  33:1 — 4,  when  God,  threatening 
to  refuse  to  go  with  them  Himself,  declares  that  He  will  send  His  angel. 
The  angel  here  spoken  of  has  no  ascription  of  divine  names  or  titles, 
and  the  change  is  (verse  4  of  Chap.  33)  recognized  by  the  whole 
people  as  a  calamity.  The  promised  presence  of  the  other  angel  had 
been  hailed  as  a  blessing.  In  Chap.  33.  subsequent  to  the  above,  we 
have  an  account  of  an  interview  because  of  these  facts  between  Moses 
and  Jehovah  and  this  followed  by  a  promise  that  he  will  hereafter 
attend  them. 

v.  8.  Moses  goes  to  the  tabernacle,  and  all  the  children  of  Israel 
stand  at  their  tent  doors  and  watch  him. 

v.  9.  The  cloudy  pillar  descends,  and  stands  at  the  door  of  the 
tabernacle  ;  and  the  Lord  talks  with  Moses. 

v.  14.  Upon  the  previous  remonstrance  of  Moses,  He  (the  Lord) 
said,  My  presence  shall  go  (with  thee,)  and  I  will  give  thee  rest. 

v.  17  to  23.  The  Lord,  thus  spoken  to,  is  asked  to  show  Moses  his 
glory,  and  declares  that  it  shall  be  partially  done,  but  cannot  be 
entirely  because  no  man  shall  see  his  face  and  live.  Now  the  fact 
that  the  Lord  had  spoken  face  to  face  with  Moses  is  stated  in  verse 
11.  How  can  we  reconcile  these  without  supposing  that  Moses 
spoke  to  the  Angel  ot  the  Lord,  who  in  that  character  spoke  to  him 
face  to  face,  and  his  promised  presence  was   regarded  as  that  of  God? 

Prom  Numbers. 

Chap.  22.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  appears  in  the  way  to  Balaam, 
angered  that  he  had  gone  to  Balak,  after  God's  consent  had  been 
given,  after  much  entreaty.     And  in 

verse  35.  Uses  the  language  which  God  had  before  used  in  v.  20. 
"The  words  which  I  shall  say  unto  thee,  that  shalt  thou 'do."  v.  35. 
"The  word  that  I  shall  speak  unto  thee,  that  shalt  thou  speak/' 

Prom  Joshua. 

Chap.  5=13.  When  Joshua  was  by  Jericho  a  man  meets  him  with 
a  drawn  sword. 

verse  14.  He  declares  himself  to  be  the  captain  of  the  Host  of  the 
Lord,  and  Joshua  worships  him. 

verse  15.  He  claims  divinity  by  saying  unto  Joshua,  "Loose  thy 
shoe  from  off  thy  foot;  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is 
holy.     And  Joshua  did  so." 


2S5 


Abstract  of  Theology 


Chap.  6.  Continues  the  narrative  immediately.  It  is  one  of  the 
cases  of  unfortunate  division  of  chapters.  There  is  here,  therefore,  the 
intimate  connection  of  continued  narrative.     And  in 

verse  2.     This  person  is  called  Jehovah. 


From  Judges. 

Chap.  2:1.  An  angel  appears  to  the  people  at  Bochim,  speaks  of 
the  covenant  he  had  made,  and  of  the  land  he  sware  unto  the  fathers. 

verse  2.  Charges  them  with  a  breach  of  their  covenant,  saying,  "ye 
have  not  obeyed  my  voice." 

verse  4.     He  is  called  "the  angel  of  the  Lord." 

verse  5.     The  people  "sacrificed  there  unto  the  Lord." 

Chap.  6:11.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  comes  and  sits  under  the  oak 
of  Joash'. 

verse  12.  Appears  to  his  son  Gideon,  and  declares  to  him,  that  the 
Lord  is  with  him. 

verse  13.  Gideon  asks  if  this  be  so,  why  these  calamities  that  have 
befallen  Israel. 

verse  14.  The  angel  is  called  the  Lord,  and  tells  Gideon  to  go  in 
his  (Gideon's)  might,  and  he  shall  save  Israel,  adding,  "have  not  I 
sent  thee." 

verse  16.  In  answer  to  Gideon's  fears,  he  says,  "surely  I  will  be 
with  thee."  j/gk 

verse  17  to  21.  Gideon  asks  for  a  sign,  which  is  granted  ^fo  him, 
and  the  angel  departs. 

verse  22.  The  effect  of  this  miracle  is  to  satisfy  Gideon  that  it  was 
an  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  he  fears  and  trembles  because  he  has  thus 
seen  him  face  to  face.  The  article  'an'  does  not  belong  to  the  Hebrew 
language.  The  article  'the'  is  not  here  used,  but  simply  Malek 
Yehovah.  The  probability  is  that  by  this  time  this  had  become  a 
proper  name  for  'the  angel  of  the  Lord.'  That  this  was  that  angel 
is  seen  from  his  promise  to  be  with  Gideon,  as  of  itself  sufficient 
protection,  and  his  declaration  that  he  sent  him,  as  furnishing  suffi- 
cient assurance  that  he  should  be  successful.     This  is  farther 

verse  23.  Confirmed  by  the  assurance  of  the  Lord,  "Peace,  be, 
unto  thee  ;  fear  not:   thou  shalt  not  die,"  and  by  the  further  fact  that 

verse  24.  "Gideon  built  an  altar  then  unto  the  Lord,  and  called  it 
Jehovah-shalom." 

We  have  a  somewhat  similar  account  in 

Chap.  13.  The  angel  that  appeared  to  Manoah,  the  father  of 
Samson. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  286 

verse  3.  The  angel  first  appeared  to  the  wife,  and  promised  the 
son,  and  gave  her  directions  how  to  live,  until  he  should  be  born. 

verse  6.  The  wife  thus  describes  him  to  Manoah  :  "A  man  of  God 
came  unto  me,  and  his  countenance  was  like  the  countenance  of  an 
angel  of  God,  very  terrible:  but  I  asked  him  not  whence  he  was, 
neither  told  he  me  his  name." 

verse  8.  Manoah  asks  the  Lord  for  the  reappearance  of  the  man 
of  God. 

verse  9.  The  angel  of  God  reappears  to  the  woman,  her  husband 
not  being  with  her. 

verse  10.     She  calls  her  husband. 

verse  11.     Manoah  comes,  and  converses  with  him. 

verse  15.     He  strives  to  detain  him  to  offer  a  kid. 

verse  16.  He  refuses  ;  using  this  language.  "Though  thou  detain 
me  I  will  not  eat  of  thy.  bread  ;  and  if  thou  wilt  offer  a  burnt  offering 
thou  must  offer  it  unto  the  Lord."  Now  nothing  has  been  previously 
suggested  as  to  burnt  offering.  The  reason  for  this  language  is  added 
"For  Manoah  knew  not  that  he  was  an  angel  of  the  Lord."  Upon 
being  asked  in  verse  17  for  his  name  the  angel  replies  : 

verse  18.  "Why  askest  thou  thus  after  my  name  seeing  it  is 
secret." 

verse  19  and  20.  Upon  Manoah's  making  an  offering  "unto  the 
Lord"  the  angel  "did  wondrously"  ascending  in  the  flame  of  the 
altar. 

verse  22.  "Manoah  said  unto  his  wife,  we  shall  surely  die  because 
we  have  seen  God." 

The  angel  of  the  Lord  thus  referred  to  in  so  many  passages  was 
the  Son  of  God,  the  second  person  of  the  Trinity. 

Prom  the  Psalms. 

The  2nd  Psalm.  This  psalm  naturally  divides  itself  into  three 
parts.     In 

verses  1  to  8.  The  nations  are  seen  taking  counsel  together  against 
God  and  the  Messiah. 

v.  4  to  9.  God  is  represented  as  laughing  at  their  folly,  and,  in 
despite  of  it,  setting  that  king  upon  the  holy  hill  of  Zion. 

v.  10  to  12.  The  kings  of  the  earth  are  exhorted  to  submit  to  his 
authority,  and  to  serve  the  Lord.     In  this  psalm 

1.  The  personage  here  spoken  of  is  identified  with  God,  so  that  to 
counsel  against  him  is  to  counsel  against  God. 


2S7 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


2.  To  him  is  to  be  given  universal  dominion. 

3.  The  epithet  Son  of  God  is  given  him. 

4.  As  the  possessor  of  this  title  he  is  to  ask  for,  and  obtain  this 
authority. 

5.  The  power  to  be  exercised  is  superhuman,  so  that  his  enemies 
shall  be  easily  and  utterly  destroyed. 

6.  He  is  the  Lord  who  is  to  be  worshipped  in  the  11th  verse. 

7.  The  kindling  of  his  wrath  but  a  little  is  to  consume  his  foes. 

8.  They  who  trust  in  him  are  peculiarly  blessed. 

Psalm  22.  This  psalm  is  divided  into  two  parts.  As  far  as  verse  22 
a  sufferer  is  described,  whose  prayers  for  deliverance  show  the  intens- 
ity of  his  sufferings.  Many  of  the  verses  as  1,  7,  8,  17,  18  are  used 
with  reference  to  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  in  the  New  Testament. 

Verses  22  to  31.     The  consequences  of  his  deliverance  are  declared 

22  to  24.  (1)  That  all  the  good  shall  be  called  on  to  love  and 
fear  God. 

verse  26.  (2)  That  by  his  sufferings  and  deliverance  provision 
shall  be  made  for  all  mankind  and  all  their  wants. 

verse  27.  (3.)  The  ends  of  the  earth  are  to  remember  and  turn  to 
the  Lord. 

verse  28.     (4)     The  kingdom  is  the  Lord's. 

Psalm  45.  In  this  Psalm  the  glory  of  a  king  is  described.  His 
superiority  to  men.  and  his  divine  character  are  plainly  taught. 

verse  2.  He  is  declared  to  be  fairer  than  the  children  of  men  ; 
grace  is  poured  into  his  lips  ;  and  God's  blessing  rests  on  him  for 
ever. 

verse  3  to  5.  He  is  called  on  to  exercise  his  glory  and  power,  and 
the  grounds  upon  which  he  is  to  conquer  are  his  truth,  meekness,  and 
righteousness. 

verse  5.  He  is  called  God,  Elohim.  The  Septuagint  translates  it 
"Theos,"  and  the  passage  is  quoted  as  proof  of  divinity  in  Hebrews, 
1:8,  "Thy  throne,  oh  God,  is  forever  and  ever." 

verse  7.  He  is  again  called  God,  "God  thy  God  hath  anointed 
thee." 

verse  8  to  16.  The  bride  is  spoken  of  in  such  terms,  as  show 
that  the  church  of  Christ  is  meant. 

verse  17.  It  is  said,  that  his  name  shall  "be  remembered  unto  all 
generations:  therefore  shall  the  people  praise  thee  forever  and  ever." 

Psalm  72.  The  divine  character  of  the  king  described  in  this 
Psalm  is  seen. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  288 

verses  1 — 4.     Show  the  peaceful  and  righteous  character  of  his  reign. 

verse  5.  It  is  to  continue  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon,  throughout 
all  generations. 

verses  6  and  7.     His  reign  is  to  be  of  the  most  blissful  character. 

verses  8 — 11.  This  dominion  shall  be  universal  "from  sea  to  sea, 
from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth."  "All  kings  shall  fall  down 
before  him  :  all  nations  shall  serve  him." 

verses  13  and  14.     He  shall  save  the  souls  of  people. 

verses  16  and  17.  His  name  is  to  endure  forever,  and  in  him  all 
nations  shall  be  blessed. 

Psalm  110.  The  divine  character  of  the  person  here  spoken  of  is 
manifest. 

verse  1.     David  calls  him  his  Lord. 

verse  2.  The  rod  of  his  strength  was  to  come  out  ofZion,  the 
church. 

verse  3.     The  people  are  to  be  made  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power. 

verse  4.  He  is  to  be  a  priest  and  a  king  forever:  being  a  priest 
after  the  order  of  Melchizedek  involved  kingship. 

verses  1  and  5.  He  is  spoken  of  as  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ;  which 
gives  him  a  position  of  conjoint  government. 

verse  5.     He  is  called  Lord. 

From  Isaiah. 

In  Chapters  7,  8  and  9,  we  have  the  account  of  the  birth  of  a 
child  from  a  virgin,  who  is  to  be  called  Immanuel,  God  with  us. 
Chap.  7:14. 

Chap.  9:2.  His  coming  is  the  source  of  great  light  to  those  who 
had  been  in  darkness. 

verse  6.  It  is  said  that  his  name  shall  be  called  "Wonderful, 
Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of 
Peace." 

verse  7.  Of  the  increase  of  his  government  and  peace  there  shall 
be  no  end. 

Chap.  11.  A  rod  is  to  come  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  branch 
to  grow  out  of  his  roots.     He  is  seen  to  be  divine, 

verses  1 — 5.     From  the  character  of  himself,   and  his  government. 

verses  6 — 10.  The  consequences  are  universal  peace,  peace  enjoyed 
even  by  a  change  of  the  nature  of  earthly  animals,  indicating  a  change 
of  the  nature  of  men  as  made  by  this  reign. 


289 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


verses  11 — 16.  There  is  to  be  universal  laying  aside  of  all  jealous- 
ies, and  all  the  people  of  God  are  to  be  gathered  together.  And  then, 
(for  the  two  chapters  are  intimately  connected.) 

Chap.  12.     There  shall  be  a  song  of  thanksgiving.     Men  shall  say  : 

verse  2.  "Behold,  God  is  my  salvation;  I  will  trust,  and  not  be 
afraid  :  for  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  my  strength  and  my  song  ;  he  also 
is  become  my  salvation." 

After  continued  praise  throughout  the  chapter  of  the  same  tenor 
it  closes  thus : 

verse  6.  "Cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion  :  for  great  is 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee." 

Chap.  40.  This  chapter  opens  with  words  of  comfort  to  the  people 
of  God,  and  then 

verse  3.  We  have  a  call,  by  one  in  the  wilderness,  to  prepare 
"the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for 
our  God." 

verse  5.  We  are  told  that  "the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed, 
and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together." 

verse  9.  Zion  and  Jerusalem  are  called  on  to  "say  unto  the  cities 
of  Judah,  Behold  your  God." 

verse  10.  This  God  is  thus  described,  "Behold  the  Lord  God  will 
come  with  s'rong  hand,  and  his  arm  shall  rule  for  him:  behold,  his 
reward  is  with  him,  and  his  work  before  him." 

verse  11.      "He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd.'" 

Chap.  42.  Speaks  of  one  called  verse  1.  "My  servant,  whom  I 
uphold;   mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul   delighteth." 

verse  4.  "He  shall  uot  fail  nor  be  discouraged,  till  he  have  set 
judgment  in  the  earth  :  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  his  law."  Then 
we  have  this  remarkable  language  : 

verse  5 — 7.  "Thus  saith  God  the  Lord,  he  that  created  the 
heavens,  and  stretched  them  out  ;  he  that  spread  forth  the  earth, 
and  that  which  cometh  out  of  it;  he  that  giveth  breath  unto  the 
people  upon  it,  and  spirit  to  them  that  walk  therein:  I  the  Lord 
have  called  thee  in  righteousness,  and  will  hold  thine  hand,  and  will 
keep  thee,  and  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  for  a  light  of 
the  Gentiles  ;  to  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the 
prison,  and  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison  house."  And 
then  follows  this  remarkable  declaration,  in  immediate  connection, 

verse  8.  "I  am  the  Lord  ;  that  is  my  name  :  and  my  glory  will 
I  not  give  to  another,  neither  my  praise  to  graven  images." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  290 

Chap.  43:1.  "But  now  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  0 
Jacob,  and  he  that  formed  thee,  0  Israel,  Fear  not :  for  I  have 
redeemed  thee.  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name  ;  thou  art  mine." 

verse  2.  '"When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with 
thee  ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee  :  when  thou 
walkest  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be  burned;  neither  shall  the 
flame  kindle  upon  thee." 

verse  3.  "For  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  the  Holy  one  of  Israel,  thy 
Saviour." 

verses  10  and  11.  The  same  person  says,  "Before  me  there  was 
no  God  formed,  neither  shall  there  be  after  me  ;  I,  even  I,  am  the 
Lord,  and  beside  me  there  is  no  Saviour." 

verses  14  and  15.  One  claims  to  be  the  Lord,  the  Redeemer,  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  refers  in  verses  16  and  17  plainly  to  the 
deliverance  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  then  goes  on  in  subsequent  verses  to 
tell  of  a  greater  deliverance. 

In  verse  23.  He  declares  that  he  has  not  been  led  to  look  with 
favour  upon  them  because  of  their  offerings. 

But  verse  24.  "Thou  hast  made  me  to  serve  with  thy  sins,  thou 
hast  wearied  me  with  thine  iniquities,"  and 

verse  25.  I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for 
mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy  sins. 

Chap.  44:6.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  the  King  of  Israel,  and  his 
Redeemer  the  Lord  of  hosts;  I  am  the  first,  and  I  am  the  last;  and 
beside  me  there  is  no  God." 

verse  22.  "I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy  transgressions, 
and,  as  a  cloud,  thy  sins:  return  unto  me;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee." 

verse  23.  "Sing,  0  ye  heavens  ;  for  the  Lord  hath  done  it :  *  *  * 
for  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and  glorified  himself  in  Israel." 

Chap.  45:15.  "Verily  thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself,  0  God 
of  Israel,  the  Saviour." 

verses  21  and  22.  "There  is  no  God  else  beside  me;  a  just  God 
and  a  Saviour :  there  is  none  beside  me.  Look  unto  me,  and  be 
ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth:  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none 
else." 

verses  24  and  25.  "Surely,  shall  one  say,  In  the  Lord  have  I 
righteousness  and  strength  :  even  to  him  shall  men  come  ;  and  all 
that  are  incensed  against  him  shall  be  ashamed.  In  the  Lord  shall 
all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified,  and  shall  glory." 


291  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Chap.  47:4.  "As  for  our  Redeemer,  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  his  name, 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel." 

Chap.  49.  This  whole  chapter  is  striking.  In  the  first  part  Christ 
is  described  as  sent  to  the  Jews,  v.  1  to  4 ;  and  complains  of  want  of 
success,  v.  5  to  12  ;  he  is  said  on  this  account  to  be  sent  to  the  Gentiles. 

verse  5.  He  declares  that  thus  :  "shall  I  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord,  and  my  God  shall  be  my  strength." 

verse  6.  The  restoration  of  Israel  is  spoken  of  as  a  trifling  service 
for  this  person,  and  God  says  :  k'I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to 
the  Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end  of 
the  earth." 

verse  7  reads  thus  :  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  Eedeemer  of  Israel, 
and  his  Holy  One,  to  him  whom  man  dispiseth,  to  him  whom  the 
nation  abhorreth,  to  a  servant  of  rulers,  Kings  shall  see  and  arise, 
princes  also  shall  worship,  because  of  the  Lord  that  is  faithful,  and 
the  Holy   One  of  Israel,  and  he  shall  choose  thee." 

Chap.  50:7 — 9.  We  have  a  passage  which,  taken  in  connection  with 
the  exultant  language  of  Paul  in  the  latter  part  of  the  8th  of  Romans 
is  remarkable. 

verse  8.  "He  is  near  that  justifieth  me;  who  will  contend  with 
me?  let  us  stand  together:  who  is  mine  adversary?  let  him  come 
near  to  me." 

verse  9.  "Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  help  me;  who  is  he  that  shall 
condemn  me?" 

Chap.  54=5.  "For  thy  Maker  is  thine  husband ;  the  Lord  of  hosts 
is  his  name  ;  and  thy  Redeemer  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  ;  The  God  of 
the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called." 

Chap.  62.     Has  a  similar  idea.     It  is  said  of  the  Church  : 

verse  5.  "As  the  bridegroom  rejoi3eth  over  the  bride,  so  shall  thy 
God  rejoice  over  thee." 

Chap.  63.  One  is  seen  coming  from  Edom  with  dyed  garments 
from  Bozrah,  one  glorious  in  apparel.  The  prophet  inquires  "who  is 
he?"  The  answer  is  made  :  "I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty 
to  save." 

verse  2.  Another  question  is  asked,  why  these  garments  are  thus 
red  ?  and  the  reply  is  made  that  he  had  trodden  the  winepress  alone. 
In  the  course  of  this  reply,  he,  who  has  thus  trodden  the  winepress, 
says  verges  4  and  5.  "The  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine  heart,  and  the 
year  of  my  redeemed  is  come.  And  I  looked,  and  there  was  none  to 
help ;  and  I  wondered  that  there  was  none  to  uphold  :  therefore  mine 
own  arm  brought  salvation  unto  me  ;  and  my  fury,  it  upheld  me." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  292 

The  author  then  goes  on  in  verse  7  to  say  that  he  will  proclaim  the 
mercies  of  the  Lord  and  the  multitude  of  his  loving  kindnesses, 
and  adds 

verse  8.  "For  he  said,  surely  they  are  my  people,  children  that 
will  not  lie  :  so  he  was  their  Saviour." 

verse  9.  "In  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted,  and  the  angel  of  his 
presence  saved  them." 

From  Jeremiah. 

Chap.  23=5.  The  day  is  foretold  by  Jehovah  when  He  will  raise 
unto  David  a  righteous  Branch. 

verse  6.  In  his  days  Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell 
safely.  And  this  is  the  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called,  "The 
Lord  our  Righteousness." 

Prom  Daniel. 

Chap.  9.  In  the  confession  and  prayer  of  Daniel  in  answer  to 
which  Gabriel  informs  him  of  the  seventy  weeks  within  which  Messiah 
shall  come,  we  have  this  verse: 

verse  17.  "Now  therefore,  0  our  God,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy 
servant,  and  his  supplications,  and  cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy 
sanctuary  that  is  desolate,  for  the  Lord's  sake."  To  what  purpose 
this  expression  unless  there  had  been  in  the  mind  of  Daniel  some 
conception  of  distinction  of  persons  in  the  Godhead.  And,  even  if  he 
had  none,  why  is  this  used  as  the  language  of  inspiration  unless  it  was 
intended  to  convey  that  idea. 

Prom  Joel. 

Chap.  2:32.  We  have  the  passage  which  was  quoted  by  Peter  in 
his  address  at  Pentecost.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever 
shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  delivered."  This  cannot 
be  pressed  because  Jehovah  may  be  called  on  as  the  Father  giving 
salvation  through  the  Son.  Still  in  New  Testament  times  Christ  was 
always  called  the  Lord  ;  see  1.  Cor.  1:2  ;  whence  Christians  are  spoken 
of  as  those  who  call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Prom  Micah. 

Chap.  5:2.  A  prophecy  is  made  of  one  to  come  out  of  Bethlehem 
Ephratah.     This  promise  was  universally  understood  as  of  the  Mes- 


293 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


siah,  and  the  event  confirmed  the  expectations  of  the  Jews.  The  person 
here  prophesied  of  is  "the  Ruler  of  Israel,"  the  heacl  of  the  church  ;  of 
him  it  is  said  that  "his  goings  forth  have  been  from  old,  from  ever- 
lasting." 

From  Haggai. 

Chap.  2=6 — 10.  The  prophecy  is  given  of  the  coming  of  "the  desire 
of  all  nations."  The  house  then  building  was  to  be  filled  with  glory, 
so  that  the  glory  of  the  latter  house  was  to  be  greater  than  that  of 
the  former. 

In  the  former  had  dwelt  the  Shechinah.  In  this  was  to  appear  the 
Son  of  God  in  human  form.  In  this  respect  only  could  the  glory  of 
the  latter  temple  exceed  that  of  the  former. 


From  Zechariah. 

The  passages  in  Chapters  1,  2,  3  and  6  are  claimed  by  Dr.  J.  Pye 
Smith  as  conclusively  testifying  of  Christ.  But  they  are  by  no  means 
conclusive.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  there  spoken  of  seems  to  say  and 
to  do  nothing,  and  to  have  nothing  said  of  him  which  might  not  be- 
long to  a  created  angel.  But,  as  these  passages  have  been  earnestly 
pressed  they  ought  at  least  to  be  mentioned,  in  order  that  they  may 
be  considered. 

Chap.  12:10.  "They  shall  look  upon  me  [unto  me]  whom  they 
have  pierced." 

This  is  God  speaking  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  It  can  only 
be  true  in  such  a  way  as  recognizes  Christ's  divine  person,  and  such 
a  union  of  that  person  with  his  human  nature,  that,  what  is  done  to 
his  body  may  be  said  by  God  to  be  done  to  himself. 

Chap.  13.     Is  a  brilliantly  descriptive  chapter  ot  Messianic   events. 

verse  1.     Speaks  of  the  fountain  to  be  opened  forsin  and  uncleanness. 

verses  2 — 6.  Relates  the  result  to  be  the  purgation  of  the  land 
from  false  prophets  and  prophecies. 

verse  7.  "Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  shepherd,  and  against  the 
man  that  is  my  fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts." 

Here  a  man  is  spoken  of  as  the  equal  of  Jehovah,  and  it  is  against 
him  that  the  sword  of  divine  justice  is  to  be  directed. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  294 


Prom  Malachi. 


Chap.  3:1.     Behold,  I  will  send  my  messenger,  and  he  shall  prepare 
the  way  before  me  :  and  the  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come     \/ 
to  his  temple,  even  the  messenger  (angel)   of  the  covenant,  whom  ye 
delight  in  :  behold,  he  shall  come,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

In  this  passage  we  find  : 

1.  The  Lord  is  to  come  suddenly  to  his  temple. 

2.  He  is  the  angel  of  the  covenant. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  296 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXVI 


The  Person  of  Christ. 

I.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  lies  at  the  foundation  of  that  of 
Christ's  Person. 

That  doctrine  is  that  three  persons  subsist , in  one  divine  nature.  It 
was  one  of  these  persons,  and  not  the  divine  nature  itself  that  became 
incarnate. 

1.  It  was  not  the  Godhead  that  became  incarnate,  but  one  of  the 
persons  of  the  Godhead. 

2.  It  was  not  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Spirit,  but  it  was 
the  Son  alone. 

3.  It  was  not  God  abstractly  and  unitedly,  but  God  personally, 
the  Word  that  was  with  God,  and  that  was  God,  that  was  made  flesh, 

4.  It  was  not,  therefore,  that  which  was  common  to  the  three 
persons  that  assumed  our  nature;  but  it  was  that  which,  in  the 
economy  of  the  Trinity,  is  distinguished  from  the  others. 

5.  It  was,  therefore,  not  the  divine  nature  or  essence,  but  a  person 
who  subsists  in  that  divine  nature  equally  with  the  others,  but  who  is 
distinguished,  in  his  relation  to  that  divine  nature,  from  the  other 
persons  of  the  Trinity. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  therefore  essentially  involved  in  that 
of  the  Person  of  Christ.  It  is  because  of  the  fact  of  individual  person- 
ality in  the  divine  Being,  by  virtue  of  which,  though  His  nature  and 
essence  and  being  are  so  one  that  He  is  one  God,  He  is  yet  threefold, 
that  personal  distinctions  also  exist,  and  that  one  person,  who  is  God, 


297 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


can  become  incarnate  without  involving  the  incarnation  of  the  other 
persons. 

Personal  distinctions  in  the  Trinity  are  not  necessary  to  the  incar- 
nation of  God,  but  are  to  that  of  a  divine  person. 

They  are  also  necessary  to  the  work  which  Christ  performed.  Were 
God  only  one  person,  He  could  not  manifest  rule  and  yet  empty 
Himself  of  it;  could  not  send  and  yet  be  sent ;  could  not  be  lawgiver 
and  also  voluntary  subject ;  could  not  make  atonement  and  yet  receive 
it  ;  could  not  pour  out  wrath  and  yet  endure  it. 

The  Scriptures,  therefore,  persistently  teach,  not  that  "God  came," 
"was  sent,"  "was  made  flesh;"  but  that  God  "gave  his  only  begotten 
Son,"  "sent  his  Son  not  to  condemn  the  world,"  "sent  forth  his  Son 
made  of  a  woman,"  "sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,"  and 
that  "the  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  Indeed 
the  first  chapter  of  John,  wThich  sets  forth  the  doctrines  of  the  incarn- 
ation and  Trinity,  plainly  declares,  (John  1:18),  "No  man  hath  seen 
God  at  any  time  ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  he  hath  declared  Him." 

II.  This  person  in  his  incarnation  preserved  unaltered  his  essential 
relations  to  the  divine  nature,  or  essence. 

1.  The  only  Scripture  passage  which  seems  to  oppose  this  is  Phil. 
2:5 — 8  ;  but  a  proper  consideration  of  this  passage  shows  that  it  does 
not.  The  subordination,  thus  voluntarily  assumed  by  the  Son,  was 
manifestly  official,  and  that  of  one  divine  person  to  another.  It  could 
not  have  been  a  subordination  of  one  divine  nature  to  another, 
for  there  is  but  the  one  divine  nature.  It  is  therefore  a  subordination 
of  one  person  to  another,  the  Son  to  the  Father.  Neither,  in  that 
subordination,  was  there  any  separation  of  Christ  from  his  divine 
nature.  Such  separation  was  noc  necessary  to  his  incarnation.  It 
was  only  necessary  that  he  should  appear  to  men  as  man,  and  not  as 
God.  His  divinity  was  therefore  concealed  in  his  human  form.  But 
he,  equally  with  the  Father  and  the  Spirit,  possessed,  of  right,  as  God, 
rule  and  authority  over  all  creatures  and  worlds.  This  he  continued 
to  possess  essentially  as  God,  but  as  the  Son  he  yielded  its  exercise 
exclusively  into  the  hands  of  the  Father  ;  so,  that  during  the  period 
I  of  his  earthly  residence,  he  consented  to  be  as  one  that  was  sent,  and 
thus  as  the  servant  of  the  Father,  doing  his  will  and  obedient  to  his 
authority.  The  context  shows  this  to  be  the  only  meaning.  The  object 
in  introducing  this  statement  is  to  induce  the  Philippians,  in  a  like 
spirit  of  self  submission,  to   esteem  others  better  than  themselves,  (a 


Abstract  of  Theology.  298 

case  therefore  of  subordination  among  equals).  And,  after  this  state- 
ment about  Christ,  Paul  enforces  this  obligation  by  showing  how  the 
Father  had  so  rewarded  this  actof  the  Son,  that  the  rightful  dominion, 
and  power,  which  belong  essentially  to  God,  and  to  Christ,  there- 
fore, only  in  his  divine  nature,  had  been  conferred  upon  him  in  his 
human  nature,  so  that  "at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow  and 
every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God, 
the  Father." 

It  was  this  official  position  of  rule  arid  dominion  which  constituted 
the  glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father,  and  which  he  prayed  the 
Father  to  bestow  upon  him  again.  Such  prayer  was  not  necessary  to 
bestow  it  upon  him  as  God  ;  for,  in  his  divine  nature,  he  had  continued 
to  possess  although  not  exercise  it,  but  it  was  necessary,  since  this  was  | 
also  to  be  conferred  upon  him  as  man,  and  in  this  respect  it  could  only 
be  conferred  as  a  reward  or  gift,  and  by  the  consent  of  all  the  persons 
of  the  Trinity.  (Compare  the  2nd  Psalm,  especially  verses  6- — 8,  but 
the  whole  Psalm.) 

The  Scriptures  go  no  farther  than  this  idea  of  official  subordination,  v 
They  say  nothing  of  Christ  leaving  his  divinity  behind  him,  as 
though  cast  off  like  a  garment.  They  do  not  say  that  for  his  dwelling 
on  earth,  his  divinity  had  to  cease,  or  be  absorbed  in  that  of  the 
Father  and  the  Spirit ;  nor  that  it  had  an  indefinite  existence  in  a 
transition  state,  awaiting  a  reunion  after  the  incarnation  work. 

It  is  well  to  remember  that  they  not  only  do  not,  but  could  not  thus 
teach,  for  some  men  imagine  this  and  overlook  what  may  be  next 
shown,  namely, 

2.     That  the  Scriptures  teach  that  while  he   was  incarnate   he  was  ") 
truly  God. 

So  fully  is  this  taught,  that  we  have  no  evidence  at  all  of  Christ's 
divinity  which  is  not  presented  with  equal  force  of  him  while  on 
earth. 

All  the  attributes  of  divinity  are  ascribed  to  him,  eternity  of  existence, 
self-existence,  omnipotence,  omnipresence,  presence  in  heaven  and  on 
earth,  the  contemplation  of  and  unity  with  the  Father,  and  co- working 
with  Him.  These  are  declared  of  him  and  manifested  by  him  while 
he  stood  in  the  form  of  man,  in  the  midst  of  his  disciples  and  the 
multitude. 

It  was  while  in  the  same  form  that  he  performed  acts  which  none 
other  than  God  can  of  himself  do,  declaring  that  these  acts  were  done 
by  his  own  power.     He  turned  water  into  wine,    not   by  the  ordinary 


299 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


and  slow  processes  of  nature,  bat  instantly  and  without  a  word.  He 
created  bread  and  fish  in  the  hands  of  his  disciples.  He  controlled  the 
winds  and  the  waves.  He  forgave  sin.  He  gave  life  to  the  dead.  He 
made  known  events  in  distant  places.  He  searched  the  hearts,  and 
revealed  the  secret  thoughts  of  men.  He  laid  down  his  own  life,  and 
took  it  up  again. 

The  constant  workings  of  his  divine  power  and  energy;  by  which  he 
is  essentially,  as  God,  always  working  with  the  Father,  were  indeed 
concealed;  but  thus,  at  times,  before  the  people  at  large,  and  more 
frequently  before  his  disciples,  the  divinity  shone  through  the  veil 
which  ordinarily  concealed  it,  and  testified  that  he  was  as  truly  God 
as  he  was  also  man. 

3.     He  allowed  himself  to  be  treated  as  God  during  the  incarnation. 

How  could  he  be  called  God  during  his  days  in  the  flesh,  or  receive 
worship  as  such?  how  could  it  be  the  will  of  the  Father  that  men 
should  honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour  the  Father?  how  could 
Elizabeth  call  Mary  the  mother  of  my  Lord'?  or  the  angels  announce 
to  the  shepherds  that  Christ  the  Lord  was  born  ?  or  Peter  declare  to 
the  Jews  that  they  had  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory  ?  or  Paul  describe 
the  people  of  God,  to  the  Ephesian  elders,  as  the  church  of  God  (the 
Lord)  which  he  had  bought  with  his  own  blood?  How  can  men  be 
warned  lest  they  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  tread  him  under 
foot  ?  How  could  Thomas  cry  out  to  him,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  and 
how  Peter  confess,  "thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  ;" 
it  was  because,  though  a  servant,  he  was  still  the  Lord,  having  his 
relations  to  his  divine  nature  unimpaired,  and  entitled  to  the  names, 
as  he  was  also  able  to  perform  the  acts,  and  display  the  attributes  of 
God. 

The  importance  of  this  fact  of  the  Scripture  teaching  cannot  be 
over-estimated.  In  its  appropriate  relations  to  the  other  truths 
taught,  it  becomes  the  foundation  of  every  hope.  It  is  not  a  mere 
speculation.  It  enters  into  the  very  life  of  the  Christian,  enabling  him 
to  say  :  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is 
able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  to  him  against  that  day." 
It  is  not  sufficient  for  us  to  know  that  the  person,  who  died  for  us,  was 
divine  before  he  came  into  the  world.  The  Scriptures  assure  us,  and 
we  need  to  comfort  ourselves  with  the  assurance,  that  he  was  equally 
divine  when  a  babe  in  Bethlehem,  when  suffering  upon  the  cross,  when 
ascending  from  Olivet,  and,  even  now,  while,  in  human  nature,  he 
rules  as  Mediatorial  King,  or  as  our  great  High  Priest  makes  inter- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  300 

cession  with  the  Father.  We  must  even  go  beyond  the  idea  of  some 
kind  of  divinity,  and  recognize  him  as  the  unchangeable  God,  who 
was,  and  is,  and  ever  shall  be,  the  Almighty,  the  well  beloved  Son  of 
the  Father,  whom  be  always  hears,  and  to  whom  all  things  have  been 
entrusted,  in  order  that  the  consummation  of  his  glorious  kingdom 
may  be  fully  attained.  The  incarnation  has  been,  indeed,  of  only  one 
person  of  the  Godhead,  but  of  a  person  truly  and  essentially  divine, 
whose  relations  to  the  divine  nature  have  remained  unaltered  during 
his  incarnation  on  earth  and  in  heaven. 

III.  That  Christ  became  incarnate  in  such  a  sense  that  he  became 
man. 

The  Scriptures  tell  us  that  "he  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among 
us,"  that  he  was  "made  like  unto  his  brethren,"  that  he  was  the  "son 
of  man,"  that  he  was  "man."  The  apostle  says,  Rom.  5:15,  "by  one 
man  Christ  Jesus." 

(1)  By  this  is  not  meant,  that  this  Divine  person  co-existed  with  a 
human  person,  so  as  to  be,  after  all,  two  distinct  existences  or  persons, 
the  one  receiving  grace,  and  favour  from  the  other.  In  this  sense 
God  may  be  said  to  co-exist  with  all  men,  especially  with  the 
righteous. 

(2)  Nor  is  the  idea  only  of  such  indwelling,  that  the  glory  of  God 
is  manifested  as  so  specially  present  that  the  human  person  was  the 
temple  of  the  divine.  In  this  sense  God  dwells  even  in  material 
substances,  as  in  the  tabernacle,  and  temple  of  God.  In  this  sense 
the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  the  bodies  of  believers  in  a  still  more  perfect 
union.  And  such  indwelling  will  attain  its  highest  form  when  God 
shall  dwell  in  the  temple  to  be  composed  of  his  redeemed  saints. 

(3)  But,  though  the  body  of  Christ  is  the  temple  of  God,  it  is  such 
as  the  result  of  a  union  not  less  strict  than  one  which  makes  the 
indwelling  person  actually  and  truly  a  man.  While  the  relation  to 
the  divine  nature  remains  unchanged  ;  and  Christ  is  still  truly  God, 
the  relation  to  the  human  nature  is  so  assumed  that  Christ  also 
becomes  truly  man.  He  is  born  of  a  woman.  He  comes  in  the  flesh. 
He  assumes  a  human  nature  which  becomes,  as  truly  and  really, 
though  not  as  eternally  and  essentially,  his,  as  his  divine  nature. 

The  Scriptures  reveal  to  us  a  proper  humanity,  consisting  of  a  real 
body,  and  a  rational  soul.  Christ  is  represented  as  combining  in  his 
humanity  all  that  is  in  ours;  except  that  he,  being  without  sin, 
exhibited  that  perfection  of  humanity  which  has  appeared  in  no  other 
of  the  race  except  in  Adam  before  his  fall. 


301  Abstract  of  Theology. 

1st.  He  had  a  human  body.  This  is  now  no  longer  questioned. 
In  early  days  heretical  views  existed  on  this  point.  Because  matter 
was  deemed  inherently  evil,  it  was  supposed  Christ  could  have  no 
material  body.  His  body  was  supposed,  therefore,  to  have  been 
merely  a  phantom,  an  appearance  of  a  man.  Probably  to  such  a 
heresy  the  Apostle  John  refers.  1.  John  4.3.  Such  was  an  early 
sect  known  as  the  Docetae.  But  these  heresies  soon  disappeared,  and 
it  is  now  no  longer  disputed  that  Christ  had  a  true  human  body  com- 
posed of  bones,  and  flesh,  and  blood   as  are  the  bodies  of  other  men. 

The  Scripture  statements  as  to  this  fact  are  unquestionable.  Christ 
is  spoken  of  as  conceived  in  his  mother's  womb,  as  born,  as  drawing 
nourishment  from  her  breast,  as  receiving  circumcision,  as  growing  in 
stature,  as  hungering,  thirsting,  wearied,  as  eating,  drinking,  sleeping. 
We  are  told  of  his  bodily  pain,  of  his  bloody  sweat,  of  his  sinking 
under  exhaustion,  of  his  pierced  body,  of  his  bones  that  were  not 
broken,  of  the  wounds  made  in  his  hands  by  the  nailing  to  the  cross. 
The  parts  of  his  body  are  mentioned,  his  hands,  his  feet,  his  side,  his 
head,  his  brow,  his  cheek,  and  his  breast  on  which  the  beloved  disciple 
leaned.  The  entire  representation  presents  him  possessed  of  such 
outward  form,  influenced  by  such  bodily  feelings,  and  engaged  in  such 
bodily  acts  as  assure  us  of  the  reality  of  his  body.  No  other  theory 
is  possible  except  that  of  the  Docetae. 

(1)  Against  that,  it  may  be  said  that,  if  che  assumption  of  a  real 
body  were  derogatory  to  Christ  the  effort  would  not  have  been  so 
persistently  made  to  present  that  body  as  real,  and  to  induce  the 
multitude  and  his  disciples  to  believe  it  such. 

(2)  Three  passages  in  Scripture  give  direct  testimony    against  it. 
Heb.  2;  14.     Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh 

and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same."  While 
thisrefers  indeed  to  human  nature,  it  cannot  be  taken  of  that  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  very  characteristics  by  which  that  human  nature  is 
described. 

The  other  two  are  stronger  for  they  directly  bear  upon  phantom 
appearances  and  Christ  denies  that  he  is  one.  One  is  the  narrative 
of  Christ  walking  on  the  sea  to  the  boat  which  held  the  disciples, 
Matt.  14:22—33.  In  verse  26  they  are  said  to  cry  out :  "It  is  a 
spirit,"  and  Christ  replies:  "It  is  I." 

The  other  is  the  account  of  that  interview  in  which  those  who  had 
walked  with  him  to  Emmaus  report  his  presence  with  them  to  the 
Eleven,  Luke  24:13—48.     The  language  of  verses  36—39  is  :    "And 


Abstract  of  Theology.  302 

as  they  thus  spake  Jesus  himself  stood  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  saith 
unto  them  :  Peace  be  unto  you.  But  they  were  terrified  and  affrighted 
and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit.  And  he  said  unto  them  : 
Why  are  ye  troubled,  and  why  do  thoughts  arise  in  your  hearts. 
Behold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I  myself,  handle  me  and  see, 
for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have."  He  then 
showed  his  hands  and  feet,  and  still  further  called  for  meat,  and  ate 
"a  piece  of  broiled  fish  and  of  an  honey  comb." 

This  action  of  Christ  either  meant  nothing,  or  meant  that  he  had, 
even  then,  a  real  body  with  all  its  functions  in  due  exercise. 

The  fact,  therefore,  that  Christ  in  his  incarnation  possesed  a  real 
human  body  subject  to  all  the  sinless  infirmities  of  our  bodies  is  put 
beyond  all  question. 

IV.  He  had  a  human  soul  also.  The  evidence  of  this  has  been 
regarded  almost  equally  conclusive.  The  only  difficulty  is  that  some 
suppose  that,  if  he  had  a  human  soul,  he  must  have  been  two  persons 
and  not  one  only.  Hence  Apollinaris  taught  that  he  had  no  human 
soul,  but  that  his  divine  nature  took  its  place.  His  theory  was 
rejected  with  almost  singular  unanimity,  but  it  has  been  revived  from 
time  to  time,  gaining  but  brief  and  limited  acceptance,  only  to  be 
forgotten  again  when  the  true  doctrine  has  been  set  forth. 

1.  The  fact  of  such  general  acceptance  of  the  existence  of  the  human 
soul  is  strong  evidence  of  its  truth.  Itis  not  certain  but  only  probable 
evidence.  When  die  theory  of  the  divine  nature  becoming  the  human 
soul  has  been  known,  the  faith  in  the  other  doctrine  shows  the  im- 
pression naturally  made  by  the  Scripture;  because  there  have  been 
no  reasons  from  prejudice,,  or  passion,  or  self-interest,  to  mislead. 

The  objection,  that  thus  there  must  be  two  persons  in  Christ,  is  an 
objection  to  the  unity  of  his  nature  ;  and  this  is  all  that  leads  to  the 
acceptance  of  the  doctrine  of  the  divine  nature  as  substituting  the 
human  soul.  If,  therefore,  such  be  the  union,  that  Christ  can,  as  one 
person,  subsist  in  two  natures,  without  involving  that  personal  duality, 
the  full  objection  to  the  human  soul  is  removed.  We  shall  see  here- 
after that  this  can  be  done.  If  it  could  not  :  then  we  have  two 
theories,  each  with  difficulties ;  the  one  which  amounts  only  to  a 
difficulty  in  our  comprehending  what  may  after  all  be  a  psychological 
fact,  the  difficulty  as  to  which  may  be  a  mere  fancy  ;  the  other  which 
involves  such  an  explanation  of  the  Scripture  statements  as  to  Christ, 
as  to  deny  that  to  be  human  action  in  him,  which  would  be  so  regarded 


303  Abstract  of  Theology. 

in  any  other,  and  which  also  forces  us   to   ascribe  to  divinity  change 
suffering,  temptation,  and  death. 

Let  us  examine  these  two  theories  first  in  the  light  of  the  Scrip- 
tures. 

1.  We  must  not  forget  what  has  been  before  stated  as  to  the 
relations  of  the  persons  of  the  Godhead.  Because  of  the  unity  of  God 
the  Son  does  not  possess  a  separate  divine  nature  from  that  of  the 
Father,  and  the  Spirit.  When  it  is  said,  therefore,  that  Christ's  divine 
nature  took  the  place  of  his  human  soul,  is  it  meant  that  the  divine 
nature  which  he  had  in  common  with  the  Father,  and  the  Spirit, 
assumed  humanity?  If  so,  the  incarnation  was  of  the  whole  Godhead, 
Father,  Son,  and  Spirit. 

Or,  is  it  meant  that  some  kind,  or  portion  of  divine  nature,  which 
Christ  had  separately  from  the  Father,  and  the  Spirit,  did  that?  If 
so,  what  was  that  divine  nature?  He  had  none  except  that  which  he 
h id  in  common.  To  maintain  otherwise,  is  to  assert,  not  a  trinity  of 
persons  in  the  Godhead,  but  three  Gods.  The  very  unity  of  the  divine 
nature  forbids  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  divine  nature  being  the 
substitute  of  his  human  soul. 

2.  But  compare  the  two  theories,  as  to  Christ's  intellectual,  and 
spiritual  life  here  on  earth. 

Neither  denies  that  there  were  intellectual,  and  spiritual  acts  per- 
formed by  Christ  while  in  the  flesh. 

The  common  theory  asserts  that  some  were  performed  by  Christ  by 
virtue  of  his  divine  nature,  and  some  by  virtue  of  his  human  soul. 
The  manifestly  divine  acts  are  ascribed  to  him  as  God,  the  manifestly 
human  to  him  as  man. 

That  there  are  divine  acts  is,  therefore,  held  by  these  as  well  as  by 
the  others;  also  that  some  acts  are  difficult  to  classify,  so  as  to  deter- 
mine whether  they  are  divine,  or  human. 

The  question  between  the  theories,  therefore,  is,  whether  there  are 
any  intellectual,  or  spiritual  acts,  or  experiences  of  Christ  here  on 
earth  which  could  not  have  resulted  from  a  divine  nature,  but  which 
are  stamped  with  a  distinctively  human  character? 

The  inquiry  is  limited  to  this,  though  we  might  press  the  arguments 
of  the  ancients  against  Apollinaris,  and  his  followers;  as,  how  can  the 
Scripture,  be  justified  in  calling  Christ  a  man,  and  in  representing  his 
humanity  as  a  qualification  for  his  work  of  righteousness,  and  atone- 
ment, if  he  had  bat  a  human  body  only  ?  Does  the  body  alone  con- 
stitute humanity  ?     If  the  body  alone  suffered,  how  then  are  the  souls 


Abstract  of  Theology.  304 

of  men  healed?  If,  when  he  appeared  upon  earth  as  a  man,  he  had 
only  the  body  of  a  man,  was  he  not,  in  the  most  important  element 
of  humanity,  only  an  appearance,  or  phantom  of  a  man  ?  Was  it  the 
body  only  of  mankind  that  had  sinned,  and  was  condemned,  and  did 
the  soul  need  no  redemption?  Was  the  virtue,  secured  by  the  divine 
nature  in  such  incarnation,  human  virtue?  Was  it  indeed  any  virtue 
at  all? 

But  these  inquiries  are  not  needed.  The  Scripture  statements  are 
themselves  more  than  sufficient.     What  then  do  they  say  ? 

1.  Of  the  theory  of  the  substitution  of  the  divine  nature  for  the 
human  soul,  not  one  hint  is  given,  throughout  the  entire  Scripture. 
Not  a  syllable  is  there  which  teaches  any  thing  more  than  that  a 
divine  person  became  incarnate.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  absence  of  a 
human  soul ;  nothing  of  the  incarnation  being  in  only  a  partial  human 
nature ;  nothing  to  show  that  the  divine  nature  had  any  thing  to  do 
with  the  work  ;  except  that  the  divine  nature  was  possessed  by  him 
who  became  incarnate,  but  possessed  by  him,  not  separately  from,  but 
unitedly  with  the  other  persons  of  the  Godhead.  The  Scriptures 
teach  not,  that  the  divine  nature,  (God,)  became  incarnate,  but  that 
he,  who  as  well  as  the  Father,  and  the  Spirit,  is  God,  became  man. 

2.  But  the  instances  of  human  emotion  are  abundant. 

(a)  Notice  first  the  experiences  already  mentioned  in  connection 
with  the  body  ;  that  it  was  not  simply  a  temple  in  which  Deity  dwelt; 
but  that  Christ  experienced  in  his  body  all  those  sinless  passions  and 
desires  which  arise  from  association  of  the  body  with  a  human  soul. 
Whence  come  weariness,  fatigue,  thirst,  &c?  Does  the  body  experience 
them  when  separated  from  the  soul  ?  Did  the  body  then  affect  the 
divine  nature  of  Christ,  as  it  does  a  human  soul  ?  Is  the  divine  nature 
capable  of  such  affection  from  a  mere  material  organization,  a  mere 
shell  of  a  man  ?  Would  such  an  idea  be  admitted  for  a  moment  of  the 
influence  of  our  bodies  on  the  Holy  Ghost  within.  A  more  vital  union 
must  exist.  That  which  thus  affects  must  be  personally  united  with 
the  nature  thus  affected.  Can  the  body  of  a  man  be  thus  personally 
united  with  the  divine  nature  ot  Christ?  If  so,  why  may  not  the  soul 
also.  Is  a  twofold  personality  created  in  the  one  case  any  more  than 
in  the  other  ?  Yet  the  objection  is  made  to  the  existence  of  a  human 
soul  that  thus  twofold  personality  must  exist,  and  that,  as  Christ  is 
but  one  person,  his  divine  nature  must  have  been  his  human  soul,  or 
must  have  been  substituted  for  it. 

But,  it  may  be  said  that  the  affections  referred  to  are  those  of  the 
body  only,  and  that,  even  among  men,   they  are   not  associated  with 


305 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


the  soul,  and  that  the  life  indicated  in  them  is  only  the  physical  life 
possessed  by  all  animals,  and  that  such  life  is  not  inconsistent  with 
the  absence  of  a  rational  soul.  The  position  assumed  is  not  correct  ; 
but,  if  granted,  gives  no-  advantage  to  the  theory  we  oppose.  Is  it 
not  still  the  fact  that  the  body  exercises  more  or  less  influence  on  the 
mind,  as  well  as  the  mind  over  the  body  ?  Bodily  disease  enfeebles 
the  mind.  The  mind,  by  its  will,  sustains,  and,  by  its  mental  trials, 
depresses  the  body.  When,  therefore,  we  see  such  results  in  Christ, 
we  must  attribute  them  to  the  same  causes  as  among  men.  What  then 
gave  occasion  and  power  to  the  tempter  in  the  wilderness  except  the 
bodily  desire  arising  from  the  previous  forty  day  fast?  To  what  was 
due  Christ's  inability  to  carry  his  cross  to  crucifixion,  if  not  to  the 
failure  of  his  bodily  powers,  resulting  from  the  mental  agony  endured 
in  the  garden  and  the  judgment  hall?  In  his  temptation  too,  what 
was  tempted  by  his  bodily  hunger  ?  Was  it  God  ?  Was  it  the  divine 
nature  which  had  taken  the  place  of  a  human  soul  ?  The  apostle  James 
declares:  (1:13.14)  "God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil."  In  the  face 
of  a  declaration  so  positive,  and  so  unqualified,  written  too,  after  the 
temptation  of  Christ,  and  with  a  full  knowledge  of  all  its  facts,  we 
must  believe  that  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  nature  of  Christ  then 
tempted  was  not  divine,  and,  therefore,  must  be  human. 

(b)  But  the  Scriptures  not  only  show  Christ  liable  to  these 
mutual  influences  of  body  and  mind,  and  the  resultant  temptation  by 
Satan  ;  but  they  teach  us  that  he  also  received  the  gracious  influences 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  the  body  was  thus  affected  is  undoubted,  for 
the  body  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  influence  of  the 
Spirit  over  the  soul  is  also  taught.  At  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  we  are 
told  that  "the  Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily  shape  like  a  dove 
upon  him."  Luke  3:22.  After  the  baptism  "Jesus,  being  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  returned  from  Jordan,  and  was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the 
wilderness."  Luke  4:1.  After  the  temptation,  "Jesus  returned  in 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee."  Luke  4:14.  At  Nazareth,  in 
his  first  recorded  public  discourse,  "he  found  the  place  where  it  was 
written,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed 
me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor."  Luke  4:17  18.  "And  he  began 
to  say  unto  them,  This  day  is  this  Scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears." 
Luke  4:21.  These  were  certainly  influences  upon  his  soul.  How 
could  they  have  been  exerted,  and.  why  so  exerted,  if  that  soul  was 
the  divine  nature  ?  what  need  could  divinity  have  for  consecration, 
for  grace  ?  what  need  to  be  led,  or,  as  Mark  expresses  it,  to  be  driven 
into  the  wilderness?     How  could  a  divine   being  lack  in  that  which 


Abstract  of  Theology.  306 

constituted  his  divinity?  That  the  wants  of  the  body  might  be  sup- 
plied is  not  strange.  The  body  is  human,  but,  if  he  had  no  human 
soul,  what  was  it  that  the  Holy  Ghost  influenced? 

(c)  The  Scriptures,  however,  do  not  represent  Christ  as  receiving 
aid  from  a  divine  person  only.  At  the  close  of  the  temptation  angels 
came,  and  ministered  to  him.  It  may  be  said  that  this  was  only  to 
the  body  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  if  it  were  of  the  body  only,  for  much  of 
his  temptation  was  mental.  But,  certainly,  it  was  the  agony  of  the 
spirit  of  Christ,  and  not  of  the  body,  which  the  angel  in  Gethsemane 
was  sent  to  relieve. 

(d)  We  have  also  such  action  of  Christ  as  is  not  consistent  with 
the  idea  that  he  had  no  human  soul.  We  find  instances  of  such 
intellectual,  and  spiritual  restraint,  limit,  and  subjection  as  cannot  be 
true  of  God. 

The  declaration  that  Christ  marvelled  at  the  unbelief  of  certain 
persons  is  perfectly  intelligible,  when  spoken  of  a  human  soul  ;  but 
not,  when  ascribed  to  the  mind  of  Deity.  So  also  Luke's  statement 
that  "Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and  in  favour  with  God 
and  man."  Also,  that  other  assertion  of  Christ,  so  plainly  and 
distinctly  made,  of  his  ignorance  of  the  time  of  the  final  judgment, 
can  be  comprehended  as  possible  only  of  his  human  soul,  to  which 
had  not  been  imparted  the  knowledge  which  he  must  have  possessed 
as  God. 

What  shall  be  said  also  of  his  subjection  to  his  parents  after  the 
dispute  with  the  doctors  in  the  temple  ?  Was  it  only  bodily  sub- 
jection ?  What  does  exclusively  bodily  subjection  mean?  Is  it  not 
the  mind,  and  the  heart,  that  yields  obedience,  and  submits  to 
authority?  What,  then,  was  it  that  was  thus  subject?  Was  it  his 
divine  nature  ?  Was  it  God  himself?  Can  God  be  thus  subjected  to 
a  creature.  Yet,  if  Christ  had  no  human  soul,  there  were  then  at 
Nazareth  two  human  beings,  to  whom  the  infinite  and  omnipotent 
God,  the  Ruler  of  the  universe,  was  subject  in  his  real  divine  nature, 
giving  them  reverence  and  obedience,  recognizing  in  them  an  official 
superiority,  and  submitting  to  their  will. 

(e)  HoiV  account  for  Christ's  prayers,  if  he  had  no  human  soul. 
Were  they  only  prostrations  of  his  body  by  the  indwelling  divine 
nature,  or  were  they  the  utterances  of  a  soul  oppressed  with  heavy 
burdens,  delighting  in  converse  with  God,  and,  knowing  that  there  is  a 
place  for  prayer,  seeking  and  rejoicing  in  the  privilege  of  offering  it.  Is 
that  soul,  God?  or  is  it  the  man,  Christ  Jesus,  lifting  up  the  voice  of 
supplication  to  his  divine  Father? 


307  Abstract  of  Theology. 

These  prayers  too,  are  for  himself;  not  for  others  only  ;  most 
frequently  for  himself.  See  a  signal  instance  in  Gethsemane.  He 
proposes  to  withdraw  for  prayer  with  three  of  his  disciples,  telling 
them  that  his  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful  unto  death.  Mark  tells  us 
that  this  was  because  "he  began  to  be  sore  amazed  and  to  be  very 
heavy.'*  "He  went  forward  a  little  and  fell  on  the  ground  and  prayed 
that,  if  it  were  pjssible,  the  hour  might  pass  from  him."  He  returned 
"and  again  he  went  away,  and  prayed,  and  spake  the  same  words." 
He  did  this  three  times.  Is  this  not  human  action  ?  What  is  there  here 
befitting,  or  possible  to  a  merely  divine  intelligence,  or  spirit?  If  his 
were  a  human  soul,  how  otherwise  would  he  have  acted  ?  But,  if 
divine,  what  reality  could  there  be  in  these  emotions,  what  need  could 
he  have?  what  comfort,  what  strength  could  he  gain  in  such  an  act? 
Upon  the  supposition  of  a  human  soul,  the  presence  of  that  strength- 
ening angel  is  accounted  for,  but,  how  explain  the  strength  which  any 
creature,  however  exalted,  can  give  to  the  Almighty  Creator  ? 

(f )  The  very  language  of  Scripture  as  to  the  condition  of  his  soul 
in  that  hour  of  trial,  is  conclusive.  To  the  expression,  just  quoted, 
may  be  added  his  prayer,  that  if  it  were  possible,  the  hour  might  pass 
from  him;  also  his  petition,  "take  away  this  cup  from  me."  "My 
soul  is  troubled,"  he  exclaims,  "and  what  shall  I  say?  Father  save 
me  from  this  hour  ;  but,  for  this  purpose,  came  I  to  this  hour,  Father 
glorify  thyself."  "Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me." 
What  have  we  here,  but  trouble,  and  anguish,  and  doubt,  and  fear, 
and  trust,  and  desire  of  release,  and  yet  full  resignation  ?  Are  these 
characteristics  of  a  divine  mind?  or  do  we  not  see  here  the  complete 
humanity  of  Christ  revealed  for  our  comfort,  and  assurance  ?  For 
what  other  purpose  the  record  of  these  facts  ?  Can  God  be  honoured 
by  showing  his  divine  nature  thus  racked,  and  agonized,  in  the  per- 
formance of  that  great  work  which  it  is  claimed  must  be  done  by  God 
alone.  Surely,  it  is  the  humanity  of  the  Saviour  that  is  thus  revealed, 
even  before  the  final  agony  and  triumph.  The  proof  that  this  same 
person  is  God,  is  not  lacking.  It  is  indeed  the  Son  of  God,  who  thus, 
in  human  soul,  and  body,  is  doing  the  work.  But,  it  is  his  human 
soul,  not  his  divine  nature,  that  thus  pleads,  and  shrinks,  and  fears,  and 
which  still  willingly  submits,  resolves  to  press  on,  is  strengthened  by 
God's  messenger,  and,  again,  confident  in  God,  goes  forward  with 
sublime  self-devotion  to  the  cross.  The  distance  between  this,  and 
God,  is  infinite  ;  this  soul,  the  creature,  the  finite,  the  fearful,  the 
mutable,  the  suffering,  the  trusting,  the  dying;  and  him,  the  creator, 
the  infinite,  the  support  of  those  who  trust,  the  immutable,  who  can- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  308 

not  suffer,  who  cannot  die.  The  acts  due  to  the  divine  nature  are 
marked,  and  characteristic,  and  so  also  are  those  of  the  human  nature. 
While  we  look  at  the  former,  we  must  say,  this  is  God;  none  but  He 
can  perform  such  acts,  can  possess  such  attributes,  can  be  called  such 
names.  Equally,  while  we  look  at  the  latter,  we  must  say,  this  is  man. 
None,  but  man  can  thus  suffer,  can  thus  be  limited,  can  thus  pray. 
The  very  nature  of  God  forbids  that  He  should  change,  that  He  should 
be  limited,  that  He  should  be  dependent,  that  He  should  be  affected 
by  anything  outside  of  Himself,  that  He  should  be  ignorant  of  any 
future  event. 

Christ,  therefore,  had  a  human  soul,  as  well  as  a  human  body.  To 
deny  this,  and  to  assert  that  the  divine  nature  became  his  soul,  we 
must  deny  the  unity  of  God,  which  establishes  the  undivided  nature 
of  His  essence,  and  the  perfection  of  God,  which  makes  Him  unchange- 
able, and  omniscient,  and  independent,  and  impassible  ;  and  we  must 
assert,  when  Scripture  presents  him  amid  intellectual,  and  spiritual 
experiences,  which  are  foreign  to  God,  but  are  of  the  nature 
of  the  human  soul,  that  those  were  not  the  experiences  of  a 
human  soul,  but  of  Divinity  itself.  If  we  thus  deny  that  the  names, 
attributes,  acts,  and  experiences,  natural  to  a  human  soul,  are  proof  of 
complete  humanity,  we  need  not  be  surprised  that  others  deny  that 
he  was  God,  however,  abundantly  the  Scriptures  ascribe  to  him  divine 
names,  attributes,  and  acts. 

V.     There  was  but  one  person  in  the  two  natures. 

We  have  not  here  a  God  and  a  man  ;  but  we  have  one  who  is  God, 
and  who  also  is  man ;  and  who,  being  thus  one  person,  unites  in  him- 
self, through  these  two  natures,  the  many  exactly  opposite  character- 
istics needed  for  his  work.  Despite  the  contradictory  character  of  his 
natures,  the  personality  is  but  one.  That  in  him  which  we  call  I,  the 
myself  which  marks  individuality,  that,  in  which  he  was  in  the  God- 
head, not  the  Father,  nor  the  Spirit,  was  common  to  both  natures. 
With  the  divine  nature,  however,  it  is  inseparably,  necessarily, 
eternally  and  essencially  united;  for  that  nature  cannot  change,  nor 
assume  new  relations ;  not  even  doing  so,  when  the  divine  person, 
which  subsists  in  it,  assumes  humanity.  But,  with  the  human  nature, 
the  personality  was  associated  voluntarily  and  separably,  though 
permanently  ;  the  human  nature  having  been  created  for  that  purpose, 
and  assumed  by  the  divine  person  of  his  own  will,  in  the  fulness  of 
time.  Hence  our  Lord  invariably  uses  the  word  "I"  whether  in  his 
human,  or  divine  nature  ;  or  in  both;  whether  speaking  of  himself  as 
Son  of  God,  or  as  Son  of  man,  or  as  the  Messiah;  and  whether  referring 


309  Abstract  of  Theology. 

to  his  human  actions,  and  emotions,  or  to  his  divine  works,  and  attri- 
butes, or  his  official  work  as  Mediator. 

But,  as  Christ  assumed  no  additional  personality  to  that  which  he 
had  before  the  incarnation,  and,  as  personality  in  man  is  certainly 
essential,  the  question  arises  :  Did  he  thus  really  become  a  man  ?  Is 
this  being  made  like  unto  his  brethren  ? 

(a)  To  this  it  may  replied,  that  if  the  Scriptures  represent  this  as  all 
that  was  done,  and  yet  teach  that  Christ  became  man,  that  teaching 
is  sufficient ;  we  need  no  further  testimony.  God  knows  what  is  essential 
to  the  constitution  of  man. 

(b)  But  consider  the  difficulty  thus  presented.  It  is  said  that  to 
be  completely  a  man,  Christ  must  also  be  a  human  person.  Granted; 
but  is  his  person  not  a  human  person  so  far  as  respects  humanity 
alone,  just  as  it  is  a  divine  person  so  far  as  respects  divinity  alone? 
Does  individuality  acquire  character  separated  from  the  nature  which 
belongs  to  it  ?  Would  Christ  be  any  longer  divine  if  separated  from 
his  divine  nature?  If  he  were  to  cease  from  his  incarnation,  would 
he  be  any  longer  a  man?  What  is  personality  but  individual  existence, 
and  what  gives  it  character,  as  human,  angelic,  or  divine,  except  the 
nature  in  which  it  inheres? 

(c)  Within  the  same  race  too  what  constitutes  personality  ?  Is  it 
the  continued  retention  unchanged  of  the  same  identical  portion  of  the 
common  nature,  the  same  body  and  soul.  Science  teaches  constant 
change  in  the  body  leaving  not  a  particle  now  of  what  existed  years 
ago.  While  the  soul  cannot  thus  be  measured,  experience  teaches  us 
that  great  changes  occur  even  here  ;  in  its  capacities,  emotions,  habits, 
tendencies,  and  in  numerous  other  respects.  Yet,  amid  all,  the 
personality  remains  unchanged.  Newton  was  the  same  person  in 
maturity  as  when  a  babe. 

(d)  Even  the  moral  nature  undergoes  change  without  the  change 
of  personality,  as  shown  in  the  difference  in  Adam  before  and  after  the 
fall,  and  in  Paul  at  Stephen's  martyrdom,  and  when  he  exclaimed  in 
contemplation  of  martyrdom,  "I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered.'' 

(e)  Nor  is  it  destroyed  by -actual  separation  from  a  part  of  the 
nature  which  belongs  to  it.  The  thief  in  Paradise  was  the  same 
person  to  whom  Christ  spoke  peace,  though  he  had  left  his  body 
hanging  on  the  cross.  The  saints  with  Christ  are  the  same  persons 
who  once  dwelt  on  earth  in  bodies  now  mouldered  into  dust. 

(f)  It  is  recognized  as  existing  unimpaired,  even  in  a  state  of 
utterly  unconscious  connection,  as   in  a  senseless  condition  produced 


Abstract  of  Theology.  310 

by  outward  pressure  on  the  skull,  or  by  the  use  of  chloroform,  and  other 
anaesthetics;  if  this  be  not  also  the  condition  of  healthy  slumber. 

If  these  are  facts,  why  may  not  a  person  who  possesses  one  nature 
assume  another  also,  and  yet  be  as  truly  a  person  in  that  nature  as 
any  others  who  possess  it  ? 

(g)  But  some  one  may  object  that  the  difficulty  arises,  in  the  case 
of  Cnrist,  from  the  union  in  the  one  person  of  two  natures  essentially 
different;  in  one  of  which  Christ  had  before  existed,  and  with  which  he 
is  essentially  united,  while  the  other  is  only  assumed  in  time,  and 
that  too  voluntarily. 

But  this  finds  sufficient  analogy  in  the  twofold  nature  united  in 
ordinary  human  persons.  Personality  here  exists  inseparably  from  the 
soul,  separably  from  the  body.  This  is  evident  when  at  death  the  person- 
ality is  with  the  soul  in  the  presence  of  God,  not  at  all  with  the  body 
in  the  corruption  of  the  grave. 

It  is  true  that  we  cannot  speak  of  these  two  elements  of  our  nature 
as  separated  from  each  other  as  widely  as  humanity,  and  divinity;  yet 
how  vast  is  the  distance  between  matter,  and  spirit ;  so  vast,  indeed, 
as  to  be  only  surpassed  by  that  between  the  finite,  and  the  infinite. 

It  is  also  true  that  we  cannot  speak  of  such  essential  union  between 
the  human  soul,  and  its  personality,  as  we  can  between  Christ,  and  his 
divine  nature.  Yet,  we  have  reason  to  believe  the  union  so  complete, 
that,  from  the  beginning  of  the  soul's  existence,  throughout  all  eternity, 
there  shall  be  no  separation. 

Upon  no  grounds,  then,  can  it  be  asserted  that  the  absence  of  a 
separate  personality  for  Christ's  human  nature,  made  Jesus  in  any 
respect  not  like  unto  his  brethren.  Scripture  affirms,  and  reason 
supports  the  idea,  that  the  same  person,  existing  and  operating,  we 
know  not  how,  but  according  to  the  nature  of  God,  was  truly  God  ; 
and,  also,  existing  in  human  nature,  and  operating  as  we  do  through 
its  conscious  relations  to  the  real  body,  and  human  soul,  of  which  that 
nature  was  composed,  was  truly  man.  In  each  nature,  he  knew  of 
his  relation  to  the  other;  as  God,  knowing  that  he  was  man,  and  as 
man,  knowing  that  he  was  God.  Yet  the  divine  nature  did  not 
partake  of  that  human  knowledge  and  experience  which  he  had  of 
affliction,  suffering  and  temptation,  any  more  than  the  human  nature 
experienced  the  conscious  relation  of  Christ  to  the  Father  in  the 
divine  nature,  or  possessed  the  attributes  of  omniscience,  or  omnipre- 
sence. No  limitations,  or  changes,  which  he  experienced  in  his  human 
nature,   could  deprive   him    of   complete    divinity  ;    nor    could    any 


311  Abstract  of  Theology. 

influence,  nor  any  value,  arising  from  the  essential  union  of  his  person 
with  his  divine  nature,  take  away  from  the  absolute  and  real  humanity 
assumed  by  Christ,  and  consciously  realized  by  him,  when  he  became 
man.  However  united,  he  was  capable  of  separate  experience,  action, 
thought,  and  knowledge,  and  indeed  of  separate  conscious  existence 
in  the  two  natures.  Thus  is  it  at  least  with  us.  We  have  separate 
experience  of  the  sufferings  and  joys  of  our  souls,  and  our  bodies,  and 
this  fact  removes  any  difficulty  in  believing  that  it  was  so  with  Christ, 
as  to  his  divine,  and  human  natures,  when  we  find  the  Bible  thus 
teaching. 

It  is  here,  that  we  are  to  find  the  full  explanation  of  the  many 
seeming  contradictions  involved  in  what  is  taught  us  of  the  person 
and  work  of  Christ.  So  intimate  is  the  union  of  the  one  person  with 
two  such  distinct  natures,  that  we  cannot  always  separate  what  Christ 
says  of  himself,  as  God,  from  what  is  said  of  himself,  as  man.  This,  how- 
ever, may  puzzle  us  in  interpreting  the  word  of  God,  but  not  in  har- 
monizing its  statements.  But,  without  this  doctrine,  the  word  of  God 
cannot  be  made  to  agree  with  itself.  When,  however,  we  remember 
that,  though  truly  divine,  he  is  human,  and  that  because  of  the  one 
person,  all  that  he  does  in  either  nature,  may  be  as  fully  said,  to  be 
done  by  him,  as  though  he  had  no  other,  we  see  the  Scripture  state- 
ments fall  beautifully,  and  regularly,  into  their  respective  ranks,  and 
in  that  twofold  unity,  each  receives  its  full  force.  It  is  thus  that  he, 
who  is  said  to  fill  the  universe,  was  contained  in  the  womb  of  Mary  ; 
that  he,  whose  are  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills,  felt  the  pangs  of 
famishing  hunger  ;  that  he,  who  made  the  world,  had  not  where  to 
lay  his  head  ;  that  he,  who  had  given  to  the  fig  tree  its  fruit,  and 
knew  what  it  was  bearing,  came  to  it,  if,  haply,  he  might  find  any- 
thing thereon  ;  that  he,  to  whom  as  God  are  known  all  things  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  yet  offered  up  fervent  prayers,  with  agony 
and  strong  supplication,  not  for  others  only,  but  chiefly  for  himself, 
and  also  declared  that  he  knew  not  the  judgment  day  ;  that  he,  who, 
as  God,  had  given  salvation  to  men  before  his  incarnation,  because  of 
the  certainty  of  the  work  he  would  accomplish,  yet,  as  man,  approached 
with  shrinking,  and  perhaps  with  fear  of  failure  in  his  work,  praying 
the  Father  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  him.  And,  hanging  upon 
the  cross,  how  amazing  the  mystery  of  contradiction  !  As  God,  he 
enjoys  supreme  felicity  in  the  unchanged  blessedness  of  his  divine 
nature.  As  man,  he  is  in  vital  agony  both  of  body  and  soul.  As 
God,  the  eternal  outflowings  of  the  mutual  love  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the    Spirit,    and    of  Himself,   the  Eternal   Son,   continue   to   bestow 


Abstract  of  Theology.  312 

unabated  mutual  bliss.  As  man,  he  is  the  victim  of  the  Father's 
wrath,  which,  because  of  the  sin  upon  him,  culminates  in  that  Father's 
withdrawal  amid  the  agonizing  cry  of  the  Son,  my  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  With  a  loud  cry  the  mortal  man  dies,  but 
the  eternal  life  of  God  remains  unchanged. 

The  full  statements  of  the  Scriptures  on  this  subject  may  be  thus 
expressed  : 

1.  There  is  one  God,  in  three  persons,  distinct  in  personality,  but 
undividedly,  and  unchangeably   the   same  in  essence  and  nature. 

2.  We  may  speak  of  a  divine  person,  but  not  of  a  divine  nature. 
We  must  say  the  divine  nature. 

3.  A  divine  person  may,  therefore,  become  incarnate,  and  yet  the 
incarnation  be  not  of  the  whole  Godhead,  for  the  persons  are  distinct ; 
but  the  divine  nature  cannot,  because,  as  common  to  all,  its  incarn- 
ation would  be  that  of  the  whole  Godhead. 

4.  It  was  a  person  of  this  Godhead,  the  Son,  the  Word,  who  so 
united  to  himself  human  nature,  as  to  become  a  person  in  that  nature, 
a  man. 

5.  In  this  union  he  assumed  all  that  constitutes  a  man.  The  fact, 
that  he  had  no  other  personality,  than  such  as  had  always  subsisted 
in  the  divine  nature,  does  not  make  him  an  impersonal  man.  It  only 
forbids  the  idea  of  an  additional  personality  exclusively  in  the  human 
nature. 

6.  This  human  nature  was  assumed  because  necessary  to  the  work 
of  salvation,  it  being  impossible  that  a  being,  only  divine,  could 
undergo  the  experience  necessary  to  redeem  man. 

7.  In  its  assumption  the  divine  nature  of  Christ  was  wholly  un- 
changed, and  the  human  nature  still  remained  purely  human. 

8.  The  nature  of  personality,  however,  allows  a  most  vital  union 
of  the  two  natures  in  his  one  person. 

9.  Thus  uniting  in  himself  God  and  man,  Christ  suffered. 

10.  There  was  here,  therefore,  no  participation  of  the  divine 
nature  in  the  suffering.  Such  participation  would  involve  actual 
suffering  of  that  nature. 

11.  But  there  was  this  connection  of  God,  even  of  the  undivided 
divine  essence  that  he  who  thus  suffered,  subsists  eternally  and 
essentially  in  that  essence,  and  is  God. 


313  Abstract  of  Theology. 

12.  Yet,  intimate  as  is  the  connection  of  the  two  natures,  they  are 
not  merged  in  each  other,  nor  does  either  of  them  lose  its  separate 
conscious  existence,  nor  the  possession  of  those  peculiarities  which 
make  the  one  divine,  and  the  other  human.  It  is  one  person,  truly 
God,  and  truly  man  ;  as  much  God,  as  though  not  man;  as  much  man, 
as  though  not  God.  The  human  can  add  nothing  to  the  divine,  except 
that  it  gives  to  the  person  that  is  divine,  the  means  of  suffering  for, 
and  sympathizing  with  us.  The  divine  adds  to  the  human,  only,  that 
it  gives  to  him,  that  is  thus  man,  that  dignity,  and  glory,  and  power, 
which  enable  him  to  perform  the  work  of  salvation,  and  to  give  to  that 
work  an  inestimable  value. 

Another  form  of  expression  of  the  Scripture  facts  may  also  be 
given. 

1.  God  is  one  in  nature,  essence,  and  being  ;  therefore,  there  is 
but  one  God,  one  divine  nature. 

2.  God  is  three  in  person,  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit.  Hence  in  the 
one  undivided  divine  nature  subsist  three  persons. 

3.  One  of  these  persons  (the  Son)  and  one  only  (not  the  Father, 
and  Spirit  also)  became  man.  It  was  not  the  three  persons  that 
became  man  ;  therefore  not.  the  divine  nature  which  is  common  to  the 
three,  but  one  person  only.  God,  therefore,  was  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  not  because  the  Godhead,  or  the  divine  nature  became  flesh,  but 
because  the  Son,  who  is  God  because  he  subsists  in  the  divine  nature, 
became  flesh. 

4.  In  becoming  man,  he  still  remained  God,  because  he  still  con- 
tinued to  subsist  in  the  divine  nature. 

5.  In  becoming  man,  he  became  as  truly  man,  as  he  is  truly  God, 
because  he  assumed  a  true  human  nature  in  both  its  forms,  body  and 
soul,  and  subsisted  in  it  as  really,  as  he  did  in  the  divine  nature. 

6.  As  it  was  the  same  person,  who  became  man  as  well  as  God, 
there  were  not  two  persons,  one  divine,  and  one  human,  but  one  at 
the  same  time  divine  and  human. 

7.  This  one  person,  therefore,  had  by  virtue  of  his  divine  nature 
all  divine  experience,  and  by  virtue  of  his  human  nature,  all  human 
experience,  thinking,  willing,  and  purposing  as  God,  and  exercising  all 
the  divine  attributes  of  omniscience,  omnipotence,  and  omnipresence, 
&c,  and  thinking,  willing,  and  purposing  as  man,  with  limited 
powers,  and  limited  knowledge,  subject  to  temptation,  suffering, 
doubts,  and  fears. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  314 

8.  This  one  person  was,  therefore,  able  to  suffer  and  bear  the 
penalty  of  man's  transgression,  because,  being  of  man's  nature-,  he 
could  become  man's  representative,  and  could  also  endure  such  suf- 
fering, as  could  be  inflicted  upon  nun  ;  yet,  being  God,  he  could  give 
a  value  to  such  suffering,  which  would  make  it  an  equivalent  not  to 
one  man's  penalty,  but  to  that  of  the  whole  race. 

9.  All  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  believing  these  things  to  be  true 
and  possible,  are  removed  by  the  analogy  which  is  seen  in  the  two- 
fold nature  of  man,  in  which  appears  a  likeness  to  that  union  of 
two  natures  in  one  person  thus  taught  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  Son  of 
God  in  his  becoming  man. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  316 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXVII. 


The  Offices  of  Christ. 

Three  offices  are  ascribed  by  the  Scriptures  to  Christ,  those  of 
prophet,  priest,  and  king. 

I.     Christ  as  Prophet. 

This  word  is  to  be  taken  in  its  wider  sense  of  teacher. 

It  is  frequently  confined  in  common  language  to  one  who  foretels 
future  events,  But  it  literally  means  one  who  speaks  for  another, 
and  merely  denotes  teaching.  Thus  Moses  is  spoken  of  as  a  prophet, 
and  Christ  was  foretold  as  a  prophet   who  should   be  like  unto  Moses> 

It  is  in  connection  with  this  that  the  term  Logos,  or  Word,  applied 
to  Christ  in  the  1st  chapter  of  John  is  appropriate. 

With  the  office  of  teacher,  Christ  united,  as  was  common  with  the 
prophets,  the  prediction  of  future  events,  and  the  working  of  miracles. 
But  the  office  of  teacher  was  his  especial  work  as  prophet. 

This  work  is  discharged  in  the  following  ways : 

1.  In  the  personal  revelations  which  he  made  to  our  first  parents, 
to  the  patriarchs,  and  others  of  their  day,  to  Moses  and  the  people  of 
God  in  the  wilderness,  and  to  various  others,  as  Manoah,  the  children 
in  the  furnace,  &c,  before  the  days  of  his  incarnation.  These  were 
made  in  appearances  of  human  form,  in  the  burning  bush,  in  the  pillar 
of  cloud  and  fire,  in  the  Shechinah,  &c,  &c. 

2.  In  the  inspired  revelations  which  he  made  through  holy  men 
of  old,  who  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  of  a  portion 
of  which  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  are  composed. 

3.  While  on  earth  in  his  incarnation. 


317  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(1)  personally  as,  (a)  he  set  forth  by  his  own  acts  the  divine 
attributes,  omnipotence,  omniscience,  omnipresence,  eternity  of 
existence,  &c,  and  (b)  as  he  exhibited  God's  love  for  man,  His  hatred 
of  sin,  and  His  love  of  holiness  and  righteousness  in  the  work  of 
man's  salvation. 

(2)  By  his  instructions,  as  he  taught  (a)  in  words  to  his  disciples 
and  others,  what  he  exhibited  in  his  person,  as  to  the  matters  above 
stated,  and  (b)  the  truths  relative  to  the  kingdom  he  was  to  establish, 
its  nature,  its  subjects,  the  relations  they  should  bear  to  each  other, 
to  him  and  the  Father,  their  future  destiny  and  glory;  as  well  as  the 
condition  and  fate  of  those  who  should  reject  him. 

4.  By  the  instructions  he  gave  through  his  apostles  and  other 
inspired  men  after  his  ascension. 

5.  By  the  revelation  of  himself  in  the  lives  and  characters  of  his 
true  disciples  in  all  ages. 

6.  By  the  instructions  given  through  his  preached  word  in  all  ages. 

7.  By  the  revelations  of  glory  he  shall  make  to  the  church  of  first 
born  ones  in  the  world  to  come. 

8.  By  the  revelation  which,  through  these,  he  shall  make  of  the 
glory  of  God  to  the  universe  of  created  intelligences. 

II.     Christ  as  Priest. 

This  office  is  one  of  divine  appointment.  That  of  Christ  cor- 
responds to  that  of  the  High  Priest  under  the  Mosaic  economy,  and 
is  foreshadowed  by  it.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  sets  this  forth 
very  plainly  and  explicitly.  The  priesthood  of  Christ,  however,  varies 
from  that  of  the  High  Priest  in  several  particulars.  Christ's  priest- 
hood is  perpetual,  is  in  one  person,  without  predecessor  or  successor, 
making  one  offering,  once  for  all,  an  offering  actually,  not  symbolically 
effective,  deriving  value  not  from  appointment  alone,  but  from  its 
nature  also.  In  this  case  also  the  victim  is  the  same  person  as  the 
High  Priest.  Consequently  Christ's  office  as  priest  is  to  be  contem- 
plated in  the  twofold  aspect  of  priest  and  victim. 

1.  As  Priest,  he  offers  up  the  sacrifice  laying  it  upon  the  altar  of 
oblation,  and,  through  it,  appeasing  the  wrath  of  God,  making  recon- 
ciliation between  God  and  man,  and  securing,  in  its  proper  present- 
ation, the  removal  of  guilt  and  punishment  from  man. 

As  Priest,  he  also  intercedes  with  God  for  pardon,  or  justifi- 
cation, or  other  blessings  for  all  for  whom  he  died,  in  all  the  respects 
in  which  his  death  is  available  for  each. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  318 

The  first  of  these  priestly  offices  was  discharged  upon  earth,  the 
second  is  discharging  in  heaven.  It  does  not  cease  with  his  life  on 
earth,  but  he  is  represented  as  continuing  as  an  everliving  High  Priest 
to  make  intercession  for  us,  Heb.  7:23 — 25  ;  sitting  down  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  Acts  2:33—36  ;  Heb.  8:1  ;  9:24.  It  is  not  for  the 
purpose  ot  offering  the  sacrifice  that  he  is  there,  Heb.  9:24 — 25  ;  but 
to  make  intercession  for  those,  for  whom  the  sacrifice  has  already  been 
offered,  Heb.  10:1112.14—18. 

While  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  he  is  engaged  in  actual  spoken 
prayer  before  God,  we  are  also  not  to  understand  by  this  a  mere 
influence  of  his  sacrifice  continued  without  further  activity  on  his 
part,  but  some  real  activity  corresponding  fully  to  the  essence  of 
prayer  and  petition,  to  which  is  due  all  the  blessings  to  which  his 
people  attain. 

This  inter-cession  is  made  for  his  people.  Isaiah  53:12  and  Luke 
23:34  have  been  adduced  as  passages  indicating  intercession  which 
avails  in  some  respects  for  all  men.  But  such  benefits  are  not  the 
result  of  intercessory  prayer,  nor  of  Christ's  atoning  work,  conferring 
general  benefits,  but  they  come  from  the  necessary  co-existence  of  the 
persons  thus  benefited  with  those  to  whom  the  resulting  benefits  of  the 
atoning  work  belong.  Luke  22:32;  John  14:16.26;  17:9.15.20.24; 
Acts   2:33;    Eph.    2:18;    Heb.  2:17.18  ;    Heb.  4:14— 16  ;    1  Pet,  2:5. 

2.     Christ  as  the  victim. 

(1)  His  qualifications. 

(a)  His  sinlessness  ;  for  this  position  he  needed  to  be  pure,  holy, 
harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners,  and  one  in  whom  there  was 
no  sin.     He  must  be  a  spotless  Lamb. 

(b)  His  humanity  ;  that  he  might  be  of  common  nature  with  those 
for  whom  he  died,  and  that  he  might  be  capable  of  suffering,  and  of 
such  suffering,  as  man  may  endure. 

(c)  His  divinity  ;  that  his  successful  prosecution  of  the  work 
might  be  assured,  and  that  his  offering  might  have  merit  sufficient  to 
ransom  those  for  whom  he  died. 

(d)  His  federal  relation  ;  that  he  might  be  a  proper  substitute  for 
sinners,  not  only  securing  righteousness  by  obedience,  but  bearing 
and  removing  their  guilt  by  making  satisfaction  for  it. 

(2)  The  offering.  Thus  qualified  he  was  offered  up  as  a  victim  ; 
his  body  to  the  suffering  which  culminated  in  his  death  on  the  cross, 
and  his  soul  to  the  anguish,  due  to  the  realized  presence  of  imputed 
sin,  to  the  wrath  endured  from  God,  and  separation  from  God's  favour, 
while  bearing  that  wrath. 


219  Abstract  of  Theology. 

III.     Christ  as  King. 

Christ  announced  to  his  disciples  just  before  his  ascension,  "all 
power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth  ;"  Matt.  28:18.  Peter 
at  Pentecost  declared,  "that  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom 
ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ;1'  Acts  2:36. 

Constant  references  had  been  previously  made  to  his  kingdom.  It 
was  not  simply  spoken  of  as  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  kingdom  of 
heaven,  but  as  closely  connected  with  Christ.  Luke  20:21 ;  22:29.30; 
23:42  ;  John  18:36.37. 

1.  Christ  as  the  Godman  is  Mediatorial  king. 

As  Son  of  God  he  had  the  right  of  rule  over  the  universe.  Of  this 
he  emptied  himself  and  became  man,  that  he  might  become  Mediator 
and  do  the  work  of  salvation.  Having  become  man  he  died  on  the 
cross.  On  this  account  he  has  been  exalted,  so  "that  at  the  name  of 
Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  *  *  *  and  every  tongue  should 
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  Father."  Phil. 
2:6—11.  Compare  Acts  2:22—36,  especially  verse  36.  "God  hath 
made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both,  Lord  and  Christ." 
Also  1  Cor.  15:24—26. 

2.  Christ  reigns  over  his  spiritual  kingdom,  securing  the  final 
result  of  the  establishment  of  that  kingdom  in  the  persons  of  all  his 
people  when  he  shall  "present  it  to  himself,  a  glorious  church." 
Eph.  5:27. 

3.  He  reigns  over  his  visible  churches  on  earth,  through  the  laws 
he  has  given,  through  the  Spirit  by  which  he  dwells  in  them,  by  his 
providences,  overruling,  and  controlling,  and  acccomplishing  all  his 
purposes. 

4.  He  rules  over  this  world  as  Kino;  of  Kings,  and  Lord  of  Lords, 
causing  all  things  to  work  together  for  his  ends. 

5.  He  rules  over  the  universe.     His  sway   is   not  limited  to  earth. 

6.  His  mediatorial  reign  is  not  confined  to  human  subjects,  but 
extends  also  to  angelic.  The  angels  of  heaven  are  his  attendants 
and  his  messengers. 

7.  He  even  rules  over  Satan,  and  his  evil  angels.  Their  exercise 
of  power  for  evil  is  permitted  only  for  a  time.  Even  during  that  time 
it  is  controlled  by  Christ ;  so  that  it  is  limited  by  his  will,  and  is, 
therefore,  truly  subjected  to  him. 


Abstract,  of  Theology.  320 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXVIII. 


The  Atonement  of  Christ. 

»    Several  prominent  theories  have  been  presented,  as  to  the  atoning 
work  of  Christ,  and  the  method  by  which  God  pardons  sin. 

1.  The  lowest  of  these  is  the  Socinian.  This  proceeds  on  the 
principle  that  God  is  pure  benevolence,  that  vindictive  justice  is 
incompatible  with  his  character,  and  that,  upon  mere  repentance,  God 
can,  and  will  forgive  the  sinner.  The  work  of  Christ,  therefore,  is 
regarded  as  one  in  which  he  simply  reveals  or  makes  known  pardon 
to  man.  Nothing  that  he  has  done  secures  it,  because  he  had  nothing 
to  do  to  this  end.  It  was  already  prepared  in  the  benevolence  of  God's 
nature,  and  is  simply  now  made  known.  [Symington  on  the  Atone- 
ment, pp.  2  and  3.] 

The  advocates  of  this  theory  explain  away  all  that  the  Scriptures 
say  on  the  subject  of  Christ's  death  for  us,  by  maintaining  that  his 
life  and  death  were  mere  examples  to  us  of  the  manner  in  which  we 
should  live  and  submit  to  God.  In  their  view,  therefore,  Christ  is 
merely  a  great  teacher  and  a  bright  example. 

Some  of  these  have  even  gone  so  far  as  to  speak  of  the  sacrifices  of 
the  ancient  dispensation  as  things  suitable  only  to  a  barbarous  age, 
and  so  far  from  regarding  them  as  types  of  Christ's  sacrificial  work, 
have  looked  on  them  as  arrangements  permitted  only  from  sympathy 
for  the  weakness  of  the  people,  whom  God  ordered  to  offer  them. 
[Nehemiah  Adams,  Evenings  with  the  Doctrines,  p.  197.] 


321 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


The  objections  to  this  theory  are  : 

1.  It  ill  accords  with  the  Scripture  description  of  the  nature  of  sin. 

2.  It  is  inconsistent  with  other  attributes  of  God  than  mercy. 

3.  It  is  at  variance  with  the  letter  and  spirit  of  divine  revelation. 

4.  It  is  irreconcilable  with  the  exalted  nature  of  the  mediatorial 
reward  conferred  on  Christ.     [Symington,  p.  3  ] 

2.  A  second  theory  of  the  Atonement  is  that  which  has  commonly 
been  called  the  Middle  Theory.  By  this  is  not  meant,  that  only  these 
two  and  one  orthodox  theory  exist ;  but,  simply,  that  this  stands  between 
the  theory  of  the  Socinians,  and  those  held  by  persons,  who.  however, 
differing  from  each  other,  are  regarded  as  Evangelical. 

"This  theory  maintains  that  in  consequence  of  what  Christ  did,  a 
certain  power  to  pardon  sin,  was  conferred  upon  him."  [Syming- 
ton, p.  3.] 

"This  system  supposes  that  God  may  pardon  sin  without  punish- 
ment or  satisfaction." 

"But  that  a  difference  should  be  made  between  innocent  persons 
who  have  never  sinned,  and  those  thus  pardoned  ;  that  the  latter  may 
not  boastingly  suppose  themselves  on  an  equality  with  the  former." 

"This  is  done  by  the  arrangement  that,  instead  of  a  full  pardon,  they 
shall  be  pardoned  on  repentance,  for  the  sake  of  something  Christ  was 
to  do,  because  of  which  he  is  entitled  to  intercede  for  them." 

(1)  "This  scheme  is  only  apparently  superior  to  the  former,  in 
claiming  that  this  is  done,  because  of  what  Christ  has  done." 

(2)  "It  gives  a  defective  view  of  the  divine  character." 

(3)  "It  does  not  explain  the  Scripture  language  as  to  Christ's  work.'' 

(4)  "It  fails  to  account  for  the  peculiarity  and  severity  of  his  suf- 
ferings."    [Symington,  pp.  3  and  4] 

3.  A  third  theory  of  the  Atonement  is  that  of  the  Arminians,  who 
hold  that  Christ  died,  and  that  for  sin  ;  bat  only  in  the  sense  that 
makes  it  consistent  for  God  to  offer  salvation  to  men  on  the  ground  of 
evangelical  obedience,  and  not  of  perfect  legal  obedience. 

This  theory  teaches  a  general  atonement  without  any  application  of 
it  on  the  part  of  God.  Connected  with  the  doctrine  of  sufficient  grace 
to  each  man,  it  supposes  that  the  individual  does,  or  does  not  exercise 
faith,  and  obedience,  and  thus  secures  eternal  life  or  loses  it. 

The  objections  to  this  theory  are  : 

(1)  "That  it  gives  an  iudefinitive  conception  of  what  Christ  did. 
Either  it  involves  no  satisfaction  to  divine  justice   and   to  the  law,  or 


Abstract  of  Theology.  322 

it  implies  universal  satisfaction.  In  the  first  case  it  dishonours  God, 
in  the  second  it  forces  us  to  hold  the  doctrine  of  universal  salvation." 
What  is  meant  by  the  expression,  that  "he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive 
us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness,''  if  God  is  not 
justly  under  obligation,  for  what  Christ  did,  to  give  salvation  to  all 
for  whom  he  died  ? 

(2)  If  it  be  said  that  the  object  was  simply  to  make  salvation  pos- 
sible for  all,  the  reply  is  that  this  is  not  what  the  Scriptures  represent. 
Theyspeak  positively  of  salvation  asprocured,  notthemeans  ofsalvation, 
and  of  certain  salvation,  not  possible  salvation.  "The  effects  of  Christ's 
death  are  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  reconciliation  and  justification. 
Rom.  5:10;  Eph.  2:16;  remission  of  sins,  Eph.  1:7;  peace,  Eph.2:14; 
deliverance  from  wrath,  1  Thess.  1:10;  from  death,  Heb.  2:14;  from 
the  curse  of  the  law,  Gal.  3:13;  from  sin,"  1  Pet.  1:1.8.  [Hodge's 
Outlines  p.  314,  1st  Edition.]  We  are  spoken  of  as  justified  when 
ungodly. 

(3)  This  view  of  the  Atonement  is  utterly  incompatible  with  the 
Scripture  doctrines  of  Innate  Corruption,  Regeneration,  Election, 
Justification,  Adoption,  and  Sanctification.  Every  proof  of  the  true 
doctrine  on  these  points  is  an  argument  against  it. 

(4)  This  theory  makes  it  possible,  that  Christ  should  have  died 
in  vain. 

(5)  This  theory  makes  salvation  partly  of  God,  and  partly  of  man, 
in  the  most  objectionable  form.  It  represents  God  as  permitting 
Christ  to  die  that  the  demands  of  the  law  may  be  lowered. 

4.  A  fourth  theory  is  the  Lutheran,  which  teaches  that  Christ's 
death  was  intended  to  make  such  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God 
that  he  could  offer  salvation  to  all  that  believe  in  him. 

The  objection  to  this  theory  is  that  by  rejecting  the  doctrine  of 
Election  it  omits  a  part  of  the  truth.  The  statement,  as  made,  is  not 
opposed  to  the  views  usually  held  by  the  orthodox.  Salvation  is  thus 
offered  to  all,  and  offered  because  satisfaction  for  sin  has  been  made 
to  the  justice  of  God.  But  for  whom  is  this  salvation?  They  say,  as 
we  do,  for  those  that  shall  believe.  And  hence  the  question  between 
us  is,  who  will  believe,  and  how  will  this  faith  be  effected?  The 
doctrine  of  Election  teaches  that  they  shall  believe  whom  God  hath 
chosen,  for  whom  He  sent  Christ,  for  whom  Christ  died ;  and  shall 
believe  as  the  result  of  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Spirit  purchased 
by  Christ's  work. 


323  Abstract  of  Theology. 

5.  A  fifth  theory  is  what  is  commonly  called  the  Governmental 
Theory  of  the  Atonement. 

Those  who  hold  this  theory  maintain  that  God  cannot  consistently 
forgive  sin  upon  mere  repentance  and  faith  ;  bat  that  the  necessity  for 
its  punishment  does  not  arise  from  the  nature  of  God,  and  His 
abhorrence  of  sin  ;  wherefore  there  is  no  principle  in  Him  which 
requires  all  sin  to  be  punished  for  itself  alone;  but  from  the  necessity 
which  exists  for  maintaining  his  moral  government  in  the  universe. 
"They  therefore  regard  the  sufferings  of  Christ  as  intended  to  make  a 
moral  impression  upon  the  universe  by  their  display  of  God's  deter- 
mination to  punish  sin,  and  thus  to  make  the  forgiveness  of  sin 
consistent  with  the  good  government  of  the  universe."  [Hodge's 
Outlines,  p.  301,  1st  Edition.] 

The  objections  to  this  theory  are  : 

1.  The  nature  which  it  ascribes  to  sin.  It  does  not  regard  it 
essential  that  all  sin  should  be  punished.  Therefore  sin  does  not  in 
itself  intrinsically  deserve  punishment. 

2.  It  places  the  punishment  of  sin  on  a  wrong  basis,  namely,  the 
good  of  the  universe  as  involved  in  the  moral  government  of  God  ; 
and  not  because  it  deserves  punishment  as  sin. 

3.  God  is  here  beheld,  not  as  a  righteous  judge  taking  vengeance 
on  the  violators  of  his  law,  nor  as  a  rightful  king  punishing  those  who 
have  rejected  his  authority,  but  simply  as  a  benevolent  being  entirely 
regardless  of  his  own  nature,  or  of  the  difference  between  right  and 
wrong,  punishing  some  msn  for  the  good  of  others. 

4.  According  to  this  theory  the  necessity  for  punishing  sin  rests, 
not  in  its  own  nature,  but  because  there  are  more  created  beings  in 
the  universe  than  those  who  have  sinned.  Had  God  created  one 
man,  or  one  angel  only,  and  had  that  angel  sinned,  there  could  have 
been  no  reason,  either  in  the  broken  law,  or  in  the  dishonour  to  God, 
for  his  punishment,  unless  other  beings  were  also  to  be  created. 

5.  This  theory  claims  no  support  from  Scripture  ;  but  is  presented 
simply  as  a  philosophical  explanation,  to  avoid  the  difficulties  supposed 
to  exist  in  the  ordinarily  received  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  punish- 
ment by  God. 

6.  It  is  opposed  by  Scripture  in  every  particular  involved  in  it ; 
the  nature  of  sin  ;  the  desert  of  punishment  ;  the  vengeance  of  God 
against  the  violator  of  his  law  ;  the  fact  that  God  acts  of  his  own  will, 
and  does  not  draw  the  reasons  of  his  action  from  without ;  the  teaching 
of  Scripture  about  the  priestly  office  of  Christ,  the  work  he  has  done, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  324 

the  position  he  bore  to  us  as  being  made  sin  for  us  ;  the  ground  of  our 
redemption;  the  causes  of  condemnation  and  a  hundred  other  particu- 
lars, which  show  that  the  Scriptures  are  not  merely  not  silent  on 
this  subject,  but  that  the  contrary  doctrine  lies  at  the  very  basis  of 
all  its  instructions. 

6.  The  sixth  theory  of  the  Atonement  is  that  which  declares  it  to  be 
general,  but  asserts  that  it  is  limited  in  its  application.  According 
to  this  theory,  the  work  of  atonement  was  not  wrought  out  by  Christ 
for  the  elect  as  such,  nor  for  the  church,  either  as  foreseen,  or 
designed  to  be  composed  of  those  to  be  saved  ;  but  for  sinners,  as 
sinners.  The  work  of  atonement  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  persons 
to  whom  it  was  to  be  applied  considered  as  an  atonement,  but  only 
had  respect  to  men  as  guilty  sinners  in  God's  sight.  The  work  to  be 
accomplished  was  precisely  what  would  have  been,  had  there  been  no 
election,  no  church  to  be  established,  no  work  of  grace  to  be  wrought 
on  the  heart,  but  each  person  left  to  act  in  its  reception,  or  rejection, 
as  he  should  choose. 

It  is  in  its  application  only  that  it  has  respect  to  Election,  and 
thus  is  it  made  particular,  not  because  in  time  it  is  applied  to  certain 
persons,  but  because  it  was  designed  in  eternity  to  be  thus  applied. 
The  application  itself,  however,  involves  the  design  of  the  atonement ; 
but,  simply,  that  which  is  made  in  respect  to  each  individual,  when,  by 
regeneration  and  faith,  he  is  vitally  made  partaker  of  Christ.  It  does 
not  include  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  God  in  the  purpose  to  apply. 
This  is  involved  in  election. 

The  most  distinguished  advocate  of  this  theory  is  Andrew  Fuller, 
a  man  of  the  clearest  perceptions,  and  of  remarkable  power  of  precise 
statement.  His  views  on  the  subject  appear  in  the  Conversation  on 
Particular  Redemption,  vol.  2nd,  p.  692  to  698  of  the  Philadelphia 
edition  of  his  works.  He  has  here  sought  to  establish  a  theory  not 
substantially  different  from  that  of  the  older  Calvinists,  but  after  all, 
one  which  has  merely  the  appearance  of  being  better.  The  distinction 
on  which  he  attempts  to  establish  it,  however,  appears  not  to  be 
correct.  The  following  extracts  from  his  discussion  will  show  his 
position.  The  disputants  are  Peter  and  James;  the  latter  presents 
the  views  of  Fuller. 

Peter  gives  the  theory  as  he  has  understood  it  thus  :  "The  particu- 
larity of  the  Atonement  consists  in  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  God  with 
regard  to  its  application." 


325  Abstract  of  Theology. 

James  replies:  I  should  rather  say  "the  particularity  of  Redemption 
consists  in  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  God  with  regard  to  the  application 
of  the  Atonement,  that  is  with  regard  to  the  persons  to  whom  it  shall 
be  applied." 

Again  says  James :  "You  say  the  position  in  question  places  the 
paticularity  of  Redemption  in  its  application.  Whence,  if  you  will 
recollect  yourself,  you  will  find  thac  it  places  it  in  the  Sovereign 
pleasure  of  God  with  regard  to  application." 

Again  Peter  :  "But,  have  you  ever  made  use  of  the  term  appli- 
cation so  as  not  to  include  the  divine  intention.'' 

James  :     "I  am  not  aware  of  having  done  so." 

Again  :  He  sums  up  by  saying  that  his  "object  in  the  distinction 
has  been  merely  to  distinguish  what  the  death  of  Christ  is  sufficient 
for,  from  what  it  was  the  design  of  the  Father  and  Son  to  effect 
through  it." 

Again  :  "I  do  not  consider  particular  redemption  as  being  so  much 
a  doctrine  of  itself  as  a  branch  of  the  great  doctrine  of  Election." 

Atonement  and  Redemption  are  both  effects  of  Christ's  death,  but 
in  such  order  as  that  one  is  the  consequence  of  the  other. 

Again  :     In  the  previous  conversation  on  substitution  he  says,  p.  690 ; 

"Concerning  the  death  of  Christ,  if  I  speak  of  it  irrespective  of  the 
purpose  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  as  to  the  objects  who  should  be 
saved  by  it,  referring  merely  to  what  it  is  in  itself  sufficient  for,  and 
declared  in  the  gospel  to  be  adapted  to,  I  should  think  I  answered 
the  question  in  the  Scriptural  way  by  saying,  it  was  for  sinners  as 
sinners.  But  if  I  have  respect  to  the  purpose  of  the  Father  in  giving 
his  Son  to  die  and  to  the  design  of  Christ  in  laying  down  his  life,  I 
should  answer,  it  was  for  the  elect  only." 

This  theory  agrees  with  the  ordinary  theory  in  : 

1.  Regarding  satisfaction  for  sin  necessary. 

2.  Recognizing  that  this  has  been  made  by  Christ. 

3.  Claiming  that  the  value  of  Christ's  death  is  sufficient  for  the 
world. 

4.  Declaring  that  its  benefits  accrue  to  some  only. 

5.  Maintaining  that  this  limitation  is  because  of  God's  purpose, 
and  not  because  of  action  on  the  part  of  man. 

It  differs  from  it  in  that  it  makes  Redemption  and  Atonement  two 
different  works,  instead  of  the  same  work  viewed  in  two  different 
aspects.  The  older  doctrine  regards  the  atonement  as  a  reconciliation 
of  sinners  to  God,  but   of  sinners,   who  are   thus  redeemed  from  the 


1 


Abstract  of  Theology.  326 

condition  of  bondage  and  misery  in  which  they  had  been.  Atone- 
ment, therefore,  is  reconciliation,  Redemption  is  deliverance  ;  but  of 
the  same  persons  by  the  same  work,  and  at  the  same  time,  each  being 
involved  in  the  same  decree.  The  new  theory  makes  atonement  an 
act  of  reconciliation  by  Christ's  death,  not  of  the  persons  redeemed 
alone,  but  of  the  whole  world,  and  this,  as  the  result  of  a  general 
decree  to  send  Christ  to  reconcile  the  world  to  God.  Redemption 
comes  under  the  decree  of  Election  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  re- 
conciliation ;  and,  by  it,  only  certain  persons  have  the  benefit  of  the 
reconciliation  thus  effected,  not  because  of  their  own  acceptance  or 
faith,  but  because  God  gives  to  them  all  the  advantages  of  the  work 
of  atonement  and  withholds  them  from  all  others. 
The  objections  to  this  view  are  : 

1.  That  it  represents  the  whole  world  as  actually  reconciled  to 
God  by  Christ's  death.  If  so,  on  what  ground  is  this  reconciliation 
destroyed.     The  doctrine  of  universal  salvation  is   therefore  involved. 

2.  If  this  is  not  the  view,  then,  when  the  Scriptures  speak  of  our 
reconciliation  to  God,  nothing  more  is  meant  than  that  a  mere  mode 
of  reconciliation  has  been  arranged,  so  that  the  divine  justice  has  been 
simply  so  satisfied  that  a  medium  of  acceptance  with  God  has  been 
provided.  But,  if  there  is  merely  a  medium  of  acceptance  provided, 
how  can  men  be  spoken  of  as  actually  reconciled  to  God  ?  In  what 
proper  sense  can  Christ  be  said  to  have  borne  our  sins,  and  to  have 
been  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  if  his  act  was  merely  the  arrange- 
ment of  a  medium  for  salvation?  Christ,  to  make  atonement,  must 
have  been  substituted  in  our  place,  borne  our  sins,  had  imputed  to 
him  our  trespasses,  and  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  must  have  been 
upon  him.  But,  if  so,  a  true  atonement  must  have  been  made.  It 
could  not  have  been  the  mere  arrangement  of  a  medium  of  salvation. 
It  must  have  been  salvation  itself.     And,  if  for  all,  all  must  be  saved. 

3.  This  theory  is  inconsistent  with  one  of  the  facts  admitted  by  its 
advocates  ;  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  a  penal  sacrifice.  Penalty  and 
guilt  have  no  respect  to  sin  in  the  abstract,  but  only  to  it  as  associated 
with  sinners.  It  the  work  of  atonement  simply  wrought  out  a  medium 
of  access,  then  was  it  a  mere  general  exhibition  of  God's  hatred  of  sin, 
having  no  respect  to  particular  persons.  On  the  governmental  theory 
that  such  an  arrangement  was  necessary  simply  to  display  before  the 
universe  the  evil  of  sin,  this  idea  of  atonement  might  be  allowed. 
But  on  the  theory  of  satisfaction  to  justice,  the  atonement  must  be 
made  by  a  penal  sacrifice. 


327  Abstract  of  Theology. 

4.  This  only  apparently  has  any  advantage  over  the  usual  older 
Calvinistic  theory. 

1.  It  confines  salvation  to  the  elect. 

2.  It  gives  salvation  as  the  result  of  God's  action. 

3.  It  ascribes  no  greater  value  to  Christ's  death.  The  older  theory, 
except  as  held  by  those  who  gave  it  a  commercial  character,  taught 
that  what  Christ  needed  to  do  for  one  man,  would  have  been  sufficient 
for  all. 

4.  It,  with  that  theory,  ascribes  the  limitation  to  God's  purpose; 
the  one  holding  the  purpose  in  actual  salvation  ;  the  other  the  purpose 
in  the  application  of  salvation. 

5.  God  can  under  either,  with  equal  sincerity,  make  the  gospel 
offer  to  all.  (1)  Each  holds  that  a  sufficient  basis  for  salvation  exists 
if  God  had  chosen  to  extend  it.  (2)  Each  holds  that  God  knows  that 
only  those  chosen  by  him  will  accept.  (3)  Each  teaches  that  this 
acceptance  is  due  to  special  grace.  (4)  Each  maintains  that  it  was 
God's  purpose  to  withhold  that  special  grace  ;  a  purpose  formed  in 
eternity  and  recognized  as  existing  when  the  sacrifice  was  offered,  and 
wThen  the  offer  of  salvation  is  made. 

6.  This  seems  at  first  more  in. accordance  with  the  expressions  of 
general  atonement  made  in  the  Scriptures;  but  it  appears  on  examination 
that  the  act  there  spoken  of  cannot  be  limited  to  the  meaning  here 
given,  and  that  either  these  passages  teach  universal  salvation,  or  have 
a  meaning,  as  used  by  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  which  does  not  involve 
the  idea  of  such  universality  as  includes  every  one  of  the  posterity  of 
Adam. 

7.  This  theory,  like  all  others  of  a  general  atonement,  lies  under 
the  difficulty  that  it  extends  reconciliation,  or  a  medium  of  recon- 
ciliation, to  persons,  who  by  death  have  been  confirmed  in  destruction, 
or  it  shuts  off  from  its  benefits  all  who  have  died  before  Christ.  The 
theory  of  limited  atonement  recognizes  all  who  are  included  in  it  as 
saved  by  virtue  of  it.  The  virtue  secured,  therefore,  is  applied  to  all  to 
whom  it  belongs.  The  fact  that  the  Lamb  was  slain  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  or,  in  other  words,  the  certainty  of  Christ's  death,  makes 
salvation  beforehand  possible,  and  permits  God  to  bestow  it.  The 
death  of  Christ  only  fulfils  what  has  thus  been  relied  on.  But  in  the 
case  of  a  general  atonement  made  for  the  whole  race,  we  have  Christ 
dying,  not  simply  for  those  who  shall  not  be  saved,  but  for  those  who 
are  alreadv  damned. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  328 

8.  This  theory  is  incompatible  with  those  expressions  of  Scripture 
which  speaks  of  Christ's  death  as  though  it.  were  confined  to  the  elect. 

John  10:11.15.26—28.  "I  am  the  good  shepherd;  the  good 
shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep,  *  *  *  and  I  lay  down  my 
life  for  the  sheep,  *  *  *  but  ye  believe  not  because  ye  are  not  of 
my  sheep,  as  I  said  unto  you.  *  *  *  My  sheep  hear  my  voice, 
and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me,  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal 
life  ;  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out 
of  my  hand." 

(1)  The  sheep  here  are  those  to  whom  he  will  give  eternal  life. 

(2)  They  are  those  for  whom  he  lays  down  his  life. 

(3)  They  are  not  all,  because  he  tells  those  who  were  rejecting  him 
that  they  were  not  his  sheep. 

(4)  The  whole  language  used  implies  that  the  salvation  of  the 
sheep  alone  is  the  object  for  which  his  life  is  laid  down. 

John  17:9.19.  "I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for  them  which  thou 
hast  given  me.  *  *  *  For  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself  that  they 
also  may  be  sanctified  through  the  truth." 

Rom.  5:8.9.  "But  God  commendeth  his  love  towards  us,  in  that' 
while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us.  Much  more  then, 
being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath 
through  him." 

Here  those  for  whom  Christ  died  are  plainly  declared  to  be  thus 
justified  by  his  blood,  and  the  certainty  ot  salvation  from  wrath  is 
maintained. 

See  also  the  passage  in  Rom.  8th  chapter,  where  the  Apostle  uses 
the  language  of  exultation.  In  verse  32.  "He  that  spared  not  his 
own  Son  ;  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all  ;  how  shall  he  not,  with 
him,  also,  freely  give  us  all  things  ?'' 

(1)  For  us  all  :  here  is  the  true  extent  of  the  atonement.  The  all, 
are  those  who  are  truly  saved. 

(2)  Those,  for  whom  he  has  thus  been  delivered,  feel  assured  that 
he  will  give  also  all  grace,  so  that  their  salvation  is  secure.  But  this 
is  true  only  of  the  elect ;  therefore,  for  them  alone  and  not  for  others, 
was  Christ  "not  spared." 

Verse  34.  "Who  is  he  that  condemneth.  It  is  Christ  that  died." 
This  is  the  sufficient  answer  as  the  apostle  teaches  ;  but  according  to 
the  theory  of  Fuller  it  is  the  application  of  Christ's  death,  and  not  the 
death  itself,  that  removes  condemnation. 


329 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


Eph.  5:25.  "Husbands  love  your  wives  even  as  Christ  loved  the 
church,  and  gave  himself  for  it." 

Titus  2:14.  "Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us 
from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous 
of  good  works."  It  is  for  the  "us"  who  compose  this  peculiar  people, 
that  Christ'has  gi'ven  himself." 

1  Peter  5:20.  The  very  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  world  is 
said  to  have  taken  place  for  those  "who  by  him  do  believe  in  God." 

The  arguments  in  favour  of  this  later  theory  are  (1)  that  the  Scrip- 
tures use  expressions,  which  favour  a  general  atonement,  at  the  same 
time  that  they  speak  of  a  specific  object  in  Christ's  death.  It  is  claimed 
that  both,  the  general  atonement,  and  the  particular  application  are 
thus  taught. 

(2)  The  second  argument  is  that  this  will  make  the  specific  offer 
of  the  gospel  to  all  appear  more  sincere  than  the  other  form. 

These  arguments  will  be  considered  in  connection  with  the  last  theory 
of  atonement,  commonly  called  the  Calvinistic  theory.  It  is  that  of 
Calvin  and  the  churches  which  he  established.  It  is  the  theory  of  the 
Regular  Baptists  of  the  past.  No  other  prevailed  among  those  who  have 
held  distinctively  Calvinistic  Baptist  sentiments  until  the  days  of 
Andrew  Fuller.  He,  because  of  his  great  ability,  contributed  greatly 
to  the  acceptance  of  the  modification  which  we  have  just  been  consid- 
ering. After  stating  the  older  Calvinistic  theory  I  will  proceed  to 
show  that  this  is  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  the  atonement  in  each  of 
its  particulars.  I  have  assumed  heretofore  that  the  nature  of  the 
Atonement  is  such  as  is  taught  by  this  doctrine.  After  this  proof 
we  shall  proceed  to  inquire  into  its  extent,  or  whether  it  is  general 
or  particular.  In  that  place  will  naturally  come  up  the  questions  as 
to  the  true  explanation  of  the  passages  which  have  been  thought  to 
teach  a  general  atonement. 


7.  The  Calvinistic  theory  of  the  atonement  is,  that  in  the  sufferings 
and  death  of  Christ,  he  incurred  the  penalty  of  the  sins  of  those  whose 
substitute  he  was,  so  that  he  made  a  real  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of 
God  for  the  law  which  they  had  broken.  On  this  account,  God  now 
pardons  all  their  sins,  and  being  fully  reconciled  to  them,  his  electing 
love  flows  out  freely  towards  them. 

The  doctrine  as  thus  taught  involves  the  following  points  : 

1.  That  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  were  a  real  atonement. 

2.  That  in  making  it  Christ  became  the  substitute  of  those  whom 
he  came  to  save. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  330 

3.  That  as  such  he  bore  the  penalty  of  their  transgressions. 

4.  That  in  so  doing  he  made  ample  satisfaction  to  the  demands  of 
the  law,  and  to  the  justice  of  God. 

5.  That  thus  an  actual  reconciliation  has  been  made  between  them 
and  God. 

Each  of  these  points  will  need  explanation  and  amplification,  as  well 
as  proof,  that  the  precise  meaning  of  each  may  be  clearly  ascertained. 

I.  The  first  point  to' be  proved  is  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  a 
real  atonement. 

By  this  is  meant  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  not  merely  a  moral 
example,  as  say  the  Socinians ;  that  it  was  not. merely  an  arrangement 
set  forth  in  the  universe  as  the  means  of  lowering  the  demands  of  the 
law,  as  say  the  Arminians ;  that  it  was  not  a  mere  exhibition  of  God's 
determination  to  maintain  his  government  for  the  benefit  of  His 
creatures,  according  to  the  governmental  hypothesis  ;  but  that  it  was 
a  sacrifice  for  sin,  the  great  antitype  of  the  Mosaic  sacrifices,  by 
which,  guilt  and  condemnation  is  taken  away  from  those  for  whom  he 
made  it,  and^they  are  made  at  one  with  God.  The  proof  that  this 
was  the  nature  of  Christ's  act,  is  : 

1.  That  this  is  the  generally  received  notion  of  sacrifice  in  all 
nations. 

2.  That  the  earliest  record  of  sacrifice,  in  the  history  of  Cain  and 
Abel,  points  to  the  idea  that  God  had  appointed  a  mode  of  expiation 
for  guilt.  The  sacrifice  of  Abel  was  in  one  sense  no  better  than  that 
of  Cain.  Each  was  a  gift ;  but  that  of  Abel  was  a  sacrifice  of.  blood, 
in  testimony  of  acknowledged  guilt  ;  that  of  Cain  merely  a  thank 
offering.  The  Lord  had  respect  to  the  offering  of  Abel,  and  when 
Cain  was  angry,  the  Lord  remonstrated  with  him,  and  said  :  "If  thou 
doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  accepted  ?  and  if  thou  doest  not  well,  sin 
(a  sin-offering)  lieth  at  the  door."  This  account  establishes  the  fact 
that  the  idea  of  sacrifice,  which  thus  has  prevailed  among  all  men, 
originated  in  early  instruction  by  God,  beginning  from  the  time  of 
our  first  parents. 

3.  When  we  come,  however,  to  look  at  the  sacrifices  of  the  Mosaic 
economy,  we  find  still  the  same  idea  taught,  and  even  more  fully; 
since  the  type  was  now  confined  to  the  nation  through  which  the 
antitype  was  to  appear.  That  economy  shows  that  the  blood  of 
animals  was  constantly  offered  to  God  ;  that  this,  was  done  by  His 
command  as  making  reconciliation  and  atonement ;  that  in  these  offer- 
ings was  always  involved  the  idea  of  sin  committed  by  the  people,  or 


331  Abstract  or  Theology. 

the  individual,  or  the  priests,  or  a  ceremonial  defilement,  of  the  nature 
of  sin,  which  made  essential  the  cleansing  of  the  altar  itself  or  the 
persons  officiating  ;  that,  in  the  act  of  sacrifice,  the  hand  of  the  indi- 
vidual, or  of  the  elders,  or  of  the  priests  was  laid  upon  the  head  of  the 
animal  for  the  confession  of  sin  upon  it,  that  it  might  be  made  a  proper 
sacrifice  ;  that  the  animal  was  then  slam  or  sent  away  ;  and  that,  as 
the  result  of  all  these  arrangements,  the  forgiveness  of  sin  followed. 

This  latter  idea  may  appear  too  strongly  put,  but  it  is  owing  to  our 
overlooking  the  fact  that  the  sins  thus  atoned  for  were  not  all  the  sins 
of  the  Israelites,  but  only  the  sins  which  took  place  in  their  relations, 
as  individual,  or  as  a  nation,  to  God.  The  forgiveness  of  them  involved, 
therefore,  only  the  temporal  blessings  thus  associated.  As  they  were 
typical  of  Christ,  and  of  a  heavenly  Canaan,  so  those  who  looked 
through  the  type  to  the  antitype  received  full  pardon,  because  of  the 
offering  that  God  was  to  make,  and  in  which  they  trusted.  In  either 
case,  however,  there  was  actual  remission  of  sins.  For  the  national 
or  individual  sins,  for  which  God  had  appointed  this  method  of  pardon, 
there  was  actual  remission  because  of  the  sacrifice,  and,  in  those  who 
looked  forward  to  Christ,  and  for  whom,  therefore,  his  sacrifice  was 
made,  there  was  also  actual  remission  of  the  sins  thus  laid  upon  him. 

Another  caution  is  also  suggested  here.  We  speak  of  the  sacrifices 
of  old  as  the  means  God  appointed  for  the  pardon  of  sin.  And  in  like 
manner  we  speak  of  God's  method  of  salvation,  being  by  the  death  of 
Christ.  But,  in  either  case,  we  do  not  mean  by  the  expression  that 
the  means  of  salvation  alone  was  in  the  sacrifice,  but  salvation  itself. 
The  law  of  sacrifice  was  the  method  of  God  for  the  remission  of  sin, 
but  the  sacrifice  itself  secured  the  actual  remission  :  so,  the  death  of 
Christ  may  be  contemplated  as  God's  method  of  saving  sinners  so 
long  as  we  are  speaking  of  it  as  the  arrangement  or  scheme  devised 
by  God  to  accomplish  a  certain  work  ;  but,  as  itself  a  sacrifice,  the  death 
of  Christ  secured  salvation,  and  not  the  mere  means  of  salvation. 

4.  Such,  now,  being  the  usage  of  the  word  sacrifice  among  all  men, 
and  especially  in  the  Jewish  nation,  did  we  find  merely  the  word  sacrifice 
used  in  reference  to  Christ,  we  should  be  justified  in  believing  that 
there  was  made  by  him  a  real  sacrifice  or  atonement.  If  the  New 
Testament  or  the  other  Scriptures  said  nothing  of  the  nature  of  his 
work,  or  of  its  effects,  we  should  be  fully  warranted  in  saying  that, 
because  it  was  a  sacrifice,  it  secured  an  actual  remission  of  sins  by  the 
shedding  of  his  blood.  Were  we  confined  to  this  argument,  therefore, 
we  might  simply  show  that  the  New  Testament  does  speak  of  him  as 


Abstract  of  Theology.  332 

the  Lamb  of  God,  as  our  Passover,  and  as  having  died  for  us,  and  thence 
we  might  argue  that  he  has  made  a  real  atonement  for  us.  But  we 
may  go  much  farther  and  show. 

5.  What  is  actually  taught  of  the  nature  of  Christ's  sacrificial 
death;  namely,  that,  by  it,  was  made  an  offering  for  sin  which  actually 
secured  the  pardon  of  the  sinner. 

The  prophets  of  old  spake  of  it  in  this  wise. 

Thus  in  Isaiah  53:6.7.10.11.     "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray, 


*     * 


an 


d  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all. 
*  *  *  He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  *  *  *  Yet 
it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him  ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief:  when 
thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his  seed,  he 
shall  prolong  his  days,  *  *  *  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his 
soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied:  by  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous 
servant  justify  many  ;  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities." 

The  points  here  are:  (1.)  Our  sins  are  laid  on  him.  (2.)  He  is 
afflicted.  (3.)  He  is  made  an  offering  for  sin.  (4.)  Thus  he  justifies 
many,  (not  all, — and  why  these  ?)  "for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities." 

Daniel  9:24.26.  "Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people 
and  upon  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgression,  and  to  make  an 
end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in 
everlasting  righteousness,  *  *  *  And  after  threescore  and  two 
weeks  shall  Messiah  be  cut  off,  but  not  for  himself." 

The  New  Testament  teaching  corresponds  with  that  of  the  Old. 

John  1:28.  The  announcement  of  the  Messiah  by  John  shows  that 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  the  prominent  work  of  his  life.  "Behold, 
the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  The  same 
announcement  was  made  again  the  next  day. 

John  6:51.  The  Saviour  says,  "the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my 
flesh,  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world." 

The  above  are  positive  declarations.  We  must  take  them  in  the 
fulness  of  the  declaration  made.  We  may  be  able  to  explain  the  sense 
in  which  this  is  applied  to  the  world,  but  of  the  persons  here  meant, 
it  is  distinctly  declared  that  sin  is  taken  away  and  life  is  given.  This 
is  true  of  other  similar  passages. 

Matt.  20:28.  "The  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but 
to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many." 

Matt.  26:28.  "This  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which  is 
shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins." 


333  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Acts  20:28.  '-The  church  of  God,  (or  of  the  Lord)  which  he  hath 
purchased  with  his  own  blood." 

Rom.  5:10.     "We  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son." 

2  Cor.  5:18.19.  t:And  all  things  are  of  God,  who  hath  reconciled 
us  to  himself  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  hath  given  to  us  the  ministry  of 
reconciliation  ;  To-wit,  that  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world 
unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them  ;  and  hath  com- 
mitted unto  us  the  word  of  reconciliation." 

Eph.  5:2.  "Christ  *  *  *  hath  given  himself  for  us  an  offering 
and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  savour." 

Col.  1:14.19.22  '-In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood, 
even  the  forgiveness  of  sins  :  *  *  *  It  pleased  the  Father  that 
in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell;  And,  having  made  peace  through 
the  blood  of  the  cross,  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  himself;  by 
him,  I  say,  whether  they  be  things  on  earth,  or  things  in  heaven. 
And  you,  that  were  sometime  alienated  and  enemies  in  your  mind  by 
wicked  works,  yet  now  hath  he  reconciled  in  the  body  of  his  flesh 
through  death,  to  present  you  holy  and  unblamable  and  unreprov- 
able  in  his  sight."  This  passage  includes  all  the  points  under  the 
head  we  are  now  discussing.  We  have  here  a  sacrifice  by  Christ  in 
his  death,  through  his  blood,  peace  is  effected,  and  forgiveness  of  sins  ; 
not  the  means,  but  the  things  themselves  ;  actual  forgiveness,  actual 
peace. 

The  whole  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  proof  upon  this  point. 

1  Peter  1:18 — 20.  "Ye  knowT  that  ye  were  not  redeemed,  &c,  but 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot." 

1  John  2:2.  "He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not  for  ours 
only,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world." 

1  John  4:10.     ':God  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins/' 

The  passages  adduced  will  suffice  to  show  that  Christ's  work  was 
a  real  sacrifice;  that,  by  his  blood,  he  procured  pardon,  peace,  re- 
demption, and  remission  of  sins,  for  those  whom  he  represented. 
How  many  or  how  few,  these  are,  does  not  here  affect  the  question. 
The  work  here  done  was  a  sacrifice  and  was  completely  accomplished. 

The  proof  to  be  given  of  the  other  points  will  add  materially  to 
the  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the  work  of  Christ  in  this  respect. 

II.  In  order  to  make  this  atonement  Christ  became  the  substitute 
of  those  whom  he  came  to  save. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  334 

Here,  also,  we  may  refer  to  the  position  in  this  respect  occupied  by 
the  offering  under  the  Mosaic  laws,  as  well  as  to  the  general  notion  of 
sacrifice. 

The  language  of  Job  1:1 — 5  indicates  that  he  recognized  the  fact 
that  substitutes  might  be  put,  and  would  be  accepted  in  the  place  of 
those  who  were  guilty  of  offences  to  God.  And  this  may  be  taken  as 
evidence  of  the  usually  received  opinion  before  the  segregation  of 
Israel,  as  well  as  of  that  among  the  Gentiles,  subsequent  to  that  event. 

But  the  declarations  of  God  as  to  the  Levitical  sacrifices  and  the 
method  of  their  observance  exhibit  this  more  clearly. 

In  the  first  chapter  of  Leviticus  God  gives  to  Moses  directions,  as 
to  the  offering  of  sacrifices  by  the  people  :  among  other  things  he  says, 
verse  4,  of  the  individual  making  the  offering  ;  "He  shall  put  his 
hand  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt  offering,  and  it  shall  be  accepted  for 
him  to  make  atonement  for  him/' 

This  is  the  substitution  of  the  victim.  We  have  in  Levit.  10:17, 
where  Moses  blames  Eliazar  and  Ithamar,  the  sons  of  Aaron,  for 
neglecting  to  eat  the  sin  offering,  the  declaration  of  the  substitution 
which  took  place  in  the  priest.     Christ  bore  both  offices. 

'•Wherefore,  have  ye  not  eaten  the  sin  offering  in  the  holy  place, 
seeing  it  is  most  holy  and  God  hath  given  it  to  you  to  bear  the 
iniquity  of  the  congregation  to  make  atonement  for  them  before  the 
Lord." 

I  have  referred  to  both  these  cases  to  show  that  there  was  a  sub- 
stitution of  the  priest,  and  one  of  the  victim.  It  was  in  the  latter 
sense  that  Christ  bore  the  sins  of  the  people  and  made  atonement. 

The  account  of  the  scape  goat,  in  Levit.  16:20 — 22,  furnishes  another 
instance  of  substitution,  which,  as  another  use  will  be  made  of  it,  is 
not  referred  to  here  at  length.  It  is,  however,  a  signal  example  of  such 
a  substitution,  as  put'an  animal  in  the  place  of  Israel,  and  made  him, 
as  their  substitute,  to  bear  their  iniquities. 

These  declarations  of  the  substitution  of  the  victim  are  numerous  in 
Exodus  and  Leviticus,  and  are  referred  to  in  all  the  Mosaic  books. 
They,  therefore,  made  familiar  to  the  Jewish  people  the  notion  of  sub- 
stitution, and  impressed  upon  them  the  need  of  a  victim,  for  the  making 
of  atonement,  who  should  actually  stand  in  the  place  of  those  who 
were  to  be  atoned  for.  The  language  of  the  Scriptures  as  to  Christ, 
therefore,  could  not  have  been  otherwise  understood.  As  used  by  the 
Prophets,  by  John  the  Baptist,  and  by  the  inspired  writers  of  the  New 
Testament     it  must  have    been  intended  to  make  this    impression, 


335  Abstract  of  Theology. 

which  must  inevitably  have  been  produced.  So  much  is  this  so,  that 
the  prophetic  language  of  Isaiah,  relative  to  Christ's  sufferings,  was 
felt  to  be  so  completely  fulfilled  in  them,  that  almost  all  the  language 
in  the  New  Testament,  which  speaks  of  his  atonement,  is  tinged  by 
the  expressions  there  used. 

Let  us  look  at  the  53rd  chapter  of  Isaiah,  then,  as  indicative  of  the 
teaching  of  the  sacrifices,  and  of  the  work  foretold  to  be  accomplished. 

The  whole  chapter  speaks  of  substitution  and  inflicted  penalty. 
The  following  passages  refer  to  substitution  : 

verses  4  and  5.  "Surely, he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows:  yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and 
afflicted.  But  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised 
for  our  iniquities:  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him  ;  and 
with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.'' 

verse  6.     "The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

verse  11.  "By  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  servant  justify 
many  ;  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities." 

verse  12.  "He  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  intercession  for 
the  transgressors." 

To  these  prophetic  passages  may  be  added  that  in  Dan.  9.26 : 
"Messiah  shall  be  cut  off,  but  not  for  himself." 

The  following  passages  show  that  the  New  Testament  recognized 
the  fulfilment  of  these  prophecies,  and  that  in  Christ  was  found  the 
antitype  of  the  sacrifices  of  old  in  this  respect. 

Matt.  20:28.  "The  Son  of  man  came  *  *  *  to  give  his  life  a 
ransom  for  many." 

Matt.  26:28.  "This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is  shed 
for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins." 

John  11:47 — 52  gives  an  account  of  a  council  among  the  Jews,  in 
which  a  certain  remark  was  made  by  Caiaphas,  which  the  Evangelist 
claims  as  a  prophecy  and  applies  to  Jesus. 

See  verse  49 — 52.  "And  one  of  them,  named  Caiaphas,  being  the 
high  priest  that  same  year,  said  unto  them,  Ye  know  nothing  at  all, 
nor  consider  that  it  is  expedient  for  us,  that  one  man  should  die  for 
the  people,  and  that  the  whole  nation  perish  not.  And  this  spake  he 
not  of  himself;  but,  being  high  priest  that  year,  he  prophesied  that 
Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation  ;  and  not  for  that  nation  only,  but 
that,  also,  he  should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that 
were  scattered  abroad." 

Rom.  5:8.     "While  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  us." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  336 

Rom.  8:32.  "He  that  spared  not  his  .own  Son,  but  delivered  him 
up  for  us  all." 

2  Cor.  5:21.     '"He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us." 

Gal.  1:3.4.     "Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  gave  himself  for  our  sins." 

Gal.  3:13.     "Being  made  a  curse  for  us." 

Eph.  5:2.  "Christ  also  hath  loved  us  and  hath  given  himself  for 
us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God,  for  a  sweet  smelling  savour." 

1.  Thess.  5:9.10.  "For  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath,  but  to 
obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  who  died  for  us,  that, 
whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live  together  with  him." 

1  Tim.  2:5  6.  "For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between 
God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus ;  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for 
all,  to  be  testified  in  due  time." 

There  are  several  questions  which  arise  in  consequence  of  this  sub- 
stitution on  the  part  of  Christ. 

One  as  to  the  qualifications  essential  to  it  which  he  possessed. 

Another  as  to  the  manner  in  which  substitution  can  be  effected. 

Another  as  to  the  justice  with  which  an  innocent  person  can  be  put 
in  the  place  of  a  guilty  one. 

And  yet  another,  whether  Christ,  being  thus  substituted,  became 
personally  a  sinner. 

These  questions  belong  the  rather,  however,  to  a  discussion  of 
imputation  and  are  only  relevant  here,  because  that  doctrine  is 
implied  in  this  doctrine  of  atonement.  The  only  exception  is  the  first. 
The  second  and  third  have  already  been  discussed  in  treating  of  the 
representative  relation  of  Adam  and  the  principle  of  substitution 
involved  in  it,  and  in  the  law  of  sacrifices.     [See  pp.  273; — 278.] 

As  to  the  fourth  point  it  may  be  said  that  Christ  is  not  represented 
in  Scripture  as  made  personally  a  sinner  by  substitution  ;  neither 
were  the  sacrifices  of  old  regarded  as  personally  obnoxious  to  God. 
But  they  were  so  officially;  that  is,  in  their  position  as  substitutes  ; 
and  Christ  became  so,  being  made  a  curse  for  us.  But  this  official 
substitution  did  not  make  him  a  sinner,  but  only  caused  him  to  be 
treated  as  such. 

The  first  question  may  be  answered  thus  : 

1.  That  the  possession  of  a  human  nature,  such  as  ours,  is  re- 
presented in  Scripture  as  essential  to  his  position  as  substitute. 

2.  The  possession  of  a  divine  nature,  in  consequence  of  which  he 
was  a  divine  person,  was  also  requisite  to  give  an  infinite  value  to 
his  work. 


337  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  It  seerns  also  essential  that  he  should  not  have  been  two  persons, 
a  divine  person,  and  a  human  person ;  else  could  not  the  value  of  the 
acts  performed  in  his  human  nature  have  been  greater  than  those  of 
any  other  innocent  man.  It  was,  therefore,  not  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  that  was  substituted  for  us,  but  Christ  himself;  yet  it  was  not 
Christ  in  his  divine  nature  that  suffered,  but  value  was  given  to  the 
suffering  from  its  being  the  suffering  of  one,  who  also  essentially 
possessed  the  divine  nature. 

The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  lies,  therefore,  at  the  basis  of  that  of  the 
atonement,  and  hence  the  denial  of  the  latter  by  all  those  who  reject 
the  former. 

4.  A  holy  nature  ;  a  lamb  without  spot  or  blemish. 

5.  As  consequent  upon  the  possession  of  such  a  union  of  natures 
in  himself,  Christ  could  make  a  voluntary  offering  of  himself,  by  which 
merit  could  be  procured  and  penalty  endured  for  others. 

6.  That  he  should  be  designated  by  the  Father  to  this  position, 
that  he  might  be  the  legal  representative  of  his  people  and  their 
covenant  head. 

III.  In  so  offering  himself,  Christ  actually  bore  the  penalty  of  the 
transgressions  of  those  for  whom  he  was  substituted. 

1.  This  point  is  involved  in  the  two  that  have  preceded  it,  and  con- 
sequently may  be  argued  from  the  evidence  afforded  by  them.  These 
points  mutually  confirm  each  other.  Thus,  in  bearing  the  penalty,  he 
appears  to  have  been  substituted  for  us  and  to  have  been  made  a 
sacrifice.  In  being  made  a  sacrifice,  he  has  been  substituted  and  has 
borne  the  penalty.  We  may,  therefore,  present  all  the  proofs  that  Christ 
was  a  sacrifice,  and  was  the  substitute  for  our  sins,  as  so  much  in 
favour  of  the  fact  that  he  bore  the  penalty  of  transgression. 

But  we  may  otherwise  learn  from  the  Scriptures  themselves  that 
this  penalty  was  actually  borne  by  Christ.     It  is  taught  : 

2.  In  those  passages  in  which  Christ  is  represented  as  having 
borne  our  iniquities.  The  meaning  of  this  clause  is  definitely  fixed 
by  the  Scripture  usage.  In  the  following  passages,  this  phrase  is 
applied  to  Christ: 

Isaiah  53:6.     ''The  Lord  hath  laid  on   him   the  iniquity    of  us  all." 
Isaiah  53;  11.     "For  by  his  knowledge   shall   my   righteous  servant 

justify  many;  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities." 

Isaiah  53:12.     "He  was  numbered  with   the  transgressors  ;  and  he 

bare  the  sin  of  many." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  338 

Heb.  9:28.  "So  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many  ; 
and  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear  the  second  time 
without  sin  unto  salvation." 

1  Peter  2:24.  "Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree." 

The  following  passages  show  that  the  phrase  "to  bear  iniquity" 
means  to  bear  the  penalty  of  iniquity. 

Lev.  5:1.  "And  if  a  soul  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  swearing,  and 
is  a  witness,  whether  he  hath  seen  or  known  of  it ;  if  he  do  not  utter 
it,  then  he  shall  bear  his  iniquity." 

Lev.  5:17.  "If  a  soul  sin  and  commit  any  of  these  things  which 
are  forbidden  to  be  done  by  the  commandments  of  the  Lord ;  though 
he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his  iniquity." 

Lev.  7:18.  "If  any  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  of  his  peace  offerings 
be  eaten  at  all  on  the  third  day,  it  shall  not  be  accepted,  neither  shall 
it  be  imputed  unto  him  that  offereth  it:  .  it  shall  be  an  abomination, 
and  the  soul  that  eatetb.  of  it  shall  bear  his  iniquity." 

Lev.  19:8.  "Therefore  every  one  that  eateth  it  shall  bear  his 
iniquity,  because  he  hath  profaned  the  hallowed  thing  of  the  Lord, 
and  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people." 

Lev.  24:15.  "And  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
saying,  Whosoever  curseth  his  God  shall  bear  his  sin." 

Numbers  14:34.  "After  the  number  of  the  days  in  which  ye 
searched  the  land,  even  forty  days,  each  day  for  a  year,  shall  ye  bear 
your  iniquities,  even  forty  years,  and  ye  shall  know  my  breach  of 
promise." 

Ezekiel  18:20.  "The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die.  The  son  shall 
not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  neither- shall  the  father  bear  the 
iniquity  of  the  son." 

Ezekiel  44:10.12.  "And  the  Levites  that  are  gone  away  far  from 
me,  when  Israel  went  astray,  which  went  astray  away  from  me  after 
their  idols;  they  shall  even  bear  their  iniquity."  "Because  they 
ministered  unto  them  before  their  idols,  and  caused  the  house  of 
Israel  to  fall  into  iniquity  ;  therefore  have  I  lifted  up  my  hand  against 
them,  saith  the  Lord  God,  and  they  shall  bear  their  iniquity."  [See 
Magee  on  the  Atonement,  vol.  1,  pp.  200 — 220,  for  an  able  and 
learned  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  "bear  iniquity."] 

Another  class  of  passages  shows  that  Christ  bore  the  penalty  of  sin 
by  representing  him  as  suffering  because  of  it,  and  as  bearing  the 
penalty  attached  to  it.     Such  passages  used  as  to   an  innocent  person 


339  Abstract  of  Theology. 

show  that  he  bore  the  penalty  for  others,  but  in  most  it  is  distinctly 
declared  that  it  was  for  his  people. 

Suffering  is  of  three  kinds:  (1)  Calamity  or  misfortune,  which  has 
no  reference  to  sin  ;  (2)  chastisement,  which  is  designed  for  the  im- 
provement of  the  sufferer ;  (3)  punishment  or  penalty,  which  is 
designed  for  satisfaction  to  justice.  The  language  of  Scripture  shows 
that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  of  the  last  class. 

(1)  That  class  of  passages  which  represents  Christ  as  suffering 
because  of  our  sin,  or  that  his  sufferings  were  connected  wTithour  sins. 

The  passage  in  Isaiah  53:4.5  is  a  signal  example.  "Surely  he  hath 
borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows :  yet  we  did  esteem  him 
stricken,  smitten  of  Cod,  and  afflicted.  But  he  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities  :  the  chastisement  of 
our  peace  was  upon  him  ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed." 

In  accordance  with  this  vision  of  the  prophet  we  have  the  accounts 
given  in  the  New  Testament. 

Rom.  4:25.     "Who  was  delivered  for  our  offences.'' 

Heb.  13:12.  "Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  the 
people  with  his  own  blood,  suffered  without  the  gate." 

1  Pet.  2:24.  "Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree." 

1  Pet.  3:18.  "For  Christ  also  hath,  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just 
for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God." 

More  passages  might  be  given  were  it  not  that  the  Scriptures  more 
frequently  state  the  nature  of  this  connection,  and  they  will  be  quoted 
under  the  succeeding  class  under  this  head. 

The  second  class  of  passages  which  treats  of  the  connection  of  Christ's 
suffering  with  our  sins  is  that  which  represents  those  sufferings  as  the 
penalty  of  our  sins,  or  which  declares  that   Christ   bore   that  penalty. 

The  penalty  which  Christ  bore  for  us,  includes  all  the  suffering 
which  he  endured  on  our  behalf.  It  is  not  confined  to  any  one  act 
of  his  life,  but,  as  those  sufferings  culminated  in  the  agony  of  the 
cross,  the  penalty  is  spoken  of  chiefly  as  borne  there.  His  previous 
sufferings,  the  miseries,  to  which  he  was  subjected,  and  the  evils  he 
endured,  were  but  as  the  beginning,  and  a  small  beginning  of  the 
penalty  which  he  there  completed. 

The  penalty  due  for  our  transgressions  was  death,  the  full  meaning 
of  which  is  only  foreshadowed  to  us  by  the  death  of  the  body.  Added 
to  this  is  the  separation  from  God,  by  reason  of  the  moral  death  which 
ensued  from  sin,  and  the  condition   of  condemnation  for  sin.     The 


Abstract  of  Theology.  340 

former  must  be  eternal,  unless  restoration  to  God  is  effected.  The 
latter  involves  eternal  death  in  its  mere  execution. 

Christ  bore  the  guilt  of  those  for  whom  he  died,  and  thus  it  became 
fit  that  upon  him  God  should  inflict  the  penalty. 

The  result  has  been  the  removal  of  condemnation  and  the  recon- 
ciliation effected  between  us  and  God.  In  the  removal  of  these  evils 
eternal  death  is  taken  away. 

As  to  the  death  of  the  body,  according  to  God's  wisdom,  and  in  a 
manner  similar  to  his  course  in  many  other  cases,  the  curse  is  made 
no  longer  a  curse,  because  the  sting  is  removed,  and  the  death  of  the 
body,  otherwise  so  intimately  connected  with  eternal  death,  now 
introduces  the  Christian  into  eternal  life. 

The  death  of  Christ  included  the  penalty  in  all  its  fulness.  In  it 
he  offered  up  his  body  and  was  laid  in  the  grave.  In  it  the  separation 
from  God  took  place  by  which  he  was  led  to  feel  himself  forsaken. 
"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me,"  was  his  cry  of  agony. 
That  his  death  was  not  eternal,  as  would  ours  have  been,  arose  from 
the  fact  that  in  the  execution  of  the  sentence  of  condemnation,  God 
found  in  him  not  such  a  victim  as  mere  man  would  have  been, 
unable  to  atone,  or  render  full  satisfaction;  but  one  whose  glorious 
nature  gave  infinite  value  to  suffering,  and  who  could  feel  most 
keenly,  yet  could  bear  without  destruction,  the  wrath  of  God. 

The  Scriptures  represent  just  such  a  penalty  to  have  been  endured 
by  Christ,  accompanied  by  just  such  agonies.  No  one  can  read  the 
accounts  given  by  the  evangelists  without  being  impressed  by  the  fact 
that  they  ascribe  just  such  a  character  to  his  sufferings  on  Calvary. 

But,  independent  of  their  general  statements,  we  have  the  class  of 
passages  just  referred  to,  that  in  which  Christ's  suffering  is  represented 
as  the  penalty  of  our  transgressions. 

In  Zechariah  13:7  we  have  that  remarkable  prophecy  which  can  be 
applied  to  Christ  as  it  has  never  been  applied  to  any  save  Christ. 
"Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that  is 
my  fellow  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  context  speaks  of  a  purging 
of  Jerusalem,  out  of  the  trial  of  which  a  third  part  shall  be  brought, 
and  the  means  by  which  this  is  done  is  the  smiting  of  the  shepherd, 
and  the  scattering  of  the  sheep,  through  which  action  they  are  refined, 
and  he  says,  "they  shall  call  on  my  name,  and  I  will  hear  them  :  I  will 
say,  It  is  my  people  :  and  they  shall  say,  The  Lord  is  my  God." 

Isaiah  53:5.  uThe  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him; 
and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  The  latter  part  of  this  verse  is 
quoted  in  1  Peter  2:24. 


341  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Isaiah  53:8.     "For  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  he  stricken."' 

verse  9.     Declares  his  perfect  innocence  and  then 

verse  10  says  :  "Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him  ;  he  hath  put 
him  to  grief:  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he 
shall 'see  his  seed,  &c." 

Matt.  20:28.  "Even  as  the  Son  of  man  came,  *  *  *  to  give 
his  life,  a  ransom  for  many." 

Rom.  5:10.  "For  if,  when  we  were  enemies,  wTe  were  reconciled  to 
God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall 
be  saved  by  his  life." 

Rom.  6:10.     "For  in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto  sin  once." 

1  Cor.  15:3.  "For  I  delivered  unto  you,  first  of  all,  that  which  I 
also  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the 
Scriptures." 

2  Cor.  5:14.15.  "For  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us  ;  because 
we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead  :  And  that 
he  died  for  all,  &c." 

2  Cor.  5:21.  "For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew 
no  sin." 

Gal.  3:13.  "Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us." 

Col.  1:21.22.  "You,  that  were  sometime  alienated  *  *  *  yet 
now  hath  he  reconciled  in  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death." 

Heb.  9:26.  "Now  once,  in  the  end  of  the  world,  hath  he  appeared 
to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself." 

IV.  We  have  thus  seen  (1)  that  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ 
were  a  real  atonement;  (2)  that  in  making  it  Christ  became  the  substitute 
of  those  whom  he  came  to  save  ;  (3)  that  as  such  he  bore  the  penalty 
of  their  transgressions.  From  these  the  fourth  point  follows,  that  in 
so  doing,  he  made  ample  satisfaction  to  the  demands  of  the  law,  and 
to  the  justice  of  God. 

1.  The  very  fact  that  he  was  the  substitute  of  the  sinner,  and  that 
he  bore  his  penalty  shows  that  the  satisfaction  he  made  was  ample  ; 
Christ  could  have  made  none  that  was  not.  Anything  he  could  do 
must  be  acceptable  to  God  ;  for  God  delighteth  in  him.  Any  act  of 
his  must  be  of  infinite  value  to  accomplish  any  end  for  which  he 
designed  it.  Any  penalty  borne  by  him  must  have  found  a  victim 
fully  sufficient  to  fulfil  every  demand.  The  very  fact  that  he  has 
been  substituted  and  has  borne  the  penalty,  shows  that  he  has  made 
ample  satisfaction. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  342 

2.  But  this  is  also  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  declaration  is  made 
that  thus  the  demands  of  the  law  are  fulfilled  and  not  lowered.  The 
language  of  Christ  on  this  point  is  explicit. 

Matt.  5:17.  "Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law,  or  the 
prophets :  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil." 

Rom.  7:1—6.  The  apostle  argues  that  we  are  no  longer  bound  to' 
the  law,  but  bound  to  Christ ;  that  our  obligations  have  been  annulled, 
and  that,  henceforth,  "we  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that  being  dead 
wherein  we  were  held  ;  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  spirit,  and 
not  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter."  This  whole  argument  implies  and  is 
based  upon  the  idea  that  the  law  has  been  fulfilled  for  us  by  Christ,  who 
has  thus-delivered  us' from  the  bondage  of  obligation,  that  we  might 
serve  with  the  spirit  of  love. 

Freedom  from  the  law  on  our  part,  accompanied  by  the  declaration 
that  Christ  came  not  to  lower  it,  but  to  fulfil  it,  shows  that  in  the 
atonement  for  us,  he  has  made  ample  satisfaction  for  all  our  sins  and 
failures,  as  well  as  secured  for  us  complete  righteousness  by  his  perfect 
obedience. 

We  may  here  add  also  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  42:21.  "The  Lord 
is  well  pleased  for  his  righteousness  sake ;  he  will  magnify  the  law 
and  make  it  honorable,"  and  the  fact  that  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  The 
Lord  our  Righteousness,  in  Jeremiah  23:6,  and  also  that  the  Apostle  Paul 
in  Philippians  3:7 — 11,  renounces  his  own  righteousness  of  the  law  that 
he  might  have  that  ' -which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  This  fact  implies  a  con- 
viction of  the  ample  extent  of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  Christ. 

3.  That  an  ample  satisfaction  is  made  to  justice  is  seen  also  in  the 
fact  that  mercy  and  justice  are  said  to  be  reconciled  in  Christ.  These 
are  represented  as  antagonistic  ;  mercy  pleading  for  the  sinner,  and 
justice  demanding  his  punishment ;  truth  requiring  the  fulfilment  of 
the  threatened  penalty,  which  is  consistent  with  peace,  only  by  the 
death  of  Christ. 

Psalm  85:10.  "Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together,  righteousness 
and  peace  have  kissed  each  other." 

Isaiah  45:21.     There  is  no  God  like  me,  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour.'.' 

Isaiah  32:17.  "And  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and 
the  effect  of  righteousness  quietness  and  assurance."     This  is  a  wonder. 

The  same  fact  seems  to  be  declared  in  the  song  of  the  angels,  on  the 
plain  of  Bethlehem,  Luke  2:14.  "Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and 
on  earth  peace,  good  will  to  men." 


343  Abstract  of  Theology. 

4.  This  ia  also  seen  in  the  approval  which  God  gave  to  the  work 
of  Christ.  Had  that  work  not  been  satisfactory,  we  should  not  have 
expected  the  actual  declarations  of  approval  of  it.  That  approval 
is  evidenced. 

(1)  By  Christ's  testimony  to  it.  He  tells  us  that  he  came  to  do 
the  will  of  his  father ;  that  his  father  sent  him  not  to  condemn  the 
world  ;  but  gave  him,  that  whosoever  believeth,  might  not.  perish 
but  have  everlasting  life. 

(2)  In  the  manifested  expressions  of  approbation  by  God  in  the 
miracles  by  which  Christ  attested  his  mission,  as  well  as  by  the 
witness  of  John. 

(3)  In  God's  own  words  of  approval,  at  his  Baptism,  at  the  trans- 
figuration on  the  mount,  and  at  other  times. 

(4)  In  the  angelic  messengers  sent  to  strengthen  him  in  his  work, 
and  to  minister  to  him  after  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness,  and  in 
the  garden. 

(5)  That  most  signal  evidence,  afforded,  as  is  constantly  declared, 
as  a  seal  of  approval,  which  is  seen  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  from 
the  dead. 

5.  The  ample  character  of  this  satisfaction  is  farther  seen  in  the 
declarations  by  the  sacred  writers  of  the  certainty  of  the  salvation  that 
is  based  upon  it.  Every  offer  of  salvation  made,  is  a  passage  in  proof 
of  this  point.  The  words  of  the  Commission,  "He  that  believeth,  and 
is  baptized,  shall  be  saved,"  and  the  offer  of  the  apostle,  "Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  are  positive 
affirmations. 

6.  But  it  may  be  said  that  all  of  these  points  only  prove  God's 
approval  of  whatever  was  done  by  Christ,  without  showing  that  in 
that  work  satisfaction  has  been  made.  While  this  is  not  admitted,  we 
find  further  proof  in  the  sixth  place  in  such  passages,  as  show  that  so 
ample  has  been  the  work  of  Christ,  that  even  a  sinner  is  warranted 
to  approach,  and  claim  salvation  in  Christ's  name,  and  that  God  gives 
it,  as  due  to  the  merits  and  work  of  Christ. 

Heb.  4:16.  "Let  us  therefore  come  boldly  unto  a  throne  of  grace, 
that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need." 

Heb.  10:19.22.  "Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into 
the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  *  *  *  Let  us  draw  near  with 
a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith." 

Eph.  3:12.  "In  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access,  with  confidence, 
by  the  faith  of  him." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  344 

1  John  1:9.  "If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins  and  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness." 

7.  The  ample  satisfaction  of  the  atonement  made  is  also  seen  in 
the  fact  that  it  is  declared  perfect  for  its  end  in  the  language  of  the 
Apostle  in  Heb.  9=25 — 28,  where  he  argues  the  incompleteness  of  the 
Mosaic  sacrifices,  because  they  had  to  be  offered  more  than  once,  and 
the  perfection  of  Christ's,  because  "now,  once,  in  the  end  of  the  world, 
hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself." 

And  again  in  Chap.  10:10.  "We  are  sanctified  by  the  offering  of 
the  body  of  Christ  once  for  all." 

1  John  1:7.      "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin." 

A  question  arises  in  view  of  this  ample  satisfaction,  in  what  way 
may  it  be  regarded  as  gratuitous  when  it  is  thus  a  full  recompense 
for  all.  This  is  well  answered  in  Hodge's  Outlines  of  Theology,  p. 
308,  1st  Edition.     The  answer  includes  five  points. 

(1.)  Christ  did  not  die  to  make  the  Father  love  the  Elect,  but  was 
given  to  die  because  of  that  love. 

John  3:16.  "God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  might  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 
lasting life." 

1  John  4:9.  "In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  towards  us, 
because  that  God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world  that  we 
might  live  through  him." 

(2  )  Christ  made  full  satisfaction  to  divine  justice  in  order  to  render 
the  exercise  of  love  consistent  with  justice. 

Rom.  3:26.  "To  declare,  I  say,  at  this  time  his  righteousness  :  that 
he  might  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him   which  believeth  in  Jesus." 

Psalms  85:10.  "Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together;  righteousness 
and  peace  have  kissed  each  other."  The  greater  the  obstacle  and  the 
more  costly  the  price  demanded  of  love  by  justice,  the  greater  the 
love  and  the  more  free. 

On  this  ground  God  commendeth  his  love. 

Rom.  5:8.  "But  God  commendeth  his  love  to  us,  in  that,  while  we 
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us." 

(3)  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son  are  one  God,  identical  in 
nature,  moved  by  the  same  love,  and  exacting  the  same  satisfaction. 

(4.)  Penal  satisfaction  differs  from  pecuniary.  If  a  Sovereign 
appoints,  or  accepts  a  substitute,  it  is  all  of  grace. 

(5.)  To  Christ  as  Mediator,  the  purchased  salvation  of  his  people 
belongs  of  right   from  the   terms  of  the   eternal   covenant,  but  to   us, 


345  Abstract  of  Theology 

that  salvation  is  given  in  all  its  elements,  stages,  and  instrumentalities, 
only  as  a  free  and  sovereign  favour.  The  gift  is  gratuitous,  if  the 
beneficiary  has  no  shadow  of  claim  to  it,  and  if  no  conditions  are 
exacted  of  him.  The  less  worthy  the  beneficiary  is,  and  the  more 
difficult  the  conditions  which  justice  exacts  of  the  giver,  the  more 
eminently  gratuitous  the  gift  is. 

V.  The  fifth  point  to  be  shown,  is  that  by  this  work  an  actual 
reconciliation  has  been  effected. 

1.  The  points  already  proved  show  this.  If  an  atonement  has 
been  made  by  one  who  was  actually  substituted  in  the  place  of  the 
guilty  ;  who,  as  so  substituted,  paid  the  penalty  and  rendered  full 
satisfaction  to  the  law,  so  that  the  law  has  no  longer  any  claims;  then 
there  has  been  undoubtedly  an  actual  reconciliation.  Peace  has  been 
made  by  the  cross  between  God  and  man. 

2.  The  plain  declarations  of  Scripture  are,  that  God  has  been 
reconciled  to  us  by  Christ. 

Rom.  5--10.  "If,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God 
by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be 
saved  by  his  life."  Similar  declarations  are  found  in  2  Cor.  5:19; 
Eph.  2:13.16.17;  Col.  1:20.21.22.  They  are  not  given  at  length, 
because  they  will  have  to  be  presented  immediately  for  another 
purpose.  It  may  be  said  tha.t  reconciliation  is  admitted,  but  that  this 
means  only  a  method  of  reconciliation. 

3.  Therefore  it  must  be  shown  that  actual  reconciliation  has  been 
made  from  what  the  Scriptures  say  of  the  purpose  had  in  view  in 
reconciliation,  which  was  actually  to  save,  not  to  make  salvation 
possible. 

Matt.  18:20.  "For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  save  that  which  is 
lost,1'     Also  Luke  19:10. 

2  Cor.  5:21.  "'He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no 
sin  ;   that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him." 

Gal.  1=4.  ."Who  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he  might  deliver  us 
from  this  present  evil  world,  according  to  the  will  of  our  Father." 

Gal.  4=4.5.  "God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under 
the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law;  that  we  might 
receive  the  adoption  of  sons." 

1  Tim.  115.  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  accepta- 
tion, that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners;  of  whom 
I  am  chief." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  346 

The  purpose  of  God  is  thus  seen,  not  to  make  salvation  possible, 
but  actually  to  save,  to  redeem,  to  make  righteous,  &c.  Still  it  may 
be  said,  that  this  purpose  might  be  effected  by  a  method  of  recon- 
ciliation. 

4.  But  the  Scriptures,  in  speaking  of  what  is  actually  effected  by 
Christ's  work  for  those  who  are  reconciled  by  it,  show  that  the  recon- 
ciliation was  actually  made  in  that  work  itself.  The  time  at  which  it 
was  done,  and  what  was  done  at  that  time  show  this. 

Rom.  5=10,  "If,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God 
by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be 
saved  by  his  life."  The  time  was,  "when  we  were  enemies,"  at  the 
time  of  Christ's  death.  The  application  of  salvation  follows  this 
reconciliation. 

Gal.  3:13.  ' -Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us." 

Eph.  1:7.  'Tn  whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace." 

Eph.  2>"14 — 16.  "For  he  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one, 
and  hath  broken  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  us  ; 
having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  enmity,  even  the  law  of  command- 
ments contained  in  ordinances;  for  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one 
new  man,  so  making  peace;  and  that  he  might  reconcile  both  unto 
God  in  one  body  by  the  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  thereby." 

Col.  1:20.  "And  having  made  peace,  through  the  blood  of  his  cross, 
by  him,  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  himself." 

1  Thess.  1:10.  "Even  Jesus,  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath 
to  come." 

1  Peter  1:18.19.  "Ye  were  not  redeemed,  *  *  *  but  with  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish,  and  without 
spot." 

All  these  passages  speak  of  these  effects,  as  actually  accomplished 
by  Christ,  in  his  death  upon  the  cross.  [See  Hodge's  Outlines,  p. 
314,  1st  Edition.] 

5.  The  connection  between  the  gift  of  the  spirit,  and  the  work  of 
Christ  shows,  that  there  has  been  actual  reconciliation.  The  promise 
of  the  Spirit  to  us  is  made  and  that  Spirit  is  given  as  a  reward  of 
Christ's  death.  That  death  is  declared  to  have  this  gift  as  one  of 
the  purposes  to  be  effected  by  it. 

Acts  233.  "Therefore,  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted, 
and  having  received  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 


347  Abstract  of  Theology 

hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  hear."  This  shows  that 
the  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  the  result  of  Christ's  exaltation,  which  was 
also  taught  by  Christ,  when  he  said  that,  unless  he  went  away,  the 
Spirit  could  not  come. 

Gal.  313. 14.  "Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
*  *  *  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through 
faith." 

Titus  3:5.6.  "He  saved  us,  *  *  *  by  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  *  *  *  which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour." 

These  passages  show  that, 

(.1)     The  gift  of  the  Spirit  was  purchased  by  Christ's  death. 

(2)  That  that  gift  secures  actual  salvation. 

(3)  That  it  must  be  given  to  all  for  whom  he  has  died. 

(4)  That  in  that  death  actual  reconciliation  is  consequently  secured. 


The  discussion  of  the  nature  of  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ  has  in 
great  part  prepared  the  way  for  that  of  the  Extent  of  the  Atone- 
ment. But  while  the  previous  inquiry  has  necessarily  included  some 
statements  as  to  the  limitation  which  the  Scriptures  put  upon  this 
work,  and  presented  some  facts  which  establish  such  limitation,  a 
special  treatment  of  this  branch  of  the  subject  is  nevertheless  necessary. 

Here  also  we  have  several  theories. 

I.  The  first  is  that  of  the  Universalists,  w^ho  connecting  the  nature 
which  the  Scriptures  assign  to  the  atonement  with  some  expressions, 
which  seem  to  assert  its  universal  extent,  hold  the  notion  of  such  a 
universal  atonement,  as  actually  secures  the  salvation  of  all  men. 

The  objections  to  this  view  are  : 

1.  That  salvation  is  confined  in  the  Scriptures  to  those  that  believe, 
and  all  men  are  not  believers. 

2.  That  the  gospel  is  spoken  of  as  the  only  means  of  salvation,  and 
the  gospel  is  not  even  preached  to  all. 

3.  That  express  threats  are  uttered  in  the  word  of  God  against 
those  who  die  in  their  sins. 

4.  That  at  least  one  sin  is  expressly  mentioned,  that  shall  not  be 
pardoned. 

5.  That  the  arrangement  of  God's  plan  of  salvation  is  such  as  shows 
that  the  people  of  God  are  saved  from  their  sins,  not  in  them  ;  con- 
sequently the  unholy  are  not  saved. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  348 

6.  The  descriptions  of  the  judgment  day  deny  universal  salvation. 

7.  The  Scripture  doctrine  of  the  Hell  prepared  for  the  punishment 
of  the  wicked  shows  it  to  be  untrue. 

These  and  many  other  facts  show  that  the  atonement  is  limited  in 
some  way.     The  question  arises  in  what  way. 

II.  A  second  theory  makes  the  atonement  itself  general,  but  limits 
its  benefits  to  those  who  exercise  faith. 

It  is  claimed  that  thus  only  can  be  interpreted  the  passages  wrhich 
speak  of  a  work  for  the  world,  consistently  with  any  limitation  ;  that 
thus  only  can  God  justly  offer  salvation  to  all;  and  that  this  theory 
fully  meets  all  the  conditions  on  which  salvation  is  offered. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  salvation  is  offered  and  will  be  given  on 
the  condition  of  faith  and  repentance  ;  nor  that  there  are  general 
expressions  which  assert  that  Christ's  work  of  atonement  has  efficacy 
beyond  the  limits  of  the  Elect;  but  these  facts  must  be  so  explained 
as  to  harmonize  with  the  nature  of  the  atonement  and  its  relation  to 
those  for  whom  it  was  specially  made.  The  following  objections, 
therefore,  may  be  made  to  this  theory. 

1.  Any  atonement,  general  in  any  such  sense  as  not  to  be  limited 
in  God's  purpose,  is  inconsistent  with  what  we  have  seen  to  be  the 
nature  of  the  atonement. 

2.  It  does  not  accord  with  justice  that  any  should  suffer  for 
whom  a  substitute  has  actually  borne  the  penalty,  and  made  full 
satisfaction. 

3.  It  makes  salvation  the  result  in  part  of  faith  ;  but  faith  is  the 
result  of  reconciliation,  not  its  cause  ;  it  is  the  gift  of  God. 

4.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  many  passages  which  teach  the 
doctrine  of  an  Election  of  man  to  salvation  not  because  of  foreseen 
faith. 

5.  It  is  inconsistent  with  tho.^e  passages  which  point  out  the  con' 
nection  of  the  purpose  of  God  with  the  salvation  of  those  who  are 
saved. 

III.  A  third  theory  is  that  this  limitation  is  one  of  purpose  ;  that 
God  designed  only  the  actual  salvation  of  some  ;  and  that,  whatever 
provision  has  been  made  for  others,  he  made  this  positive  arrangement 
by  which  the  salvation  of  certain  ones  is  secured.  In  favour  of  this 
theory  it  may  be  said  : 

1.  That  this  is  in  accordance  with  the  doctrine  of  Election. 

2.  That  it  explains  how  it  is  that  such  a  salvation  as  the  Scriptures 


349  Abstract  of  Theology. 

represent  to  have  been  wrought  out  by  Christ  is  attained  by  some,  and 
by  some  only. 

3.  It  alone  agrees  with  the  language  of  limitation  used  in  some 
Scriptures  as  to  Christ's  death  ;  either  in  those  passages  in  which  it 
is  specially  appropriated  to  Christians  ;  or  those  in  which  he  is  spoken 
of  as  a  ransom  "for  many."     This  class  of  passages  is  numerous. 

The  difficulties  against  this  theory  are  : 

1.  That  the  offer  of  salvation  is  made  to  all  men. 

2.  That  the  Scriptures  speak  of  Christ's  death  as  for  the  world, 
and  in  such  a  way  as  to  contrast  the  world  at  large  with  those  who 
believe. 

An  explanation  of  these  passages  must  therefore  be  given,  which, 
while  it  retains  the  full  force  intended  in  Scripture  of  these  general 
expressions,  and  maintains  the  sincerity  of  God's  offer  of  the  gospel  to 
all,  shows  at  the  same  time  its  harmony  with  the  doctrine  of  a 
definite  purpose  of  God. 

1.  It  was  with  the  intention  of  doing  this  that  Andrew  Fuller 
suggested  his  theory  of  the  atonement.  But,  as  has  been  shown,  that 
theory  accomplishes  the  desired  end  only  by  ascribing  such  a  nature  to 
the  atonement,  as  makes  it  only  a  method  of  reconciliation  for  the 
people  of  God,  and  not  actual  reconciliation. 

2.  A  far  better  explanation  is  given  by  Dr.  A.  A.  Hodge  in  the 
following  question  and  answer  : 

"Ques.  17.  State  first  negatively,  and  then  positively,  the  true 
doctrine  as  to  the  design  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  providing 
satisfaction." 

"I.  Negatively— 1st.  There  is  no  debate  among  Christians  as  to 
the  sufficiency  of  that  satisfaction  to  accomplish  the  salvation  of  all 
men,  however  vast  the  number.  This  is  absolutely  limitless.  2nd. 
Nor  as  to  its  applicability  to  the  case  of  any  and  every  possible  human 
sinner  who  will  ever  exist.  The  relations  of  all  to  the  demands  of 
the  law  are  identical.  What  would  save  one  would  save  another.  3rd. 
Nor  to  the  bona  fide  character  of  the  offer  which  God  has  made  to 
"whomsoever  wills"  in  the  gospel.  It  is  applicable  to  every  one,  it 
will  infallibly  be  applied  to  every  believer.  4th.  Nor  as  to  its  actual 
application.  Arminians  agree  with  Calvinists  that  of  adults  only 
those  who  believe  are  saved,  while  Calvinists  agree  with  Arminians 
that  all  dying  in  infancy  are  redeemed  and  saved.  5th.  Nor  is  there 
any  debate  as  to  the  universal  reference  of  some  of  the  benefits 
purchased  by  Christ.     Calvinists  believe  that   the   entire  dispensation 


Abstract  of  Theology.  350 

of: forbearance  under  which  the  human  family  rests  since  the  fall, 
including  for  the  unjust  as  well  as  the  just  temporal  mercies  and 
means  of  grace,  is  part  of  the  purchase  of  Christ's  blood.  They  admit, 
also  that  Christ  did  in  such  a  sense  die  for  all  men,  that  he  thereby 
removed  all  legal  obstacles  from  the  salvation  of  any  and  every  man, 
and  that  his  satisfaction  may  be  applied  to  one  man  as  well  as  to 
another  "if  God  so  wills  it." 

"II.  But  positively  the  question  is  what  was  the  design  of  the 
Father  and  Son  in  the  vicarious  death  of  Christ.  Did  they  purpose 
to  make  the  salvation  of  the  elect  certain,  or  merely  to  make  the 
salvation  of  all  men  possible?  Did  his  satisfaction  have  reference 
indifferently  as  much  to  one  man  as  to  another  ?  Did  the  satisfaction 
purchase  and  secure  its  own  application,  and  all  the  means  thereof,  to 
all  for  whom  it  was  specifically  rendered  ?  Has  the  impetration  and 
the  application  of  this  atonement  the  same  range  of  objects  ?  Was  it, 
in  the  order  of  the  divine  purpose,  a  means  to  accomplish  the  purpose 
of  election,  or  is  the  election  of  individuals  a  means  to  carry  into  effect 
the  satisfaction  of  Christ  otherwise  inoperative?" 

Our  Confession  answers  : 

Ch.  viii,  §  5.  "The  Lord  Jesus,  by  his  perfect  obedience  and  sacrifice  of  him- 
self, *  *  *  purchased  not  only  reconciliation,  but  an  everlasting  in- 
heritance in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  for  all  those  whom  the  Father  hath  given 
unto  him."  —  Ch.  iii,  \  6.  "As  God  hath  appointed  the  elect  unto  glory,  so 
hath  he,  by  the  eternal  and  most  free  purpose  of  his  will,  foreordained  all 
the  means  thereunto.  Wherefore  they  that  are  elected,  being  fallen  in  Adam, 
are  redeemed  in  Christ.  *  *  *  Neither  are  any  other  redeemed  by 
Christ     *     *     *     but  the  elect  only." 

Ch.  viii,  \  8.  "To  all  those  for  whom  Christ  hath  purchased  redemp- 
tion, he  doth  certainly  and  effectually  apply  and  communicate  the  same." — - 
"Articles  of  Synod  of  Dort,"  Ch.   II,  \  1.2.8. 

"The  design  of  Christ  in  dying  was  to  effect  what  he  actually  does 
effect  in  the  result.  1st.  Incidentally  to  remove  the  legal  impedi- 
ments out  of  the  way  of  all  men,  and  render  the  salvation  of  every 
hearer  of  the  gospel  objectively  possible,  so  that  each  one  has  a  right 
to  appropriate  it  at  will,  to  impetrate  temporal  blessings  for  all,  and 
the  means  of  grace  for  all  to  whom  they  are  providentially  supplied. 
But,  2nd,  Specifically  his  design  was  to  impetrate  the  actual  salvation 
of  his  own  people,  in  all  the  means,  conditions,  and  stages  of  it,  and 
render  it  infallibly  certain.  This  last,  from  the  nature  of  the  case, 
must  have  been  his  real  motive.  After  the  manner  of  the  Augustinian 
Schoolmen  Calvin,  on  1  John  2:2,  says,  "Christ  died  sufficiently  for 
all,  but  efficiently  only  for  the  elect."  [Outlines  of  Theology,  pp. 
416  and  417  of  the  second  edition.] 


351  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  Another  statement  upon  this  subject  may  prove  more  satis- 
factory, although  it  embraces  no  more  than  is  actually  implied  in  the 
above  extract  from  Dr.  Hodge.  It  has  only  the  advantage  of  recog- 
nizing more  explicitly  the  relation  of  the  atoning  work  of  Christ  both 
to  the  world  and  to  the  elect;  a  relation  clearly  indicated  to  be  such 
that  he  can  be  called,  in  some  general  sense,  the  Saviour  of  all  men, 
though  he  bears  this  relation  more  especially  to  those  who  believe. 
1  Tim.  4:10.  The  statement  suggested  is,  that  while,  for  the  Elect, 
he  made  an  actual  atonement,  by  which  they  were  actually  reconciled 
to  God,  and,  because  of  which,  are  made  the  subjects  of  the  special 
divine  grace  by  which  they  become  believers  in  Christ  and  are  justified 
through  him,  Christ,  at  the  same  time,  and  in  the  same  work, 
wrought  out  a  means  of  reconciliation  for  all  men  ;  which  removed 
every  legal  obstacle  to  their  salvation,  upon  their  acceptance  of  the 
same  conditions  upon  which  the  salvation  is  given  to  the  Elect. 
According  to  this  statement: 

1.  Christ  did  actually  die  for  the  salvation  of  all,  so  that  he  might 
be  called  the  Saviour  of  all ;  because  his  work  is  abundantly  sufficient 
to  secure  the  salvation  of  all  who  will  put  their  faith  in  him. 

2.  Christ  died,  however,  in  an  especial  sense  for  the  Elect  ;  because 
he  procured  for  them  not  a  possible,  but  an  actual  salvation. 

3.  The  death  of  Christ  opens  the  way  for  a  sincere  offer  of  sal- 
vation by  God  to  all  who  will  accept  the  conditions  he  has  laid  down. 

4.  That  same  death,  however,  secures  salvation  to  the  Elect, 
because  by  it  Christ  also  obtained  for  them  those  gracious  influences, 
by  which  they  will  be  led  to  comply  with  those  conditions. 

5.  The  work  of  Christ,  contemplated  as  securing  the  means  of 
reconciliation,  is  a  full  equivalent  to  all  that  the  advocates  of  a  general 
atonement  claim:  for  they  do  not  suppose  that  more  than  this  was 
done  for  mankind  in  general ;  while  Calvinists  readily  recognize  that 
this  much  has  been  done  for  all. 

6.  But,  while  the  making  of  an  actual  atonement  for  the  Elect  is  not 
inconsistent  with  the  securing  of  a  method  of  atonement  for  all,  the 
assertion  that  such  was  the  special  work  done  for  them  complies 
with  the  nature  of  the  atonement  as  heretofore  seen,  and  shows*  how 
Christ  could  be  especially  their  Saviour,   and   also  the  Saviour  of  all. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  352 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXIX. 


ELECTION. 

The  words  Elect,  Election,  Predestination,  Chosen,  Foreknow,  and 
Foreknowledge  occur  so  frequently  in  Scripture,  that  it  is  allowed  by 
all  that  the  Scriptures  teach  a  doctrine  of  Election  of  some  kind. 
The  chief  controversy  is  as  to  what  that  doctrine  is. 

Several  theories  have  been  presented  as  descriptive  of  the  instruc- 
tions of  the  Scriptures. 

I.  First  there  is  the  theory  set  forth  by  the  celebrated  John  Locke 
in  his  commentary  and  paraphrase  of  the  epistles  of  Paul.  It  has 
been  called  the  theory  of  Nationalism.  According  to  this,  Election 
consists  "in  the  choice  of  certain  whole  nations  into  the  pale  of  the 
visible  Church  Catholic,  which  choice,  however,  relates  purely  to  their 
privileged  condition  in  this  world,  extending  not  to  their  collective 
eternal  state  in  another  world."  The  cause  of  this  election  is  :  "That 
same  absolute  good  pleasure  of  God,  which,  through  the  exercise  of  His 
sovereign  power,  led  Him  to  choose  the  posterity  of  Jacob,  rather  than 
that  of  Esau,  that,  upon  earth,  they  should  become  his  peculiar  people 
and  be  made  the  depositaries  and  preservers  of  the  true  religion." 
("Faber's  Primitive  Election,"  p.  22.] 

The  objections  to  this  theory  are  evident,  and  may  be  briefly  stated, 
1.  That  the  election  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament  is  an  election 
of  persons  within  a  nation,  and  not  of  the  nation  itself.  A  distinction 
is  made  between  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  remnant  of  them  accor- 
ding to  the  election  of  grace.  Rom.  11:5.  It  is  also  said  in  verse  7: 
''Israel  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  seeketh  for,  but  the  election 
hath  obtained  it,  and  the  rest  were  blinded." 


353  Abstract  of  Theology 

Mr.  Locke  attempts  to  remove  this  difficulty  by  supposing  that  the 
Israel  here  spoken  of  is  the  whole  nation  before  the  loss  of  the  ten 
tribes,  and  that  the  remnant,  is  all  of  the  rest  that  remained  Jews  at 
the  time  Paul  wrote.  But,  that  the  present  nation  was  the  Israel 
referred  to  Paul  himself  shows  by  applying  to  it,  in  Rom.  10:21,  the 
title  of  Israel.  "But  to  Israel,"  he  saith,  "all  day  long  I  have 
stretched  forth  my  hands  unto  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people." 
The  Israel  to  whom  Isaiah,  who  is  here  referred  to,  went,  was  Judah; 
his  prophecies  were  but  seldom  made  to  the  Ten  Tribes. 

2.  A  distinction  is  also  made  between  persons  in  the  same  nation ; 
the  elect  being  separated  from  others,  as  in  Matt.  24:22 — 24,  where 
fearful  calamities  are  foretold,  and  it  is  said,  that  prophets  shall  arise, 
&c,  and  that  if  it  were  possible,  they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect. 

The  parallel  passage  is  in  Mark  13:20 — 22. 

3.  Against  this  theory  may  also  be  quoted  such  passages  as  show 
that  the  called,  and  the  elect  are  not  identical,  as  : 

Matt.  22-14.     "Many  are  called,  but  few  chosen." 

II.  A  modification  of  this  theory  has  been  made  or  the  rather 
another  one  has  been  suggested  so  similar  that  the  idea  has  evidently 
been  caught  from  that  of  Locke.  It  is  given  by  George  Stanly  Faber 
in  his  work  on  "The  Primitive  Doctrine  of  Election."  It  may  be 
called  the  theory  of  Church  Election,  or  of  External  Church  privileges. 
Mr.  Faber  states  it  as  follows  :  "The  idea  is  that  of  an  Election  of 
individuals  into  the  pale  of  the  visible  church,  with  God's  moral 
purpose  that  through  faith  and  holiness  they  should  attain  everlast- 
ing life;  but  yet  with  a  moral  possibility  of  their  abusing  their 
privileges  even  to  their  own  final  destruction. 

1.  It  is  argued  in  favour  of  this,  that  "we  never  find  one  particu- 
lar set  of  Christians  addressed  as  being  especially  elect  to  the  ex- 
clusion of  all  other  Christians,  who,  together  with  the  unconverted 
world  at  large,  are  thence  exhibited  as  reprobates.  But  we  constantly 
find  that  all  the  members  of  th  e  local  church  addressed  are  collectively 
saluted  as  being  in  God's  purpose  and  design  elected  through  holiness 
to  glory." 

In  reply  it  may  be  remarked  : 

(1.)  That  this  argument  proceeds  upon  the  erroneous  supposition 
that  there  were  persons  called  Christians  in  Apostolic  times  who  did 
not  actually  profess  to  be  converted  persons,  and  therefore  were  not 
properly  to  be  regarded  as  such. 


Abstkact  of  Theology.  354 

Every  argument  in  favour  of  a  converted  church  membership  is  an 
argument  against  this  supposition,  and,  therefore,  against  this  theory. 

(2  )  Or  it  proceeds  upon  a  second  erroneous  supposition,  namely, 
that  the  Apostles  undertook  to  pronounce  infallibly  upon  the  spiritual 
condition  of  those  to  whom  they  wrote.  On  the  contrary,  proceeding 
upon  the  rule,  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them,"  they,  in  the 
judgment  of  charity,  spoke  of  those  to  whom  they  wrote  as  though 
they  were  actually  Christians,  because  professedly  such,  and  main- 
taining outwardly  the  life  of  such.  Thus  they  are  called  "holy,"  in 
like  manner  as  they  are  called  "elect,"  and  are  said  "to  be  without  blame 
before  God  in  love,''  Eph.  1:4  ;  and  to  have  redemption,  and  the  for- 
giveness of  sins,  v.  7  ;  and  to  have  obtained  an  inheritance,  of  which 
the  sealing  of  the  Spirit  was  an  earnest. 

2.  In  favour  of  this  view,  it  is  asserted  that  the  Apostle  teaches 
us  in  Rom.  9:6 — 26,  that  the  terms  election  and  elect  are  used  in  the 
same  sense  in  which  they  are  used  in  the  Old  Testament. 

To  this  it  may  be  replied  : 

(1.)  That  if  true  it  favours  the  theory  of  Nationalism  rather  than 
this. 

(2  )  That  the  Apostle  himself  distinguishes  between  the  extent  of 
the  election,  which  had  before  existed,  and  that  which  was  now  mani- 
fested. "They  are  not  all  Israel  who  are  of  Israel."  "Neither  because 
they  are  the  seed  of  Abraham  are  they  all  children  ;"  thus  indicating 
that  the  limitation  had  been  formerly  made  according  to  the  national 
extent,  but  that  now  a  segregation  is  made  from  this.  The  two 
elections,  therefore,  differ  in  extent. 

(3.)  But  the  difference  is  also  in  kind.  This  is  what  affects  this 
theory  most  closely.  Even  under  the  old  election,  not  all  the 
children,  but  simply  the  one  of  the  promise  is  the  one  in  whom  the 
election  exists.  Under  the  new,  the  same  thing  is  true,  the  election  is 
not  of  all  to  whom  the  external  privileges  connected  with  it  belong, 
but  of  those  only  who  are  partakers  of  the  promise.  In  this  respect 
they  are  similar,  and  so  Paul  indicates:  "The  children  of  the  promise 
are  counted  for  the  seed."  But  formerly  the  promise  was  of  Isaac, 
wherefore  it  was  said,  "In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called."  And  that 
promise  was  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  which  wTas  granted  actually  to  all 
of  his  descendants  as  a  class.  So  also  now,  the  children  of  the  promise 
are  the  elect ;  but  they  are  not  all  to  whom  the  external  privileges 
of  hearing  the  gospel,  or  even  of  entering  the  church  of  Christ,  are 
given,  for  unto  these  as  a  class  this  promise  is  not  fulfilled  ;  but,  simply, 


355  Abstract  of  Theology 

to  those  who  truly  embrace  the  gospel,  and  by  faith  in  Jesus  are 
vitally  united  to  him.  It  is  to  this  class  only  that  the  election  refers. 
There  is,  therefore,  a  difference  in  kind  indicated  by  the  Apostle. 

3.  It  is  said  that  the  language  of  address  to  the  churches,  con- 
tained in  the  letters  of  the  Apostles,  indicate  the  election  of  whole 
churches,  and  that,  consequently,  election  must  be  merely  to  external 
church  privileges.  Dr.  Faber  does  not  cite  the  passages  at  length, 
because  he  thinks  that  any  attentive  reader,  by  attending  to  them, 
will  readily  perceive  their  palpably  universalizing  tendency.  But  he 
adduces  as  proof  the  beginnings  of  Romans,  1  Corinthians,  Ephesians, 
Colossians,  1st  and  2nd  Thessalonians  and  1  Peter. 

(1.)  Of  these,  singular  to  say,  none  speak  of  election  in  the  ad- 
dresses to  the  churches,  except  Ephesians,  the  two  Thessalonians  and 
1st  Peter.  But  the  others  all  speak  of  the  saints,  and  of  a  calling  to 
sanctification.  The  truth  is,  that,  as  they  professed  to  be  God's  child- 
ren, the  Apostle,  in  the  judgment  of  charity,  speaks  of  them  as  such,, 
and  this  is  shown  by  the  language  of  all  the  salutations  as  well  as  of 
the  epistles  at  large. 

(2.)  The  language  in  Ephesians  is  used  as  inclusive,  not  only  of 
those  to  whom  he  wrote,  but  of  himself  also.  It  evidently  is  intended 
to  refer  to  him  and  them,  as  having  like  hopes,  and  being  partakers 
of  like  promises.  That,  at  least,  it  is  not  intended  to  refer  to  the  mere 
privilege  of  church  membership,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  the 
apostle  speaks  of  these  persons  as  "sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of 
promise,"  Ch.  1:13.  They  are  spoken  of  as  "having  been  quickened," 
Ch.  2:1,  as  having  been  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  Gh.  2:1,  and 
as  having  been  the  "children  of  wrath  even  as  others,"  Ch.  2:2.  Such 
language  scarcely  comports  with  an  address  to  those  whom  the  Apostle 
had  not  reason  to  believe  converted  persons. 

The  epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,  to  which  Faber  also  refers,  are 
even  more  distinctly  against  him.  For,  here,  we  have  not  simply  to 
infer  what  were  the  feelings  which  led  to  the  expressions  used  by  the 
Apostle  ;  but  he  himself  tells  us  of  the  fact  that  he  knew  their  election, 
and  assigns  the  reasons  of  his  belief.  These  are  not  because  they 
enjoyed  the  outward  privileges  of  the  church  ;  but  because  of  their 
work  of  faith  and  labours  of  love,  and.  patience  of  hope,  and  because 
the  gospel  came  not  to  them  in  word  only,  bnt  also  in  power,  and  in 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance. 

As  to  the  Epistle  of  Peter  it  may  be  said, 

(a)     That  the  elect  spoken  of  are   "strangers  scattered  throughout 


Abstract  of  Theology.  356 

Pontus,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia."  This  at  least  creates  the 
presumption  that  they  had  no  especial  opportunities  of  church  privi- 
leges.    This,  however,  is  doubtful. 

(b)  They  are,  however,  spoken  of,  verses  3  and  4,  as  "begotten" 
* .  *  *  "unto  a  lively  hope,  *  *  *  to  an  inheritance  *  *  * 
reserved  in  heaven  for  you,  who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  salvation."  Again,  they  are  spoken  of,  verse  8,  as  "loving 
Christ,"  as  "believing  in  him  and  rejoicing  with  joy  unspeakable." 

4.  Yet,  again,  three  passages  are  adduced  in  which  a  whole  church 
as  such  is  styled  elect,  and  it  is  argued  thence  that  this  is  the  Scrip- 
tural meaning  of  election.  These  passages  are,  1  Pet.  5:13,  "The  co-elect 
church,  which  is  in  Babylon,  saluteth  you."  2  John,  1st  verse,  "The 
elder  to  the  elect  lady  and  her  children,''  and  verse  3rd,  "The  children 
of  thine  elect  sister  salute  thee." 

(1.)  Of  these  passages  it  may  be  said  that  the  application  of  any 
of  them  to  a  church  is  doubtful.  This  is  evident  from  the  English 
version  of  all  but  the  first,  and  the  literal  rendering  of  that  is,  "The, 
from  or  in  Babylon,  that  is  elected  with  you,  saluteth  you. "  It  would 
be  bad  to  form  a  theory  upon  such  doubtful  passages. 

(2.)  Admitting  these,  however,  to  have  the  meaning  asserted  and 
that  an  elect  church  would  be  spoken  of  as  such  only  with  reference 
to  the  privileges  thus  conferred  upon  its  members  ;  it  does  not  follow 
that  this  is  the  only  sense  which  election  can  have.  It  must  be  shown 
not  only  that  there  is  such  an  election,  but  that  nothing  else  is  spoken 
of  under  that  name  before  this  theory  can  be  established  as  the  only 
election  taught.  The  truth  is.  that  the  general  nature  of  the  term, 
elec^  choose,  &c,  makes  it  practicable  to  have  several  kinds  of 
election,  and  the  nature  of  the  election  has  to  be  decided  by  those 
declarations  of  its  character  and  purpose  which  accompany  it. 

(3.)  Under  any  view  of  Election,  save  that  of  Nationalism,  it  would 
be  perfectly  appropriate  to  apply  the  word  elect  to  the  body  as  such 
which  is  supposed  to  be  composed  only  of  elect  members.  Thus  we 
often  speak  of  Congress  or  of  a  State  Legislature  as  the  assembled  wis- 
dom of  the  State  or  Country,  because  such  is  hypothetically  its 
character ;  it  being  supposed  to  be  composed  of  men  who  represent  by 
their  wisdom  that  of  their  constituents.  So  the  church  may  be  spoken 
of  as  elect,  because  composed  of  those  supposed  from  the  best  sources 
of  knowledge  to  be  the  elect  of  God. 

5.  The  fifth  argument  is  from  the  parables  of  the  labourers  in 
the  vine  yard,  Matt.  20;1 — 16,  and  the  marriage  of  the  King's  son, 
Matt.  22:2—14. 


357  Abstract  of  Theology. 

"These/'  says  Faber,  "contain  the  passages  where  the  term  Elect  or 
Chosen  first  occurs  and  in  these  parables  the  Chosen  or  the  Elect  are 
all  those  who  so  far  obey  the  call  of  the  gospel  as  to  enter  the' pale  of 
.  the  visible  Christian  Church."  And  in  order  to  show  that  they  are 
not  secure  there  from  destruction,  the  case  of  the  man  without  the 
wedding  garment  is  mentioned. 

It  may  be  replied,  as  to  the  first  of  these  parables,  that  Faber  does  not 
point  out  any  indication  of  such  loss  of  any  persons  in  the  churches,  as 
is  implied  in  this  parable.  The  parable  is  merely  instructive  as  to 
the  fact  of  God's  sovereignty,  and  as  to  his  bestowment  of  blessings 
on  whom  He  will.  The  phrase  is  added,  "many  be  called  but  few 
chosen  ;"  which  is  the  key  to  the  parable  and  yet,  in  no  wise  bears 
upon  the  subject  under  discussion,  save  to  show  that  there  are  two 
classes,  the  called,  and  the  elect,  and  that  the  first  comprises  many,  the 
latter  few ;  facts  which  oppose  the  theory  of  the  author,  who  claims 
that  the  elect  are  not  the  few  that  are  saved,  but  are  the  same  as  the 
many   who  are  called  to  the  external  privileges  of  God's  trufh. 

The  second  parable  is  even  more  distinctly  against  him.  In  it  there 
are  three  classes :  the  first,  those  who  are  called,  and  pay  no  attention 
to  the  invitation  to  the  feast ;  the  second,  those  who  enter  to  partake 
of  it,  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  ones  gathered  here  on  earth  into 
the  earthly  church  ;  the  third,  the  class  marked  by  the  separation 
from  among  them  of  the  one  who  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment, 
which  represents  the  self  deceived  in  Christ's  earthly  churches. 
Immediately  after  the  order  for  his  destruction  is  given  by  the  king, 
it  is  added,  "For  many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen."  Does  not  the 
word  chosen  here  evidently  point  out  those  who  are  the  saved,  as 
distinguished  from  those  who  are  the  outwardly  privileged  ;  either  as 
the  outwardly  called  who  refuse,  or  the  called  who  enter  the  church 
and  enjoy  its  privileges.     If  so,  the  author's  view  of  Election  is  false. 

These  are  the  only  arguments,  that  can  properly  be  so  called,  that 
are  advanced  in  favour  of  this  theory,  and  the  above  statements  fully 
show  that  the  Scriptures  nowhere  teach  the  doctrine  of  Election  as 
thus  set  forth.  The  theory  has  been  examined  more  at  length 
than  its  own  merits  deserve,  partly,  because  it  is  not  so  generally 
known,  but  more  especially,  because  it  has  the  sanction  of  a  man  of 
known  ability  and  scholarship  though  of  admitted  fanciful  and 
unsound  judgment. 

III.  Finding  now  that  election  is  in  no  respect  one  to  external 
privileges,  we  pass   to  the   third   theory  which   has   been  suggested  r. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  358 

that  of  foreseen  faith,  set  forth  by  Arminians  of  all  classes.  It  is  thus 
expressed  in  one  of  the  five  articles  on  Predestination  and  Grace  set 
forth  by  the  Synod  of  Dort. 

"God,  from  all  eternity,  determined  to  bestow  salvation  on  those 
whom  he  foresaw  to  be  about  to  persevere  unto  the  end  in  their  faith 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  inflict  everlasting  punishment  on  those  who 
should  continue  in  their  unbelief  and  should  resist  unto  the  end  his 
divine  succors." 

The  other  articles,  which  accompany  this,  teach  a  universal  atone- 
ment, offered  upon  condition  of  faith  to  all  persons,  to  each  of  whom 
is  given  sufficient  grace  to  accept  or  reject  it.  Upon  this  acceptance 
or  rejection,  salvation  depends. 

This  theory  of  election,  therefore,  asserts  that : 

(1.)     The  Election  of  individuals  is  the   result  of  their  own  choice. 

(2.)     That  that  made  by  God  is  simply  an  election  of  a  class. 

(3.)  That  so  far  as  the  election  of  individuals  took  place  in  eternity 
it  was  only  as  God  foresaw  what  would  be  the  result  of  the  election 
of  a  class. 

(4.)  That  it  is  an  election  made  upon  condition  that  they  would 
accept  the  offer  of  the  gospel. 

TV".  As  this  theory  is  just  the  opposite  in  every  respect  of  the 
Galvinistic  theory  of  personal,  unconditional,  and  eternal  Election,  it 
is  better  to  put  the  two  in  direct  contrast,  and  to  proceed  to  the  proof 
that  the  Scriptures  teach  the  latter,  and  not  che  former. 
-  The  latter  theory  is  that  God,  (Who  and  not  man  is  the  one  who 
chooses  or  elects,)  of  His  own  purpose,  (in  accordance  with  His  will, 
and  not  from  any  obligation  to  man,  nor  because  of  any  will  of  man,) 
has  from  Eternity,  (the  period  of  God's  action,  not  in  time  in  which 
man  acts,)  determined  to  save  (not  has  actually,  saved,  but  simply 
determined  so  to  do  ;  and  to  save,  not  to  confer  gospel  or  church 
privileges,)  a  definite  number  of  mankind,  (not  the  whole  race,  nor 
indefinitely  merely  some  of  them,  nor  indefinitely  a  certain  propor- 
tionate part  ;  but  a  definite  number,)  as  individuals,  (not  the  whole 
or  a  part  of  the  race,  nor  of  a  nation,  nor  of  a  church,  nor  of  a  class, 
as  of  believers  or  the  pious  ;  but  individuals,)  not  for  or  because  of 
any  merit  or  work  of  theirs,  nor  of  any  value  to  Him  of  them,  (not 
for  their  good  works,  nor  their  holiness,  nor  excellence,  nor  their 
faith,  nor  their  spiritual  sanctification,  although  the  choice  is  to  a 
salvation  attained  through  faith  and  sanctification ;  nor  their  value  to 


359  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Him,  though,  their  salvation  tends  greatly  to  the  manifested  glory  of 
His  grace ;)  but  of  His  own  good  pleasure,  (simply  because  He  was 
pleased  so  to  choose.) 

This  theory,  therefore,  teaches  that  election  is  : 

(1.)     An  act  of  God,  and  not  the  result  of  the  choice  of  the  elect. 

(2.)     That  this  choice  is  one  of  individuals,  and  not  of  classes. 

(3.)  That  it  wTas  made  without  respect  to  the  action  of  the  persons 
elected. 

(4.)     By  the  good  pleasure  of  God. 

(5  )     According  to  an  eternal  purpose. 

(6.)     That  it  is  an  election  to  salvation  and  not  to  outward  privileges. 

To  the  Scriptures  alone  must  we  look  for  the  truth  upon  this  subject. 
Upon   opening  them  we  find  that  the  words  Election  and  Elect  are 
used  in  various  senses. 

1.  They  signify  a  choice  to  office  whether  by  man  or  God. 
Luke  6:13.     Christ's  choice  of  the  twelve  Apostles. 

Acts  1:21.     The  selection  of  an  Apostle  in  the  place  of  Judas. 
Acts  9:15.     Saul  is  called  a  chosen  vessel. 

1  Pet.  2:6 — 10.  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  the  corner  stone,  elect, 
precious  that  is  laid  in  Zion. 

2.  The  choice  of  Israel  to  their  peculiar  national  privilege  of  being 
the  chosen  or  separated  people  of  God  ;  as  in  Acts  13:17.  "The  God 
of  this  people  Israel  chose  our  fathers." 

3.  It  is  once  used  for  a  choice  made  of  salvation  by  an  individual. 
Luke  10:42.     "Mary  hath  chosen  that  better  part  which  shall  not 

be  taken  from  her." 

4.  In  a  large  majority  of  cases  it  has  reference  to  the  choice  to 
salvation,  either  in  the  purpose  or  act  of  choice  by  God. 

It  is  to  the  doctrine  taught  in  this  last  class  of  passages  that  our 
inquiries  are  to  be  turned. 

1.  Election  is  an  act  of  God,  and  not  the  result  of  the  choice  of  the 
Elect. 

This  is  not  now  an  inquiry  into  the  reason  of  Election  ;  but  simply 
into  the  agent.  Does  God  choose  the  elect,  whether  by  his  own  purpose, 
or  because  he  foresees  that  they  will  believe,  or  for  any  other  reason  ? 
Is  election  an  act  of  God? 

The  fact  on  this  point  would  appear  more  clearly  if  we  were  to 
exchange  the  common  word  choice  or  chosen  with  the  equivalent 
word   elect. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  360 

The  following  passages  are  sufficient,  though  the   examples  are  far 

more  numerous. 

John  13:18.     "I  know  whom  I  have  chosen." 

John  15:16.     "Ye  have   not  chosen  me,   but  I  have   chosen  you," 

(not  to  their  offices  as  apostle,  but)  "that  ye  should  bring  forth  fruit." 
Rom.  8:33.     "Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?'5 
Rom.  9:15.     "I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy." 
Eph.  1:4.     "According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him." 
Eph.  1.11.     "Being  predestinated  according  to  the  purpose  of  him 

who  worketh  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  own  will." 
2  Thess.  2:13.     "God   hath    from    the    beginning    chosen    you    to 

salvation." 

2.     This  choice  is  one  of  individuals  and  not  of  classes. 

This  position  needs  to  be  explained.  It  is  not  denied  that  the  Elect 
are  to  be  true  believers,  and  that  true  believers  are  the  Elect.  The 
character  of  the  Elect  does  not,  therefore,  enter  into  this  question. 
The  issue  is  simply,  does  God  choose  all  who  shall  believe  and  are 
they,  as  such,  His  elect  ?  or,  does  he  choose  his  elect  and  will  they,  as 
such  believe  ?  Is  belief  the  result  of  God's  election,  or  is  God's  election 
the  result  of  man's  faith  ? 

Acts  13:48.  "As  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed." 
This  is  a  historical  statement  made  subsequent  to  the  event,  not  by 
man's  knowledge  but  by  inspiration. 

Eph.  1:4.5.  "According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him,  *  *  * 
having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  children." 

2  Thess.  2:13.  "But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  God 
for  you,  brethren,  beloved  of  the  Lord,  because  God  hath  from 
the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salvation  through  sanctification  of  the 
spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth."  Here  the  choice  is  made  to  salvation, 
and  the  means  to  salvation,  sanctification  and  faith  are  indicated  ;  no 
prerequisite  or  means  being  stated  as  to  Election.  It  is  not  as 
believers  that  they  are  elected  ;  but  as  elected,   that  they  are  saved. 

Rom.  8:29.  "Whom  he  did  foreknow  he  also  did  predestinate  to 
be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son."  The  foreknowledge  here  is 
of  persons,  not  of  personal  acts,  not  of  those  whose  faith  He  foreknew, 
nor,  as  would  be  essential  to  their  theory,  is  it  of  the  class  of  believers 
as  such.  The  Arminian  theory  would  require  the  substitution  of  the 
words  "as  believers"  or  "you  as  believers"  instead  of  those  which  are 
used. 


361  Abstract  of  Theology 

It  is  not,  therefore,  to  the  class  of  believers,  but  to  individuals  that 
election  refers.  But,  it  may  be  asked,  does  it  not  refer  to  them  in  that 
character  ?     Did  not  God  choose  those  whose  faith  He  foresaw  ? 

3.  The  third  point  then  to  be  proved  is,  that  it  was  not  because 
of  any  act  or  merit  of  theirs,  but  irrespective  of  anything  but  His  own 
good  pleasure,  that  this  Election  was  made. 

This  is  merely  a  negative  form  of  the  same  fact  stated  by  the  next 
point  affirmatively.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  unite  this  with  the 
succeeding  one  which  is, 

4.  That  the  election  is  made  through  the  mere  good  pleasure  of 
God. 

Some  of  the  passages  simply  affirm  a  choice  by  God's  Sovereign 
will;  others,  while  asserting  this,  also  deny  merit  in  those  elected ;  and 
still  others  represent  the  fact  of  sovereignty  by  asserting  a  choice  of 
such  persons  as  would  not  ordinarily  be  chosen.  The  following  are 
some  of  the  passages  which  prove  these  points 

(i.)  Such  as  simply  assert  sovereign  will.  Such  are  Matt.  24:40.41 
and  Luke  17:33 — 36.  These  declare  the  sovereign  choice  of  God  by 
showing  such  choice  exercised  as  to  persons  in  the  same  situation,  so 
that  the  one  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left;  "two  men  in  one  bed;" 
"two  women  grinding  at  the  mill;"  "two  men  shall  be  in  the  field;" 
one  of  each  shall  be  taken  and  the  other  left. 

John  3:3 — 8.  Regeneration  is  here  spoken  of  as  essential  to  en- 
trance into  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  precedes  any  act  on  which 
election  is  said  by  any  to  depend.  Yet  the  sovereignty  of  God  in 
this  is  declared  in  verse  8.  "The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and 
thou  nearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh, 
and  whither  it  goeth  ;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit." 

John  6:37.39.44.64.65.  "All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come 
to  me.  *  *  *  This  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath  sent  me,  that 
of  all  which  he  hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing.  *  *  *  No 
man  can  come  to  me  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw 
him.  *  *  *  Jesus  knew  from  the  beginning  who  they  were  that 
believed  not,  and  who  should  betray  him.  And  he  said,  Therefore 
said  I  unto  you,  that  no  man  can  come  to  me,  except  it  were  given 
unto  him  of  my  Father." 

John  15:16.  "Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,  and 
ordained  you,  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit."  The  object 
to  be  attained  cannot  be  the  cause. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  362 

John  17:2.  "As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he 
should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him."  See 
alsj  verse  6 — 12. 

Acts  22:14  Ananias  says  to  Paul,  "The  God  of  our  fathers  hath 
chosen  thee,  that  thou  shouldest  know  his  will." 

Eph.  1:4.  In  the  third  verse  having  referred  to  God's  choice  of  us 
eternally,  he  says,  ''having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of 
children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of 
his  own  will,  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace."  In  verse  11  we 
are  said  to  be  predestinated  to  our  inheritance  "according  to  the  pur- 
pose of  him  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  council  of  his  own  will." 

James  1:18.     "Of  hi^  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  word  of  truth." 

(2.)  Such  as  deny  merit  in  the  persons  elected  as  well  as  assert 
the  sovereign  choice  of  God. 

Ezek.  36;32.  In  this  passage,  after  describing  the  blessings  con- 
nected with  the  new  dispensation,  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  and  the 
new  heart  which  He  would  give  them, — gifts  which  the  Calvinistic 
theory  regards  as  the  result  of  election  ;  but  which  the  Arminian 
maintains  to  be  its  cause, — God  adds,  "Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this, 
saith  the  Lord  God,  be  it  known  unto  you  ;  be  ashamed  and  con- 
founded for  your  own  ways,  0  house  of  Israel." 

John  1:13. 16.  "He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him 
not.  But,  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name  ;  which  were 
born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of 
man,  but  of  God." 

In  Rom.  9:11  Election  is  illustrated  by  the  case  of  the  twins;  "the 
children  being  not  yet  born,  neither  having  done  any  good  or  evil, 
that  the  purpose  of  God  according  to  election  might  stand,  not  of 
works,  but  of  him  that  calleth.  *  *  *  So  then  it  is  not  of  him 
that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy." 

Rom.  11=5.6  "Even  so  then  at  this  present  time  also  there  is  a 
remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace.  And  if  by  grace,  then  it 
is  no  more  of  works  ;  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace." 

(3.)     Such  as  so  describe  the  persons  chosen  as  to  imply  this. 

Matt.  11:25.  "At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said,  I  thank  thee, 
0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  thou  hast  hid  these 
things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes. 
Even  so,  Father  :  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight." 


363  Abstract  of  Theology 

Luke  4:25 — 27.  Christ  illustrates  this  sovereignty  of  God  by 
mentioning  that  many  widows  had  been  in  Israel,  yet  had  only  a 
heathen  widow  been  blessed  ;  and  again  many  lepers,  and  yet  only 
a  heathen  leppr  cured.  "I  tell  you  a  truth,  many  widows  were  in 
Israel  in  the  days  of  Elia^,  *  *  *  but  unto  none  of  them  was 
Elias  sent,  save  unto  Sarepta,  a  city  of  Sidon,  unto  a  woman  thaUwas 
a  widow.  And  many  lepers  were  in  Israel  in  the  time  of  Eliseus  the 
prophet  ;  and  none  of  them  was  cleansed,  saving  Naam-in  the  Syrian." 

Acts  26:12 — 23.  Paul's  description  of  his  personal  condition  at  his 
conversion  shows  that  God  chose  him  not  for  his  merits  but  for  his 
own  good  pleasure. 

1  Cor.  1:26 — 30.  "For  ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,  how  that  not 
many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are 
called.  But  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  con- 
found the  wise ;  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to 
confound  the  things  which  are  mighty;  and  base  things  of  the  world, 
and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and  things 
which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are,  that  no  flesh  should 
glory  in  his  presence.     But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  &e." 

Gal.  1:15.16.  Paul  says,  "when  it  pleased  God,  who  separated  me 
from  my  mother's  womb,  and  called  me  by  his  grace,  to  reveal  His 
Son  in  me  that  I  might  preach,  &c." 

Ephesians  2=1 — 13.  The  description  of  the  condition  of  those  who 
were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  in  that  state  were  quickened, 
proves  that  the  quickening  and  salvation  was  due  to  no  merit  of 
their  own. 


The  texts  thus  exhibited  under  these  three  classes  prove  conclusively 
that  not  on  account  of  their  own  merits,  but  because  of  the  good 
pleasure  of  God,  does  He  choose  men.  They  have  been  presented  at 
some  length,  because  this  is  after  all  the  point  upon  which  all  that  is 
important  in  this  controversy  turns.  For,  although  the  other  points 
are  equally  essential  to  the  doctrine,  the  whole  opposition  arises  from 
an  unwillingness  on  the  part  of  man  to  recognize  the  sovereignty  of 
God,  and  to  ascribe  salvation  entirely  to  grace.  This  proof,  however, 
has  been  by  no  means  exhausted,  the  attempt  having  been  to 
select  some  only  of  the  numerous  passages,  and  mainly  such  as  from 
their  conciseness  allowed  of  presentation  in  full.  Let  the  Scriptures 
be  read  with  reference  to  this  doctrine  and  every  passage  marked 
which  indicates  God's  dealing  with  men  as  an  absolute  sovereign,  and 


Abstract  of  Theology.  364 

also  every  declaration  which  ascribes  Election  or  the  fruits  of  it  to  His 
choice  and  not  to  the  will  or  acts  of  men,  and  every  illustration 
afforded  that  this  is  God's  usual  method,  and  it  will  appear  that 
scarcely  any  book  of  Scripture  will  fail  to  furnish  testimony  to  the 
fact  that  in  the  acts  of  grace,  no  less  than  those  of  providence,  God 
"doe th  according  to  His  will  in  the  army  of  Heaven  and  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Earth." 


5.  Another  important  fact  to  be  shown  is  the  eternity  of  Election 
in  opposition  to  the  idea  that  it  was  in  time.  The  proof  on  this  point 
is  two-fold.  There  are  (1)  those  passages  which  show  that  the 
Election  took  place  before  existence  in  this  world  or  before  the  world 
began,  and  (2)  those  which  actually  declare  that  it  was  eternal. 
Between  the  two  classes  of  passages  there  is  really,  however,  very 
little  difference,  as,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  what  took  place  before 
time  must  have  been  in  Eternity,  and  besides  the  object  of  proof  of 
an  eternal  Election  is  simply  to  show  that  it  was  not  dependent  on 
human  action,  but  simply  on  the  will  of  God. 

(1.)  Those  which  show  that  the  Election  took  place  before  man's 
existence,  or  before  the  world  began. 

Jer.  1:5.  "Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  belly,  I  knew  thee,  and 
before  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  womb,  I  sanctified  thee." 

Matt.  25:34.  "Then  shall  the  King  say  unto  them  on  his  right 
hand,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world." 

Eph.  1:4.  "According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world.'' 

2  Thess.  2:13.  "But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  God, 
brethren,  beloved  of  the  Lord,  because  God  hath  from  the  beginning 
chosen  you  to  salvation  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief 
of  the  truth." 

2  Tim.  1:9.  "Who  hath  saved  us  and  called  us  with  an  holy  call- 
ing, not  according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose 
and  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began." 

Compare  also  the  language  used  as  to  the  names  written  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  life. 

Rev.  13:8.  "And  all  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  worship  him, 
(that  is  the  beast)  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  of 
the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world." 

Kev.  17:8.     "And  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  wonder,  (whose 


365        •  Abstract  of  Theology. 

names  were  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world,)  when  they  behold  the  beast  that  was.  and  is  not,   and  yet  is." 

Referring  to  the  adherents  of  the  Lamb  as  persons  '-with  him,'"  it 
had  been  previously  said  in  verse  14,  "They  that  are  with  him  are 
called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful." 

Rev.  21:27.  "And  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing 
that  derilelh,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a 
lie:  but  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life." 

(2  )  The  passages  which  distinctly  declare  that  this,  which  may 
be  thus  inferred  to  have  been  an  eternal  Election,  is  really  such. 

Acts  15:18.  The  Apostle  is  referring  to  the  change  made  in  the 
calling  of  the  Gentiles,  and,  after  showing  its  accordance  with  the 
ancient  Scriptures,  he  adds  in  this  ;  ''Known  unto  God  are  all  his 
works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,"  literally  from  Eternity. 

1  Cor.  2:7.  "Even  the  hidden  wisdom,  which  God  ordained  before 
the  world  unto  our  glory." 

Eph.  3:11.  "According  to  the  eternal  purpose  which  He  prepared 
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

6.  It  remains  to  be  proved  that  this  Election  is  one  to  salvation, 
and  not  to  mere  external  privileges. 

Jeremiah  31:31 — 34  : 

verse  31.     Tells  of  a  day  when  a  new  covenant  shall  be  made. 

verse  32.  Says  that  this  shall  not  be  like  that  made  with  their 
fathers,  (not  one  of  external  privileges.) 

verse  33.  But  of  this  sort,  "I  will  put  my  law  in  their  inward 
parts,  and  write  it  in  their  hearts  ;  and  will  be  their  God,  and  they 
shall  be  my  people." 

verse  34.  "And  they  shall  teach  no  more  every  man  his  neighbour, 
and  every  man  his  brother,  saying,  know  the  Lord  :  but  they  all  shall 
know  me,  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the  greatest  of  them,  saith  the 
Lord,  for  I  will  forgive  their  iniquity,  and  I  will  remember  their  sin 
no  more." 

Speaking  again  of  the  restoration  of  Israel  the  same  prophet  adds  a 
like  passage  in  Chap.  32:37 — 40.  A  similar  passage  is  to  be  found  in 
Ezekiel  36:24—27. 

John  10:16.  "Other  sheep  I  have  which  are  not  of  this  fold  ;  them 
also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice  ;  and  there  shall  be 
one  fold,  and  one  shepherd." 

John  10:26.  "Ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep,  as 
I  said  unto  you." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  366 

verse  27.  "My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they 
follow  me."  . 

Rom.  8:28 — 30.  "We  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good 
to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to  his  pur- 
pose." Paul  now  proceeds  to  tell  who  these  are.  "For  whom  he  did 
foreknow,  he  also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
his  Son,  that  he  might  be  the  first-born  among  many  brethren. 
Moreover  whom  he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called :  and  whom 
he  called,  them  he  also  justified  :  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also 
glorified."  This  passage  shows  that  foreknowledge,  predestination  to 
holiness,  calling,  justification,  and  a  state  of  glory  are  inseparably  con- 
nected, and  hence  that  the  election,  from  which  they  proceed,  is  to 
salvation. 

Eph.  1=4 — 9.  This  passage  speaks  of  our  being  chosen  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  "that  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame 
before  him  in  love:  having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of 
children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of 
his  will,  to  the  praise  ot  the  glory  of  his  grace,  wherein  he  hath  made 
us  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through 
his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace  ; 
wherein  he  hath  abounded  toward  us  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence  ; 
having  made  known  unto  us  the  mystery  of  his  will,  according  to  his 
good  pleasure  which  he  hath  purposed  in  himself." 

2  Thess.  2:13.  After  referring  to  others  who  were  to  have  the  same 
outward  privileges,  but  upon  whom  God  would  send  strong  delusion, 
the  Apostle  says  in  this  verse,  "But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks 
alway  to  God  for  you,  brethren,  beloved  of  the  Lord,  because  God  hath 
from  the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salvation,  &c." 

1  Peter  5:10.  "The  God  of  all  grace  who  hath  called  us  unto  his 
eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesus,  &c."  Here  the  apostle  is  speaking  of 
that  effectual  calling,  which  is  the  result  of  Election  and  tells  us  that 
it  is  a  call  unto  eternal  glory. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  368 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXX. 


REPROBATION. 

The  doctrine  of  Election  is  intimately  associated  with  and  involves 
that  of  Reprobation.  The  latter  has  met  with  even  greater  opposition, 
and  misconstructions  of  what  the  orthodox  teach  on  this  subject  have 
been  even  more  numerous. 

The  Scriptural  statements  as  to  Reprobation  are  that  God,  in 
Eternity,  when  he  elected  some,  did  like  wise  not  elect  others;  that 
as  resulting  from  this  non-election,  but  not  as  efficiently  caused  by  it,  He 
passes  by  these  in  the  bestowment  of  the  special  favours  shown  to  the 
Elect,  and,  as  in  like  manner  yet  further  resulting,  condemns  men 
because  of  sin  to  everlasting  destruction,  and  while  they  are  in  this 
state  of  sin  and  condemnation  He  effects,  or  permits  the  hardening  of 
their  heart  so  that  His  truth  is  not  appreciated,  but  actually  rejected. 

According  to  this  statement  there  are  four  points  involved  in  the 
decrees  as  to  Reprobation. 

1.  The  decree  not  to  elect. 

2.  The  decree  to  pass  by  in  bestowing  divine  grace. 

3.  To  condemn  for  sins  committed. 

4.  To  harden  against  the  truth  all  or  some  persons,  already  sinners, 
and  to  confirm  them  in  sin. 

In  considering  this  doctrine  we  are  met  by  the  difficulty  arising 
from  the  want  of  knowledge  of  God's  purpose  in  action.  It  may  be 
questioned  whether  wre  can  arrive  at  this  at  all,  yet,  to  understand 
this  subject  fully,  we  must  know  that  purpose.  If,  therefore,  we  can 
not  learn  it,  we  see  with  what  propriety  wTe  must  submit  simply  to 
accept  what  God  says. 


369  Abstract  of  Theology. 

A  careful  examination  of  the  four  points  indicated  will  show  that 
two  of  them  have  necessary  reference  to  sinners,  and  that  the  other 
two  have  not.  These  are  only  thus  connected,  because  God,  in 
carrying  out  His  purpose,  has  chosen  to  do  it  by  the  creation  of  man, 
and  by  permitting  him  to  fall.  This  may  be  shown  by  supposing  God 
to  have  some-  great  object  in  view  to  be  accomplished  by  beings 
selected  from  those  to  remain  holy;  as  through  a  part  of  the  angelic 
hosts.  He  selects  some  as  the  ones  through  whom  Tie  will  accom- 
plish his  purpose,  He  rejects  the  others  as  not  choosing  so  to  use  them. 
He  gives  to  the  former  special  grace  to  fit  them  for  their  work,  or  to 
remove  from  them  any  imperfection  for  it.  His  plan  not  having  required 
that  they  be  permitted  to  fall,  the  act  of  rejection  and  refusal  to  add  the 
special  grace  given  to  others,  constitutes  in  this  case  all  of  Reprobation. 
The  purpose  of  God  as  to  man,  on  the  other  hand  affected  a  fallen  race, 
and  hence  the  other  two  points,  in  accordance  with  His  determination 
to  permit  man  to  fall,  are  associated  with  and  made  a  part  of  the 
decree  of  Reprobation,  with  which  otherwise  they  would  have  no 
necessary  connection. 

The  fact  that  God  has  permitted  man  to  fall  is  undoubted.  It  is 
beyond  our  power  to  show  how  it  is  consistent  with  his  justice  and 
mercy.  That  it  is  so  should  be  acknowledged  by  all,  because  God 
has  done  it. 

In  like  manner  must  we  deal  with  any  result  that  flows  from  any 
doctrine  in  connection  with  that  purpose.  If  it  was  right  for  God  to 
permit  man  to  fall,  in  order  to  carry  out  His  purpose,  it  is  right  to 
condemn  him  for  his  sin.  But  the  connection  of  condemnation  for  sin, 
thus  permitted,  with  rejection  from  the  number  of  those  through  whom 
that  purpose  is  effected,  extends  no  farther  than  that,  from  the 
circumstances  of  the  case,  the  rejected  in  one  part  of  the  decree  become 
the  condemned  in  another. 

The  relation  borne  by  these  two  parts  of  the  decree  will  be  better 
seen  by  the  following  table  showing  what  is  done  on  the  one  side  for 
the  Elect  and  on  the  other  for  the  rejected. 


i.     Election  from  good  pleasure.  i.     Rejection  from  good  pleasure. 


Sin  having  been  committed. 


2.  To   recover  by   the    gospel  and 
special  grace. 

3.  As  thus  recovered,  to  glorify. 


2.  Not  to  recover,  but  to  leave 
sinners. 

3.  As  left  sinners,  to  condemn  for 
sin  and  to  harden  some  of  those  thus 
left. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  370 

In  thus  arranging  this  table  no  reference  has  been  had  to  the  views 
of  either  Sublapsarians  or  Supralapsarians.  The.  doctrine  of  Repro- 
bation is  not  affected  by  the  scheme  of  either.  This  may  be  shown  by 
presenting  the  order  of  the  decrees  as  taught  by  each. 

The  Supralapsarians  teach  that  there  was  : 

1.  God's  decree  to  glorify  Himself  in  the  raising  up  of  the  church 
in  which  His  grace  should  be  peculiarly  manifested. 

2.  To  create  the  men  whom  he  had  selected  and  rejected  for  its 
composition. 

3.  To  permit  to  fall. 

4.  To  send  Christ  to  redeem. 
The  Sublapsarian  view»is  : 

1.  A  decree  to  create. 

2.  To  permit  to  fall. 

3.  To  elect  some  to  everlasting  life. 

4.  To  send  Christ  for  their  Redemption  and  salvation. 

The  only  difference  in  the  decree  of  Reprobation  as  held  by  either 
of  these  views  is  that  the  Sublapsarians  suppose  man  to  have  been 
decreed  as  fallen,  before  decreed  as  elected,  or  rejected  ;  yet  they  deny 
that  the  rejection  was  because  of  the  sin  of  the  non-elect,  for  if  so, 
they  say,,  the  others  would  have  been  rejected,  being  equally  in  sin. 
The  Supralapsarian  view  supposes  that  the  Election  to  a  certain 
purpose  and  the  Rejection  took  place  before  the  decree  to  permit  to 
fall  had  been  entertained.  According  to  each  theory,  therefore,  the 
last  two  points  of  the  decree  have  only  what  has  been  called  an 
accidental  connection  with  it. 

This  preliminary  statement  will  prepare  the  way  for.  the  Scriptural 
proof  of  the  points  indicated. 

I.     The  decree  to  reject  some. 

1.  This  is  involved  in  the  doctrine  of  Election.  The  choice  of 
some  and  not  of  the  whole,  involves  the  non-election  and  thus  the 
rejection  of  others. 

2.  But  it  is  plainly  taught  in  Scripture : 

(1.)  In  such  passages  as  declare  salvation  not  to  be  attained 
because  God  has  not  given  the  means.  These  will  be  presented  under 
the  next  general  head. 

(2.)  In  such  as  declare  salvation  not  to  be  attained  because  men 
are  not  of  the  Elect,  as 

John  10:26.     "Ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep." 


371  Abstract  of  Theology. 

John  6:65.  "No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  it  were  given  him  of 
my  Father.'" 

1  Cor.  1:26.  "Ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,  that  not  many  wise 
men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  called  : 
but  God  hath  chosen,  &c." 

(3.)  In  all  such  passages  as  declare  the  preordination,  or  appoint- 
ment by  God  of  thes^  persons  either  to  condemnation,  or  destruction. 
Though  not  the  direct  result  of  this  decree  so  as  to  be  efficiently 
caused  by  it,  these  things  yet  prove  the  rejection  of  some  who,  under 
the  circumstances  thus  accidentally  arising,  are  thus  preordained. 

1  Peter  2:8.  "A  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence,  even  to 
them  which  stumble  at  the  word,  being  disobedient,  whereunto  also 
they  were  appointed." 

Jude  4.  "There  are  certain  men  crept  in  unawares,  who  were 
before  of  old  ordained  to  this  condemnation.'' 

1  Thess.  5:9.  In  this  chapter,  the  Apostle  tells  of  the  evil  that  in 
the  last  day  shall  come  upon  certain  ones,  and  then  says,  "For  God 
hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  Jesus 
Christ." 

(4  )  In  the  illustrations  from  the  twins,  the  potter,  and  the  clay  in 
Rom..  9  chapter. 

(5.)  In  the  same  chapter  the  words  used  are  expressive  directly  of 
the  truth  involved. 

Bom.  9:18.  "Therefore  hath  he  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy, 
and  whom  he  will  he  hardeneth." 

(6.)  The  Apostle  was  teaching  this  doctrine  in  the  ninth  chapter 
of  Romans  and  in  verses  20  and  21  anticipated  and  answered  the  ob- 
jection of  one  inquiring,  why  God  should  punish  those  who  are  thus 
fulfilling  his  will,  by  saying:  "Nay  but,  0  man,  who  art  thou  that 
repliest  against  God  ?  Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed 
it,  why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ?  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the 
clay,  of  the  same  lump  to  make  one  vessel  unto  honour,  and  another 
unto  dishonour." 

II.  The  second  point  of  proof  is  that  God  passes  by  some  in  the 
bestowment  of  His  special  grace. 

That  God  does  bestow  many  of  the  means  of  grace  on  many  not  to 
be  saved  is  admitted  ;  but  what  needs  to  be  shown  is  that  there  are 
special  effective  means  which  distinguish  the  Elect,  and  which  are 
not  bestowed  on  others. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  372 

The  language  of  Scripture  on  this  point  is  twofold.  There  are 
passages  which  simply  speak  of  the  withholding  of  privileges,  and 
others  which  seem  to  go  beyond  this  and  assert  a  positive  influence 
exerted  to  keep  men  from  the  truth.  The  meaning  of  this  latter  class 
of  passages  will  be  examined  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  fourth 
point.  At  present  they  are  presented  as  though  they  meant  no  more 
than  the  mere  neglect  to  bestow  these  spiritual  advantages. 

Deut.  29:4.  "The  Lord  hath  not  given  you  a  heart  to  perceive,  and 
eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear,  unto  this  day.  ' 

Job  17:4.  "For  thou  hast  hid  their  heart  from  understanding, 
therefore,  shalt  thou  not  exalt  them." 

1  Sam.  2:25.  After  Eli  had  exhorted  his  sons  to  refrain  from 
making  the  people  of  the  Lord  transgress,  it  is  said,  "notwithstanding 
they  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice  of  their  father,  because  the  Lord 
would  (or  intended  to)  slay  them." 

Isaiah  6=9.  "Go,  and  tell  this  people,  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  under- 
stand not ;  and  see  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not." 

Rom.  11:7.8.  "Israel  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  seeketh  for  ; 
but  the  election  hath  obtained  it,  and  the  rest  were  blinded  (accord- 
ing as  it.  is  written,  God  hath  given  them  the  spirit  of  slumber,  eyes 
that  they  should  not  see,  and  ears  that  they  should  not  hear  ;)  unto 
this  day." 

Matt.  13:11 — 15.  "Because  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  to  them  it  is  not  given.  For 
whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more 
abundantly  :  but  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken  away 
even  that  he  hath.  Therefore  speak  I  unto  them  in  parables, 
because  they  seeing,  see  not ;  and  hearing,  they  hear  not,  neither  do 
they  understand.  And  in  them  is  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Esaias, 
which  saith,  by  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  understand  ;  and 
and  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  shall  not  perceive.  For  this  people's 
heart  is  waxed  gross,  and  their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing,  and  their  eyes 
they  have  closed;  lest  at  any  time  they  should  see  with  their  eyes, 
and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  should  understand  with  their  heart,  and 
should  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal  them."  The  parallel  to  the 
first  part  is  Luke  810,  and  to  the  last  Mark.  4:12.  Similar  passages 
also  are  in  John  12:39.40  and  Acts  28:25—27. 

2  Cor.  3=15.  "Even  to  this  day  when  Moses  is  read  the  vail  is  upon 
their  hearts." 


373  Abstract  of  Theology. 

These  texts  will  suffice  when  it  is  remembered  that  to  the  plain 
declarations  here  made,  may  be  added  the  proof  afforded  by  all  those 
passages  which,  teaching  that  God  bestows  on  the  elect  alone  salva- 
tion, with  such  attendant  blessings  as  without  fail  lead  to  it,  show 
that  these  blessings  are  also  withheld  from  the  non- elect. 

At  present  it  is  assumed  that  this  is  done  simply  as  an  act  of  with- 
holding.    What  is  meant  by  this  will  be  shown  hereafter. 

The  question  has  been  raised  as  to  the  two  points  considered  above, 
whether  the  decree  which  has  respect  to  them  is  positive  or  negative. 
By  a  positive  decree  is  meant  one  which  involves  an  actual  direct 
exercise  of  the  will  of  God.  A  negative  decree  is  one  in  which  the 
effect  purposed  flows  as  the  result  of  the  actual  exercise  of  the  will 
on  something  else. 

The  answer  to  this  question  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  union 
of  the  different  parts  of  the  decree  of  reprobation.  By  some 
theologians  all  four  of  the  points  involved  in  the  decree  are  included 
in  one  and  by  Keprobation  they  mean  che  actual  preordination  to 
damnation  of  certain  persons,  just  as  effectively  as  the  preordination  of 
others  to  salvation  by  Election.  Others  conceiving  this  to  be  a  false 
statement  have  separated  the  first  and  second  points  from  the  third  and 
fourth,  uniting  them  together,  however,  as  one,  and  giving  to  it  the  name 
of  Pretention.  The  great  difficulty  which  these  had  to  encounter,  arose 
from  the  fact  that  while  it  is  true  that  the  mere  neglect  to  bestow 
certain  blessings  on  some,  may  take  place  without  their  being  con- 
ceived of  as  in  the  mind,  and  may,  therefore,  be  a  mere  negative  act, 
the  choice  of  some  so  necessarily  involves  the  rejection  of  others  as  to 
require  that  rejection  to  accompany  the  act  of  choice.  Rejection  must, 
therefore,  have  accompanied  Election.  In  the  very  fact  that  some 
were  chosen,'  was  involved  the  rejection  of  others.  [But  even 
here  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  rejection  was  not  from 
God's  favour,  not  from  salvation,  not  from  hope  of  mercy.  Rejection 
has  nothing  to  do  with  any  of  these.  The  loss  of  these  results  from 
sin.]  But  the  intimate  connection  between  chosen  and  not  chosen 
does  not  exist  in  the  bestowment  of  gifts  and  graces.  These  were 
conferred  on  those  chosen  and  not  conferred  on  those  not  chosen. 
Hence  no  positive  act  of  God  occurs,  as  to  those  not  chosen.  Con- 
sequently it  is  better  to  divide  this  part  of  the  decree  and  regard 
Rejection  as  a  positive  act,  and  Pretention  in  bestowing  grace  as  a 
negative  one. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  374 

From  the  first  and  second,  the  third  and  fourth  points  result,  con- 
sequentially but  not  effectively.  This  has  been  before  shown.  They 
do  not  result  from  these,  so  as  to  be  their  consequences,  but  they 
are  actually  caused  only  by  the  sin  of  man  and  are  causally  related 
only  to  it.  It  is  neither  as  an  effect  of  Election  or  Rejection  or  of 
Pretention  that  man  has  fallen,  or  sins,  or  is  condemned,  or  will  be 
destroyed.  The  simple  effect  is  that  he  is  not  rescued,  and  con- 
sequently is  left  where  he  would  have  been  without  these  acts.  They 
do  not  lead  to  destruction.     They  simply  do  not  rescue  from  it. 

III.  The  third  point  needs  no  proof  at  present.  The  condemnation 
for  the  sins  man  commits  is  too  plainly  taught  in  the  word  of  God. 
From  this  condemnation  the  Elect  are  rescued  by  special  grace,  the 
Rejected  are  left,  liable  to  it  and  consequently  suffer  from  it. 

This  decree  of  God  is  positive,  involving  specially  an  act  of  God's 
will  in  reference  to  the  sin  that  is  to  be  punished. 

IV.  The  fourth  point  of  Reprobation  is  the  hardening  some  or 
all  of  the  Rejected  against  the  truth,  and  the  confirmation  of  them 
in  their  sin. 

Some  or  all  sinners  are  spoken  of  as  hardened  because  according  to 
the  definition  given  to  this  hardening  process  must  it  be  limited  or 
not.  If  the  hardening  of  God  means  no  more  than  the  mere  permission 
of  those  influences  by  which  this  is  accomplished,  then  it  is  universal, 
because  the  evil  influences  of  the  heart  and  of  Satan  undoubtedly 
lead  to  a  constant  increase  of  indisposition  for  God's  service.  But  if 
that  process  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  special  act  of  God,  it  must  be  con- 
fined to  those  persons  whom  God  by  special  acts  of  goodness  or  justice 
hardens  so  that  they,  in  an  extraordinary  sense,  are  set  against  the 
truth  and  are  lead  to  reject  it. 

The  language  used  in  Scripture  upon  this  point  is  very  decided. 
The  only  question  is  about  the  meaning  to  be  put  on  it  as  to  a  single 
point.  It  is  best  to  state  the  two  positions  recognized  as  true  and 
then  add  the  other  about  which  the  discussion  arises. 

1.  God  is  represented  as  hardening  the  heart. 

2.  This  is  admitted  by  all  to  be  done  so  far  as  permitting  it  to 
work  out  its  own  destruction  or  by  not  interfering  to  prevent  the  evil 
influences  which  would  have  that  tendency. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  present  the  Scripture  proof  of  these  points 
which  is  abundant,  because  it  will  plainly  appear  in  connection  with 
the  third  which  is,  that 


375  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  God  does  himself  operate  upon  and  affect  the  heart  and  faculties 
of  the  individual  so  that  he  is  hardened  against  the  acceptance  of  the 
truth  of  the  Gospel.  This  point  is  supported  by  many  passages  of 
Scripture  and  should  be,  at  least  briefly,  considered. 

(1.)  It  may  here  again  be  suggested  that  if,  upon  an  examination 
of  the  Scriptures,  this  is  seen  to  be  God's  teaching,  we  are  bound,  in 
the  simplicity  of  faith,  not  only  to  receive  it,  but  also  to  continue  with 
firm  confidence  to  believe  and  maintain  that  it  is  perfectly  consistent 
with  the  character  of  God.  The  fact  that  we  cannot  show  it  to  be 
such,  ought  not  to  make  us  hesitate  a  moment  after  we  are  convinced 
that  God  has  taught  it. 

(2.)  But  if  so  taught  it  may  be  made  to  appear  perfectly  consistent 
with  God's  righteous  action  and  should  be  recognized  as  such. 

The  contrary  has  been  argued  from  the  alleged  fact  that  thus  the 
sinner  is  prevented  from  accepting  the  gospel  plan  of  salvation.  But 
this  is  not  true.  His  previous  condition  has  already  caused  this.  It 
is  not  any  action  of  God  withholding  grace  or  conferring  further 
disability  that  leads  any  man  to  reject  the  gospel.  All  are  already 
in  such  a  state  of  depravity  that  they  will  certainly  refuse  it.  This 
is  proved  from  the  fact  that  those  who  reject  the  gospel  are  not  only 
not  confined  to  the  hardened,  but  comprise  all  sinners,  and  that  nothing 
can  prevent  this  result  but  a  positive  act  of  God  by  which  He  rescues 
man  from  his  evil  nature  as  well  as  from  its  effects. 

The  only  evil  then  that  arises  to  the  sinner  is  that,  under  these 
influences,  he  sins  more  freely  or  more  flagrantly  than  he  would  other- 
wise have  done,  or  that  his  sinful  nature  more  rapidly  developes 
itself.  But  if  it  be  wrong  in  God  to  do  anything  by  which  this  shall 
be  accomplished,  it  will  be  wrong  to  cast  man  into  hell ;  for  the  change 
of  state  from  this  life  to  that  has  this  tendency. 

This  illustration  suggests  indeed  what  God  under  these  cir- 
cumstances is  doing,  which  is  nothing  more  than  inflicting  punishment 
on  the  individual  because  of  his  sin.  He  is  a  sinner  in  God's  sight. 
His  sin  deserves  punishment,  and  God  punishes  him  by  making  his 
increased  power  to  do  wrong  the  punishment  of  the  wrong  already 
done.  "He  hath  simply  fallen  into  the  pit  his  own  hands  have 
digged." 

In  this  view  of  the  doctrine  it  is  nothing  worse  than  one  very  com- 
monly taught  by  Arminians  as  well  as  by  Calvinists  of  all  kinds, — that 
of  the  closing  of  a  day  of  grace,  when  the  time  comes  when  the  line  is 
passed  beyond  which  God   no   longer  shows  favour.     That  doctrine 


Abstract  of  Theology.  376 

which  asserts  an  eternal  shutting  out  of  light  as  the  penalty  of  resist- 
ance to  truth  is  of  precisely  the  same  nature  as  this  the  most 
objectionable  form  in  which  this  point  of  Reprobation  can  be  presented. 

(3.)  But,  again,  whence  are  the  influences  which  thus  tend  to 
salvation.  Do  they  arise  from  the  rights  of  man,  or  from  the  claims 
which  he  as  man  may  be  said  to  have  upon  his  Creator.  Not  at  all. 
They  are  involved,  not  in  Creation,  but  in-  Redemption.  They  are 
influences,  therefore,  which  belong,  in  the  purpose  of  God,  to  the  elect 
only.  This  is  true,  whether  we  regard  the  atonement  as  particular,  or 
as  general  with  a  particular  application. 

These  influences,  therefore,  come  to  man  simply  as  the  chosen  of 
God.  God  may  withhold  them  from  all  others.  He  does  withhold 
them  from  the  heathen.  He  might  withhold  them  from  those  to 
whom  they  are  thus  given.  But  if  God  may  justly  withhold  from 
any,  He  may,  with  equal  justice,  stay  the  hand  that  would  be 
stretched  out  to  take  what  He  has  intended  shall  not  be  given. 
So  long  as  the  things  which  He  withholds  or  prevents  man  from 
taking,  are  not  things  on  which  man  has  any  claim,  God  cannot 
be  charged  with  injustice  in  thus  acting.  Admitting  this  doctrine, 
therefore,  in  its  worst  form  it  may  be  defended. 

(4  )  But  fourthly,  we  are  liable  to  hold  this  form  of  the  doctrine 
simply  from  want  of  consideration  as  to  the  method  of  God's  action, 
as  well  as  from  overlooking  the  language  of  Scripture  elsewhere. 
Let  these  be  regarded  and  it  will  appear  that  God  doe's  not  teach  us 
that  he  directly  hardens  the  hearts  of  any.     We  must  remember 

(a.)  That  there  is  a  sense  in  which  God  is  said  to  do  everything 
that  is  done  Whatever  happens  must  either  be  done  by  Him,  or 
permitted  by  Him ;  and  must  be  done,  or  permitted  directly,  or 
indirectly,  according  as  His  action  is  immediate  or  through  secondary 
means.  Now  it  is  the  custom  of  the  Scriptures  to  speak  of  God  as 
doing  whatever  is  done  in  any  of  these  ways.  If,  therefore,  we  have 
no  indications  of  the  mode  of  his  action,  we  cannot,  from  the  mere  de- 
claration that  the  Lord  did  it,  decide  that  he  did  it  directly,  or  indi- 
rectly ;  efficiently  or  permissively.  Thus  Joseph  said  to  his  brethren, 
"It  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither,  but  God,"  and  yet  we  know  that 
these  men  were  willing  instruments  of  God.  The  Scripture  declarations 
as  to  reprobation,  or  hardening,  are  not  stronger  than  these  which 
are  thus  used  relative  to  other  matters  where  we  know  that  God  only 
acted  indirectly  and  permissively. 


377  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(b.)  There  are  causes  at  work  fully  sufficient  to  accomplish  all 
that  God  would  thus  purpose  without  requiring  efficient,  and  causal 
action.  There  are  the  sinful  depravity  of  the  heart  and  the  wiles  of 
Satan.  It  can  hardly  be  supposed  that,  when  the  work  to  be  done 
could  thus  be  effected,  God  would  not  leave  it  to  be  thus  done. 

(c.)  In  James  1:13.14.  the  apostle  uses  language  inconsistent  with 
the  idea  that  God  efficiently  leads  to  sin.  "Let  no  man  say  when  he 
is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God:  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with 
evil,  neither  te^mpteth  he  any  man.  But  every  man  is  tempted,  when 
he  is  led  away  of  his  own  lust,  ai*4  enticed." 

(d.)  Whenever  the  heart  is  hardened  as  the  result  of  any  action 
of  God,  it  is  always  as  the  result  of  merciful  action,  which  should  have 
had  an  opposite  tendency.  Thus  was  it  with  Pharaoh,  and  thus  was 
it  with  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  Christ. 

(5.)  An  examination  of  the  passages  which  refer  to  the  hardening 
of  the  heart  will  show  that  (a)  some  expressly  declare  this  hardening 
to  have  been  by  means,  or  by  the  individuals  themselves  ;  (b)  that, 
others  are  explained  by  parallel  or  allied  passages  to  have  this 
meaning  ;  and  (c)  that  there  is  nothing  inconsistent  with  this  view. 

1.  Passages  which  affirm  this  hardening  to  be  the  work  of  the 
individuals  themselves. 

2  Kings  17:14.  The  people  of  Israel  carried  away  by  the  Assyrians 
are  said  to  have  hardened  their  necks  like  their  fathers.  See  also 
Neh.  9:16.17—29,  and  Jer.  7:26. 

2.  Passages  which  furnish  explanations.  To  these  belong  the 
famous  passages  concerning  Pharaoh.  There  could  be  no  stronger 
expressions  than  those  there  used. 

(1.)     God  foretells  that  he   will   harden  Pharaoh's  heart.     Ex.  7:3. 

(2.)     It  is  expressly  said  that  He  hardened  it.     Ex.  7:13. 

(3.)  God  declares  that  for  this  very  purpose  did  He  raise  up 
Pharaoh  that  He  might  show  His  glory. 

(4.)  And  yet  Pharaoh  is  expressly  declared  to  have  hardened  his 
own  heart.  Ex.  8:15.32.  Notice  in  this  case  the  way  of  hardening  ; 
whenever  the  curse  was  sent,  Pharaoh  yielded ;  whenever  it  was  re- 
moved, his  heart  was  hardened.  And,  that  this  was  not  an  accidental 
connection,  is  seen  by  the  fact  that  in  Ex.  9:34.  it  is  said  of  Pharaoh 
that,  "when  he  saw  the  rain  and  hail,  and  the  thunders  were  ceased,  he 
sinned  yet  more  and  hardened  his  heart." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  378 

Another  passage,  which  has  often  been  commented  on,  is  that  in 
1  Kings,  22nd  chapter,  where  Ahab  calls  on  his  prophets  and  receives 
assurance  of  success.  He  sends  for  a  prophet  of  God  who  gives  him  the 
same  answer,  probably  ironically,  as  Ahab  immediately  turns  and  says 
to  him,  "How  many  times  shall  I  adjure  thee  that  thou  tell  me  nothing 
but  that  which  is  true  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  The  prophet  then 
proceeds  to  tell  of  the  scattered  house  of  Israel,  as  a  sheep  that  have 
no  shepherd,  thus  foretelling  evil.  The  king  says  to  Jehoshaphat,  his 
officer,  "did  I  not  tell  thee  that  he  would  prophecy  no  good  concern- 
ing me,  but  evil."  Then  the  prophet  proceeds  to  tell  a  vision  wherein 
God  is  represented  as  wishing  to  destroy  Ahab  and  asking  of  all  his 
hosts,  who  will  persuade  Ahab  that  he  may  go  and  fall  at  Ramoth 
Gilead.  And  after  various  replies,  one  Spirit  came  and  said,  that  he 
would  persuade  him  by  being  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  his 
prophets.  And  the  prophet  adds,  "Now,  therefore,  behold,  the  Lord 
hath  put  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  these  thy  prophets  and  the 
Lord  hath  spoken  evil  concerning  them."  This  is  the  verse,  1  Kings 
22:23,  that  is  frequently  referred  to  as  a  case  of  God's  misleading 
Ahab.  Independently  of  the  fact  that  the  prophet  uses  drapery  for 
what  he  says,  he  tells  the  King  distinctly  God's  will,  and,  as  his 
prophet  who  ought  to  be  heard,  declares  the  truth.  This  passage 
ought  not  to  weigh  for  a  moment  in  favour  of  the  idea  that  God  seeks 
effectively  to  harden,  and  thus  to  destroy. 

Again,  we  have  a  class  of  passages,  for  they  are  many,  such  as  the 
one  before  referred  to  as  showing  Reprobation,  Matt.  13:11 — 15. 

That  one  may  be  taken  as  explanatory  of  others.  The  doctrine 
meant  was  so  plainly  understood  that  the  language  is  not  always 
guarded.  It  may  not  have  been  by  Christ  in  its  utterance.  But  we 
have  here  the  intended  meaning  manifested  in  a  single  phrase,  "and 
their  eyes  they  have  closed  lest  at  any  time  they  should  hear  &c," 
"and  be  converted  and  I  should  heal  them." 

The  passage  in  Isaiah  63:17  is  easily  explained  in  like  manner,  "0 
Lord,  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  err  from  thy  ways  and  hardened  our 
hearts  from  thy  fear." 

3.  Passages  not  inconsistent  with  this  interpretation.  On  the 
contrary,  in  view  of  what  has  been  said,  this  interpretation  seems 
most  natural.     These  are  fair  examples, 

Deut.  2:30.  "But  Sihon  king  of  Heshbon  would  not  let  us  pass  by 
him:  for  the  Lord  thy  God  hardened   his  spirit,   and  made  his  heart 


379  Abstract  of  Theology. 

obstinate,  that  he  might  deliver  him  into  thy  hand,  as  appeareth 
this  day." 

Acts  19:9.  "But  when  divers  were  hardened,  and  believed  not, 
&c,     *     *     *     he  (Paul)  departed  from  them." 

Rom  9:18.  "Therefore  hath  he  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have 
mercy,  and  whom  he  will  he  hardeneth."  The  example  referred  to 
here  is  that  of  Pharaoh  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  case  of  self- 
hardening  under  mercies. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  380 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXI 


Outward  and  Effectual  Calling. 

The  atoning  work  of  Christ  was  not  sufficient  for  the  salvation  of 
man. 

That  work  was  only  Godward,  and  removed  only  all  the  obstacles 
in  the  way  of  God's  pardon  of  the  sinner. 

But  the  sinner  is  also  at  enmity  with  God,  and  must  be  brought  to 
accept  salvation,  and  must  learn  to  love  and  serve  God. 

The  first  step,  here,  is  to  make  known  to  man  the  gospel,  which 
contains  the  glad  tidings  of  this  salvation,  under  such  influences  as 
ought  to  lead  to  its  acceptance. 

The  Gospel  is,  therefore,  commanded  to  be  proclaimed. to  every 
creature,  inasmuch  as  there  is  in  the  work  of  Christ  a  means  of 
redemption  for  every  one. 

This  is  the  external  call  of  the  Gospel. 

This  proclamation,  however,  meets  with  no  success  because  of  the 
wilful  sinfulness  of  man,  although,  in  itself,  it  has  all  the  elements 
which  should  secure  its  acceptance. 

God  knowing  that  this  is  true,  not  only  of  all  mankind  in  general, 
but  even  of  the  elect  whom  he  purposes  to  save  in  Christ,  gives  to 
these  such  influences  of  the  Spirit  as  will  lead  to  their  acceptance  of 
the  call.     This  is  called  Effectual  Calling. 

1.     The  Gospel  is  commanded  to  be  preached  to  all.     This  is  proved 

(1.)  By  such  passages  as  show  that  the  outward  privileges  of 
God's  word  are  no  longer  to  be  confined  to  Israel,  but  are  to  be 
extended  to  the  Gentiles  also.     This  had  been  foretold  in  prophecy. 


381  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Gen.  18:18;  26:4;  Psalm  2:8;  Isa.  42:1.4;  49:6.7.8;  55:5;  60:3; 
65:1—12;  Jer.  16:19;   Mai.  1:11. 

It  is  also  taught  in  the  New  Testament  in  various  ways. 

Matt.  8:11—13;.  12:18—21;  21:33—41;  22:1;  28:19;  Mark 
12:1— 9  ;  Luke  4:20— 27  ;  14:16—24;  20:9—16;  John  3:16  ;  4:20. 
21.39. 

(2.)  By  the  history  of  the  extension  of  this  gospel  to  the  Gentiles 
by  the  Apostles  and  their  contemporaries,  who  so  preached  it,  as  to 
show  that  the  Gentiles  were  not  first  to  become  Jews  in  order  to  be 
made  partakers  of  that  gospel. 

Acts  10th  Chapter.     Peter  sent  to  Cornelius. 

Acts  11:1 — 18.     Peter's  report  of  that  visit. 

Acts  11:19 — 30.     The  gospel  sent  to  Phenice,  Cyprus,  and  Antioch. 

Acts  13th  Chapter.     The  labours  of  Paul  and  his  companions. 

Acts  15th  Chapter.     The  Council  at  Jerusalem. 

Rom.  1:13 — 16,  and  generally  the  whole  of  the  Epistle  and  of  Paul's 
other  Epistles  to  the  churches,  especially  Galatians. 

The  above  two  classes  of  passages  serve  to  show  how  the  universal 
preaching  of  the  gospel  was  impressed  upon  the  early  Christians,  and 
consequently  that  they  would  be  led  to  give  full  meaning  to  other 
unlimited  expressions. 

(3  )     By  such  passages  as  directed  the  gospel  to  be  preached  to  all. 

Mark.  16:15;  Acts  2:21;  Rom.  10:13. 

(4.)  By  such  as  show  the  freeness  with  which  salvation  was 
offered  to  all  as  individuals.  Acts  2:39  ;  11:14  ;  16:31  ;  2  Cor.  5:19— 
21  ;   1  Tim.  4:9  ;  Tit.  2:11  ;  Rev.  22:1. 

(5.)  The  restrictions  which  separated  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles 
being  removed,  the  universal  offers  of  salvation  made  previously  to 
the  Jews,  may  be  now  applied  to  all  men  in  general.  Isaiah  1:18; 
55:1—7;  Ezek.  18:21,32;  33:11. 

(6.)  The  language  of  Christ  to  those  to  whom  he  spake  may  also 
thus  be  applied.     Matt.  11:28  ;  John  7:37. 

The  above  classes  of  passages  show  that  this  call  of  the  gospel  is 
made  indiscriminately  to  all  men.  No  difference  of  nation,  or  class, 
or  condition  ;  no  question  as  to  election,  or  non-election,  nor  as  to  the 
purpose  to  make  it  effectual  enters  into  this  call.  It  is  made  to  every 
one.  Nothing  is  known  to  those  who  are  to  proclaim  the  gospel  which 
can  make  its  offer  to  one  any   more  sincere  than  to  another.     What- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  382 

ever  differences  men  may  make  from  personal  feeling,  or  national 
sympathy,  or  local  attachment,  are  not  only  not  commanded  by  it,  but 
are  often  inconsistent  with  it. 

2.  This  offer  of  the  gospel  meets  of  itself  with  no  success. 

(I.)  The  testimony  ol  all  who  have  preached  it  has  been  that, 
without  special  influence  of  grace  from  God,  the  preaching  has  been 
in  vain.  The  prayers  made  to  God  constantly  for  such  aid  furnish 
universal  evidence  of  such  convictions. 

(2.)  The  same  testimony  is  as  universally  given  by  those  who  have 
received  the  gospel.  Each  one  ascribes  his  salvation  to  the  special 
influences  of  God. 

(3.)  This  also  is  the  teaching  of  the  Scriptures  which  declare  this 
fact.  Eph.  2:8.  is  only  a  specimen  of  the  universal  teaching,  which 
will  appear  more  fully  elsewhere. 

3.  This  failure  is  not  due  to  any  deficiency  in  the  gospel. 

(1.)  None  can  doubt  the  fulness  of  the  scheme  of  redemption 
contained. 

(2.)  None  can  question  the  facts  as  to  personal  sin  and  need  of 
Christ  which  are  made  known. 

(3.)     None  can  deny  the  freeness  with  which  it  is  offered. 

(4.)     No  one  can  deny  that  he  is  one  of  those  to  whom  it  is  offered. 

(b.)  All  persons  admit  that  God  will  give  it  to  any  who  will 
forsake  sin  and  strive  to  lead  a  new  life  trusting  Him  for  help. 

(6.)  Every  one  is  convinced  that  he  can  turn  away  from  all  acts 
of  sin  and  live  the  contrary  life  of  holiness  and   obedience,   if  he  will. 

(7.)  It  is  universally  acknowledged  that  God  is  worthy  to  be 
believed  in  every  statement  He  makes. 

It  is  because  of  the  above  and  kindred  facts  that  our  Lord  says, 

John  11:48.  "The  word  that  I  have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge 
him  in  the  last  day." 

4.  The  Scriptures  teach  us  why  this  word  is  rejected.  It  is  not 
from  want  of  evidence,  nor  from  intellectual  doubt,  but  always  because 
of  some  thing  sinful,  either  in  the  heart  or  will. 

Some  of  the  reasons  which  the  Scriptures  thus  give  are  presented 
in  Hill's  Bible  Readings,  p.  99,  as  follows : 

(1.)  Pride  which  may  be  national.  Matt.  3:9  ;  John  8:33  ;  Acts 
13:45  ;  17:5  ;  22:21.22  ;  intellectual,  Matt.  11:25  ;  John  9:39—41  ; 
Rom.  1=21.22  ;  1  Cor.  1:19—21  ;  or  social,  John  748. 

(2.)  Self-righteousness.  Mark.  2:16;  Luke  7=39;  18:10—14; 
Rom.  10:3. 


383  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(3.)     Love  of  praise.     John  5:44  ;   12:43. 

(4.)     Love  of  the  world.     2  Tim.  4=10  ;  James  4=4  ;  1  John  2:15. 

(5.)  Love  of  money.  Mark  10=17—24;  Luke  16:13.14;  1  Tim. 
6:9.10. 

(6.)     Cares  of  the  world.     Matt.  13:7.22  ;  Luke  10:40. 

(7.)     Fear  of  man.     John  7=13  ;  9:22;  12=42. 

(8.)     Worldly  self-interest.     Mark  5=16.17  ;  John  11=48.       . 

(9.)  Unwillingness  to  separate  from  impenitent  friends.  Luke 
9:59—62. 

(10.)  Unwillingness  to  believe  what  they  cannot  understand. 
John  3=9  ;  6=52,60  ;  Acts  17=32  ;   1  Cor.  2=14. 

(11.)     Unwillingness  to  have  their  sins  exposed.     John  3:19.20. 

(12.)  Unwillingness  to  submit  to  God's  authority.  Luke  19:14  ; 
20:9—18. 

(13  )  Prejudice  against  the  messenger.  Matt.  1224;  13;57  ;  John 
1:46;  6=42;  7=52;  9:29. 

(14.)     Spiritual  blindness.     Matt.  13:15  ;   1  Cor.  2=14. 

(15.)     Unfaithfulness  to  the  light  which  they  had.     John  12=36. 

(16.)     Waiting  for  a  convenient  season.     Acts  24=25. 

(17.)     Frivolous  excuses.     Luke  14=18. 

(18.)     Lack  of  deep  convictions.     Matt.  13=5  ;  22=5. 

(19.)     Lack  of  earnestness.     Luke  13=24. 

(20.)  Neglect  of  the  Bible.  Luke  24=25;  John  5=39;  7:27:  Acts 
17=11.12. 

(21.)     Neglect  of  religious  meetings.     John  20:24. 

(22.)     Blindness  to  special  opportunities.     Luke  19:44. 

(23.)  Desire  for  special  signs.  Matt,  12=38.39;  16:1—4;  John 
6:30;  1  Cor.  1=22. 

(24.)     Regard  for  human  traditions.     Matt,  15:9;    Mark  2:23— 28. 

(25.)     Insincerity.     Matt.  15:7.8  ;  21=25—31 ;  Acts  24=26. 

(26.)     A  controversial  spirit,     Matt,  22:15—40. 

(27.)     A  murmuring  spirit,     Matt.  25=24. 

(28.)     Having  no  desire  for  God.     John  5=42 ;  Rom.  1:28. 

(29.)     Hatred  of  God  and  of  Christ,     John  15=22—25. 

(30.)  Hatred  of  the  truth.  Acts  7=51—54  ;  2  Thess.  2=10—12  ;  2 
Tim.  4=3. 

(31.)     The  power  of  the  devil.     Matt.  13=4.19;  John  8:44:  2  Cor. 

4:3.4. 

5.  The  offer  of  the  gospel  thus  referred  to  is  denominated  the 
External  Call. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  384 

It  is  made  to  man  through  the  senses,  and  consists  in  a  declaration 
of  the  nature  of  salvation  and  an  offer  of  it  upon  the  conditions  of  faith 
and  repentance.  It  is  enforced  by  statements  as  to  the  sinful  condition 
of  man  and  his  need  of  a  Saviour  ;  by  the  command  of  God  to  repent 
and  believe  ;  and  by  exhortations  and  threats,  as  inducements  to  the 
acceptance  of  salvation  through  it. .  It  is  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures, 
as  a  call,  in  passages  which  have  no  reference  to  its  becoming  effectual, 
and  in  some  which  contrast  it  with  the  effectual  calling  of  others. 
Prov.l:24;  Isa.  65:12  ;  Matt.  9=13. 

6.  But,  in  contrast  with  this  usage,  is  the  more  common  one,  by 
which  the  called  in  the  Scriptures  are  those  who  are  actually  brought 
to  the  reception  of  the  truth  and  participation  in  salvation. 

(1.)  This  is  seen  in  the  name  for  the  collective  bodies  of  Christ's 
disciples,  each  of  which  is  called  in  the  Greek  Ecclesia.  The  word  for 
calling  is  klesis,  and  an  Ecclesia  is  composed  of  those  called  out  of 
the  world  into  an  ecclesia,  a  church. 

(2.)     In  those  passages  which   speak   to  church  members  of  their 
calling  as  something  different  from  the  mere  outward  call.     Rom.  8:30 ; 
9=11.24;    1  Cor.  1:9.26;  Gal.  1=6.15  ;    1  Thess.   2:11;    5=24;  2   Thess. 
2:14;    Eph.   M8;    4=1.4;    2  Tim.  1:9;    Ileb.  3=1 ;    1  Pet.  2:9  ;  5:10; 
2  Pet.  1:3.10. 

(3.)  Christian  believers  are  spoken  of  as  the  called.  Rom.  1:6; 
8:28  ;   1  Cor.  1:24  ;   Heb.  9:15  ;   Rev.  17:14. 

7.  The  effectual  call  of  these  is  due  to  the  purpose  and  act  of  God. 
Matt.  11:25;  Rom.  8:29.30;  Rom.  9:15.16;  1  Cor.  1:26—31, 
especially  verse  30. 

8.  The  agent  by  which  this  is  accomplished  is  the  Holy  Spirit  by 
whose  influences  the  saved  are  led  to  the  exercise  of  repentance  and 
faith.     John  6:44.46  ;   1  Thess.  1:5.6. 

9.  Such  an  agency  is  necessary  to  overcome  the  moral  condition 
of  man  as  "blind"  and  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  1  Cor.  2:14; 
2  Cor.  4:4;   Eph.   2:1.5. 

10.  In  connection  with  this  doctrine  of  the  Effectual  Calling  of 
some,  has  arisen  a  question  as  to  the  sincerity  of  God  in  making  the 
outward  call  to  those  who  do  not  accept.  It  is  said  that  the  fact  that 
it  is  made  by  Him,  knowing  that  men  will  not  accept  it  without  His 
efficient  grace,  and  yet  not  purposing  to  give  that  grace,  argues 
insincerity  in  the  offer. 


385  Abstract  of  Theology. 

To  this  the  following  replies  may  be  made. 

(1.)  If  it  be  true  that  He  does  make  the  outward  call,  and  does 
not  give  to  all,  but  to  some  only,  the  efficient  grace  ;  the  very  character 
of  God  is  an  assurance  of  His  sincerity.  The  real  question  here  then 
is  an  inquiry  into  these  two  facts.  If  they  be  taught  in  the  Scriptures, 
it  is  impious,  and  blasphemous  to  doubt  God's  sincerity. 

(2.)  This  inquiry  would  never  have  arisen,  had  God  only  made  the 
general  offer  and  left  all  men  to  perish  in  its  rejection.  But,  if  so, 
his  additional  grace  to  some  does  not  in  any  respect  argue  his 
insincerity  in  the  partial  grace  thus  shown  to  others. 

(3.)  The  very  nature  of  the  gospel  offer,  as  before  stated,  shows 
God's  sincerity.  It  is  one  which  has  all  the  inducements  for  its 
acceptance  which  one  can  imagine,  and  that  acceptance  depends  simply 
upon  the  willingness  of  each  man  to  take  it. 

(4.)  Lest  any  should  doubt  the  sincerity  of  God  He  assures  us 
of  that  fact  in  His  word.  Paul  describes  Him,  1  Tim.  2:4,  as  one 
"who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved."  God  himself  says, 
Ezek.  33:10.11,  "Therefore,  0  thou  son  of  man,  speak  unto  the  house 
of  Israel.  Thus  ye  speak,  saying.  If  our  transgressions  and  our  sins 
be  upon  us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we  then  live? 
Say  unto  them,  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked  ;  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live; 
turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways  ;  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house 
of  Israel." 

Compare  this  with  Heb.  6:13—18.  "For  when  God  made  promise 
to  Abraham,  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by  him- 
self, Saying,  Surely  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  multiplying  I  will 
multiply  thee.  And  so,  after  he  had  patiently  endured,  he  obtained 
the  promise.  For  men  verily  swear  by  the  greater  :  and  an  oath  for 
confirmation  is  to  them  an  end  of  all  strife.  Wherein  God,  willing 
more  abundantly  to  shew  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the  immutability 
of  his  council,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  :  That  by  two  immutable  things, 
in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  con- 
solation, who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set 
before  us." 

11.  The  attempt  has  been  made  by  Lutheran  theologians,  and 
adopted  by  some  others  to  harmonize  the  sincerity  of  God's  External 
Call  with  the  salvation  of  some  only,  by  supposing  that  God  gives  His 
Spirit,  which  makes  salvation  effectual  in  some,  equally  to  all,  but 
that  those  who  reject  the  gospel   resist  the  Spirit  given  to  them,  and 


Absteact  of  Theology.  386 

thus  refuse,  while  the  others  yield  to  it  and  thus  are  saved.  They 
say,  therefore,  that  it  is  thus  true  that  all  have  the  Spirit  equally,  and 
yet  that  the  salvation  of  the  saved  may  be  said  to  be  by  the  grace 
of  God. 

The  natural  objection  to  this  explanation  is  that  not  only  is  the 
salvation  of  men  ascribed  to  grace,  but  to  grace  alone,  to  the  exclusion 
of  all  merit,  and  work.  See  Rom.  4:27  to  5=25  ;  9:11  and  Gal.  2:16. 
But  if  some  do  not  resist  and  others  do,  however  much  of  grace  there 
is,  there  is  certainly  some  merit  in  those  not  resisting  by  which  they 
can  boast  over  others  who  resisted.  Notice  especially  Rom.  4:27. 
''Therefore  it  is  of  faith  that  it  might  be  by  grace  ;  to  the  end  the  promise 
might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed." 

Another  objection  is  that  the  salvation  of  the  saved  is  distinctly 
based  in  the  word  of  God  on  the  Election  of  some,  "According  as  he  hath 
chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we  should 
be  holy  and  without  blame  before  Him  in  love.  Having  predesti- 
nated us  unto  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself 
according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will,  to  the  praise  of  the  glory 
of  his  grace  wherein  he  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  beloved." 
Eph.  1:5.6.7. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  388 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXII. 


Regeneration    and    Conversion. 

At  the  outset  of  a  discussion  of  these  two  subjects  we  are  met  by 
the  question,  whether  they  are  not  one  and  the  same  thing.  They 
are  unqaestionally  so  intimately  associated  that  it  is  difficult  to 
separate  them  and  point  out  the  distinctions  between  them.  The 
Scriptures  connect  the  two  under  theone  ideaof  the  new  birth,  and  teach 
that  not  only  is  regeneration  an  absolute  essential  in  each  conversion, 
but  that  in  every  intelligent  responsible  sou)  conversion  invariably 
accompanies  regeneration.  It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  they  are 
often  confounded.  Yet,  after  all,  the  Scriptures  also  teach  that 
regeneration  is  the  work  of  God,  changing  the  heart  of  man  by  His 
sovereign  will,  while  conversion  is  the  act  of  man  turning  towards 
God  with  the  new  inclination  thus  given  to  his  heart. 

Regeneration. 

I.  It  is  best  first  to  collect  together  the  various  terms  and  ex- 
pressions in  which  this  whole  matter  is  taught. 

1.  Forms  of  the  verb  "gennao"  which  means  "to  beget." 

John  1=13;  3:3.4.  (two  places)  5.6.7.8 ;  1  Cor.  4:15  ;  Phil.  10 ;  1 
John  2:29 ;  3:9,  two  places  ;  4:7  ;  5:1,  three  places  ;  5:4.18,  two  places. 

2.  Compound  forms  of  gennao. 

1  Pet.  1=23.  "Being  born  again  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of 
incorruptible,  by  the  word  of  God  which  liveth  and  abideth  forever." 

Titus  3:5.  "He  saved  us  by  the  washing  of  regeneration  and 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 


389  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.  The  word  "apekuesan,"  is  used  in  James  1:18,  and  means  to  bring 
forth  or  bear  young,  and  there  evidently  means  to  bring  to  the  con- 
dition of  sonship. 

4.  "Ktisis"  and  "Ktidzo,"  which  mean  creation  and  create,  are 
found  in  2  Cor.  5:17  ;  Gal.  6:15  ;  Eph.  2:10.15;  4=24. 

5.  "Sunedzoopoiese,"  to  quicken  together  with  (Christ.)  Eph.  2:5; 
Col.  2:13. 

In  addition  to  the  above  uses  of  single  words  are  the  following  pas- 
sages which  speak  of  the  word  of  God  as  an  effective  instrument,  but  not 
as  a  creative  power.  These,  however,  do  not  connect  this  instrument 
with  either  regeneration  or  conversion  necessarily  ;  but  speak  of  it 
(a)  as  a  means  of  partaking  of  the  divine  nature,  2  Pet.  1:4;  (b)  as  a 
means  of  purifying,  John  15:3  ;  (c)  as  a  means  of  Christian  defence, 
Eph.  6:17  ;  and  (d)  as  an  instrument  of  powerful  convictiou  and 
destruction  of  the  wicked,  Heb.  4:12. 

II.  From  the  Scriptural  teaching  we  see  that  the  whole  work  of 
Regeneration  and  Conversion  is  included  under  the  one  term 
regeneration. 

It  is  true  that  but  few  of  the  passages  refer  to  anything  save  the 
work  of  God  ;  yet  these  few  sufficiently  teach  the  use  of  the  word  in 
regeneration  to  lead  us  not  to  reject,  as  a  part  of  it,  that  result  of 
God's  act,  which,  in  connection  with  the  word,  leads  to  the  full  union 
of  its  subject  with  Christ  through  repentance  and  faith. 

The  passages  in  connection  with  Paul  as  God's  instrument,  1  Cor. 
4:15,  and  Philemon  10,  would  not  be  conclusive,  but  they  are  made 
so  by  the  others. 

However  much  James  1:18  suggests  a  different  aspect  of  the 
work,  namely,  the  bringing  forth  that  which  has  been  begotten,  still 
it  so  nearly  connects  that  idea  with  the  begetting  as  to  create  doubt 
if  the  whole  work  may  not  be  virtually  involved. 

But,  1  Pet.  1:23,  by  the  use  of  the  compound  of  gennao,  shows  that 
all  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  including  both  the  new  heart,  and  the 
leading  of  it  to  conscious  faith,  is  properly  to  be  spoken  of  by  the  same 
term  as  a  mere  change  of  heart. 

The  whole  work  is  thus  spoken  of,  however,  because  God  is  operative 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  but  this  does  not  prove  that  He  does 
not  operate  differently  in  one  part  from  what  He  does  in  the  other. 

III.  The  Scripture  teaching  is  that  God  operates  immediately 
upon  the  heart  to  produce  the  required  change,  by  which  it  is  fitted 


Abstract  of  Theology.  390 

to  receive  the  truth,  and  mediately  through  the  word  in  its  reception 
of  that  truth. 

1.  He  operates  immediately  upon  the  heart  to  prepare  the  way 
for  the  truth.     This  is  evident 

(1.)     From  the  description  given  of  man's  spiritual  condition. 

(a)  As  spiritually  dead.     Rom.  4d7  ;  Eph.  2:1, 

(b)  As  blind.     Eph.  4:18. 

(c)  As  slaves  to  sin  and  Satan.     John  8=34;  Rom.  617.19. 

(d)  As  needing  deliverance  from  the  power  of  darkness.    Col.  1:13. 

(e)  As  incapable  of  knowing  or  discerning  the  things  of  the  Spirit. 
1  Cor.  2=14  ;  Eph.  4:18. 

(f)  As  incapable  of  changing  himself.     Jer.  13:23. 

(g)  As  defiled  in  conscience.     Tit.  1:15. 

These  passages  show  man  in  a  condition  from  which  he  must  be 
rescued  even  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  truth  of  God. 

(2.)  The  Scripture  attributes  the  birth  to  the  will  of  God 
exclusively  thus  showing  that  in  some  aspect  it  is  not  to  be  regarded 
as  due  to  the  reception   of  the  truth.     John   1:13 

[For  sections  (3),  (4),  (5)  and  (6),  see  Hodge's  Outlines,  p.  451.] 

(3.)  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  is  distinguished  from  that  of  the 
word.     John  6:45.64  65  ;   1  Cor.  2=12—15  ;  1  Thes.  1:5.6. 

(4.)  A  divine  influence  is  declared  to  be  necessary  for  the  reception 
of  the  truth.     Ps.  119:18  ;  Acts  16=14  ;   Eph.  1:17—20. 

(5.)  Such  an  internal  operation  on  the  heart  is  attributed  to  God. 
Matt.  11=25;  Luke  10:21  ;   Phil.  2=13;   2  Thess.  Ml  ;    Heb.  13=21. 

(6  )  The  nature  of  this  influence  is  evidently  different  from  that 
effected  by  the  truth.     Eph.  1:19  ;  3:7  ;  2  Tim.  2:25. 

(7.)  This  influence  is  spoken  of  as  a  preparation  of  the  heart  for  the 
truth;  which,  therefore,  must  be  distinct  from  the  truth  or  its  reception 
Luke  8=8.15  ;  Acts  16:14. 

This  preparation  of  the  heart  comes  from  God.  1  Chron.  29:18.19; 
Ps.  119=18;  Prov.  16:1;  Acts  16=14;  Rom.  9:23. 

2.  The  Spirit  acts  mediately  through  the  word. 

(1.)  He  inspired  that  word  and  sends  it  forth  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  ends  designed.     John  14:16;  2  Tim.  3:16. 

(2.)  He  aids  the  ministry  and  others  in  making  it  known.  1  Cor. 
4=7  ;  2  Thess.  3=1. 

To  the  extent  that  these  are  his  agents  he  uses  the  word. 

(3.)  The  instrument  thus  used  is  in  itself  effective  as  truth.  Heb. 
4:12.     Therefore,  Christians  are  commanded  in  their  spiritual  warfare 


391  Abstract  of  Theology. 

to  take  the  word  of  God  as  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  Eph.  6:17.  It  is, 
however,  made  especially  so  to  the  heart  prepared  for  it  by  his 
illuminating  influences,  which  reveal  its  beauties  and  its  suitableness, 
and  by  the  aid  of  the  memory  which  recalls,  and  the  conscience  which 
applies,  and  the  affections  which  lay  hold  upon  it.     2  Tim.  3:15.16.17. 

(4.)  Christians  are,  therefore,  said  to  be  "begotten,"  that  is  brought 
forth,  (James  1:18),  with  the  word  of  truth,  because  that  is  the  seed 
sown  in  the  prepared  ground  through  which  they  are  led  by  repent- 
ance and  faith  to  union  with  Christ  and  sonship  of  God. 

(5.)  Since  this  use  of  the  word  is  due  to  its  own  fitness  to 
present  motives  to  action,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not  limited  to  this  word 
alone  but  uses  such  other  truth,  and  such  events  of  life  as  may  be 
effective  towards  the  contemplated  end.  Thus  any  events  in  God's 
providence,  as  afflictions,  or  danger,  or  personal  sins,  or  the  .conversion 
of  others,  or  aught  else  that  may  lead  to  seeking  God,  are  used  as  a 
means  of  awakening,  or  of  giving  deeper  conviction,  or  of  enforcing  the 
Scripture  truths  which  lead  to  conversion. 

(6.)  This  is  especially  true  of  the  ordinances  of  Baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper  duly  set  forth  before  mankind.  So  far  as  these 
ordinances  are  fitted  to  convey  truth,  or  to  impress  duty  they  are 
instruments  in  regeneration. 

(7.)     But  neither  of  them  regenerates  or  confers  regeneration. 

(a)  This  is  not  done  by  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  has  been  argued 
from  John  6:51 — 58,  where  Christ  promises  eternal  life  to  those  who 
shall  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood,  and  denies  it  to  all  who  shall 
not.  The  language  used  refers  to  spiritual  participation  in  his 
salvation.  It  is  similar  to  the  promise  to  the  woman  at  Sychar  that 
"whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never 
thirst ;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  a  well  of  water- 
springing  up  into  everlasting  life.''  John  4:14.  It  is  argued  that 
Christ  must  have  meant  the  partaking  of  his  real  body,  because  he 
did  not  correct  the  Jews  who,  because  they  so  understood  him,  rejected 
him.  But,  John  8=51 — 53,  he  did  not  correct  a  similar  mistake  which 
led  to  a  similar  result  when  he  said  in  verse  51,  "If  a  man  keep  my 
saying  he  shall  never  die." 

(b.)  Even  more  distinctly  is  this  true  of  Baptism.  Spiritual  effects 
are  spoken  of  in  connection  with  this  ordinance.  Thus  we  have  "the 
washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Titus  3:5. 
We  have  Paul  exhorted  by  Ananias,  Acts  22:16,  "arise  and  be  baptized 
and    wrash    away    thy    sins,"   and  the  language   of  Christ,  John  3:5, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  392 

'"Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit  he  cannot  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  first  of  these  has  reference  to  the 
cleansing  influence  of  regeneration  by  the  Spirit  in  like  manner  as  his 
renewing,  which  is  spoken  of  in  the  immediate  context  and  has  no 
reference  to  baptism.  That  the  last  refers  to  baptism  is  at  least 
doubtful ;  but  admitting  that  it  does,  which  is  doubtless  true  of  the 
second  we  have  here  outward  Baptism,  only  as  symbolizing  an  inward 
change  and  not  producing  it.  The  following  reasons  plainly  show  that 
neither  of  these  ordinances  have  regenerating  power. 

(1.)  That  ordinances  can  only  be  signs  of  grace  and  cannot  con- 
fer it. 

(2.)  They  may  convey  truth  symbolically,  and  only  such  truth  is 
fitted  to  affect  the  mind.  But  nothing  symbolized  by  these  two  can 
confer  regeneration  upon  those  receiving  them. 

(3.)  They  are  appointed  to  be  used  only  by  those  who  have  been 
regenerated.  Baptism  is  an  act  of  obedience,  symbolizing  the  death 
of  believers  to  sin,  and  resurrection  to  new  life,  and  setting  forth  their 
union  with  Christ  in  his  death  and  burial.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  to 
be  partaken  of  by  those  already,  as  Christian  believers,  united  together 
in  church  fellowship. 

(4.)  That  this  was  the  use  of  Baptism  is  evident  from  the  practice 
of  the  Apostolic  Christians.  Acts  2:41.  The  baptized  had  "gladly 
received  the  word.''  This  followed  repentance,  and  preceded  baptism. 
The  Eunuch  was  baptized  after  he  had  believed  with  all  his  heart. 
Acts  8:37.  Paul  before  his  baptism  had  received  the  Lord  Jesus  and 
his  eyes  had  been  opened  and  the  Holy  Ghost  givers  Acts  9:18. 
Cornelius  and  his  house  also  received  the  Holy  Ghost  and  spake  with 
tongues  before  their  baptism.  Acts  10:44 — 48.  The  Jailer  at 
Philippi  manifestly  believed  before  he  was  baptized.  Baptism  with- 
out antecedent  faith  was  treated  as  invalid  in  certain  disciples  at 
Ephesus.     Acts  19:1 — 5. 

(5.)  That  this  was  also  true  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  shown  by  the 
fact  that  it  was  partaken  of  only  by  churches,  and  the  members  of 
churches  are  everywhere  spoken  of  and  treated  as  converted  persons. 
Also  by  the  further  fact  that  it  was  a  memorial  service  ("in  remem- 
brance of  me")  and  a  memorial  implies  previous "  knowledge  of  the 
persons  and  facts  remembered.  But  only  such  a  knowledge  and 
remembrance  could  be  blessed,  as  involved  faith  in  Jesus.  1  Cor. 
11:28.29. 


393  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(6.)  The  Spirit  does  not  make  truth  effective  by  giving 'it 
additional  force  to  that  which  it  has  naturally,  but  by  so  affecting  the 
mind  that  the  man  is  so  prepared  to  receive  it  that  it  has  its  own  due 
force.  Thus  he  changes  the  mind,  illuminates  the  mind,  helps  it  to 
appreciate  and  lay  hold  of  truth.  Only  thus  does  He  make  truth 
effectual.  Therefore,  the  outward  washing  or  partaking  can  have  no 
effect  to  renew,  or  regenerate  the  heart,  which  must  itself  have  been 
prepared,  before  it  can  even  appropriate  the  truths  conveyed  by  these 
ordinances. 

The  above  statements  are  only  intended  to  meet  the  views  of 
Romanists  and  such  others  as  claim  regenerating  influence  of  sacra- 
ments, and  not  those  of  such  as  make  Baptism  only  a  condition  of 
pardon.  The  latter  claim  that  regeneration  is  through  the  word  only 
and  are  met  by  the  proofs  that  the  Spirit  acts  independently  of  the 
word. 

Conversion. 

I.  This  is  the  result  of  regeneration.  The  new  heart  is  prepared 
to  turn  to  God  and  does  actually  so  turn.  Without  regeneration,  the 
sinfulness  of  man  keeps  him  away  from  God,  causes  him  to  set  his 
affections  upon  self  and  his  own  pleasure,  and  to  find  gratification  in 
things  which  are  opposed  to  God  and  holiness.  The  regenerated 
heart  has  new  affections  and  desires  and  is,  therefore,  fitted  to  seek 
after  God  and  holiness. 

If.     It  is  both   the  act  of  God  and  of  man  co-operating  with  him. 
I.     It  is  the  act  of  God.     It  is  thus  described  in  the  Scriptures. 
1  Kings  18:37.     "Thou  hast  turned  their  heart  back  again." 
Ps.  80:3.     "Turn  us  again,  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,   cause   thy  face  to 

shine  and  we  shall  be  saved." 

Ps.  85:4.     "Turn  us,  0  God  of  our  salvation." 

Song  of  Sol.  1:4.     "Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  thee." 

Jer.  30:21.     "I  will  cause  him  to  draw  near,  and  he  shall  approach 

urrto  me." 

Jer.  31:18.     "Turn  thou  me  and  I  shall  be  turned." 

Ezek.  36:27.     "And  I  will   put   my  Spirit   within   you,  and   cause 

you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments  and  do 

them." 

John  6:44.     "No   man  can   come  to   me,   except  the  Father  which 

hath  sent  me  draw  him." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  394 

2.  It  is  the  act  of  the  regenerated  heart  actively  co-operating  in 
thus  turning. 

Deut.  4:30.     '-If  thou  turn  to  the  Lord." 

Prov.  1:23.     "Turn  you  at  my  reproof." 

Hosea  12:6.     "Therefore,  turn  thou  to  thy  God." 

Isaiah  55:7.     "Let  him  return  unto  the  Lord." 

Joel  2:13.    ," Rend  your   heart,   and   not   your  garments,    and  turn 

unto  the  Lord  your  God." 

Acts  11:21.     "A  great  number  believed  and  turned  unto  the  Lord." 

* 

III.  The  question  naturally  arises  what  is  the  nature  of  conver- 
sion.    In  reply  it  may  be  said  thtt  it  consists  : 

1.  Not  in  mere  outward  re'ormation. 

2.  Not  in  return  from  backsliding. 

3.  But  in  the  turning  of  the  heart  to  God  and  holiness.  It  is  a 
turn  of  the  thoughts,  desires,  and  affections  of  the  heart  from  sinful 
and  carnal  lusts  and  pleasures  toward  holy  things,  and  God,  and 
Christ,  and  salvation.  It  is  a  turning  from  darkness  to  light,  from 
the  power  of  SaUn  to  God.  [See  Gill  2.132 — 4.]  It  consists  "in  a 
man's  turning  actively  to  God  under  the  influence  of  divine  grace." 
[Gill  2:135  ] 

IV.  This  conversion  comprises  : 

1.  A  knowledge  of  the  true  God,   and   acceptance  of  Him  as  such. 

2.  Knowledge  of  personal  sin,  guilt,  and  condemnation. 

3.  Sorrow  for  sin  and  desire  to  escape  condemnation. 

4.  Determination  to  turn  away  from  sin  and  seek  God. 

5.  Conviction  of  personal  need  of  help  in  so  doing. 

6.  Knowledge  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour  from  sin. 

7.  Personal  trust  in  Christ  and  his  salvation. 

Note.  A  man  in  one  sense  may  be  called  converted  as  soon  as  he 
has  truly  turned  to  God  and  is  also  seeking  to  know  and  do  His  will. 
This  is  that  amount  of  conversion  which  is  so  nearly  contemporaneous 
with  regeneration  as  to  be  liable  to  be  supposed  to  exist  at  the  same 
moment  with  it,  and  which  indeed  in  a  being  capable  of  thought  on 
such  subjects  must  be  its  immediate  effect. 

But  what  the  Scriptures  and  our  common  language  comprise  in  this 
word  is  repentance  and  trust  in  God's  saving  power,  and,  in  connection 
with  Christian  knowledge,  trust  in  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  The 
attainment  of  the  fulness  of  such  conversion  is  by  the  gradual 
appreciation  of  truth,  resulting  not  only  from  regeneration,  and 
knowledge  but  from  spiritual  illumination  of  the  mind. 


395  Abstract  of  Theology. 

V.  The  relation  of  regeneration  to  conversion  will,  therefore, 
appear  to  be  one  of  invariable  antecedence. 

Wherever  the  appropriate  truth  is  at  the  time  present,  its  relation 
is  almost  that  of  producing  cause,  for  the  prepared  heart  at  once  receives 
the  truth.  Hence,  as  this  is  so  generally  the  case,  they  have  been 
usually  regarded  as  contemporaneous  and  by  some  even  as  identical. 
But  that  regeneration  is  the  invariable  antecedent  is  seen. 

1.  From  the  fact  that  the  heirt  is  the  soil  in  which  the  seed,  the 
word  of  God,  is  sown  and  that  seed  only  brings  forth  fruit  in  the 
good  soil.     The  heart  is  made  good  soil  by  regeneration. 

2.  Regeneration  (as  in  infants)  may  exist  without  faith  and 
repentance,  but  the  latter  cannot  exist  without  the  former.  Therefore, 
regeneration  precedes. 

3.  Logically  the  act  of  God  enabling,  must,  in  a  creature,  precede 
the  act  of  the  creature  thus  enabled.  But  this  logical  antecedence  in- 
volves actual  antecedence,  or  the  best  conceptions  of  our  mind  deceive 
us  and  are  not  reliable.  For  this  logical  antecedence  exists  only  because 
the  mind  observes  plainly  a  perceived  dependence  of  the  existence  of 
the  one  on  the  other.  But  such  dependence  demands,"  if  not  causal,  at 
least  antecedent  existence.     Here  it  is   only  antecedent. 

VI.  There  is  not  only  antecedence,  but  in  some  cases  an  appre- 
ciable interval. 

1.  This  is  true  even  of  conversion  regarded  as  a  mere  turning  to 
God.  Between  it  and  regeneration  must  intervene  in  some  cases  some 
period  of  time  until  the  knowledge  of  God's  existence  and  nature  is 
given,  before  the  heart  turns,  or  even  is  turned  towards  that  God. 

(1.)  This  must  be  true  of  all  infants  and  of  all  persons,  otherwise 
incapable  of  responsibility,  as  for  example  idiots. 

(2  )  There  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  true  of  some  heathen. 
The  missionaries  of  the  cross  have  been  sought  by  men,  who  knew 
nothing  of  Christianity,  but  whose  hearts,  unsatisfied  with  the 
religion  of  their  fathers,  were  seeking  restlessly  for  what  their  soul 
was  crying  out. 

2.  It  is  still  more  manifestly  true  of  full  Christian  conversion. 
(1.)     The  Scriptures  teach  this  in   many  examples  of  persons  pious, 

holy,  and  fearing  God,   yet  unacquainted   with   the    full  truth  which 
secures  union  with  Christ. 

Ethiopian  Eunuch  :   Acts  8:26—40. 

Paul :  Acts,  chapters  9  and  26.     Gal.,  chapters  1st  and  2nd. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  396 

Cornelius  the  Centurion  :  Acts  10:2. 

Lydia:  Acts  16:14. 
.  (2.)  Experience  of  ministers  in  all  ages  with  persons  seeking  and 
attaining  salvation  confirms  this  idea.  The  attainment  of  conversion 
may  be  marked  by  stages.  The  sinner  is  at  first  totally  indifferent. 
The  word  produces  on  him  no  effect.  Then  (1.)  There  is  an  evident 
willingness  to  give  serious  attention  to  the  truth  of  God.  God  has 
opened  the  heart  as  he  did  that  of  Lydia.  (2.)  There  is  conviction 
of  sin,  sense  of  its  vileness,  and  of  its  dangerous  effects.  (3.)  The 
soul,  oppressed  by  these,  strives  to  do  something  by  which  to  attain 
salvation,  but  finds  all  in  vain.  (4.)  At  last  accepting  the  truth  of 
God's  word  it  rests  in  trust  of  a  personal  Saviour. 

VII.  The  term  conversion  is  not  technically  applied  to  any 
change,  except  that  which  follows  upon  regeneration,  and  consists  in  the 
Godward  turning  of  one  heretofore  turned  entirely  away  from  God. 
The  return  of  men  who  have  backslidden,  or  fallen  into  grievous  sin 
is  also  called  "a  return  to  God,"  and  such  a  return  is  possibly  what  is 
called  "conversion"  in  Peter's  case.  Luke  22:32.  But  conversion  is 
theologically  used  exclusively  of  the  first  act. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  398 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXIII. 


REPENTANCE. 

The  Scripture  doctrine  of  Repentance  is  to  be  learned  in  part  from 
the  meaning  of  the  original  Greek  word  used  to  express  it.  and  in  part 
from  its  application  to  a  matter  which  is  within   the  sphere  of  morals. 

I.  There  are  two  forms  of  words  used  in  the  New  Testament  which 
are  translated  repent  and  repentance.  Only  one  of  these  is  used  of 
the  repentance  associated  with  salvation  from  sin. 

This  is  the  verb  •'metanoeo"  and  the  corresponding  noun  "metanoia." 
The  other  verb  is  "rnetamelomai,"  the  noun  of  which  does  not 
appear  in  the  New  Testament,  but  occurs  in  the  Septuagint  in  Hosea 
11:8.  The  verb  is  used  in  the  Septuagint  in  Psalm  110:4;  and 
Jer.  20:16.  It  is  also  the  word  used  in  the  New  Testament  in  Matt. 
21:29,  which  says  of  the  son  who  had  refused  to  obey  his  father's 
command  to  work  in  the  vine-yard,  "afterward  he  repented  and 
went."  It  likewise  is  found  in  Matt,  21:32  and  27:3,  this  latter 
being  the  case  of  Judas.  Paul  uses  it  in  Rom.  11:29  ;  and  2  Cor. 
7:8.10.  It  is  also  the  word  used  in  Heb.  7:21.  In  all  other  places, 
translated  repent  and  repentance  in  the  New  Testament,  the  original 
is  metanoeo  or  metanoia.  This  word  means  to  reconsider,  to  perceive 
afterwards,  and  hence  to  change  one's  view,  mind,  or  purpose,  or  even 
judgment,  implying  disapproval  and  abandonment  of  past  opinions 
and  purposes,  and  the  adoption  of  others  which  are  different.  In  all 
cases  of  inward  change  there  is  not  necessarily  a  change  of  outward 
conduct,  nor  is  such  inward  change  accompanied  by  -regret.  These 
results  of  the  inward  change  would  flow  from  the  nature  of  that  about 
which  that  change  has  arisen. 


399  Abstract  of  Theology. 

We  arrive,  therefore,  at  the  meaning  of  Christian  repentance  partly 
through  the  meaning  of  these  Greek  words,  but  also  partly  because 
it  is  exercised  about  a  question  of  morals.  It  is  seen  that  it  involves 
a  change  in  the  outward  life  because  such  change  is  a  result  of  the 
change  of  inward  opinions.  It  also  includes  sorrow  for  sin  because  a 
change  of  view  as  to  the  nature  of  sin  and  of  holiness  must  be  accom- 
panied by  regret  and  sorrow  as  to  past  acts  of  sin. 

The  word  metamelomai  means  to  change  one's  care,  to  regret ;  the 
idea  of  sorrow  always  accompanying  it. 

The  two  words  are  nearly  synonymous  in  their  secondary  meaning, 
and  each  is  used  in  this  secondary  meaning  in  the  New  Testament. 
Metanoeo,  however,  traces  the  feeling  of  sorrow  and  the  change  of 
life  back  to  an  inward  change  of  opinion  and  judgment  as  to  the 
nature  of  sin  and  holiness,  and  of  the  relations  of  man  and  God..  It 
is  perhaps  on  this  account  that  it  is  exclusively  used  for  true  repent- 
ance in  the  New  Testament.  This  is  not  simply  sorrow,  or  remorse, 
which  may  pass  away,  or  lead  in  despair  to  other  sins,  or  fill  the  soul 
with  anxiety;  but  a  heartfelt  change  in  the  inward  soul  towards  God 
and  holiness,  which  is  lasting  and  effective,  and  which  may  be 
associated  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing. 

II.  To  set  forth  more  explicitly  what  Repentance  is,  it  may  be 
stated  that  it  includes 

1.  An  intellectual  and  spiritual  perception  of  the  opposition 
between  holiness  in  God  and  sin  in  man.  It  does  not  look  at  sin  as 
the  cause  of  punishment  but  abhors  it  because  it  is  vile  in  the  sight 
of  God  and  involves  in  heinous  guilt  all  who  are  sinners. 

2.  It  consequently  involves,. sorrow  and  self-loathing,  and  earnest 
desire  to  escape  its  evil.  The  penitent  soul  does  not  so  much  feel 
the  greatness  of  its  danger  as  the  greatness  of  its  sinfulness. 

3.  It  also  includes  an  earnest  turning  to  God  for  help  and  deliver- 
ance from  sin,  seeking  pardon  for  guilt  and  aid  to  escape  its  presence. 

4.  It  is  also  accompanied  by  deep  regret  because  of  the  sins  com- 
mitted in  the  past,  and  by  determination  with  God's  help  to  avoid 
sin  and  live  in  holiness  hereafter.  The  heart  heretofore  against  God 
and  for  sin  is  now  against  sin  and  for  God. 

From  these  facts  it  will  be  seen  that 

(1.)  The  seat  of  true  repentance  is  in  the  soul.  It  is  not  of  itself 
the  mere  intellectual  knowledge  of  sin,  nor  the  sorrow  that 
accompanies  it,  nor   the   changed  life  which  flows   from  it ;   but  it  is 


Abstract  of  Theology.  400 

the  soul's  apprehension  of  its  heinous  character,  which  begets  the 
horror  and  self-loathing  which  accompany  it  and  the  determination 
to  forsake  sin  which  flows  from  it. 

(2.)  That  true  repentance  is  inconsistent  with  the  continuance  in 
sin  because  of  abounding  grace. 

(3.)  That  true  repentance  consists  of  mental  and  spiritual  emotion, 
and  not  of  outward  self  imposed  chastisements.  Even  the  pious  life 
and  devotion  to  God  which  follow  are  described  not  as  repentance, 
but  as  fruits  meet  for  repentance. 

III.  The  Scriptures  teach  that  the  author  of  true  repentance  is  God 
operating  by  truth  upon  the  renewed  heart. 

Acts  5:31.  Christ  is  said  to  have  been  exalted  ''to  give  repentance 
unto  Israel  and  remission  of  sins." 

Acts  11:18.  "Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  repent- 
ance unto  life." 

The  means  used  is  the  preaching  and  other  exhibition  of  the  truth. 
Repentance  like  faith  comes  through  the  hearing  of  the  word.  By 
this  men  are  exhorted  to  that  duty,  and  gain  the  knowledge  of  the 
truths  taught  by  God.  through  spiritual  apprehension  of  which  men  are 
led  to  the  truth. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  402 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXIV. 


FAITH. 

I.  Its  important  position. 

As  disbelief  was  so  prominent  in  the  sin  of  the  first  Adam  so  faith 
is  most  prominent  in  the  redemption  through  the  second  Adam. 

It  holds  an  important  connection  with  every  act  and  condition  of 
salvation. 

It  is  by  faith  that  men  come  into  vital  union  with  Christ,  through 
faith  that  they  are  justified,  through  faith  that  they  can  acceptably 
worship,  through  faith  that  the  Christian  lives,  through  faith  that  his 
sanctification  progresses,  it  being  the  means  of  his  conquering  the 
world,  of  his  exercising  hope  in  the  future,  and  becoming  more  and 
more  identified  with  Christ  in  his  spiritual  reign  here  and  hereafter. 
These  facts  evince  its  importance  and  the  necessity  of  fully  under- 
standing what  is  meant  by  it. 

II.  Its  meaning. 

It  corresponds  with  our  words  belief  and  trust, — with  belief  so  far 
as  it  refers  to  the  acceptance  of  facts  and  statements,  or  of  the  veracity 
of  a  person, — with  trust  so  far  as  a  person  or  object  is  made  the 
foundation  of  reliance.  We  believe  a  fact,  a  statement,  a  person  ;  we 
trust  or  rely  upon  that  fact,  statement  or  person  as  something  upon 
which  we  build.  In  the  one  case  we  have  faith  in,  in  the  other  we 
put  faith  in. 

The  noun  "pistis'r  and  the  verb  "pisteuo"  are  used  in  each  of  these 
senses  in  the  Scripture,  and  also  in  the  two  unitedly  ;  (1.)  as  to  mere 
belief  of  the  truth  either  savingly  or  otherwise.  2  Thess.  2:13  ;  Heb. 
10:39  ;  John  2:22  ;  John  5:46  ;  Acts  26:27  ;   Jas.  2=19, 


403  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(2.)     In   the  sense  of  reliance. 

John  1:24.     "Jesus  did  not  commit  himself  unto  them." 

John  7:5.     "Neither  did  his  brethren  believe  in  him." 

2  Tim.  1:12.     "I  know  whom  I  have  believed." 

1  John  4:1.     "Beloved,  believe  not  every  Spirit." 

But  the  almost  invariable  usage  of  the  New  Testament  includes 
both  elements,  the  belief  of  the  facts  and  person,  and  reliance  upon 
them  and  him  for  salvation. 

The  difference  between  these  three  forms  of  belief  is  apparent. 

1.  Mere  belief  may  be  weak  and  motiveless,  and  thus  it  may  result 
in  indifference  as  to  action  ;  or  it  may  be  a  mere  opinion,  the  holding  of 
which,  or  not,  is  not  felt  to  be  a  matter  of  consequence  ;"  or  it  may  be 
a  mere  notion  taken  up  without  sufficient  evidence. 

2.  Mere  trust  in  a  person  or  thing,  may  result  from  confidence  in 
the  word  of  another,  or  in  the  actions  of  others,  or  from  something  in 
our  experience  teaching  us  that  we  may  venture,  though  we  know  no 
reason  why  we  should  thus  trust.  Thus  some  one  tells  us  that  this  is 
the  train  wTe  wish  to  take — or  we  go  over  a  bridge  over  which  others 
have  gone — or  we  ford -a  stream  through  which  we  see  by  tracks  that 
others  have  driven.  Here  our  trust  is  much  more,  if  not  altogether, 
in  the  testimony  of  others  rather  than  in  any  knowledge  of,  or  con- 
fidence in  that  to  which  we  commit  ourselves. 

It  is  only  through  the  combination  of  the  two  that  we  have  faith, 
which  must  be  an  intelligent  trust.  By  it  we  believe  not  only  in  him 
upon  whom  we  trust,  but  we  do  so  because  we  believe  the  facts  which 
make  him  trustworthy. 

Hence  it  is  that  the  Scriptures  use  it  in  the  twofold  sense,  uniting 
the  two  ideas  in  the  case  of  believers  in  Christ,  because  not  only  do 
they  rely  upon  Jesus,  but,  from  the  belief  of  the  facts  concerning  him 
taught  in  God's  word,  they  know  whom  they  have  believed,  and  why 
they  should  believe  him. 

Christian  faith,  therefore,  is  personal  reliance  upon  Christ  for 
salvation  because  of  belief  of  God's  testimony  as  to  our  sinful  and 
ruined  condition,  and  as  to  what  Christ  has  assuredly  done  to  save  us. 

It  is  based,  therefore,  upon  the  knowledge  of  this  testimony  as  given 
by  our  own  consciences  and  the  word  of  God.  It  is  consequently  an  act 
of  the  mind.  As  the  truth  thus  apprehended  is  spiritual,  so  it  is 
apprehended  spiritually  by  the  heart.     As  it  occurs  in  the  heart  of  a 


Abstract  of  Theology.  404 

sinner,  so  it  must  be  the  act  of  a  regenerated  heart  which  alone  is 
inclined  to  such  belief  as  constitutes  trust.  And  it  is  attained  by  this 
heart  through  the  illuminating  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

III.  The  nature  of  saving  faith  will  further  appear  by  noticing 
its  objects. 

These  objects  are  not  mere  abstract  truths,  nor  opinions,  nor  facts, 
but  only  such  as  are  connected  with  a  person. 

1.  One  object  of  faith  is  God  the  Father,  not  considered  alone  as 
the  Father,  but  both  as  Father,  and  as  representing  the  Godhead. 

(1.)  As  representing  the  Godhead.  As  such,  it  has  Him  also  for 
its  object,  not  in  all  the  aspects  he  bears  to  man,  for  it  does  not 
apprehend  Him  as  Creator,  Preserver,  Ruler,  or  Benefactor.  These  are 
aspects  believed  in,  but  they  are  not  at  the  basis  of  saving  faith. 

This  has  respect  to  Him  only  in  those  relations  in  which  He  is 
viewed  in  special  connection  with  salvation. 

(a)  As  a  God  of  holiness,  hating  sin,  Himself  infinite  in  purity, 
before  whom  even  the  angels  are  chargeable  with  folly. 

(b)  As  a  God  of  justice,  who  will  certainly  punish  every  sin,  even 
the  least. 

(c)  As  the  righteous  judge,  who  will  show  no  favour,  and  who  has 
appointed  a  day  wherein  He  will  judge  the  world. 

(d)  As  the  omniscient  searcher  of  hearts,  who  knoweth  even  the 
msot  secret  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart. 

(e)  As  the  almighty  and  living  God,  into  whose  hands  it  is  a 
fearful  thing  to  fall. 

(f)  As  the  God  who  delights  not  in  the  death,  but  rather  in  the 
salvation  of  the  wicked. 

(g)  As  the  God,  whose  love  for  the  world  has  sent  His  own  Son 
for  its  salvation, 

(h)  As  a  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  and  long  suffering,  &c. 
Ex.  34:6.7. 

(i)     As  a  God,  forgiving  iniquity,  transgression,  and  sin. 

(j)  As  a  God,  promising  and  giving  the  aid  of  His  Spirit  to  such 
as  seek  Him. 

(k)  As  a  God,  that  justifies  those  who  trust  in  Tlim  for  pardon 
through  Christ. 

(1)     As  a  God,  that  can  and  will  secure  the  final  salvation  of  His 
people.     John  10:28.29;   Rom.  11:29;  Phil.  1:6;  1  Pet.  1:5. 
(2.)     In  God  the  Father  as  Father. 


405  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(;t)  Who  hath,  from  the  beginning,  chosen  us  in  Christ.  2  Thess. 
2:13;  Eph.  1:4. 

(b)  Who  hath  loved  us.     2  Thess.  2:16  ;   1  John  4:19. 

(c)  Who  hath  adopted  us  as  sons,  1  John  3:1.2  and  consequently 
as  joint  heirs  with  Christ,  Rom.  8=17. 

.  (d.)     As  the  unchangeable  bestower  of  grace.     James  1:17;    Rom. 
11:29. 

(e)  As  the  author  of  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  2 
Pet.  1:4;  2  Cor.  1-20. 

2.  Another  object  of  faith  is  Christ. 
(1.)     In  his  person  and  work. 

(a)  As  Son  of  God,  giving  dignity  and  value  to  the  work  of  atone- 
ment. 

(b)  As  man,  as  duly  representing  us ;  as  having  properly  suffered 
for  us  ;  and  as  fully  sympathizing  with  us. 

(c)  As  the  Godman,  so  uniting  the  divine  and  human  natures  in 
one  person,  that  we  can  say  that  he  that  is  God,  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Lord  of  glory,  bore  our  sins  and  died  for  our  salvation. 

(2.)  In  his  testimony,  as  to  himself  as  sent  by  God,  and  as  to  his 
work  as  approved  of  God. 

(3  )  In  his  abounding  love  and  grace,  as  seen  in  his  humiliation, 
and  the  greatness  of  his  personal  sacrifice  for  us. 

(4.)  In  his  earnest  desire,  that  sinners  should  come  to  God 
through  him. 

(5.)     In  his  assurances  of  the  answers  of  our  prayers. 

(6.)     In  his  promises  of  grace  unto  the  end. 

(7.)  In  his  constant  presence  with  us,  sympathizing,  aiding 
pleading  for  us  and  securing  our  acceptance  with  God. 

(8.)     In  all  his  offices,  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King. 

3.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  also  an  object  of  faith. 
(1.)     As  to  His  promised  presence. 

(2.)     As  to  the  work  within  the  heart,  being  His  work. 
(3.)     As  to  His  power  to  accomplish  it  unto  the  end. 

Remark.  It  is  thus  seen  that  not  only  the  Godhead  as  such,  but 
the  separate  persons  in  it,  are  objects  of  saving  faith.  Hence  the 
union  of  them  all  in  Baptism.  Even  if  it  be  true  that  "baptized 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  means  that  a  different  formula  was 
used,  still  this  baptism  involved  a  knowledge  of  the  Trinity,  and  would 
have  been  virtually  a  baptism  with  respect  to  that  Trinity. 


&> 


Abstract  of  Theology.  406 

IV.  The  nature  of  saving  faith  may  be  still  further  seen  by  no- 
ticing other  words  by  which  it  is  expressed.  [See  Gill,  2:395 — 400  for 
full  statement  of  following  points  taken,  except  the  fourth,  from  him.] 

1.  As  looking  to  Christ.  Isa.  45:22  ;  Micah  7:7.  Illustrated  by 
the  uplifted  serpent.     John  3:14.15. 

2.  As  coming  to  him.     Isa.  55=1  ;  Matt.  11:28  ;  John  6:37.44.45.65. 

3.  As  fleeing  to  him  and  laying  hold  upon  him.     Heb.  6:18. 

4.  As  eating  and  drinking  him.     John  6:51 — 58. 

5.  As  receiving  him.     Col.  2:6. 

V.  That  the  above  is  the  nature  of  saving  faith  will  still  further 
appear  by  contrasting  with  it  other  kinds  of  faith  which  have  been 
attempted  to  be  substituted  for  it. 

1.  Implicit  faith.  Romanists  claim  that  faith  must  be  in  the 
church, — simply  in  it ;  in  its  doctrines  so  far  as  known  ;  but  believed 
upon  the  church's  authority  and  not  upon  any  other  apprehension  of 
its  truth. 

This  is  really  to  make  the  church  a  fetish,  a  mere  charm  which 
gives  salvation  simply  to  one  who  trusts  salvation  in  its  hands. 

It  is  as  though,  with  our  belief  implicitly  in  the  Bible,  we  should 
say  that  one  who  believes  the  Bible  is  saved  ;  whether  he  knows  its 
contents  or  not. 

Our  trust,  neither  in  Christ,  nor  in  the  Bible,  is  of  this  kind.  It  is 
based  upon  an  intelligent,  not  a  blind  confidence  of  the  truths  taught. 
We  simply  put  blind  faith,  as  to  anything  we  comprehend,  that  that 
thing  is  true  because  God  says  so.  But  the  whole  hope  of  salvation 
and  faith,  in  every  other  respect  which  is  effective  and  operative,  is  in 
what  we  believe,  not  in  the  fact  that  it  is  true,  but  in  the  knowledge 
which  the  fact  that  it  is  true  conveys  to  us.  Our  salvation  does  not 
rest  in  the  belief  that  the  books  of  the  Bible  teach  the  truth,  but  in 
belief  of  the  things  which  they  teach. 

2.  Historical  faith.  This  is  a  mere  intellectual  belief  of  the  truths 
taught  in  the  Scriptures  as  historical  facts  ;  as  that  there  was  such  a 
person  as  Jesus,  who,  being  die  Son  of  God,  wrought  out  salvation  and 
has  now  commanded  all  men  to  repent  and  be  baptized  for  the  remis- 
sion of  sins. 

One  fact  that  favours  the  substitution  of  this  for  the  faith'  which 
trusts  with  the  heart  in  Christ,  is  that  in  the  apostolic  days,  such  was 
the  danger  of  professing  Christ  that  none  would  be  apt  to  do  so,  who 
did  not  heartily  believe  in  him.  Another  is  that  as  the  new  religion, 
presented  itself  in  salient  points  in  opposition   to  the  old,  the  accept- 


407  Abstract  of  Theology. 

ance  of  these  points  could  be  due  only  to  a  heartfelt  belief  in  Jesus. 
Hence  the  language  of  1  John  4:15,  "Whosoever  shall  confess  that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  God,"  and 
other  similar  passages. 

Fortunately,  however,  we  have  sufficient  teaching  to  show  what  is 
the  true  faith. 

There  is  the  case  of  Simon  Magus,  Acts  8:13 — 24.  Manifestly  he 
had  historical  faith,  and  yet  the  Apostle  is  led  to  say  to  him,  verse  21, 
"Thou  hast  neither  part,  nor  lot  in  this  matter  ;  for  thy  heart  is  not 
.right  in  the  sight  of  God."  The  case  of  Judas  also  is  one  of  bare 
historical  faith. 

That  faith,  however,  is  a  work  of  the  heart,  is  manifest  from  the 
following  passages  : 

Acts  2:37.     "They  were  pricked  in  their  heart." 

Eom.  10:8 — 10.  "Shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  G^dhath  raised 
him  from  the  dead,  *•  *  *  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto 
righteousness." 

See  an  illustration  of  the  difference  between  historical  faith  and 
hearty  acceptance  of  the  truth  in  John  12:42.43  and  Kom.  10:16 — 21. 

2  Cor.  3:3.  "In  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart,"  also  verse  6,  "the  letter 
killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life." 

Heb.  10:22.     "Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart." 

2  Tim.  2:22.  Christians  are  described  as  those  who  "cali  on  the 
Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart." 

It  is  also  proved  by  all  we  have  seen  of  the  necessity  and  nature 
of  Regeneration,  Conversion,  and  Repentance. 

Hodge,  [Outlines,  p.  473,]  gives  this  further  proof  from  the  effects  of 
faith.  "The  Scriptures  declare  that  by  faith  the  Christian  "embraces 
the  promises"  "is  persuaded  of  the  promises,"  "out  of  weakness  is  made 
strong,"  "waxes  valiant  in  fight,"  "confesses  himself  a  stranger  and 
pilgrim  seeking  a  better  country."  As  faith  in  a  threatening  neces- 
sarily involves  fear,  so  faith  in  a  promise  necessarily  involves  trust." 
"Besides,  faith  rests  upon  the  trustworthiness  of  God  and,  therefore, 
necessarily  involves  trust.     Heb.   10:23  and  the  whole  11th  chapter." 

3.  Assurance  of  personal  interest  in  Christ's  salvation  ;  so  that 
one  may  say,  I  know  that  Christ  died  for  me,  that  I  am  one  of  his 
elect,  that  my  sins  were  removed  by  him,  and  I  have  been  reconciled 
to  God  by  him. 

Such  cannot  be  the  nature  of  saving  faith,  because 


Abstract  of  Theology.  408 

(1.)  This  is  not  the  experience  of  an  early,  but  of  an  advanced 
stage  of  Christian  experience. 

(2.)  Because  this  is  not  the  object  of  Christian  faith.  That  object 
is  Christ,  and  the  statements  of  God's  truth  concerning  him  and 
salvation.  Those  statements  are  general  so  far  as  the  revelation  is 
made.  They  are  made  personal  by  our  acceptance.  But  our  faith 
enters  into  that  condition.  If  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  that  our  faith 
is  undoubtedly  genuine,  not  merely  temporary,  but  actually  one 
rooted  in  Christ,  we  may  gain  this  assurance,  but  that  assurance  would 
rest  not  on  God's  word,  nor  on  Christ's  salvation,  but  on  the  evidence 
afforded  by  the  Spirits  work  in  our  hearts.  [See  Hodge's  Outlines, 
P.  478.] 

(3.)  The  Scriptures  give  an  example  in  Paul  of  a  true  Christian 
who  still  continued  in  doubt  as  to  personal  salvation,  as  1  Cor.  9:27  ; 
Phil.  3:12—14. 

(4.)  "From  the  exhortations  addressed  to  those  who  were  already 
believers  to  attain  to  assurance  as  a  degree  of  faith  beyond  that 
which  they  already  enjoyed."     [Hodge's  Outlines,  p.  478  ] 

(5.)  "From  the  experience  ot  God's  people  in  all  ages."  [Hodge's 
Outlines,  p.  478.] 

Rem.  1st.  The  assurance,  however,  which  is  not  thus  a  part  of 
saving  faith,  is  one  which  can  be  attained  and  doubtless  frequently 
has  been  attained. 

(a)  This  is  directly  asserted.  Rom.  8:16  ;  2  Pet.  1=10  ;  1  John 
2:3;  3:14;  5;13. 

(b)  Scriptural  examples  are  given  of  its  attainment,  as  Paul. 
2  Tim.  1:12;  4:7.8. 

(c)  "Many  eminent  Christians  have  enjoyed  an  abiding  assurance, 
of  the  genuineness  of  which  their  holy  walk  and  conversation  was  an 
indubitable  seal."     [Hodge's  Outlines,  p.  478.] 

Rem.  2nd.  The  grounds  upon  which  a  man  can  be  assured  of 
salvation  are 

(a)  The  divine  truth  of  the  promises  of  salvation. 

(b)  The  inward  evidence  of  those  graces  unto  which  those  promises 
are  made. 

(c)  The  testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  Rom.  8:15.16,  wit- 
nessing with  our  Spirits  that  we  are  the  children  of  God,  which  Spirit, 
Eph.  1:13.14 ;  2  Cor.  1:21.22,  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance, 
whereby  we  are  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption.  [West.  Conf.,  chap. 
18,  quoted  in  Hodge's  Outlines,  p.  479.] 


409  Abstract  of  Theology. 

"This  genuine  assurance,"  says  Hodge,  (Outlines,  p.  479)  "may  be 
distinguished  from  that  presumptuous  confidence  which  is  a  delusion 
of  Satan,  chiefly  by  these  marks.  True  assurance,  1st,  begets  un- 
feigned humility,  1  Gor.  15:10;  Gal.  6.14;  2nd,  leads  to  ever 
increasing  diligence  in  practical  religion,  Ps.  51:12.13.19;  3rd,  to 
candid  self-examination  and  a  desire  to  be  searched  and  corrected  by 
God,  Ps.  139:23.24;  4th,  to  constant  aspirations  after  nearer  con- 
formity and  more  intimate  communion  with  God,  1  John  3:2.3." 

4.  Temporary  or  delusive  faith.  This  has  many  marks  of  true 
faith.  Hence  it  is  not  only  the  intellectual  reception  of  historical  facts, 
but  a  joyful  acceptance  of  them.  This  is  the  case  of  the  seed  of  the 
stony  places  which  represents  the  man  that  heareth  the  word  and  anon 
with  joy  receiveth  it.  But  the  parable  teaches  us  that  the  soil  was  not 
prepared.  It  is,  therefore,  not  in  the  regenerated  heart  that  it  arises. 
The  evidence  of  its  temporary  character,  therefore,  will  soon  appear. 
It  lacks  the  following  characteristics  of  saving  faith  and  may  thus  be 
distinguished  from  it. 

(1.)  Continuance  in  trusting  Christ,  and  in  devotion  to  him  and 
his  service. 

(2.)     Desire  to  be  useful  in  the  work  of  Christ. 

(3.)     Attendance  to  Christian  duty. 

(4.)  Love  of  prayer  and  the  word  of  God,  and  of  the  meetings  with 
his  people  for  worship. 

(5)     Devoted  love  to  the  children  of  God  as  such. 

(6.)  Progress  in  knowledge  of  self  and  sin,  and  of  Christ  as  a 
Saviour. 

(7  )  Progress  in  loving  holiness  and  hating  sin,  with  increased 
conviction  of,  and  humility  concerning  sinfulness. 

VI.  It  is  through  this  saving  faith  that  we  attain  vital  union  with 
Christ.  It  is,  however,  not  a  meritorious  ground,  nor  a  procuring 
cause  of  such  union,  but  simply  the  mere  act  of  clinging  to  him,  and 
trusting  in  him  which  becomes  the  instrumental  cause  of  such  union. 
Rom.  4:16. 

1.  There  are  several  senses  in  which  Christians  are  spoken  of  as 
in  Christ. 

(1.)     By  election  ;   "Chosen  in  him." 

(2.)     By  federal  representation  in  his  atoning  work. 

(3.)     From  the  union  of  believers  with  him  by  faith. 

Rom.  16:7.     "Who  also  were  in  Christ  before  me." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  410 

2  Cor.  5:17.  "Therefore,  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new 
creature." 

2.  This  union  is  represented  in  the  Scriptures  by  the  figure  of  the 
vine  and  i*s  branches  in  John  15:1 — 6,  by  that  of  a  living  stone  unto 
which  as  lively  stones  Christians  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  (1  Pet. 
2:4 — 6),  by  Christ,  as  the  head,  of  whom  Christians  are  the  members, 
(Eph.  4:16),  and  as  husband  and  bride  (the  church),  Eph.  5:25 — 32. 
[Hodge's  Outlines,  p.  483  ] 

3.  On  the  one  hand  this  union  does  not  involve  any  mysterious 
confusion  of  the  person  of  Christ  with  the  persons  of  his  people  ;  and 
on  the  other  hand  it  is  not  such  a  mere  association  of  separate  persons 
as  exists  in  human  societies.  But  it  is  a  union  which  (1.)  determines 
our  legal  status  on  the  same  basis  with  his,  (2.)  which  revives  and 
sustains,  by  the  influence  of  his  indwelling  Spirit,  our  spiritual  life 
from  the  fountain  of  his  life,  and  which  transforms  our  bodies  and 
souls  into  the  likeness  of  his  glorified  humanity. 

It  is  therefore 

"(1.)  A  spiritual  union.  Its  actuating  source  and  bond  is  the 
Spirit  of  the  head,  who  dwells  and  works  in  the  members."  1  Cor. 
6:17;   12:13;   1  John  3=24;  4:13. 

"(2.)  A  vital  union,  i.  e.  our  spiritual  life  is  sustained  and  deter- 
mined in  its  nature  and  movement  by  the  life  of  Christ  through  the 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit."     John  14=19  ;  Gal.  2=20. 

"(3.)  It  embraces  our  entire  persons,  our  bodies  through  our 
Spirits."     1  Cor.  6:15.19. 

"(4.)  It  is  a  legal  or  federal  union,  so  chat  all  of  our  legal  or  cove- 
nant responsibilities  rest  upon  Christ,  and  all  his  legal  or  covenant 
merits  accrue  to  us." 

"(5.)  It  is  an  indissoluble  union."  John  10:28  ;  Rom.  8:35.37  ; 
1  Thess.  4:14.17. 

"(6.)  This  union  is  between  the  believer  and  the  person  of  the 
Godman  in  his  office  as  Mediator.  Its  immediate  organ  is  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  dwells  in  us,  and  through  him  we  are  vitally  united  to 
and  commune  with  the  whole  Godhead  since  He  is  the  Spirit  of  the 
Father,  as  well  as  of  the  Son."  John  14:23;  17:2L23.  [Hodge's 
Outline?,  pp.  483  and  484.] 

VII.     The  difference  between  faith  and  hope. 

That  they  are  not  the  same  is  evident  from  1  Cor.  13:13,  where  they 
are  plainly  distinguished  from  each  other  ;  also  in  Rom.  5=2 — 5  ;  1 
Pet.  1:21 ;  Heb.  11:1.     Illustrated  by  Rom.  4:18. 


411  Abstract  of  Theology. 

It  is  objected  that  the  view  taken,  that  saving  faith  involves  trust, 
makes  it  the  same  as  hope,  and,  therefore,  faith  must  be  of  such  a 
nature,  as  not  to  include  trust. 

But  Christian  faith  and  hope  differ 

1.  In  their  nature,  (a)  Faith  is  reliance  upon  something  now  present 
as  known  or  believed.  Hope  is -looking  forward  to  something  in  the 
future,  with  more  or  less  expectation  of  receiving  it. 

Faith  is  belief,  Hope  is  expectation.  Each  involves  the  idea  of 
trust,  but  with  the  use  of  different  prepositions.  Faith  is  trust  in  or 
upon  any  person  or  thing,  Hope  is  trust  of  or  for  any  person  or  thing. 

See  every  passage  in  Cruden's  Concordance  where  "hope"  is,  of 
which  the  following  are  specimens.  Acts  23:6;  24:15;  26=6;  28=20; 
Rom.  8=24;  15=4;  1  Cor.  15=19;  2  Cor.  3:12;  Col.  1:5.23.27;  1 
Thess.  5:8. 

(b)  Joyful  expectation  enters  into  the  nature  of  hope,  but  not  into 
that  of  faith.  It  is  only  because  the  things  believed  beget  a  joyful 
hope,  that  the  Christian's  trust  can  be  mistaken  for  hope. 

2.  Hope  is  the  result  or  effect  of  faith  and,  therefore,  not  faith 
itself.     Rom.  5:2—5  ;  Rom.  15:4.13  ;  Gal.  5:5  ;   Heb.  11*1. 

3.  They  differ  in  their  objects.  Faith  rests  upon  Christ  and  his 
work  for  our  salvation  and  upon  the  promises  made  of  blessings.  Hope 
rests  in  the  blessings  resultant  from  that  work  and  those  promises. 
Its  object  is  salvation,  freedom  from  sin,  heaven,  glory  hereafter.'  We 
can  not  say  we  have  faith  in  salvation,  but  in  the  Saviour  and  his 
work;  we  have  not  faith  in  future  freedom  from  sin ;  but  we  have  it  in 
the  promised  deliverance.  Likewise  we  have  not  faith  in  heaven  or 
glory  ;  but  in  these  as  promised  to  us. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  412 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE    XXXV. 


JUSTIFICATION. 

No  doctrine  of  Scripture  is  more  important  than  that  of  justification. 
It  involves  the  whole  method  of  the  salvation  of  sinners.  It  is  vitally- 
connected  with  all  other  fundamental  doctrines.  A  correct  concep- 
tion of  it  cannot  exist  when  other  truths  are  ignored,  or  only  partially 
received.  The  opinions  held  upon  this  point  control  in  great  part  the 
theological  views  in  general  of  all  christian  individuals  and  parties. 
The  importance  of  a  correct  knowledge  of  what  God  has  taught  on 
this  subject  cannot  therefore  be  exaggerated. 

The  discussion  of  this  doctrine  will  be  best  presented  by  a  defini- 
tion of  the  word  Justification,  accompanied  by  proof  of  the  several 
statements  involved  in  that  definition. 

Justification  is  a  judicial  act  of  God,  by  which,  on  account  of  the 
meritorious  work  of  Christ,  imputed  to  a  sinner  and  received  by  him 
through  that  faith  which  vitally  unites  him  to  his  substitute  and  Sa- 
viour, God  declares  that  sinner  to  be  free  from  the  demands  of  the 
law,  and  entitled  to  the  rewards  due  to  the  obedience  of  that  sub- 
stitute. 

I.     It  is  a  judicial  act  of  God. 

That  God  is  its  author  is  emphatically  declared  by  Paul  in  Rom. 
8:33;  "It  is  God  that  justifieth."  As  he  is  the  lawgiver  and  judge 
so  must  He  also  be  the  justifier. 

The  act  is  not  one  of  sovereignty,  as  is  election,  because  He  does  not 
justify  merely  of  good  pleasure,  but  because  the  demands  of  the  law  have 


413  Abstract  of  Theology. 

been  met.  Yet  his  act  is  free,  and  of  grace,  because  it  is  of  His  own 
choice  that  He  accepts  a  substitute,  and  because  Christ  and  his  meri- 
torious work  have  been  graciously  secured  and  given  by  God  Himself. 
See  Rom.  3:24. 

The  virtue  of  the  act  consists  in  its  being  His  judicial  act.  Any 
one  might  perceive,  or  declare  the  demands  of  the  law  to  be  satisfied 
upon  knowledge  of  that  fact.  Any  one  might  proclaim  that  the  re- 
wards of  Christ's  merit  have  been  secured.  But,  whether  declared  of 
the  value  and  efficacy  of  Christ's  work  in  itself,  or  of  its  application  to 
an  individual,  such  a  declaration  would  not  be  justification.  It  only 
becomes  so  when  uttered  by  God  in  His  capacity  as  Judge.  All 
others  could  only  recognize  or  declare  the  fact.  The  declaration  of 
the  judge  sets  the  sinner  free  from  all  demands  of  the  law,  and  con- 
fers upon  him  all  the  blessings  appertaining  to  this  new  condition. 

This  judicial  act  of  justification  is  made  necessary  because  the  law 
has  been  broken.  One  who  has  completely  fulfilled  the  law  needs  not 
to  be  justified.  His  position  before  the  law  is  that  of  one  personally 
just  or  righteous ;  not  of  one  that  is  justified,  or  declared  righteous, 
or  treated  as  such  though  not  personally  so.  He  may  be  said  to  be 
justified,  because  recognized  or  treated  as  such,  though  the  ground  of 
such  action  is  that  he  is  personally  just.  Thus  the  term  "justified,"  is 
properly  applied  to  the  doers  of  the  law,  and  that  of  "just"  denied  to 
the  mere  hearers  of  the  law  in  Rom.  2:13.  But,  while  the  terms  may 
be  thus  used  of  one  personally  just,  he,  nevertheless,  needs  no  such  jus- 
tification because  his  righteousness  is  not  questionable.  His  position, 
like  that  of  those  who  fully  obey  human  laws,  is  recognized  without 
any  special  act  affirming  it. 

Hence  it  is,  that  the  Scriptures,  so  commonly  use  the  word  just 
(dikaios)  of  one  who  is,  in  some  one,  or  all  respects,  perfectly  conformed 
to  the  law  by  his  own  acts,  and  who  is,  to  that  extent,  therefore,  person- 
ally holy,  applying  the  term  not  to  men  only,  nor  even  to  Christ,  who 
was  made  under  the  law,  but  also  to  God  Himself.  See  Matt.  1:19  ; 
5.45;  9=13;  Luke  23=50  ;  Acts  3=14  ;  7=52;  22:14;  Rom.  3  :26.  This 
usage  has  given  rise  to  the  opinion  of  some  that  justification  is  not 
simply  a  judicial  act,  but  that  it  involves  holiness  in  the  one  justified 
and  in  the  case  of  justified  sinners  an  infusion  of  holiness  in  the  act  of 
justification. 

But  that  this  is  an  error  is  obvious, 

1.  From  the  fact  that  justification  is  presented  as  the  opposite  of 
condemnation,  (Rom.  8:33.34),  and  not  of  sinfulness.     Condemnation 


Abstract  of  Theology.  414 

is  never  spoken  of  as  the  infusion   of  a   corrupted   nature    and  conse- 
quently justification  would  not  involve  that  of  a  holy  nature. 

2.  That  the  justified  are  not  declared  in  Scripture  to  be  free  from 
sin  or  possessed  of  holy  natures,  but  are  represented  as  still  struggling 
against  sin,  and  not  only  sin  which  arises  from  outward  temptations,  but 
that  proceeding  from  the  motions  of  sin  within. 

3.  The  change  of  nature  which  causes  that  of  character  is  called 
in  the  Scriptures  "regeneration,"  and  differs  essentially  from  justifi- 
cation. The  former  is  the  special  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
latter  is  the  act  of  God  the  Father.  That  is  an  effect  wrought 
inwardly,  which  developes  itself  in  a  continuous  and  progressive 
process  which  the  Scriptures  called  sanctification.  If  justification 
includes  an  infused  righteousness  as  the  opposite  of  sinfulness,  then 
it  includes  sanctification,  and  there  is  no  ground  for  the  scriptural 
distinction  between  them. 

4.  The  usage  of  other  words  in  connection  with  justification  shows 
it  to  be  a  forensic  act.  The  term  "righteousness"  (dikaiosune)  which, 
like  righteous  (dikaios),  is  used  in  connection  with  personal  right- 
eousness, as  of  God  in  Act  17:31,  and  of  Christ  "the  Faithful  and 
True",  Rev.  19:11,  and  of  the  Martyrs  in  Heb.  11:33,  and  of  human 
obedience  to  the  law  in  Rom.  10:3.5  ;  Phil.  3:6.9,  is,  in  connection  with 
God's  justification  of  sinners,  applied,  though  chiefly  by  the  Apostle 
Paul,  to  "the  righteousness  which  God  bestows  or  accepts,"  and  which 
is  imputed  to  the  sinner  or  reckoned  to  his  account. 

Another  term,  dikaiosis,  signifies  "the  act  or  process  of  declaring 
righteous,"  viz:  justification. 

The  word  dikaioma,  which  means  "that  which  is  declared  right- 
eous", and  hence  a  statute  or  command,  as  something  which  the  law,  or 
God  declares  to  be  a  righteous  requirement,  is  used  in  connection  with 
justification  for  "the  deed  by  which  one  declares  another  righteous, 
and  is  partially  equivalent  to  dikaiosis." 

The  principal  word  which  is  used  for  expressing  the  nature  of  God's 
action  in  justification  is  dikaioo  (to  justify),  which  means  every  where 
"to  declare  righteous"  "to  regard  and  represent  as  righteous"  and  not 
"to  make  righteous"  in  the  sense  of  conferring  personal  righteousness. 

This  usage  of  terms  shows  plainly  that  justification  is  a  judicial  act 
of  God,  in  which  he  does  not  confer  holiness,  but  only  declares  the 
relation  occupied  to  the  law  by  the  one  who  is  in  Christ. 


415  Abstract  of  Theology. 

II.    The  Ground. of  this  Justification. 

It  is  manifest  from  what  has  already  been  said  that  the  justification 
of  the  sinner  must  depend  on  something  not  personally  his  own.  The 
Scriptures  teach  that  it  is  due  not  to  his  own  good  works  but  to  the 
meritorious  work  of  Christ  which  is  imputed  to  him,  or  put  to  his 
account. 

1.  They  teach  us  negatively  that  it  is  not  due  to  his  own  good 
works. 

(1.)  They  expressly  deny  that  justification  can  be  by  the  works  of 
the  law.     Rom.  3:20;  Gal.  3.11  ;  Eph.  2:9. 

(2.)  They  assert  that,  could  it  thus  have  been  attained,  Christ's 
death  has  been  useless.     Gal.  2:21 ;   5:4. 

(3.)  Sinfulness  is  declared  to  be  the  condition  of  every  man,  which 
excludes  the  possibility  of  works  untainted  by  sin.     Rom.  3:10. 

(4.)  The  law  is  said  to  demand  such  complete  obedience  that 
"whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law  and  yet  offend  in  one  point  he 
is  guilty  of  all."     James  2:10. 

(5.)  We  are  told  that  "if  there  had  been  a  law  given  which  could 
have  given  life,  righteousness  should  have  been  by  the  law."  Gal.  3:21. 

(6.)  It  is  likewise  stated  as  necessary  to  the  certainty  of  attaining 
salvation  that  "it  is  of  faith  that  it  might  be  of  grace."     Rom.  4:16. 

These  statements  show  that,  not  only  are  men  not  saved  by 
works  alone,  but  not  even  by  works  combined  with  grace.  Justifica- 
tion cannot  arise  therefore  from  the  good  works  of  men.  Not  even 
has  its  condition  been  so  modified  that  a  partial  obedience  can  be 
accepted,  whether  this  stands  alone  or  is  supplemented  by,  or  is  supple- 
mentary to  the  merits  of  Christ.  Something  entirely  outside  of  man 
must  constitute  the  basis  of  justification. 

2.  The  word  of  God  declares  this  outside  something  to  be  the 
meritorious  work  of  Christ. 

(I.)     In  general 

(a)  By  declaring  that  the  righteousness  of  God  is  connected  with 
our  relations  to,  or  belief  in  Christ.  Rom.  3:22.26;  5:1  ;  10:4;  1  Cor. 
1:30. 

(b)  By  stating  that  redemption  is  in  Christ  Jesus.     Rom.  3:24. 

(c)  By  setting  him  forth  as  the  only  foundation  of  salvation. 

(d)  By  asserting  salvation  to  be  found  only  in  Christ.     Acts  4:12. 

(e)  By  asserting  a  definite  relation  between  our  sin  and  Christ,  and 
his  righteousness  and  ourselves.     2  Cor.  5:21. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  416 

2.  More  specifically  by  connecting  the  salvation  and  justification 
of  man  with  Christ's  merits. 

This  may  be  shown. 

(a)  In  connection  with  his  sufferings,  or  what  is  usually  called  his 
passive  obedience. 

1.  Christ  is  presented  as  "the  Lamb  of  God,"  John  1:29,  in  evi- 
dent allusion  to  the  sacrificial  offerings  of  the  olden  days,  and  Paul 
speaks  of  him  as  one  "whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  his  blood."     Rom.  3;25. 

2.  He  is  presented  as  one  who  has  died  for  us.  Rom.  5:6.8;  8;34  ; 
14:15;  1  Cor.  8:11;  2  Cor.  5=14.15;  1  Thess.  5:10;  and  specifically  as 
having  died  for  our  sins,     1  Cor.  15=3. 

3.  We  are  said  to  be  justified  by  his  blood  (Rom.  5:9) ;  and  recon- 
ciled by  his  death  (Rom.  5:10),  and  by  his  cross  (Eph.  2:16). 

(b.)  Our  justification  is  due  also  to  the  active  obedience  of  Christ, 
and  not  to  passive  obedience  only. 

1.  Righteousness  involves  character,  conduct  and  action,  even 
more  than  suffering  endured  as  penalty.  The  sinlessness  of  Christ  is 
therefore  plainly  taught,  and  especially  in  connection  with  imputation. 
2  Cor.  5:21. 

2.  The  gracious  salvation  he  brings  is  said  to  establish  the  law. 

3.  He  assures  us,  that  he  came  to  fulfill  the  law.     Matt.  5:17. 

4.  The  obedience  of  Christ  is  not  only  contrasted  with  that  of 
Adam,  but  is  declared  to  be  the  means  by  which  many  shall  be  made 
righteous.     Rom.  5.19. 

It  thus  appears,  that  the  ground  of  justification  is  the  whole  meri- 
torious work  of  Christ.  Not  his  sufferings  and  death  only,  but  his 
obedience  to,  and  conformity  with  the  divine  law  are  involved  in  the 
justification,  which  is  attained  by  the  believer.  The  question  is  here 
sometimes  asked,  how  the  active  obedience  of  Christ  can  avail  to 
us,  when  he  was  himself  a  man  and  under  the  law,  and  owed  obe- 
dience personally  on  his  own  behalf.  The  answer  to  this  is  two- 
fold, in  each  case  depending  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  incarnation 
of  the  Son  of  God.  On  the  one  hand,  the  position  was  one  volun- 
larily  assumed  by  the  Son  of  God.  He  was  under  no  obligation 
to  become  man.  He  was  not,  and  could  not  be  made  man  without 
his  own  consent.  In  thus  voluntarily  coming  under  the  law,  his 
obedience  would  have  merit  to  secure  all  the  blessings  connected  with 
the  covenant,  under  which  he  assumed  such  relations.  But  beside 
this,  the  fulfilment  of  the  law  would  not  simply  be  that  fulfilment  due 


417  Abstract  of  Theology. 

by  a  mere  man,  which  is  all  the  law  could  demand  of  him  on  his  own 
behalf,  so  that  the  merit  secured  is  that  due  to  the  Son  of  God,  thus 
as  man  rendering  obedience  to  the  law.  That  merit  is  immeasurable 
and   is  available  for  all  for  whom  he  was  the  substitute. 

III.     The  Imputation. 

This  meritorious  work  of  Christ,  called  in  the  Scriptures  "the  right- 
eousness of  God,"  is  imputed  by  God  to  those  whom  He  justifies,  as  the 
ground  or  cause  of  their  justification.  It  is  reckoned  to  their  account 
They  are  treated  as  though  they  had  themselves  done  that  which 
Christ  has  done  for  them. 

This  imputation  is  in  accordance  with  the  action  of  God  through- 
out the  economy  of  human  affairs.  Adam  as  the  representative  of 
man  sinned,  and  his  sin  has  been  imputed  to  all  of  his  descendants, 
and  they  are  treated  as  though  personally  sinners.  Christ  stood  also 
as  the  representative  of  his  people  and  their  sins  were  imputed  to  him 
and  he  was  treated  as  though  personally  a  sinner.  Likewise  his 
righteousness  is  imputed  to  them,  and  they  are  treated  as  though  per- 
sonally righteous. 

In  each  of  these  cases  there  is,  however,  no  such  transfer  as  makes 
one  personally  what  he  is  representatively.  It  is  not  the  imputed  sin 
of  Adam  which  makes  men  personally  sinners.  The  corrupted  nature 
is  one  of  the  natural  consequences  of  that  sin,  and  is  a  punishment  of 
it.  So  the  imputation  of  our  sin  to  Christ  did  not  make  him  person- 
ally a  sinner.  He  was  still  of  himself  "the  holy  and  righteous  one." 
In  like  manner,  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness  does  not 
make  man  holy  and  righteous  personally.  In  each  of  these  cases  it- 
is  only  relation  to  the  law  which  is  expressed. 

IV.     The  relation  of  faith  to  justification. 

It  is  not  every  sinner  that  is  justified.  It  is  the  believer  in  Jesus. 
An  important  inquiry,  therefore,  is  as  to  the  relation  of  faith  to  justi- 
fication. The  Scriptures  teach  that  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness. 
Rom.  4:5.9. 

By  this  is  not  meant,  that  faith  is  accepted  in  the  place  of  right- 
eousness as  the  cause  of  justification,  for,  as  we  have  seen,  that  place 
is  occupied  by  the  meritorious  work  of  Christ.  Nor  is  it  meant? 
that  the  righteousness  of  God  has  so  lowered  the  law,  that  some- 
thing less  than  obedience  can  be  accepted  by  Him  as  a  full  satisfac- 
tion   of    that   law ;    because    the    demands   of    the    law    have    not 


Abstract  of  Theology.  418 

been  lowered  but  have  been  completely  fulfilled  by  Christ.  Besides 
this  would  be  to  make  of  faith  a  work,  by  which  salvation  is 
secured,  and  the  Scriptures  deny  that  it  has  this  character.  Rom. 
4:16.  "We  are  never  said  to  be  justified  dia  pistin,  (on  account  of 
faith),  but  only  diapisteos  through  faith,  or  ekpisteos  of  faith,  eis  pistin 
unto  faith,  and  epi  te  pistei  by  faith.  The  fact  that  faith  is  counted 
for  righteousness  shows,  that  in  itself  it  is  not  righteousness  and  has  no 
merit,  but  is  only  so  "reckoned  on  the  ground  of  something  outside  of 
itself,  viz:  the  saving  work  of  Christ." 

It  is  evidently  so  reckoned,  because  by  faith  the  sinner  appropriates 
to  himself  the  work  of  Christ,  and  becomes  vitally  united  with  him. 
Faith  may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  the  condition  upon  which  justifica- 
tion is  bestowed  upon  those  to  whom  Christ  is  presented  as  a  Saviour, 
to  be  received  and  rested  upon  for  salvation.  "Faith,"  says  Dr.  Charles 
Hodge,"  is  the  condition  of  justification.  That  is,  so  far  as  adults  are 
concerned,  God  does  not  impute  the  righteouness  of  Christ  to  the  sin- 
ner, until  and  unless,  he  (through  grace),  receives  and  rests  on  Christ 
alone  for  salvation."  Sys.  Theol.  Vol.  3,  p.  118.  It  is  a  condition 
which  has  in  it  no  merit  in  itself,  but  which  only  seizes  upon  merit  in 
another.  It  is  also  an  act  of  the  sinner,  to  which  he  is  graciously  dis- 
posed and  led  by  God  Himself  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

V.     The  relation  of  works  to  justification. 

We  have  already  seen  that  works  cannot  enter  meritoriously  into 
justification  as  its  procuring  cause.  But  the  Scriptures  evidently  as- 
sociate works  in  some  manner  with  justification.  Paul  himself  says, 
that  "love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,"  Rom.  13:10,  and  declares  that 
that  which  avails  in  Christ  Jesus  is  "faith  which  worketh  by  love,"  and 
that  "all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word  even  in  this,  thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbor  as  thyself."  Gal.  5:6.14.  There  is  here  an  evident  corres- 
pondence with,  if  not  allusion  to,  the  frequent  teachings  of  our  Lord, 
and  especially  to  his  answer  to  the  Pharisee  about  the  great  command- 
ment of  the  law.     Matt.  22:34-40. 

The  teaching  of  the  apostle  James,  is  not  therefore,  to  be  held  to  be 
different  from  the  other  Scriptures,  when  he  speaks  of  a  justification 
by  works.  His  language  is  very  strong.  He  says,  that  "faith  with- 
out works  is  dead".  He  asks,  "was  not  Abraham  justified  by  works, 
when  he  had  offered  Isaac  his  son  upon  the  altar."  He  inquires, 
"seest  thou  how  faith  wrought  with  his  works  and  by  works  was  faith 
made  perfect,"  and  especially  declares,  "ye  see  then  how  that  by  works 
a  man  is  justified  and  not  by  faith  only."     James  2:20.21.22.24. 


419  Abstract  of  Theology. 

What  then  is  the  relation  of  works  to  justification  ? 

1.  Certainly  not  as  a  .procuring  cause,  or  a  meritorious  ground. 
The  faith  with  which  James  associates  works,  and  upon  a  level  with 
which  he  seems  to  place  them,  does  not  itself  occupy  this  position. 

2.  The  works  are  not  such  as  precede  justification  or  are  contem- 
poraneous with  it,  and  hence  cannot  be  a  cause,  nor  even  a  condition 
such  as  we  have  seen  faith  to  be.  Even  in  the  case  of  Abraham  the 
justifying  work  referred  to  occurred  long  after  the  justification  which 
he  attained  by  faith.  Compare  Rom.  4:9-11  ;  Heb.  11:8  ;  Gen.  15:6  ; 
17:1-27  ;  22:1-19. 

3.  The  works  are  referred  to  as  means  of  manifesting  as  well  the 
faith  as  the  justification  claimed  to  be  by  faith.     James  2:18. 

4.  The  apostle's  object  is  to  deny  the  living  character  of  any  faith, 
which  has  not  wrought  with  works,  and  has  not  been  perfected  through 
works. 

It  is  thus  evident,  that  works  occupy  the  position  of  subsequent  not 
antecedent  accompaniments  of  justification.  They  manifest,  that  jus- 
tification has  taken  place,  because  they  are  invariable  consequents. 
They  do  this  however,  not  before  man  only,  but  God  also  and  conse- 
quently He.  as  well  as  man  perceives  them,  and  because  of  them  the 
believer  performing  these  good  works  is  justified  before  God.  But 
such  justification  is  not  that  actual  justification  which  takes  place  in 
connection  with  faith,  which  is  the  judicial  act  of  God  declaring  the 
relation  of  the  believer  to  the  law,  but  that  declarative  or  manifesting 
justification,  which  cannot  exist  except  as  the  result  of  the  actual  jus- 
tification, but  which  is  so  inseparably  connected  with  the  latter  that 
by  its  presence,  or  absence,  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  justifica- 
tion is  distinctly  established. 

VI.     The  benefits  included  in  justification. 

The  benefits  conferred  by  justification  are  many. 

1.     Freedom  from  the  condemnation  of  the  law.     This  includes: 

(1)  Forgiveness  for  all  sin.  Not  for  the  past  only,  but  through- 
out the  Christian's  life.  .     , 

(2)  Discharge  from  his  relation  to  the  law  as  a  rule  of  bondage, 
for  which  is  now  exchanged  his  service  to  it  in  the  newness  of  the 
spirit.     Rom.  7:6. 

(3)  Peace  with  God-assured  peace-because  dependent  on  the 
merits  of  Christ  and  not  those  of  himself. 

These  and  all  other  blessings  which  may  be  included  under  the  gen- 
eral idea  of  pardon  are  necessary  results  of  justification. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  420 

But  justification  confers  righteousness  as  well  as  pardon.  Not 
only  are  sins  remitted  but  men  are  made  partakers  of  the  righteous- 
ness procured  by  Christ  which  is  imputed  to  them.  They  are  thus  re- 
cognized before  the  law  as  righteous  persons,  not  simply  as  persons 
pardoned  for  breaking  the  law,  but  as  those  who  are  rewarded  for  hav- 
ing fulfilled  all  its  demands. 

But  there  are  other  blessings  which  arise  from  the  relation  to  Christ 
of  those  whom  God  justifies.  That  relation  was  shown  in  the  lecture  on 
Faith  (pp.  409-410).  It  is  a  vital  and  spiritual  as  well  as  a  legal  and 
federal  union  between  Christ  and  his  people.  By  virtue  of  this  they 
are  identified  with  him  in  his  relation  to  God  as  their  Representative 
and  Covenant  Head,  and  are  made  partakers  of  all  the  blessings 
which  he  has  obtained  as  an  inheritance.  It  is  thus  that  they  are 
adopted  into  the  family  of  God  and  become  His  sons  and  daughters; 
thus  are  they  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit  partly  in  this  life,  and  pro- 
gressively advance  until  complete  holiness  shall  be  theirs  in  Heaven. 
Thus  also  do  they  persevere  in  the  divine  life,  being  preserved  or 
kept  by  God  through  faith  unto  complete  salvation.  By  the  same  act 
of  faith  which  is  the  condition  of  justification  is  secured  by  those 
united  to  Christ,  the  privilege  of  complete  participation  in  the  re- 
wards of  their  federal  head.  They  shall  be  heirs  with  him,  shall 
reign  with  him,  shall  be  partakers  of  his  glory.  No  imagination  can 
compass  the  reward  which  shall  be  theirs  together  with  Christ.  The 
Scriptures  seem  to  teach  that  whatever  Christ  shall  be  or  possess  in 
his  human  nature  they  also  shall  be  and  possess. 

VII.     The  time  of  justification. 

We  may  finally  inquire  into  the  time  at  which  justification  occurs. 
It  does  not  occur  periodically  but  is  a  single  act,  and  not  one 
repeated  with  reference  to  new  sins.  This  arises  from  its  nature  as 
an  act  of  God  declaring  the  relation  of  the  believer  to  the  law  and 
from  the  ground  of  that  act,  the  never  failing  merits  of  Chrisc.  The 
pardon  which  the  Christian  seeks  of  God  is  that  of  a  child  for  offences 
against  a  father's  love,  and  not  of  a  culprit  before  an  avenging  judge. 
The  sufferings  which  Christians  endure  are  not  avenging  punish- 
ments for  sin,  but  chastisements  from  a  Father  who  chastises  those 
whom  He  loves  and  scourges  those  whom  He  receives. 

2.  It  is  an  instantaneous  and  not  a  continuing  work  as  is  sanctifi- 
cation.  It  is  God's  act  declaring  the  sinner's  relation  to  the  law. 
That  sinner  is  under  condemnation  until  justified.     As  soon  as  justi- 


421  Abstract  of  Theology. 

lied  his  condemnation  ceases.  He  cannot  be  partly  condemned  and 
partly  justified.  He  is  under  condemnation  until  brought  into  that 
condition  which  secures  his  justification.  When  that  moment  comes 
God  must  justify. 

3.  But  when  is  that  moment  ?  The  Scriptures  teach  that  it  is  when 
man  believes.     It  is  in  the  moment  of  trust  in  a  personal  Saviour. 

It  was  not  at  the  time  that  Christ  finished  his  work  and  laid  the 
foundation  of  justification  in  his  merits  and  satisfaction.  By  these 
justification  was  secured  but  not  bestowed.  It  was  not  in  Eternity  as 
is  Election  by  which  the  subjects  of  the  future  justification  were 
chosen.  It  is  at  the  moment  of  belief  when  faith,  which  is  its  con- 
dition, is  experienced.  Then  is  consummated  that  which  was  purposed 
in  Eternity  and  which  was  made  possible  and  certain  by  the  work  of 
Christ.  The  hour  of  faith  was  even  the  period  of  justification  before 
the  incarnation  of  Christ  because  of  the  faith  which  rested  personally 
upon  him  through  the  promises  of  God,  and  the  acceptance  by  God  of 
the  meritorious  work  of  Christ  as  though  already  existing  because  of 
the  absolute  certainty  that  it  would  be  performed. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  422 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXVI. 

ADOPTION. 

Adoption  is  that  privilege,  bestowed  upon  those  who  are  united 
with  Christ,  and  justified  by  faith,  by  which  they  are  admitted  into 
the  family  of  God,  adopted  as  His  children,  and  made  joint  heirs  with 
His  own  Son. 

In  the  strict  sense  of  the  word  "Son,"  this  title  can  be  given  only  to 
the  Eternal  Son  of  God,  who  is  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  (John 
1:14),  and  is  exclusively  "the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  express- 
image  of  His  person."  (Heb.  1:3). 

But  others  are  called  participatively  sons  of  God,  as  probably  the 
angels,  (Job  1:6  ;  38:7,)  as  Adam,  (Luke  3:38,)  and  as  Israel,  (Ex. 
4:22 ;  Hosea  11:1 ;  cf.  Rom.  9:4).  The  sonship  of  angels  and  of  Adam, 
manifestly  proceeds  from  their  creation  by  God  in  His  image,  and 
likeness.  That  of  Israel,  however,  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  typical  re- 
lation which  that  nation  occupied  to  the  true  people  of  God.  The 
application  to  Christ  in  Matt.  2:15,  of  the  sonship  declared  of  Israel 
in  Ex.  4:22,  and  Hos.  11:1,  together  with  the  adoption  to  which  Paul 
refers,  Rom.  9:4,  shows,  that  Israel's  sonship,  like  Israel's  election,  was 
but  a  type,  the  fulfilment  and  reality  of  which  were  to  be  found  only 
in  the  antitype.  So  far  as  Israel  itself  was  concerned,  the  title  could 
mean  no  more,  than  that  that  nation  had  been  chosen  by  God  to 
be  outwardly  His  people,  the  depositories  of  His  holy  oracles,  and  the 
means  through  which  His  salvation  would  come  to  man.     John  4:22. 

The  sonship  ascribed  to  the  believer  in  Christ,  will  be  best  under- 
stood by  considering  its  gracious  origin,  its  peculiar  nature,  and  the 


wondrous  blessings  which  it  confers. 


423  Abstract  of  Theology. 


I.    Its  gracious  origin. 


1.  It  is  not  due  to  any  natural  relation,  either  originally  possessed, 
or  restored  through  justification. 

2.  Nor  does  it  arise  from  any  new  image  or  likeness  of  God,  which 
has  come  through  regeneration. 

3.  It  is  the  simple  gift  of  God's  love  to  those  who  by  faith  are 
brought  into  union  with  His  proper  Son. 

4.  It  is  an  act  originating  entirely  in  the  good  pleasure  of  God. 
Eph.  1:5. 

5.  It  is  due,  meritoriously,  only  to  the  work  of  Christ.  It  could 
be  founded  thus  upon  nothing  else. 

6.  It  is  conferred  like  justification  upon  all  who.  by  faith  receive 
Christ.     John  1:12. 

7.  It  is  bestowed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  career,  when  there 
could  be  no  ground  for  supposing  it  due  to  the  character  or  acts  of 
the  recipient. 

II.     Its  peculiar  nature. 

If  what  has  been  said  shows  that  the  gift  of  sonship  to  the 
believer  is  a  gracious  act  of  God,  that  fact  will  appear  more  plain  as 
we  study  the  peculiar  nature  of  that  sonship. 

1.  It  is  an  act  by  which  God  chooses  to  take  those  who  are  not  His 
children,  and  to  make  them  such  by  adopting  them  into  His  family. 
Because  of  this  they  "are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners,  b,ut  fellow 
citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God."     Eph.  2=19. 

2.  As  they  are  united  in  this  sonship  with  His  own  Son,  who,  in 
his  human  nature,  is  "the  beginning,  the  first  born  from  the  dead," 
(Col.  1:15),  "the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God,"  (Rev.  3:14).  so 
does  their  sonship  partake  of  the  nature  of  his,  not  in  its  divine  rela- 
tions, but  in  those  by  which  he  is  also,  even  in  that  human  nature,  the 
Son  of  God.     Luke  1:35. 

3.  It  is  an  everlasting  sonship;  because  its  continuance  depends 
not  upon  what  they  do,  and  are  ;   but  upon  what  he  has  done,  and  is. 

4.  It  is  one  in  which  Christ  Jesus  "is  made  unto  them  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption."  1  Cor.  1:30. 
Thus  are  all  their  deficiences  removed,  and  exchanged  for  the  glory  of 
his  abundant  fulness. 

5.  It  is  one  in  connection  with  which  is  fulfilled  the  prayer  of 
Christ,  "that  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  Thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I 


Abstract  of  Theology.  424 

in  Thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us,"  *****  "that  they 
may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one  ;  I  in  them,  and  Thou  in  me,  that  they 
may  be  made  perfect  in  one."     John  17:21.22.23. 

6.  To  such  a  perfection  of  sonship  do  they  consequently  attain, 
that  not  of,  nor  through,  themselves',  but  solely  through  Christ  Jesus, 
do  they  thus  become  "partakers  of  the  divine  nature,"  (2  Pet.  1:4),  at- 
taining, as  near  as  creatures  may,  to  the  position,  and  character  of 
proper  sonship  to  God. 

III.     Its  wondrous  blessings. 

The  blessings  connected  with  this  sonship  are  scarcely  less  wonder- 
ful than  is  its  nature. 

1.  Intimate  fellowship  with  Christ  and  God.  "Wherefore,"  says 
the  apostle,  "thou  art  no  more  a  servant  but  a  son."  Gal.  4;7. 
"Henceforth,"  said  Jesus,  "I  call  you  not  servants  ;  *  *  *  but  I 
have  called  you  friends."     John  15-15. 

2.  The  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  "as  many  as  are  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God."     Rom.  8:14. 

3.  The  witnessing  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit:  "the  Spirit  itself 
beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  the  children  of  God." 
Rom.  8:16. 

4.  The  conscious  recognition  in  our  hearts  of  God's  relation  to  us 
as  Father.  "God  has  sent  forth  the  spirit  of  His  Son  into  your  hearts, 
crying,  Abba,  Father."     Gal.  4=6  ;  also  Rom.  8:15. 

5.  "If  children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with 
Christ."     Rom.  8:17. 

6.  Unknown  glory  in  future  likeness  to  Christ :  "it  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be  :  but  we  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear, 
we  shall  be  like  him."     1  John  3:2. 

7.  The  inheritance  includes  all  things  ;  "he  that  overcometh  shall 
inherit  all  things  and  I  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  son." 
Rev.  21:7;  cf.  1  Cor.  3=21-23. 

IV.     It  differs  from  justification. 

It  has  been  contended  that  "adoption  cannot  be  said  to  be  a  different 
act  or  grace  from  justification."  [Dabney's  Theology,  p.  627.]  "It 
appears  to  me,"  says  Dr.  Dick,  [Lect.  73,  Theol.,  vol.  2,  p.  224,]  "to 
be  virtually  the  same  with  justification,  and  to  differ  from  it  merely 
in  the  new  view  which  it  gives  of  the  relations  of  believers  to  God, 
and  in  the  peculiar  form  in  which  it  exhibits  the  blessings  to  which 


425 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


they  are  entitled."  Turretine  says  also  "that  adoption  is  included  in 
justification  as  a  part  which,  with  the  remission  of  sins,  constitutes 
this  whole  blessing;  nor  can  justification  be  distinguished  from 
adoption,  unless  so  far  as  it  is  taken  strictly  for  the  remission  of  sins; 
whilst  in  its  own  formal  conception  it  includes  also  acceptance  unto 
life  which  flows  from  the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ." 
Turretine's  Theol.,  B.  16,  c.  6,  sec.  7. 

The  position  taken  by  these  writers  is  a  contrary  extreme  to  that 
which  some  have  held,  viz:  that  justification  consists  only  of  pardon. 
It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  it  is  more  than  this,  and  includes  restoration 
to  the  favour  of  God,  and  to  eternal  life.  But  these  might  have  been 
bestowed  without  conferring  upon  the  justified  the  peculiar  blessings 
contained  in  Adoption.  "Adoption,"  says  Buchanan  [on  Justification, 
p.  262,]  "is  distinct  in  some  respects  from  justification.  For  although 
both  denote  a  change  of  relation,  it  may  be  affirmed  that,  according  to 
the  Scriptures,  pardon,  acceptance,  and  adoption,  are  distinct  priv- 
ileges, the  one  rising  above  the  other  in  the  order  in  which  they  have 
been  stated; — that  if  it  be  conceivable  that  a  sinner  might  have  been 
pardoned,  without  being  accepted  to  eternal  life,  it  is  equally  conceiv- 
able, that  he  might  have  been  both  pardoned  and  accepted,  without 
being  adopted  as  a  son  ; — and  that,  while  the  two  first  properly  belong 
to  his  justification,  as  being  both  founded  on  the  same  relation, — that 
of  a  Ruler  and  Subject, — the  third  is  radically  distinct  from  them,  as 
being  founded  on  a  nearer,  more  tender,  and  more  endearing  relation, — 
that  between  a  Father  and  his  Son. 

Dabney  argues  that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  two  because 
the  "instrument  is  the  same:  faith,  and  because  the  meritorious  ground 
of  adoption  is  the  same  with  that  of  justification,  viz:  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ." 

But  these  facts,  which  are  admitted,  are  due  to  another  which  is 
that  the  faith  by  which  we  are  justified  is  one  which  secures  to  us 
union  with  Christ.  It  would  not  necessarily  follow  that  this  union 
confers  upon' us  only  a  single  blessing  or  a  number  of  blessings  which 
may  be  combined  together  under  one  name.  We  can  only  learn  this 
by  examination.  If,  therefore,  it  shall  appear  that  there  are  distinc- 
tions between  the  accompanying  blessings,  to  the  extent  that  these 
exist  must  those  blessings  be  regarded  as  different? 

That  there  are  distinctions  appears  to  be  plain  from  the  following 
considerations: 


Abstract  of  Theology.  426 

1.  The  Scriptures  speak  separately  of  justification  and  adoption, 
and  do  not  state  that  the  latter  is,  in  whole,  or  in  part,  the  same  as 
the  former. 

.  2.  Justification  is  ascribed  to  the  righteous  character  of  God  as  its 
formal  ground.  In  it  He  is  only  gracious  in  accepting  and  providing 
a  substitute.  Adoption  is  expressly  referred  to  the  love  of  God. 
1  John  3:1.  The  fact  that  these  cannot  be  interchanged,  and  justifica- 
tion referred  to  love,  or  adoption  to  justice,  shows  a  decided  distinction 
between  them. 

3.  While  there  is  a  change  of  relation  in  each  of  them,  in  justifi- 
cation it  is  a  change  of  relation  to  the  law,  and  only  through  that  to 
the  lawgiver  and  judge;  in  adoption  it  is  a  change  of  relation  to  the 
family  of  God  and  thus  to  God  as  the  Father. 

4.  While  faith  is  that  through  which  each  is  attained,  in  justifica- 
tion it  is  a  condition  precedent  to  a  forensic  act  which  we  are  assured 
that  God  will  do  because  of  justice  as  well  as  faithfulness  (1  John  1:9) ; 
while  in  adoption  it  is  merely  receptive  of  Christ,  securing  that  union 
through  which  the  paternal  love  of  God  flows  freely,  on  no  other 
ground  than  faithfulness  to  his  promises, 

5.  The  act  of  justification  is  never  ascribed  to  the  Son,  and  is  seen 
to  be  plainly  a  prerogative  of  the  Father  as  God ;  but  it  is  said  of  the 
Son  that  "as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name."  John  1:12. 
In  some  sense,  therefore,  which  is  not  true  of  justification,  adoption  is 
connected  as  a  gift  with  the  Son  as  well  as  the  Father. 

The  above  distinctions  are  sufficient  to  show  that  there  is  a  real 
basis  of  distinction  between  Justification  and  Adoption,  and  that  the 
latter  is  not  included  in  the  former.  They  are  separate  effects 
which  flow  from  the  union  with  Christ  attained  through  faith  ;  because 
of  which  we  are  made  partakers  of  all  benefits  of  his  meritorious  work^ 
Justification  is  one  of  these;  and  by  it  we  obtain  pardon,  and  favour 
with  God,  which  is  eternal  life.  Adoption  is  yet  another  which  confers 
upon  us  the  especial  privilege  of  children  and  heirs  of  God.  It  is  no 
more  to  be  confounded  with  justification  than  is  sanctification,  which 
is  also  an  effect  of  the  same  union  with  Christ,  for,  although  its  dis- 
tinctions are  not  so  many,  nor  so  broad,. yet  to  the  extent  that  they 
exist,  they  are  as  real. 

"This  closer  and  more  endearing  relation  to  God,  which  is  constitu- 
ted by  Adoption,  is  necessary,  in  addition  to  that   which  is  included 


427  Abstract  of  Theology. 

in  our  Justification,  to  complete  the  view  of  our  Christian  privileges, 
and  to  enhance  our  enjoyment  of  them,  by  raising  us  above  the  spirit 
of  bondage  which  is  unto  fear;  and  cherishing  the  spirit  of  adoption 
whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  It  is  necessary,  also,  to  explain  how 
the  sins  of  believers  are  not  visited  with  penal  inflictions,  properly  so 
called,  but  are  nevertheless  treated  in  the  wTay  of  fatherly  chastise- 
ment; and,  still  further,  to  show  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  hereafter 
will  not  be  bestowed  as  wages  for  work  done,  but  as  an  'inheritance,' 
freely  bestowed,  on  those,  and  those  only,  who  are  'joint  heirs  with 
Christ.'     Buchanan  on  Justification,  pp.  263,  264. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  428 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXVII. 


SANCTIFICATION. 

The  correctness  of  the  statements,  as  to  the  forensic  nature  of  justi- 
fication, and  its  being  an  act  of  God  which  declares  simply  the  relation 
of  the  justified  to  the  law,  will  more  plainly  appear  from  what  we 
shall  learn  of  the  nature  of  Sanctification,  which  is  another  of  the 
privileges  bestowed  upon  the  people  of  God,  as  the  result  of  their 
union  with  Christ. 

I.     Meaning  of  the  terms  used. 

While  justify,  as  has  been  seen,  means  simply  to  declare  just,  or  to 
treat  as  just;  sanctify  means  to  make  holy.  The  usage  of  Scripture 
is  as  clear  in  this  case'-as  in  that.  The  word  "holy"  in  Scripture  has, 
however,  various  meanings.  It  is  sometimes  applied  to  things,  and 
hot  to  persons  only.  (1.)  It  is  used  in  the  sense  of  that  which  is 
set  apart  or  dedicated  to  any  especial  use.  Thus,  God  threatens  that 
instruments  of  vengeance  will  be  "prepared''  (sanctified)  against  "the 
king's  house  of  Judah."  Jer.  23=7.  But  the  dedication  is  most  fre- 
quently for  some  holy  use.  Thus,  "holy"  is  applied  to  the  Sabbath  day, 
(Ex.  31:14).;  and  to  the  house  of  God  (Lev.  16:33) ;  and  to  the  water 
(Num.  5:17):  and  to  the  vessels  of  the  young  men  (1  Sam.  21:5). 

(2.)  Things  are  also  called  holy  from  their  connection  with  holy  per- 
sons. Thus,  the  "place"  on  which  Moses  stood  was  proclaimed  "holy"  on 
account  of  its  connection  with  Jehovah  (Ex.  3:5) ;  likewise  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration  (2  Pet.  1:18).  (3.)  As  descriptive  of  an 
act  free  from  sin,  and  performed  with  holy  motives.     Thus,  the  kiss 


429  Abstract  of  Theology. 

of  Christian  salutation,  called  in  1  Pet.  5=14  a  kiss  of  charity,  is  in 
several  other  places  called  a '-holy  kiss."  1  Cor.  16=20;  2  Cor.  13=12; 
1  Thess.  5:26.  (4.)  '"Holy,"  as  tending  to  produce  holiness;  as  the 
"Holy  Scriptures"  (2  Tim.  3:15);  and  "most  holy  faith"  (Jude.  20). 
(5.)  It  is  most  generally  used  as  descriptive  of  personal  character, 
whether  the  holiness  be  perfect,  as  in  God,  or  angels,  or  glorified 
saints,  or  partial,  as  seen  in  His  people  on  earth.  A  few  of  the  many 
instances  of  its  application  to  this  last  class  are  1  Sam.  2=9;  Ps.  116:15; 
Acts  9=13;  Pom.  15:25.26;  Phil.  4=21 ;  Eph.  1:1;  Pev.  18=24. 

The  doctrine  of  sanctification  has  reference  to  the  first  and  last  of 
these  usages  of  "holy";  to  the  last  more  especially,  as  including  the 
character  of  holiness  produced  by  the  continuous  working  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  through  the  word  of  truth  ;  but  also  to  the  first,  as  involving 
that  dedication  of  person  and  life  to  God  which  constitutes  that  "living 
sacrifice,  holy  acceptable  unto  God,"  which  is  the  believer's  "reasonable 
service."  Rom.  12=1.  Christian  holiness  includes  both  character  and 
life.  "Sanctification"  is  the  process  by  which  these  are  accomplished. 
The  "sanctified"  are  those  who  are  thus  made  holy.  To  "sanctify"  is  to 
make  them  thus  holy. 

II.     Who  are  sanctified. 

The  sanctified  are  those,  only,  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus;  who  have 
been  regenerated,  and  have  been  justified  through  faith. 

1.  No  man  can  cleanse  or  purify  his  heart  or  life.  He  lacks 
especially  the  will  to  do  so.  If  he  should  determine  to  attempt  it, 
the  temptations,  which  will  assail  him,  will  soon  overcome  that  will. 

2.  The  law  cannot  furnish  controlling  power  to  this  result;  not 
because  of  its  own  deficiences,  but  because  of  its  weakness  through 
the  flesh.     Pom.  8=3. 

3.  The  difficulty  of  the  work  to  be  done  consists  in  its  not  being 
a  mere  reformation  of  a  bad  life  and  habits,  which  is  measurably 
within  the  power  of  man,  and  is  sometimes  accomplished  so  far  as 
the  mere  outward  life  among  men  demands;  but  in  its  including  the 
destruction  and  removal  of  man's  sinful  condition,  and  habits,  and 
action,  which  he  by  nature  ardently  loves,  and  the  substitution  for 
them  of  their  very  opposites  in  every  respect. 

4.  Regeneration,  therefore,  is  necessary,  as  antecedent  to  the  work 
of  sanctification.  A  new  nature  must  be  attained  which  will  love  and 
seek  after  holiness,  and  struggle  forward,  dissatisfied  until  it  shall  be 
perfected.      The  Scriptures,  therefore,  represent  sanctification' as  oc- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  430 

curring  only  in  those  who  have  been  regenerated,  and  to  whom  a  new 
heart  and  a  new  spirit  have  been  given. 

5.  But,  not  only  regeneration,  but  justification  also,  must  precede 
sanctification.  Yet  certainly  not  for  the  same  reasons;  for  regener- 
ation is,  like  sanctification,  a  change  in  nature,  and  character ;  and 
justification  a  change  only  in  relation  to  the  law.  There  is,  therefore, 
no  such  natural  connection  of  sanctification  with  justification  as  there 
is  with  regeneration.  Nor  is  there  anything  meritorious  in  the  po- 
sition of  the  justified  person.  For  the  meritorious  ground  of  all  bles- 
sings can  be  found  only  in  the  person  and  wTork  of  Christ.  But,  as 
the  merit  of  Christ  becomes  that  of  the  believer  only  in  justification, 
and,  as  the  faith  by  which  we  are  united  with  him  is  also  the  condition 
of  justification,  so  must  justification  precede  the  blessings  which  flow 
from  that  union,  and  from  justification  itself.  The  same  necessity  for 
precedence  arises  because  in  justification  are  furnished  the  motives  by 
which  the  Christian  is  led  through  the  Spirit.  The  Psalmist  of  old 
sang  "there  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  Thou  may  est  be  feared," 
Ps.  1304,  and  the  Apostle  John  declares  uevery  man  that  hath  this 
hope  in  him  [of  sonship  and  likeness  to  Christ]  purifieth  himself  even 
as  he  is  pure/'  Paul  also,  teaches,  that  the  condition  of  obedience  with 
the  newness  of  the  spirit,  is  that  we  have  been  delivered  from  the  law. 
Rom.  7:6.  The  believer  must  co-operate  in  the  work  of  sanctification. 
His  reception  of  the  word  of  God,  his  reliance  upon  its  promises,  his 
struggles  against  sin,  and  his  earnest  longings  for  holiness  are  important 
elements  in  his  sanctification.  But  the  existence  of  these  depends 
upon  the  belief  that  God  has  pardoned  his  sins,  and  will  accept  and 
bless  him,  which  is  the  consequence  of  the  personal  trust  in  Christ 
which  constitutes  justifying  faith. 

This  precedence  of  justification  to  sanctification  is  distinctly  set  forth 
by  the  Apostle  in  the  order  in  which  the  parts  of  salvation  are 
arranged  in  Rom.  8:29.30,  and  Phil.  3=9-12. 

III.     The  nature  of  sanctifcation. 

What  now,  we  may  inquire,  is  the  nature  of  the  sanctification  which 
is  wrought  out  in  the  believer? 

1.  It  is  a  personal  sanetification.  It  is  accomplished  in  each  indi- 
vidual personally,  and  not  in  that  of  a  common  representative  as  is 
the  righteousness  which  justifies. 

2.  It  is  a  real  sanctification,  not  merely  one  that  is  imputed,  as  is 
righteousness.     Holiness  is  not  merely  "accounted  to  men,"  so  that 


431  Abstract  of  Theology. 

they  are  treated  as  though  holy,  but  they  are  made  holy.  Holiness 
becomes  the  characteristic  of  their  natures.  It  is  habitually  exercised 
in  their  lives.  It  will  eventually  be  possessed  in  perfection.  It  is  real 
and  in  no  sense  only  virtual. 

3.  It  is  of  the  whole  nature.  The  renewed' nature,  given  in  regener- 
ation, shows  that  sanctification  includes  the  whole  spiritual  part  of 
man.  It  is  not  to  be  confined  to  mere  outward  actions.  God's  spirit- 
ual nature  demands  not  only  spiritual  worship,  but  holy  spiritual 
emotions  and  affections;  and  these  belong  to  the  heart.  Hence  the 
need  of  inward  conformity  to  His  will  and  commands  is  so  especially 
set  forth  in  the  New  Testament,  as  to  mark  its  teachings  as  essen- 
tially spiritual.  We  are  also  plainly  taught  that  between  the  out- 
ward fruit,  and  the  inward  condition,  is  such  a  connection  that  the 
latter  is  the  actual  producing  power  of  the  former,  and  is  manifested 
by.it.     Matt.  12:33-35  ;  Luke  643-45. 

But  sanctification  is  to  be  extended  to  the  body  likewise.  Its 
appetites  and  passions  are  to  be  controlled,  wicked  actions  are  to  cease, 
and  unholy  habits  to  be  put  away,  the  members  of  the  body  are  to  be 
mortified,  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  to  be  cleansed,  good  works  are  to 
be  exhibited  to  mankind,  and  such  high  moral  duties  to  be  performed 
as  are  imposed  upon  Christians  as  obligatory  towards  each  other 
and  the  world. 

The  Scriptures  exhort  to  sanctification  of  the  whole  nature,  both 
body  and  soul.  See  2  Cor.  7=1 ;  Eph.  4:17-24;  Col.  3=5-10;  1  Thess. 
5:23  That  of  the  body  alone  is  urged.  Rom.  6:12  13  ;  1  Thess.  4:3-7. 
The  apostle  tells  the  Ephesians  about  his  prayers  for  their  spiritual 
sanctification,     Eph.  1=17-19. 

4.     It  is  not  a  sanctification  to  be  completed  in  this  life. 

It  is  not,  like  justification,  a  single  act,  but  is  a  continuous  process. 
The  work  goes  on  throughout  the  lifetime. of  the  believer,  nor  is  it 
completed  before  death. 

(1.)  This  is  manifest  from  the  frequent  exhortations  to  sanctifica- 
tion addressed  to  those  who  are  already  believers  in  Christ,  and  who 
are  actually  called  saints.  Many  of  the  passages  containing  these 
have  been  given  in  the  preceding  section. 

(2.)  It  is  also  shown  by  the  warnings,  about  the  danger  of  back- 
sliding, addressed  to  Christian  believers.  Such  was  that  to  Peter  by 
our  Lord,  the  reality  of  the  danger  of  which  was  shown  by  his  sub- 
sequent grievous  fall.  Luke  22:31.32.  See  examples  of  other  such 
warnings  in  1  Cor.  10:12:  Col.  1:23:   Heb.  3=12.13:   12:15. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  432 

(3.)  The  fearful  condition -of  actual  apostasy  is  presented  for  the 
purpose  of  teaching  the  true  people  of  God  the  extent  to  which 
knowledge  of  His  grace  may  be  possessed  without  the  attainment  of 
actual  and  final  salvation.  Heb.  64-6;  10:26-29;  2  Pet,  2=20.  The 
object  of  this  instruction  is  to  warn  against  committing  *sins,  and  in- 
dulging habits  to  which  they  are  still  prone. 

(4.)  Christians  are  not  presented  in  the  New  Testament  as  com- 
pletely pure  and  holy,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  very  best  of  them 
acknowledge  the  existence  of  sinful  tendencies,  and  pronounce  any 
idea  of  freedom  from  the  presence  of  sin  to  be  a  delusion.  The  faults 
of  good  men,  such  as  Peter,  James  and  John,  Thomas,  and  Paul  and 
Barnabas  (Luke  15:37-40)  are  especially  mentioned,  and  John  who 
declares  that  "whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not"  (1  John  5:18) 
is  the  very  apostle  who,  in  a  previous  part  of  that  very  same  epistle, 
teaches  that  "if  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin  we  deceive  ourselves,  and 
the  truth  is  not  in  us."  1  John  1:8.  Paul  constantly  speaks  of  himself 
as  still  struggling  against  the  power  of  sin,  as  not  counting  himself  to 
have  attained*  as  keeping  his  body  under  subjection  lest  he  should  be 
a  castaway,  and  thus  he  gives  us,  in  his  descriptions  of  his  own  ex- 
perience, a  pattern  of  what  has  been  almost  universally  acknowledged 
as  that  of  every  other  Christian. 

5.  But  sanctification  will  not  always  be  incomplete.  In  heaven 
perfect  purity  and  holiness  will  be  the  portion  of  the  believer. 

(1.)  The  purpose  of  God,  in  the  predestination  of  those  whom  He 
foreknew,  is  that  they  shall  "be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son." 
Rom.  8:29.  This  conformity  shall  be  attained  in  heaven,  for  "when 
he  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is." 
1  John  3:2.     Such  likeness  involves  personal  sinless  purity. 

(2.)  Paul's  triumphant  language  as  to  the  resurrection  showTs  that 
this  will  be  true  of  the  body  no  less  than  of  the  soul.    1  Cor.  15:50-57. 

(3.)  The  Scriptures  declare  that  into  the  New  Jerusalem  "there 
shall  no  wise  enter  anything  that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh 
abomination  or  maketh  a  lie;  but  they  which  are  written  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  life."  Rev.  21:27.  Peter  says  that  the  inheritance 
reserved  in  heaven  for  the  saints  is  incorruptible  and  undefiled. 
1  Pet.  1:4. 

6.  The  partial  sanctification  of  this  life  is  also  progressive.  It  is 
not  a  certain  degree  of  attainment,  possessed  by  all  alike,  and  remain- 
ing always  in  this  life  the  same  ;  it  is  a  growth  from  the  seed  planted 
in  regeneration,  which  constantly  is  bringing  forth  new  leaves,  and 


433  Abstract  of  Theology. 

new  fruit;  it  grows  with  increased  intellectual  knowledge  of  God's 
truth,  with  a  clearer  perception  of  human  sinfulness  and  corruption, 
with  stronger  faith  and' brighter  hope,  and  more  confident  assurance 
of  personal  acceptance  with  God,  with  a  more  heartfelt  conception  of 
the  sacrificing  love  of  Christ,  and  with  a  more  realizing  belief  in  his  con- 
stant presence  and  knowledge  of  what  we  do.  It  even  increases  from 
its  own  acquired  strength  and  through  the  suffering  and  doing  in 
which  it  is  developed.  In  these  and  many  other  ways  do  Christians 
grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  in  conformity  to 
his  image  "cleansing  themselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and 
spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God."     2  Cor.  7:1. 

When,  however,  this  sanctification  is  said  to  be  progressive,  it  is  not 
meant  to  deny  the  imperfections  before  referred  to,  nor  to  assert  that 
there  is  a  constant  rise  upward  to  God  and  toward  His  holy  perfection. 
The  Christian  life  on  earth  is  a  warfare  with  sin,  and  the  believer  is 
not  always  without  failure.  He  often  yields  to  temptation,  sometimes 
falls  even  into  most  grievous  sin.  The  personal  experience,  presented 
by  Paul,  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  Romans,  is  so  strong. a  statement 
of  such  struggles  that  some  have  been  inclined  to  confine  its  applica- 
tion to  a  time  prior  to  acceptance  of  the  gospel.  But  there  can  be  no 
question  of  the  applicability  to  Christians  of  the  declaration  made  to 
the  Galatians,  "the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit 
against  the  flesh:  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other;  so  that 
ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would."     Gal.  5:17. 

But  the  progress  of  sanctification  is  nevertheless  continuous.  These 
temptations  and  struggles  enter  into  that  progress,  and  not  only  they, 
but  even  the  sins  and  falls  which  mar  the  Christian  life.  The  process 
of  sanctification  is  like  the  ascent  of  a  mountain.  One  is  always 
going  forward,  though  not  always  upward,  yet  the  final  end  of  the 
progressive  movement  of  every  kind  is  the  attainment  of  the  summit. 
Sometimes,  because  of  difficulties,  the  road  itself  descend?,  only  more 
easily  to  ascend  again.  Sometimes  certain  attractions  by  the  way 
cause  a  deviation  from  the  route  most  suitable  for  ascent.  Often  it  is 
feared  that  there  has  been  no  higher  attainment,  often  that  it  has  been 
but  a  continual  descent,  until,  perchance,  some  point  of  view  is  gained 
from  which  to  look  down  upon  the  plain  whence  the  journey  was 
begun  and  behold  the  height  which  has  already  been  overcome.  Often, 
with  wearied  feet,  and  desponding  heart,  the  traveller  is  ready  to 
despair,  because  of  his  own  feebleness,  and  the  difficulties  which  sur- 
round. But  he  earnestly  presses  forward  and  the  journey  is  completed, 
the  ascent  is  made,  the  end  is  attained.. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  43  i 

IV.     The  author  of  Sanctification. 

1.  From  what  we  have  learned  of  the  persons  who  are  sanctified, 
and  of  the  nature  of  the  work  performed,  it  is  evident  that  the  author 
of  it  must  be  more  than  man.     The  Scriptures  teach  that  it  is  God. 

The  work  is  attributed  to  God  without  reference  to  any  distinction 
of  persons.  1  Thess.  4:3;  5:23.  It  is  also  ascribed  to  the  Father. 
John  17:17 ;  Heb.  13:21 ;  Jude.  1 ;  and  to  Christ.    Eph.  5:26  ;  Tit.  2:14. 

But  it  is  the  especial  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  author  of 
the  process  of  Sanctification,  as  he  is  also  of  the  act  of  Regeneration. 
1  Cor.  6:11 ;  2  Cor.  3:18  ;  2  Thess.  2:13;   1  Pet.  1:2. 

(1.)  He  enlightens  the  mind.  John  14:26;  1  Cor.  2:9-16;  Eph. 
1=18;  3:18.19;  1  John  2:20.27.  On  this  account  He  is  called  "the 
Spirit  of  truth,"  John  14=17;  15:26;  16=13;  and  the  "Spirit  of  wis- 
dom."    Eph.  1:17. 

(2.)  He  gives  spiritual  strength,  (Eph.  3:16),  lusting  against  the 
flesh,  (Gal.  5:17),  enabling  the  believer  to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the 
body,  (Rom.  8:13),  leading  the  sons  of  God,  (Rom.  8:14),  and  en- 
abling them  to  purify  their  souls  in  obeying  the  truth.     1  Pet.  1:22. 

(3.)  Inasmuch  as  He  dwells  within  them,  (Rom.  8:9), so  that  they 
are  His  temple  (1  Cor.  3=16),  with  whom  they  are  sealed  as  the  earnest 
of  their  inheritance  (Eph.  1:13.14),  so,  also,  does  He  bear  witness  with 
their  spirits  that  they  are  the  children  of  God,  and,  removing  the 
spirit  of  bondage  to  fear,  bestows  on  them  the  spirit  of  adoption, 
whereby  they  cry  Abba,  Father.     Rom.  8=15.16. 

(4.)  The  fruit  of  this  indwelling  Spirit  is  declared  to.be  "in  all 
goodness  and  righteousness  and  truth."  Eph.  5:9.  It  is  specifically 
stated  to  be  "love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance  "     Gal.  5=22. 

2.  But,  while  there  is  such  need  of  a  divine  author  of  sanctification, 
it  is  not  a  work  in  which  the  believer  is  passively  a  recipient,  but  one 
in  which  he  actively  co-operates.  This  is  exhibited  in  various  ways  in 
the  word  of  God. 

(1.)  The  Christian  is  called  upon  to  recognize  this  presence  of  the 
Spirit.  1  Cor.  3=16.17.  They  are  exhorted  to  "walk  in  the  Spirit," 
and  assured  that,  in  so  doing,  they  "shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the 
flesh."  Gal.  5:16.  They  are  taught  that  '-they  that  are  after  the  flesh 
do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh  ;  but  they  that  are  alter  the  Spirit  the' 
things  of  the  Spirit."  Rom.  8:5.  They  are  told  that,  because  of  the 
indwelling  Spirit,  "we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh  to  live  after  the 
flesh,"  and  thus,  by  implication,  that  we  are  debtors  to  live  after  the 


435  Abstract  of  Theology. 

Spirit.  Rom.  8:12.  They  are  charged  to  "grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  whereby  they  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption."  Eph.  4:30. 
In  these,  and  in  other  ways,  their  co-operation  with  the  Spirit  in  the 
work  is  implied  quite  plainly. 

(2.)  They  are  exhorted  to  engage  in  the  work  of  self  purification. 
The  apostle  exhorts  the  Ephesians  not  to  '-walk  as  other  Gentiles  walk, 
in  the  vanity  of  their  mind,  *  *  *  to  put  oft'  *  *  *  the  old 
man  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,  and  to  be  re- 
newed in  the  spirit  of  their  mind,  *  *  *  and  to  put  on  the  new  man 
which,  after  God,  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness." 
Eph.  4:17-24. 

(3.)  This  sell  purification  is  declared  to  be  the  work  of  every  one 
that  has  the  hope  of  likeness  to  Christ.     1  John  3:3. 

(4.)  Direct  commands,  and  exhortations  to  perfection  and  holiness, 
imply  co-operative  action  in  those  who  are  in  process  of  attaining 
sanctification.     Matt.  5:48;  2  Cor.  7=1. 

(5.)  All  warnings  against  the  power  of  temptation,  the  lust  of  the 
flesh,  the  subtlety  of  Satan,  the  influence  of  the  world,  the  grievous 
character  of  sin;  all  exhortations  to  lead  a  virtuous  and  godly  life,  to 
set  the  affections  on  heavenly  and  divine  things,  to  consecrate  soul 
and  body  to  God ;  all  motives  to  these  ends  drawn  from  the  work  of 
Christ,  as  an  exhibition  of  divine  love  and  mercy,  as  an  example  of 
purity  of  life,  and  of  patient  suffering,  or  as  personally  connected  with 
the  believer  because  of  his  union  with  the  Lord, — in  short,  all  that  the 
Scriptures  contain  fitted  to  lead  the  Christian  to  a  higher  spiritual 
life,  is  evidence  of  his  co-operation  with  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  work 
of  sanctification. 

The  author  of  sanctification  is  indeed  the  Divine  Spirit,  but  the 
Christian  actively  unites  with  that  Spirit,  "working  out  his  own  sal- 
vation with  fear  and  trembling,"  being  exhorted  and  encouraged  to  do 
so,  because  "it  is  God  which  worketh  in  him,  both  to  will,  and  to  do,  of 
His  good  pleasure."     Phil.  2:12.13. 

V.     The  means  of  Sanctification. 

The  manner  in  which  the  Spirit  operates  in  sanctification  is  be- 
yond our  knowledge.  In  none  of  the  acts  of  God  can  we  tell  how  He 
exerts  His  power,  not  even  in  creation.  "As  thou  knowest  not,"  says 
the  preacher,  "what  is  the  way  of  the  Spirit,  nor  how  the  bones  do 
grow  in  the  womb  of  her  that  is  with  child ;  even  so  thou  knowest  not 
the  works  of  God  who  maketh  all."     Ecc.  11:5.     In  sanctification  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  436 

Spirit  moves  as  mysteriously  as  we  are  taught  that  He  does  in  regen- 
eration. John  3=8.  In  general,  undoubtedly,  it  is  in  accordance  with 
the  laws  of  mind,  and  of  spiritual  life.  Yet  we  know  no  reason  why 
there  is  not  a  place  for  miraculous  action  in  sanctification,  as  well  as  in 
regeneration.  We  can  only  know  the  effects  produced,  and  the  means 
which  are  revealed  in  the  word  of  God,  and  in  Christian  experience. 

1.  The  primary  means  which  the  Spirit  uses  for  our  sanctification, 
as  both  of  these  sources  of  information  teach,  is  the  truth  of  God. 
"Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth;  thy  word  is  truth,  (John  17:17), 
was  the  prayer  of  the  Lord,  in  which  the  whole  work,  both  of  conse- 
cration and  cleansing,  is  set  forth  as  thus  to  be  accomplished.  (See 
also  John  17:19).  "Growth  in  grace"  is  inseparably  connected  with 
growth  'in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 
2  Pet.  318. 

This  is  farther  taught  in  Scripture  by 

(1.)  Such  passages  as  connect  spiritual  life  with  truth;  as  John 
6:63;  8:32. 

(2.)  Such  as  ascribe  quickening  power  to  the  word  of  God;  as 
Ps.  119=50.93. 

(3.)  Such  as  teach  that  truth  is  promotive  of  obedience  ;  as  Ps. 
119--34.43.44. 

(4.)     Such  as  declare  its  usefulness  in  preventing  sin  ;  as  Ps.  119:11. 

(5.)  Such  as  associate  it  with  cleansing  from  sin;  as  Ps.  119:9; 
1  Pet.  1:22. 

(6.)     Such  as  state  that  it  produces  hatred  of  sin  ;  as  Ps.  119:104. 

(7.)     Such  as  assert  its  power  to  lead  to  salvation  ;  as  2  Tim.  3:15- 17. 

(8.)  Such  as  say  that  "all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  god- 
liness" have  been  given  through  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  Christ; 
as  2  Pet,  1:2.3. 

(9.)  Such  as  imply  that  growth  in  grace  is  due  to  greater  knowledge ; 
as  Heb.  5:12-14. 

(10.)  Such  as  account  for  inability  to  accept  higher  doctrinal  truth, 
by  such  weakness  as  should  be  characteristic  only  of  those  who  are 
babes  in  Christ;  as  1  Cor.  3=1-3. 

(11.)  Such  as  set  forth  the  word  of  God  as  "the  sword  of  the 
Spirit";  as  Eph.  6:17. 

(12.)  Such  as  announce  that  all  the  ministerial  gifts  bestowed  by 
Christ  are  "for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  min- 
istry, for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ,  till  we  all  come  in  the 


437  Abstract  of  Theology. 

unity  of  the  faith,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a 
perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ." 
Eph.  4:11-16. 

2.  In  connection  with  this  primary  means  of  divine  truth  others 
are  presented.  But  they  are  not  only  secondary,  but  actually  sub- 
ordinate means  to  the  word  of  God.  They  rather  furnish  occasions 
for  the  exercise  of  the  means  of  sauctification  contained  in  the  truth 
of  God  than  are  proper  means  in  themselves  to  that  end.  In  themselves 
they  have  no  efficacy,  and  only  accomplish  the  end  of  sanctification 
by  bringing  the  believer  into  connection  with  the  truth  of  God. 

(1.)  Such  are  the  providences  of  God,  which  tend  in  various  ways 
to  arouse  and  move  His  children,  and  avail  unto  sanctification  so  far 
only  as  they  recall,  and  lead  to  the  apprehension  of  divine  instruc- 
tion. They  are  frequent,  and  effective  means  of  such  apprehension, 
and,  through  this,  of  the  believers  growth  in  holiness.  Such  especially 
are  the  afflictions,  sent  as  chastisements  by  the  Heavenly  Father  upon 
His  children.  Such,  also,  are  the  temptations,  and  trials  to  which 
they  are  subjected.  Such,  likewise,  are  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh, 
and  perplexities  of  the  spirit  which  God  permits  to  remain,  or  causes 
to  arise  in  his  own  elect.  In  these,  and  in  numerous  other  ways,  as 
well  of  what  is  called  good,  as  of  what  is  called  evil,  does  God  sur- 
round His  people  with  the  acts  of  His  providence.  But  these  acts 
themselves  avail  not  unto  their  sauctification  but  are  only  made  effect- 
ive through  the  truth  of  God  apprehended  amid  such  events,  and  re- 
ceived as  spiritual  food  for  the  growth  of  the  believer. 

(2.)  The  good  works  of  the  Christian,  furnish  another  secondary 
means  for  his  sanctification.  By  these  are  not  meant  works  that  are 
good  in  a  legal  sense,  for  such  goodness  would  require  a  perfection 
and  freedom  from  taint  which  no  work  of  fallen  man  can  possess: 
but  it  is  the  privilege  of  the  Christian  to  live  unto  the  Lord,  and  the 
name  of  good  works  is  given  in  Scripture  to  such  outward  actions  as 
are  the  results  of  his  life  through  the  Spirit. 

These  good  works  are  the  result  of  sanctification  ;  but,  in  their  per- 
formance, they  naturally  become  the  means  of  further  sanctification. 
John  14:23  ;  Eph.  3:16-20.  Yet,  is  this  accomplished,  not  apart  from, 
but  in  connection  with,  the  truth  of  God.  The  new  developement  will 
always  be  in  the  direction  of  the  particular  truths,  contemplated  in 
their  performance.  These  will  furnish  the  motives  to  further  action, 
the  strength  for  additional  duty,  the  earnest  purpose  of  deeper  conse- 
cration, or,  whatever  else  the  Spirit  may  graciously  use  for  a  more 
complete  sanctification  of  the  believer. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  438 

(3.)  Prayer  is  a  still  further  means  to  the  same  end  ;  which,  from 
its  nature,  can  be  effective  only  through  the  believer's  apprehension 
of  divine  truth. 

Hence  the  worthlessness  of  mere  lip  service  (Isa.  29:13;  Ezek.  33=31; 
Matt.  15:8),  or  vain  repetitions  (Matt.  6:7).  Not  only  are  they  offensive 
to  God,  but  without  value  to  the  soul.  Hence  also  the  necessary 
spirituality  of  divine  worship,  because  that  is  only  true  worship, 
which  is  the  service  of  the  soul.  John  4:23  24.  Prayer,  which  is  a 
mere  formal  or  mechanical  utterance  of  words,  can  have  no  value;  be- 
cause the  one  that  offers  it,  does  so  in  ignorance,  or  forge tfuln ess  of  the 
truth  of  God  appropriate  to  accompany  it. 

(4.)  The  Lord's  day  is  another  secondary  means  of  sanctification, 
which  manifestly  becomes  such  only  in  the  Christian's  use  of  divine  truth; 
either  such  as  is  suggested  by  God's  appointment  of  such  a  day,  or 
such  as  is  attained  through  the  opportunity  for  such  purpose  which  it 
affords. 

(5)  The  association  of  believers  in  church  relations,  is  another  of 
the  means  ordained  by  God  for  the  increase  of  individual  spiritual 
life  and  consequently  of  sanctification.  This  is  attained  not  only 
through  social  prayer,  and  the  preaching  of  the  word,  but  also  by  Christian 
watchcare  and  discipline,  and  by  the  mutual  sympathy  and  aid  of  be- 
lievers in  matters  both  temporal  and  spiritual.  Whatever  in  these 
pertains  to  sanctification,  must  be  connected  with  the  recognition  of 
divine  truth  in  the  moving  influences  which  bestow,  or  the  accepting 
thankfulness  which  receives. 

(6.)  The  ministry  given  by  Christ,  is  also  a  means  for  the  sanctifi- 
cation of  his  people,  in  the  preaching  of  his  truth,  in  the  spiritual 
guidance  and  rule  of  the  flock,  and  in  the  sympathizing  bestowment 
of  the  consolations  of  his  grace.  But,  even  these,  though  officially  ap- 
pointed, cannot  either  of  themseves,  or  by  virtue  of  their  office,  con- 
fer or  increase  spiritual  grace.  Their  ministry  is  one  only  of  the  word 
of  God,  and  it  is  only  through  his  inspired  truth  "that  the  man  of 
God  is  throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."  2  Tim.  3=16.  What 
these  works  are,  is  shown  by  verse  15,  viz;  "doctrine,  reproof,  correc- 
tion, instruction  in  righteousnes."  Ministers  are  in  no  other  sense 
vehicles  of  grace.  They  are  not  appointed  as  personal  channels  of 
access  to  God,  or  of  the  bestowment  of  blessings  by  Him,  except  so  far 
as  He  has  made  it  their  duty  to  make  known  His  truth.  In  connec- 
tion with  that  truth  they  are  means  of  sanctification  to  His  people, 


439  Abstract  of  Theology. 

and  only  thus  are  to  be  regarded  as  occupying  relations  between  their 
fellow  men  and  God. 

(7.)  The  ordinances  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Sapper  are  also  means 
of  sanctification.  It  is  especially  important  to  understand  in  what 
respects  they  are  so.     Upon  this  subject  there  are  several  opinions. 

By  the  Papal  Church  these,  with  five  others,  are  regarded  as  the 
Sacraments  of  the  New  Law.     As  to  their  efficacy  as  means  of  grace 

1.  This  Church  maintains  that  the  Sacraments  are,  in  and  of 
themselves, — wherever  conferred  with  the  intention  of  the  church,  and 
where  the  recipient  does  not  put  obstacles  in  the  way, — active  causes 
to  produce  the  grace  which  they  signify,  by  virtue  of  the  sacramental 
action  itself,  instituted  by  God  for  this  end.  The  sufferings  of  Christ 
concur  as  the  meritorious,  but  not  as  the  efficient  cause,  which  also 
depends  neither  upon  the  merit  of  the  agent,  nor  upon  that  of  the 
receiver. 

They  make  distinctions,  however,  as  to  the  necessity  of  these  two 
Sacraments,  regarding  baptism  as  absolutely  necessary  to  justification, 
in  which  they  include  sanctification  ;  but  the  Lord's  Supper  as  only 
necessary  because  commanded  and  eminently  useful. 

The  efficacy  which  is  thus  ascribed  to  the  Sacraments  is  that  of  what 
is  called  an  opus  operatum,  in  which  grace  is  conferred  ex  opere operato , 
viz  :  from  the  mere  act  done.  It  denies  that  faith  alone  in  the  divine 
promise  suffices  to  obtain  the  grace.  Will,  faith,  and  repentance,  in 
the  adult,  are  necessarily  required  as  dispositions  on  the  part  of  the 
subject,  but  only  to  remove  obstacles,  for,  as  fire  burns  wood,  not 
because  the  wood  is  dry,  nor  because  fire  is  applied  to  it,  but  because 
of  the  power  in  fire  to  consume,  so,  they  maintain  that  a  sacrament, 
by  its  own  inherent  power,  confers  the  grace  when  no  obstacle  prevents' 
such  as  would  be  dampness  in  wood  to  the  power  of  fire  to  burn. 

[See  statements  and  extracts  from  the  Canons  of  the  Council  of 
Trent,  and  from  Bellarmine,  contained  in  Hodge's  Outlines,  pp. 
597-600]. 

The  objections  to  this  explanation  of  the  use  of  the  Sacrament  as 
means  are, 

(a.)  That  the  ordinance  is  thus  regarded  as  effective  in  itself,  dis- 
connected from  any  divine  truth  which  may  be  symbolized  in  it,  or 
taught  in  its  objective  presentation,  or  suggested  through  the  Christian 
experience  which  accompanies  its  reception.  The  Scriptures  no  where 
teach  such  efficacy  apart  from  the  truth  of  God. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  440 

(b.)  To  no  immediate  connection  of  God  with  these,  is  ascribed 
their  effective  power.  They  are  held  to  be  mere  appointments  of  God 
to  be  applied  through  man,  and  grace  is  taught  to  be  as  inherent  in 
them  as  is,  in  any  merely  physical  substance,  any  natural  quality  which 
God  has  bestowed  upon  it. 

(c.)  The  faith  which  is  declared  requisite  to  remove  obstacles  is 
"mere  assent"  to  receive,  and  not  the  appropriating  faith  of  personal 
trust  in  Christ  which  alone  is  the  saving  faith  of  the  Bible.  Hodge's 
Sys.  Theol.,  vol.  3,  p.  512. 

(d.)  This  doctrine  of  the  Sacraments  places  the  salvation  of  every 
one  entirely  in  the  power  of  others.  Whatever  his  own  faith,  unless 
some  one  else  will  baptise  him,  he  cannot  attain  justification  and 
fcanctification. 

(e.)  Inasmuch  as  the  Sacraments  are  valid  to  convey  grace  only 
when  performed  with  "the  intention  of  doing  what  the  Church  does," 
no  one  can  know  that  the  grace  has  been  conferred,  since  he  cannot 
know  the  mind  of  the  administrator. 

2.  A  second  opinion,  different  in  many  respects  as  to  the  efficacy 
of  the  Sacraments,  has  been  held  by  almost  all  Protestants. 

(1.)  In  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  Rome  they  teach  that  the 
Sacraments,  which  are  but  two,  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  are 
not  in  themselves  means  of  grace,  and  have  no  separate  inherent 
power  to  convey  it. 

(2.)  They  say,  however,  that  these  are  "real  means  of  grace,"  that 
"they  are  not,  as  Romanists  teach,  the  exclusive  channels;  but  they 
are  channels."     Hodge's  Sys.  Theol.,  vol.  3,  p.  499. 

(3.)  They  also  assert  that  they  are  "sacred  signs  and  seals  of  the 
covenant  of  grace."     Westminster  Confess.,  ch.  27,  sec.  1. 

(4.)  They  hold  that  the  efficacy  of  the  Sacraments  depends  "upon 
the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  word  of  institution,  which  contains 
together  with  a  precept  authorizing  the  use  thereof,  a  promise  of  ben- 
efit to  worthy  receivers."     West.  Conf.,  ch.  27,  sec.  III. 

This  position  is  preferable  to  that  of  the  Romanists  inasmuch  as: 

1.  It  recognizes  the  necessary  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  connection 
with  the  grace  bestowed,  and  thus  denies  that  this  proceeds  exclusively 
from  any  natural  inherent  power. 

2.  The  benefits  are  said  to  be  conferred  only  upon  those  "who  worthily 
receive  the  Sacraments."  By  this  is  possibly  meant  persons  receiving 
them  through  the  exercise  of  true  faith  in  Christ.    Such  is  generally  the 


441  Abstract  of  Theology. 

position  assumed  by  the  various  theologians  of  these  churches  as  to 
the  adult  recipients  of  these  Sacraments.  But  it  should  have  been 
more  clearly  stated  in  their  creeds.  The  language  used  could  only 
mean  this  in  adult  receivers.  Yet  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  in- 
tention was  to  include  infants  among  those  who  "worthily  receive.'' 
He,  however  who  "worthily  receives"  through  faith  must  be  capable 
of  personal  faith.  If  the  receiver  is  not  himself  a  believer,  he  does 
not  receive  "through  faith."  He  may  receive  because  of  the  faith 
of  another,"  but  it  is  through  ihe  personal  exercise  of  faith,  and  not 
on  account  of  its  exercise  by  others,  that  the  Scriptures  teach  that 
the  Christian  is  blessed  in  connection  with  the  ordinances. 

The  objections  to  this  form  of  the  doctrine  are; 

1.  The  continued  use  of  the  word  sacrament.  It  has  no  Scriptural 
authority.  It  has  led  many  to  attach  a  superstitious  sacredness  to 
these  ordinances. 

2.  The  use  of  the  word  "seal"  is  also  objectionable.  A  seal  is  a 
visible  stamp,  or  impression  which  is  made  upon  a  paper  or  some 
other  substance  for  the  purpose  of  certifying  to  the  truth  of  some 
fact  thus  implied.  It  may  either  be  attached  personally  by  the  one 
whom  it  represents,  or  by  some  person  authorized  by  him;  but  its 
presence  by  his  authority  is  his  testimony  to  the  genuineness  or  cor- 
rectness of  what  is  witnessed. 

Now  neither  of  the  ordinances  makes  a  visible  mark  upon  their 
recipients.  They  are  thus  without  an  important  characteristic  of  the 
seal.  Neither  of  them  is  affixed  to  a  designated  individual  by  divine 
authority.  The  authority  to  administer  is  only  a  general  one.  No 
man  can  put  marks  upon  the  elect  of  God  which  shall  authoritatively 
certify  that  they  are  His.  Neither  Baptism,  nor  the  Lord's  Supper, 
becomes  such  an  authentication  either  to  the  recipient,  or  to  others. 
This  is  found  only  in  the  conscious  possession  of  true  faith,  or  in  the 
manifestation  of  that  faith  by  the  good  works  of  his  life. 

This  common  usage  of  the  word  "seal"  in  connection  with  the 
ordinances  has  no  other  Scriptural  support  than  the  reference  *to 
Abraham  in  Gen.  4=11.  "He  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal 
of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith,  which  he  had,  being  uncircum- 
cized."  But  the  rite  then  performed  had  the  characteristics  of  a  seal 
which  have  been  denied  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  was  a 
visible  mark,  and  not  only  so,  but  it  was  applied  to  the  individual 
man  Abraham  by  direct  divine  authority. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  442 

3.  Objection  may  also  be  made  to  the  word  "sign"  in  the  sense  in 
which  it  is  used.  These  two  ordinances  are  indeed  "signs",  but  signs 
of  what  Christ  did  and  suffered,  and  not  of  what  is  done  to  his  people. 
Yet  it  is  in  the  latter  sense  that  the  word  "sign"  is  exclusively  used  by 
those  holding  this  opinion. 

4.  The  use  of  these  two  words  has  led  to  the  mistake  about  the 
manner  in  which  these  two  ordinances  are  means  of  grace,  which  con- 
stitutes the  fatal  error  of  this  opinion.  They  are  means  of  grace  as 
they  set  forth  truth,  as  they  teach  something,  and  only  in  this  way  do 
they  convey  grace.  In  the  act  of  receiving,  that  grace  may  be  con- 
ferred either  from  the  consciousness  of  an  act  of  obedience,  or  through 
the  apprehension  and  comprehension  of  the  trutvh  symbolized.  It  can  . 
come  in  no  other  way.  The  strongest  expression  in  Scripture  in  favour 
of  the  grace  conveying  power  of  an  ordinance,  that  in  1  Pet.  3:21 
in-  which  the  apostle  speaks  of  "water:  which  also  after  a  true  likeness 
(in  the  antitype)  doth  now  save  you,  even  baptism,"  is  at  once  ex- 
plained by  him  to  be  not  the  ordinance,  but  the  spiritual  condition  in 
which  it  is  received  viz  :  "not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh  but  the  interrogation  (inquiry,  appeal)  of  a  good  conscience  to- 
ward God  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  [Canterbury 
Revision]. 

Serious  has  been  the  error  which  has  resulted  from  these  expressions 
and  the  doctrine  taught  in  connection  with  them.  It  has  led 
men  actually  to  teach  that  the  grace  of  God  has  been  really  con- 
ferred upon  or  pledged  to  a  recipient  by  the  agency  of  the  adminis- 
trator. In  the  Anglican  Catechism  the  question  is  put  to  the  child  : 
"Who  gave  you  this  name  ?"  to  which  it  is  taught  to  reply  "My  God- 
father, and  Godmother,  in  my  baptism,  wherein  I  was  made  a  member 
of  Christ,  the  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven." Here  the  ordinance 'performed  upon  an  unconscious  subject  is 
taught  to  have  produced  regenerating  power.  This  doctrine  of  bap- 
tismal regeneration  has  been  commonly  regarded  as  unscriptural  and 
false  by  Evangelical  Christians.  But  is  the  effect  declared  of  this 
baptismal  act  any  more  a  matter  of  the  mere  human  choice,  and  will 
and  action  of  some  other  than  the  recipient,  than  is  the  result  ascribed 
by  an  eminent  Presbyterian  Theologian  to  the  baptism  of  the  child  of 
a  believer?  He  says,  "And  so  when  a  believer  adopts  the  covenant 
of  grace,  he  brings  his  children  within  that  covenant,  in  the  sense 
that  God  promises  to  give  them,  in  His  own  good  time,  all  the  bene- 
fits of  redemption,  provided  they  do  not  willingly  renounce  their  bap- 
tismal engagements."     Hodge's  Sys.  Theology,  vol.  3,  p.  555. 


443 


Abstract  of  Theology. 


3.  The  true  statement  of  the  sanctifying  power  of  these  ordinances 
seems  the  rather  to  be, 

1.  A  denial  of  all  inherent  power  in  them  as  means  of  grace. 

2.  Recognition  of  them  as  conveying  truth  by  symbolical  instruc- 
tion. 

3.  The  fact  that  they  are  partaken  of,  because  of  the  command  of 
Christ,  also  makes  the  act  of  obedience  to  him  a  means  of  grace  to  the 
recipient. 

4.  Only  as  truth  is,  in  some  way  or  other,  brought  to  the  accept- 
ance of  the  heart  and  mind,  can  they  have  sanctifying  power. 

It  is  thus  seen,  that  all  the  means  of  sanctification  are  connected 
with  the  truth,  and  are  secondary  to  it.  They  only  become  such,  as 
they  convey  truth,  or  as  they  suggest  truth,  or  as  they  are  employed  in 
the  recognition  of  some  truth. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  444 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXVIII. 


Final    Perseverance   of   the    Saints. 

The  doctrine  of  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints  teaches,  that 
those  who  are  effectually  called  of  God  to  the  exercise  of  genuine  faith 
in  Christ,  will  certainly  persevere  unto  final  salvation.  This  is  not 
taught  of  a  class  of  mankind  in  general,  as  something  that  will 
usually  be  true  of  the  persons  composing  that  class,  but  of  each  indi- 
vidual in  it;  so  that  not  one  will  finally  apostatize,  or  be  lost;  but 
each  will  assuredly  persevere  and  be  saved. 

This  fact  is  taught  explicitly  in  the  word  of  God,  which  sets  it  forth 
as  due  to  the  purpose,  and  power  of  God,  and  the  grace  which  He 
bestows,  and  not  to  any  excellence,  or  power  in  the  believer.  Indeed, 
such  is  stated  to  be  the  weakness  of  man,  that,  if  left  to  himself,  he 
would  assuredly  fall ;  against  the  danger  of  which  he  is  constantly 
warned  ;  a  danger  to  which,  even  the  best  instructed  and  most  sancti- 
fied are  liable,  and  which  is  evidenced  by  the  sins  which  are  commit- 
ted, which  are  often  of  a  most  heinous  character,  sometimes  extending 
to  actual  denial  of  the  faith,  and  backsliding  from  God;  and  showing 
that,  but  for  God's  mercy  and  grace,  final  apostasy  would  occur.  But, 
from  the  danger  thus  due  to  himself,  he  is  rescued  by  the  power,  and. 
grace  of  God,  Who  by  His  watchful  preservation,  keeps  guard  over 
His  unworthy  children,  preventing  their  total  estrangement  from 
Him,  and  bringing  them  finally  unto  the  salvation  He  has  designed 
for  them.  In  so  doing,  however,  He  does  not  act  independently  of 
their  cooperation ;  but  leads  them  unto  salvation  through  their  own 
perseverance  in  faith,  and  holiness. 


445  Abstract  of  Theology. 

1.     The  Scriptures  tea^h  the  final  salvation  of  all  believers. 

(1.)  The  Psalmist  sang,  "though  he  fall,  he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast 
down,  for  the  Lord  upholdeth  him  with  His  hand.  *  *'  *  * 
The  Lord  loveth  judgment,  and  forsaketh  not  his  saints  :  they  are 
preserved  forever."  Ps.  37:24.28.  The  wise  man  said  :  "The  path  of 
the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the 
perfect  day."  Prov.  4:18.  Isaiah,  referring  to  the  true  Israel  of  God, 
said  "Fear  not :  for  I  have  redeemed  thee,  I  have  called  thee  by  thy 
name  ;  thou  art  mine.  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will 
be  with  thee  :  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee  ; 
when  thou  walkest  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be  burued  ; 
neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee.  For  I  am  the  Lord  thy 
God,  the  Holy  one  of  Israel,  thy  Saviour.  *  *  *  *  Even  every 
one  that  is  called  by  my  name  ;  for  I  have  created  him  for  my  glory, 
I  have  formed  him  ;  yea  I  have  made  him."  Isa.  43:1.2.7.  "Israel 
shall  be  saved  in  the  Jjord  with  an  everlasting  salvation  ;  ye  shall  not 
be  ashamed  nor  confounded  world  without  end."  Isa.  45:17.  "The 
heavens  shall  vanish  away  like  smoke,  and  the  earth  shall  wax  old 
like  a  garment,  and  they  that  dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like  manner  ; 
but  my  salvation  shall  be  forever,  and  my  righteousness  shall  not  be 
abolished.-'  Isa.  51:6.  "Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me  :  hear, 
and  your  soul  shall  live  ;  and  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant 
with  you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of  David."  Isa.  55:3.  "I  will  make 
an  everlasting  covenant  with  them,  that  I  will  not  turn  away  from 
them,  to  do  them  good;  but  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  that 
they  shall  not  depart  from  me."     Jer.  32:40. 

Christ  himself,  referring  to  the  "false  Christs  and  false  prophets," 
who  shall  arise  professedly  in  his  name,  teaches  the  impossibility  of 
deceiving  the  elect  of  God  by  saying  "if  it  were  possible  they  shall 
deceive  the  very  elect."  Matt.  24;24.  He  likewise  declared  "He 
that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  Him  that  sent  me,  hath  ever- 
lasting life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation  ;  but  is  passed  from 
death  unto  life."  John  5:24.  To  the  Samaritan  woman  he  said: 
"whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  never 
thirst;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  John  4:14.  He  also 
affirmed  even  more  expressly  the  final  salvation  of  each  of  his  people 
by  declaring  "My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they 
follow  me:  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life;  and  they  shall  never 
perish,  and  no  one  shall  snatch  them  out  of  my  hand.     My  Father 


Abstract  of  Theology.  446 

which  hath  given  them  unto  me,  is  greater  than  all ;  and  no  one  is 
able  to  snatch  them  out  of  my  Father's  hand.  I  and  the  Father  are 
one."     John  10:27-29.     [Canterbury  Revision.] 

The  apostle  Paul  presents  the  effectual  calling  of  those  whom  God 
had  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  as  con- 
nected absolutely  with  their  being  glorified  by  Him.  Rom.  8.30.  In 
the  same  chapter,  vv.  35-39,  he  declares  their  separation  from  the  love 
of  Christ  impossible.  Writing  to  the  Corinthians,  he  assures  them 
that  Christ  will  "confirm'"  them  uunto  the  end,"  so  that  they  shall  be 
"unreprovable  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  adding  "God  is 
faithful,  through  whom  ye  were  called  unto  the  fellowship  of  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  1  Cor.  1:8  9.  To  the  Philippians  he  also 
declares  himself  "confident  of  this  very  thing  that  he  which  hath 
begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus 
Christ."  Phil.  1=6.  In  like  manner  he  says  to  the  Thessalonians 
"The  Lord  is  faithful,  who  shall  stablish  you  and  keep  you  from  evil." 
2  Thess.  3=3.  Peter  also  writes  to  "the  strangers  scattered  abroad"  as 
unto  persons  "who  had  been  begotten  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible, 
and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  you, 
who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready 
to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."     1  Pet.  L3-5. 

(2.)  This  doctrine  is  inseparably  associated  with  the  other  doctrines 
of  grace  which  we  have  found  taught  in  that  word.  So  true  is  this, 
that  they  are  universally  accepted,  or  rejected  together.  The  perse- 
verance of  the  saints  is  a  part  of  every  Calvinistic  confession.  It  is 
rejected  by  Romanists,  Lutherans,  and  Arminians.  All  the  evidence, 
therefore,  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrines  already  examined,  may  be 
presented  in  favour  of  this  which  is  a  necessary  inference  from  them. 
In  like  manner,  all  the  independent  proof  of  this  doctrine  confirms 
the  separate  doctrines,  and  the  system  of  doctrine,  with  which  it  is 
associated. 

2.  The  Scriptures  declare  that  the  sure  salvation  of  each  believer 
is  due  to  the  purpose  of  God.  This  would  be  naturally  inferred  from 
some  of  the  doctrines  to  which  reference  has  just  been  made.  But  it 
is  distinctly  asserted.  Those  who  believed  are  said  to  have  been 
"ordained  to  eternal  life."  Acts  13=48.  Those  finally  glorified  are 
said  to  have  been  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His 
Son,  and,  therefore,  called.  Rom.  8=30.  Referring  to  the  falling 
away  of  some,  the  apostle  writes  to  Timothy  declaring  that  neverthe- 


447  Abstract  of  Theology. 

less  the  "firm  foundation  [Canterbury  Revision]  of  God  standeth, 
having  this  seal,  "The  Lord  knoweththem  that  are  His"'  (2  Tim.  2:17) 
thus  establishing  the  identity  of  those  that  are  thus  known  with  those 
who  shall  remain  steadfast.  Our  Lord  himself  declared  this  final  sal- 
vation to  be  the  will  of  God,  "This  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath 
sent  me,  that  of  all  which  He  hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing 
but  should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day."     John  6=39. 

3.  The  final  salvation  of  the  believer  is  ascribed  to  the  power  of 
God. 

It  is  the  power  of  Christ,  and  of  God,  which  makes  it  impossible 
that  the  sheep  shall  be  snatched  from  their  hands.  John  10=27-29. 
It  is  God  that  will  perform  the  good  work  which  He  had  begun. 
Phil.  1:6.  "It  is  God  that  worketh  in  you"  says  the  Apostle  to  the 
Philippians,  "both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure."  Phil  2:13. 
Peter  addresses  his  readers  as  those  "who  are  kept  by  the  power  of 
God  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 
time."  1  Pet.  1:5.  He  likewise  invokes  that  "grace  aud  peace  be 
multiplied"  to  those  who  "have  obtained  like  precious  faith,"  *  *  * 
"according  as  His  divine  power  hath  given  us  all  things  that  pertain 
unto  life  and  godliness."  2  Pet.  1:1-3.  The  Apostle  Paul  declares 
that  it  is  God  that  is  to  be  thanked  because  of  the  growth  of  faith. 
2  Thess.  1:3.  In  the  same  chapter  he  says,  "we  pray  always  for 
you,  that  our  God  would  count  you  worthy  of  this  calling,  and  fulfil 
all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the  work  of  faith  with 
power."  2  Thess.  Lll.  It  was  in  reliance  upon  this  power,  that 
Paul  triumphantly  wrote  to  Timothy  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed 
and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com- 
mitted unto  him  against  that  day."     2  Tim.  1:12. 

4.  The  final  salvation  is  also  ascribed  to  the  grace  of  God.  Not 
only  is  the  power  of  God  exercised  ;  but  it  is  graciously  exercised. 
His  aid  is  a  gift  of  unmerited  favour.  The  apostle  to  the  Romans 
asserts  that  salvation  must  needs  be  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  of 
grace  "to  the  end  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  of  the  seed." 
Rom.  4:16.     It  is  only  "as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God"  that 

'are  the  sons  of  God."  Rom.  8:14.  "It  is  not  of  him  that  willeth, 
nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  sheweth  mercy."  Rom.  9:16. 
This  gracious  character,  which  is  ascribed  to  the  whole  work  of  salva- 
tion, is  not  less  true  of  it  in  the  end,  than  in  the  beginning.  Hence, 
when  the  Apostle  prays  for  his  brethren  at  Thessalonica,  that  their 
"whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body   be   preserved   blameless   unto  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  448 

coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  he  immediately  adds  "faithful  is 
he  that  calleth  you  who  also  will  do  it."  2  Thess.  5:23.24.  That 
faithfulness  consists  in  the  fulfilment  of  gracious  promises,  and  not  of 
matters  of  obligation  and  duty. 

5.  That  the  perseverance  of  believers  depends  solely  upon  the 
purpose  and  power  and  grace  of  God,  will  still  further  appear  from  the 
natural  weakness  of  the  Christian  and  his  liability  to  fall.  Even  an 
innocent  and  pure  human  being  must  be  fallible,  because  he  is  a  mere 
creature,  and  may  therefore  choose  evil  instead  of  good.  We  have  a 
sad  illustration  of  this  in  the  fall  of  our  first  parents.  It  may  be 
doubted  whether  the  confirmation  of  holy  angels,  or  saints,  is  due  to 
anything  in  themselves,  or  in  their  condition,  or  state.  It  is  most 
probable  that  their  only  ground  of  confidence  is  in  the  purpose  and  pro- 
mise of  God.  But  the  Christian  is  not  free  from  sin.  He  does  not  in 
this  life  attain  perfect  sanctification.  Hence  the  constant  tendencies  to 
sin,  the  liability  to  temptation  from  within,  and  from  without,  and 
the  utter  dependence  upon  the  grace  of  God  for  his  progress  in  the  di- 
vine life.  These  have  been  pointed  out  in  the  discussion  about  his 
sanctification.  The  Scripture  teaches  the  fact  expressly  in  such  pas- 
sages as  1  John  1=8-10;  and  2=1.  It  is  also  to  be  inferred  from  the 
frequent  warnings  against  the  power  of  temptation,  and  the  necessity 
of  resisting  it  from  whatever  source  it  may  arise.  We  are  taught  not 
only  the  liability  to  sin  from  our  own  corrupted  natures,  and  from 
the  influences  of  the  world  around  ;  but  also  that  we  have- a  spiritual 
enemy  to  contend  with  in  Satan  who  zealously,  and  with  much  craft 
and  subtilty,  seeks  the  destruction  of  the  children  of  God. 

Nor  does  the  Bible  alone  give  warnings  of  what  may  possibly  happen 
but  the  religious  experience  of  the  Christian  also  which  is  one  of  constant 
struggles  against  the  evil  of  sin.  These  struggles  the  word  of  God 
teaches  not  only  to  be  consistent  with  a  state  of  gracious  acceptance 
with  God,  but  to  be  an  evidence  of  such  a  state ;  inasmuch  as  they 
show  that  the  believer  is  no  longer  "dead  in  trespasses,  and  sins,"  but  is 
engaged  in  a  conflict  to  destroy,  and  escape  them.  In  this  warfare 
the  strange  condition  is  presented  of  divine  strength  perfected  in 
human  weakness.  While  the  Scriptures  command  watchfulness  and 
prayer  against  temptations,  (Mark  14=38)  and  enforce  the  command 
by  the  fearful  conflict  of  our  Lord  in  Gethsemane,  they  also  encourage 
believers  by  the  assurance  that  "God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer 
you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able  but  will,  with. the  tempta- 
tion, also,  make  a  way   to  escape,  that  ye  may  be   able   to  bear  it." 


449  Abstract  of  Theology. 

1  Cor.  1:13.  '"Therefore"  said  the  apostle,  "I  take  pleasure  in  infirmi- 
ties, in  reproaches,  in  necessities,  in  persecutions,  in  distresses  for 
Christ's  sake  :  for  when  I  am  weak  then  am  I  strong."  2  Cor.  12:10. 
He  gives  the  reason  why  he  thus  rejoices  in  the  preceding  verse,  viz: 
"he  said  unto  me,  my  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee:  for  my  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  weakness." 

6.  The  weakness  thus  taught  of  the  Christian  is  not  confined  to 
those  wTho  have  just  begun  their  career  of  faith,  or  who  are  babes  in 
Christ,  but  is  found  also  in  the  best  instructed,  and  most  sanctified,  to 
such  an  extent  as  to  make  necessary  their  continued  watchfulness  and 
prayer.  It  was  to  those  to  whom  the  Apostle  wrote,  "in  every 
thing  ye  are  enriched  by  him,  in  all  utterance  and  in  all  knowledge 
*  *  so  that  you  come  behind  in  no  gift,"  1  Cor.  1:4-7  that  he 
found  it  necessary  to  say  "let  him  that  think eth  he  standeth,  take 
heed  lest  he  fall,"  1  Cor.  10=12.  They  also  whose  "faith"  was 
"spoken  of  throughout  all  the  world,"  Rom.  1:8,  needed  the  warning 
"well;  because  of  unbelief  they  were  broken  off,  and  thou  standest 
by  faith.  Be  not  high  minded  but  fear  :  for  if  God  spared  not  the 
natural  branches,  take  heed  lest  he  also  spare  not  thee."  Rom. 
11=20.21.  They  were  our  Lord's  chosen  companions  whom  he  taught 
to  pray,  "Bring  us  not  into  temptation  but  deliver  us  from  tha  evil 
one."  Matt.  6:13.  [Canterbury  Revision.]  These  also  were  the 
ones  to  whom  primarily  the  warning  of  Christ  was  given  with  the 
accompanying  scene  at  Gethsemane.  Even  Paul  at  the  very  moment 
in  which  he  declared,  "I  therefore  so  run,  not  as  uncertainly;  so 
fight  I,  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air,"  added  "but  I  keep  under  my 
body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection  :  lest  that  by  any  means,  when  I  have 
preached  to  others,  I   myself  should  be  a  castaway."     1  Cor.  9:26.27. 

7.  Nor  are  examples  wanting,  not  merely  of  faults  and  errors 
committed  by  Christian  men,  but  of  grievous  sins;  and  these  in 
men  of  the  highest  religious  privileges  and  attainments.  Such  was 
the  desertion  of  Christ  by  all  the  apostles,  when  he  was  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  Mark  14:50,  the  thrice  denial 
of  his  Lord  by  Peter,  Mark  14:66-72,  the  contention  between  Paul 
and  Barnabas,  Acts  15=39,  and  the  blameworthy  conduct  of  Peter 
and  of  the  other  Jews  who  dissembled  with  him,  and  of  Barnabas  at 
Antioch.  Gal.  2.-11—13.  All  of  these  are  instances  of  grievous  falls 
in  those  who  were  true  believers  in  Jesus.  They  can  also  be  paralleled 
in  the  lives  of  God's  true  servants  in  the  Old  Testament  times,  in  the 
sin   of    Abraham,  Gen.  20:5-13;  of    Moses,  Num.   20=7-13;    of  Eli, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  450 

1  Sam.  2:22-36;  of  David,  2  Sam.  12:1-14;  and  of  Hezekiah,  2  Kings 
20:12-21  . 

The  extent  to  which  this  weakness  of  man  is  seen  to  exhibit  itself 
is  evidence  not  only  of  what,  but  for  the  intervention  of  God,  might 
occur  in  each  case,  but,  also,  that  so  far  as  man  is  concerned,  the  final 
apostasy  of  each  one  is  not  only  possible  but  probable,  nay  certain. 
We  thus  have  additional  proof  that  the  final  salvation  is  due  to  the 
purpose,  power,  and  grace  of  God. 

8.  This  salvation  is,  however,  secured  only  through  the  co-oper- 
ation of  the  believer.  It  is  not  one  bestowed  upon  him  in  his  sins; 
but  through  deliverance  from  his  sins.  It  is  not  merely  preservation 
by  God,  but  also  perseverance  of  the  believer,  in  faith,  and  holiness, 
unto  the  end.  It  is  the  good  work  begun  in  the  Christian  which  is 
performed  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  Phil.  1=6.  The  confirma- 
tion to  the  end  secures  that  they  shall  be  "unreprovable  in  the  day  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1  Cor.  1:8.  The  predestination  is  unto  con- 
formity to  the  image  of  His  Son.  Rom.  8:30.  This  is  secured  by 
various  means : 

(a.)     Faith  is  one  of  these. 

Christians  are  <lkept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  sal- 
vation." 1  Pet.  1:5.  "Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the 
world :  and  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our 
faith."  1  John  5:4.  "As  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his 
name."  John  1:12.  "These  are  written  that  ye  might  believe  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  that  believing  ye  might  have 
life  through  his  name."     John  20:31. 

(b.)     It  is  also  accomplished  by  consecration  to  God. 

This  is  earnestly  enjoined  upon  the  people  of  God  because  of  the 
great  privileges  bestowed  upon  them.  Paul  besought  the  Romans  by 
the  mercies  of  God  to  present  their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  unto  God. 
Rom.  12:1.  He  urged  the  Ephesians  to  be  followers  of  God,  as  dear 
children,  and  walk  in  love,  not  allowing  certain  sins  which  he  men- 
tioned to  be  once  named  among  them  as  they  were  unbecoming  to  saints. 
Eph. 5=1-4.  The  writer  to  the  Hebrews,  also,  surrounding  himself  and 
his  brethren  with  a  cloud  of  martyrs,  exhorts  "let  us  lay  aside  every 
weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us,  and  let  us  run  with 
patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us ;  looking  unto  Jesus  the  author 
and  finisher  of  our  faith.     Heb.  12:1. 

(c.)     Self  purification  from  sin  is  another  of  the  means. 


451  Abstract  of  Theology. 

We  find  Paul  urging  upon  his  brethren  at  Rome  not  to  yield  their 
members  as  instruments  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin,  but  to  yield 
themselves  unto  God,  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead,  and  their 
members  as  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God.  Rom.  6:13.  So, 
also,  in  view  of  their  adoption  by  God,  he  exhorts  the  Corinthians  to 
cleanse  themselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting 
holiness  in  the  fear  of  God.  2  Cor.  7*1.  "They  that  are  in  Christ" 
it  is  said  "have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts.  Gal. 
5:24.  The  apostle  John  declares  that  "every  man  that  hath  this  hope 
in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  (Christ)  is  pure."  1  John  3:3. 

(d.)  The  warnings  of  God's  word  are  also  means  to  the  same  end. 
They  imply  the  importance  of  Christian  exertion,  and  the  value  of 
effort  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  danger.  The  Hebrews  were  warned 
that  they  should  fear  lest,  a  promise  being  left  of  rest,  any  of  them 
should  seem  to  come  short  of  it.  Heb.  4=1.  They  are  especially' 
warned  to  go  on  unto  perfection,  upon  the  ground  that  "it  is  impossi- 
ble, for  them  who  were  once  enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the 
heavenly  gift,  and  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  have 
tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  if 
they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance;  seeing  they 
crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open 
shame."  Heb.  6:4-6.  This  was  a  description  of  such  persons  as  they 
themselves  were;  of  real  Christians.  They  were,  in  themselves,  in  real 
danger  of  such  a  fall.  They  were  only  secure  from  it  through  the 
purpose  and  power  and  grace  of  God.  This  danger  was  therefore  a 
fit  cause  for  exhortation  to  them  to  push  forward  unto  perfection. 
There  were  doubtless  many  around  them  who  had  appeared,  or  had 
professed  to  have  the  privileges  here  referred  to,  who,  by  their  deser- 
tion of  Christianity,  were  inflicting  grievous  evil  upon  the  cause  of 
Christ.  These  Christians  were  tempted  to  commit  the  same  sin. 
Should  they  do  this,  they  could  not  be  renewed  again  unto  repentance; 
and  this  warning  was  given  as  the  means  under  God  of  restraining 
them  from  sin.  It  is  thought  by  some,  that  this  passage  shows  the 
possibility  of  a  fall  from  grace,  and  therefore  is  contrary  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints.  It  is  admitted  that,  regarded 
in  their  own  strength  only,  there  was  this  possibility  of  fall  in  the 
persons  thus  addressed.  But  the  doctrine  we  are  considering  does  not 
regard  the  believer  as  preserved  and  as  persevering  only  through  him- 
self. He  is  thus  kept  by  God ;  not  by  his  own  power.  One  of  the 
means,  by  which  this  is  done,  is  that  he  is  warned  of  the   danger  in 


Abstract  of  Theology.  452 

which  he  is  of  himself,  that  he  may  co-operate  with  God,  so  as  not 
only  to  be  preserved,  but  also  to  persevere  in  the  divine  life.  Of  like 
purpose,  and  to  the  same  effect,  are  the  other  warnings  found  in  the 
tenth  chapter  of  this  Epistle  in  verses  26-29.38,  and  those  in  2  Pet. 
2:20.22,  and  elsewhere  in  the  Scriptures. 

The  means  mentioned  are  only  some  of  the  numerous  ways  in  which 
the  Christian  is  led  to  persevere  in  the  divine  life,  actively  co-operating 
with  the  grace  of  God.  It  is  because  God  bestows,  and  man  attains, 
as  the  apostle  Peter  so  completely  sets  forth  in  his  preceding  remarks, 
that  he  exhorts  his  brethren,  "give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and 
election  sure,"  adding,  "for  if  ye  do  these  things  ye  shall  never  fall : 
for  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into 
the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  2 
Pet.  1:10.11.  It  is  because  of  the  divine  help  afforded  through  the 
incarnation,  and  humiliation,  and  consequent  exaltation  of  Christ 
Jesus,  that  the  apostle  could  urge  the  Philippians,  "work  out  your 
own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God  which  worketh 
in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  .good  pleasure."  Phil.  2  12.13. 

It  will  be  seen,  from  the  preceding  statements,  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints  does  not  deny  that  Christians  are 
liable  to  sin,  nor  that  they  do  sin,  nor  that  they  do  turn  away 
from  God,  and  backslide  from  their  Christian  profession,  and  even 
fall  into  grievous  wrong,  by  which  they  displease  God,  and  lose 
confidence  and  hope  in  Him,  and  become  barren  and  unfruitful  in 
good  works:  nor  does  it  deny  that  final  apostasy  would  be  possible 
to  the  Christian  if  he  were  left  to  the  exercise  of  his  own  will,  sub- 
ject, as  he  would  be,  not  only  to  the  natural  fallibility  of  a  crea- 
ture, but  to  the  still  continuing  lusts  of  his  flesh,  and  tempted  not 
only  by  these,  but  by  the  attractions  of  the  wTorld,  and  the  malice 
of  Satan.  But  it  asserts,  that  it  is  the  purpose  of  God  that  none 
shall  finally  be  lost  who  have  been  given  to  Christ  by  the  Father, 
and  have  by  faith  been  vitally  united  with  him,  and  justified  through 
him;  and  that,  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  purpose,  the  power  of  God 
is  sufficient  to  keep  them  unto  final  salvation,  and  the  love  of  Christ  is 
so  invincible,  in  his  forbearance,  mercy,  and  grace,  that  nothing  can 
separate  them  from  it.  It  also  teaches,  that  they  are  not  saved 
while  indulging  in  sin,  and' walking  after  their  own  lusts;  but  that 
they  are  sanctified  through  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  enables 
them  so  to  persevere  in  the  divine  life  in  co-operation  with  his  influences, 
that  their  life  and   salvation    is  not  a  mere   gift   without  effort  on 


453  Abstract  of  Theology. 

their  part,  but  a   growth   through   perseverance    unto  the  end  in  the 
use  of  the  appointed  means. 

It  is  well  to  notice  briefly  some  of  the  objections  presented  to  this 
doctrine. 

1.  One  of  the  most  plausible  of  these  is  based  upon  the  apostasy 
of  the  nation  of  Israel  despite  the  many  promises  with  which  it  was 
blessed. 

But  the  analogy  of  God's  dealings  with  His  ancient  people,  favours, 
rather  than  opposes,  the  doctrine  of  final  perseverance.  Their  history 
presents  to  us  just  such  cases  of  backsliding,  and  recovery,  as  have 
been  pointed  out  as  true  of  Christian  believers.  The  backsliding  was 
through  their  sin,  the  recovery  through  the  power  and  grace  of  God. 
The  one  followed  the  other,  at  greater,  or  less  intervals,  but  always 
followed  it.  Is  it  said,  however,  that  Israel  is  now  entirely  cast  away? 
But  such  is  not  the  teaching  of  the  word  of  God.  Paul  expressly 
denies  this,  and  teaches  their  restoration  to  God  when  the  fulness  of 
the  Gentiles  has  come  in.  Rom.  11;26.  It  is  to  be  remembered  also 
that  the  calling  of  Israel  was  that  of  the  nation,  and  not  of  the  in- 
dividuals within  it.  The  fact  that  many  Israelites  have  been  lost 
eternally,  and  beyond  rescue,  does  not  affect  the  fulfilment  of  any 
gracious  purpose  of  God  towards  the  nation  as  such. 

There  are  many,  however,  who  interpret  all  the  promises  for  the 
future  as  made  simply  of  the  gathering  of  the  spiritual  Israel.  Even 
were  this  position  incorrect  there  has  been  no  failure  in  God's  covenant 
relation  to  the  natural  Israel,  for  the  promises  to  it  were  all  based  upon 
the  condition  of  their  faithfulness  to  God.  God,  therefore,  has  not 
failed,  even  if  He  has  cast  them  off  forever. 

It  is  especially  to  be  noticed?  also,  that  the  new  covenant  made  in 
Christ,  is  one  which  includes  not  only  the  promise  of  the  blessing,  but 
of  the  establishment  in  His  people  of  the  conditions  upon  which  these 
blessings  depend.  The  nature  of  the  new  covenant  is  set  forth  in  the 
prophecy  of  Jeremiah,  and,  with  its  statements,  many  other  passages 
of  Scripture  concur.  From  its  very  nature,  it  is  impossible  that  the 
blessings  promised  in  it  should  not  be  given  to  all  the  people  of  God. 
'Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  make  a  new  cov- 
enant with  the  house  of  Israel,  and  with  the  house  of  Judah.  Not 
according  to  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  their  fathers  in  the  day 
that  I  took  them  by  the  hand  to  bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt; 
which  my  covenant  they  brake,  although  I  was  an  husband  unto  them, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  454 

saith  the  Lord  :  but  this  shall  be  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with 
the  house  of  Israel ;  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  put  my 
law  in  their. inward  parts,  and  write  it  in  their  hearts;  and  will  be 
their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people.  And  they  shall  teach  no 
more  every  man  his  neighbour  and  every  man  his  brother,  saying,  know 
the  Lord:  for  they  shall  all  know  me,  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the 
greatest  of  them,  saith  the  Lord:  for  I  will  forgive  their  iniquity,  and 
I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more.  Jer.  31:31-34.  See  also  Jer. 
32:38-40. 

2.  It  is  again  objected  that  the  warnings  against  apostasy,  and  ex- 
hortations to  perseverance,  imply  the  possibility,  and  danger  of  fall 
on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  they  were  addressed.  Even  if  this  were 
absolutely  true,  it  would  not  be  proof  that  any  have  fallen  away,  or 
shall  fall  away.  These  very  warnings  might  become  effective  to  guard 
against  the  danger,  as  the  signs  set  up  in  hazardous  places,  are  the 
means  by  which  the  danger  is  avoided.  But,  as  has  been  already 
explained,  this  danger  arises  solely  from  the  believer  if  left  to  himself; 
the  certainty  that  he  will  not  finally  fall  away  depends  upon  God's 
purpose  to  preserve  him,  and  to  enable  him  to  persevere.  These 
warnings  and  exhortations,  are,  therefore,  perfectly  consistent  with 
his  safety,  and  are  the  signs  of  danger  which  God  sets  up  to  prevent 
the  fall  of  His  servants. 

3.  It  is  objected,  however,  that,  while  we  have  instances  of  some 
who  are  rescued  from  their  grievous  sins,  and  blackslidings,  the  Scrip- 
ture also  gives  examples  of  others  who  are  left  to  perish.  But  the  doc- 
trine of  God's  word  is  that  of  the  perseverance  of  believers ;  of  -the 
elect  of  God  ;  of  those  called  to  be  saints.  An  examination  of  the 
cases  mentioned  will  show  no  reason  for  believing  those  who  thus  fell 
away  to  have  been  of  this  class.  Indeed,  in  most  cases  the  contrary 
is  taught.  The  case  of  Judas  is  the  most  prominent.  It  would  seem 
more  nearly  to  correspond,  than  any  other,  with  the  privileges  referred 
to  in  Heb.  6:4.5.  and  yet  Christ  proclaimed  his  condition,  as  not  that  of 
a  Christian,  about  a  year  before  his  betrayal.  "Have  not  I  chosen  you 
twelve  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ?  He  spake  of  Judas  Iscariot  the  son 
of  Simon."  John  6:70.71.  We  need  no  better  proof  that  this  man,  in 
the  betraying  of  our  Lord,  did  not  fall  from  a  state  of  grace  and  salva- 
tion into  the  perdition  to  which  he  was  doomed. 

So  also  as  to  Simon  Magus,  Peter  expressly  declared,  "Thou  hast 
neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter  :  for  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the 
sight  of  God.     *     *     I  perceive  that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 


455  Abstract  of  Theology. 

and  the  bonds  of  iniquity."  Acts  8=21.23.  The  apostle  John  seems, 
in  general  terms,  to  state  the  truth  as  to  all  those  who  finally  depart 
from  the  faith.  "They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us  ; 
for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  have  continued  with  us  :  but 
they  went  out,  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  how  that  they  all 
are  not  of  us."     1  John  2=19.     [Canterbury  Revision]. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  456 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XXXIX. 


Death  and  the  Soul's  Immortality. 

We  proceed  next  to  the  consideration  of  the  death  of  man,  and  other 
topics  which  are  intimately  connected  with  it.  In  the  present  lecture 
will  be  discussed  death  ;  the  immortality  of  the  soul ;  and  the  condi- 
tion of  the  latter  between  the  hour  of  death,  and  that  of  reunion  with 
the  body. 

I.     Death. 

The  term  death  is  most  commonly  applied  to  that  separation  of  soul 
and  body  which  is  the  most  manifest  form  in  which  the  penalty  of  sin 
is  seen  among  men.  That  there  is  a  death  of  the  soul  also,  and 
that  it  is  something  far  more  terrible  than  the  death  of  the  body, 
has  been  shown  in  the  lecture  on  the  "Effects  of  Adam's  sin,"  pp. 
262-267.  But,  that  death  is  spiritual  in  its  nature,  and  does  not  for- 
bid the  continued  existence  of  the  soul,  and  its  dread  realities  will  be 
more  plainly  evinced  in  the  unseen  hereafter.  Consequently  the  sep- 
aration of  body  and  soul  makes  a  more  profound  impression  among 
living  men,  and  to  it  the  term  death  is  almost  exclusively  appro- 
priated. 

It  is  sometimes  called  "natural,"  or  "physical"  death,  to  distinguish 
it  from  that  which  is  "spiritual ;"  the  death  "of  the  body,"  as  opposed 
to  that  "of  the  soul;"  and  "temporal"  death,  in  contrast  with  that 
which  is  eternal. 


457  Abstract  of  Theology. 

This  separation  of  body  and  soul  is  the  almost  universal  destiny  of 
men.  The  Scriptures,  however,  teach  that  Enoch  did  not  die  but 
"God  took  him,"  Gen.  5:24,  and  that  he  "was  translated  that- he  should 
not  see  death,"  Heb.  11=5  ;  also  that  Elijah  "went  up  by  a  whirlwind 
into  heaven,''  2  Kings  2:11.  Some  have  supposed  that,  in  like  man- 
ner Moses  escaped  death,  but  it  is  expressly  stated  that  he  died,  and  was 
buried  in  the  land  of  Moab.  Deut.  34  4.5.  But  Paul  declared  that,  at 
the  second  coming  of  the  Lord,  "we,  which  are  alive,  and  remain,  shall 
be  caught  up  together  with  them  (the  dead  in  Chirist)  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air  =  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord." 
1  Thess.  4=17.  Even  more  explicitly  he  said  "we  shall  not  all  sleep  ; 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
at  the  last  trump  :  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be 
raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed."  1  Cor.  15:51.52.  This 
is  the  change  of  "our  vile  body  that  it  may  be  fasliioned  like  unto  his 
(Christ's)  glorious  body"  foretold  in  Phil.  3:21. 

But,  while  death  comes  thus  almost  universally  to  all,  there  is  a 
marked  difference  between  its  connection  with  the  righteous,  and  with 
the  wicked. 

The  death  of  the  wicked  is  easily  accounted  for.  It  constitutes  a 
part  of  the  penalty  of  sin,  to  which,  the  Scriptures  teach,  all  men 
are  liable,  Rom.  5:12.14;  1  Cor.  15:21.22.53-56,  but  from  which,  as 
such,  the  people  of  God  are  exempted  because  Christ  has  redeemed 
them  from  the  curse  of  the  law.  The  "death  of  the  saint"  instead  of 
being  accursed,  is  "precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  Ps.  116:15,  and 
this  because  he  has  redeemed  them.  Ps.  72:14.  His  death  is  a  death 
"unto  the  Lord."  Rom.  14:8.  Death  is  his.  1  Cor.  3:22.  Its  sting 
has  been  removed.  1  Cor.  15:56.  But  none  of  this  is  true  of  the 
wicked.  He  has  neglected,  or  rejected  the  offer  of  salvation  through 
Christ  Jesus.  There  is  no  other  method  of  escape  from  the  penalty; 
and  it  rests  upon  him  in  all  its  fulness. 

It  is  not  so  easy  to  account  for  the  death  of  the  righteous.  As  he 
is  no  longer  liable  to  the  penalty  of  sin,  there  is  no  legal  ground  upon 
which  he  must  endure  death,  and,  because  of  which,  he  cannot  be 
released.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  some  righteous  have  not 
died,  and  others  will  only  be  changed.  But,  while  death  may  not  thus 
be  legally  necessary,  it  may  subserve  many  purposes  in  the  gracious 
providence  of  God,  and  is,  ordinarily,  the  best  way  for  the  Christian  to 
attain  the  "change"  for  which  he  is  destined.  This  should  be  believed 
even  if  it  could  in  no  respect  be  explained. 


Absteact  of  Theology.  .  458 

It  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  that  this  is  not  the  only  dealing  of  God 
with  His  people,  which  evidently  arises  from  some  wise  purpose  which 
He  has  not  fully  revealed.  They  might  have  been  taken  out  of  the 
world  as  soon  as  they  were  justified.  Yet,  that  this  is  graciously  and 
wisely  prevented,  is  evident  from  Christ's  declining  to  pray  for  it.  John 
17=15.  They  might  have  been  preserved  from  affliction,  and  persecu- 
tion, and  similar  inflictions  from  God  or  man.  That  these  are  blessed 
to  them,  is  no  proof  that  they  would  not  have  been  more  blessed  with- 
out them,  for  they  are  taught  to  look  forward  to  greater  bliss 
in  their  exemption  from  them  in  Heaven.  Our  Lord  prayed  that  they 
might  be  kept  from  the  Evil  One,  and  they  are  doubtless  protected 
from  his  power  in  answer  to  this  prayer,  but  they  are  still  left  subject 
to  his  influences,  and  temptations,  and  are  very  far  from  escaping  the 
presence  and  pollution  of  sin.  In  all  of  these  things,  we  see  some 
reasons  for  the  action  of  God,  though  our  knowledge  is  imperfect  and 
incomplete.  It  ought  not  to  be  thought  strange  if,  in  like  manner,  we 
can  only  account  partially  for  the  death  of  true  believers. 

1.  Some  have  thought  that,  for  the  attainment  of  perfect  sanctifi- 
cation,  it  is  necessary  that  the  soul  and  body  be  separated,  and  the 
body  reduced  to  its  original  elements.  That  this  is  not  necessary  is 
manifest  from  the  examples  of  exemption  from  death  already  stated. 
But  it  may  be  admitted  to  be  the  ordinary  method  which  God  has 
ordained  for  such  sanctification.  For  the  desired  perfection,  there 
must  be  removal  of  the  passions  and  appetites  of  the  flesh  by  which 
man  is  tempted  not  only  from  himself,  but  through  himself.  The 
"change"  at  the  last  day  accomplishes  this  in  an  extraordinary  manner. 
The  more  ordinary  method  of  God  seems  to  be  through  death,  in  which, 
by  its  separation  from  the  body,  the  soul  is  freed  from  these  temptations, 
and  enabled  to  live  perfectly  the  life  of  holiness  for  which  it  longs. 

2.  Another  opinion  which  has  been  expressed,  is,  that  death  is 
natural  to  man,  and  that  it,  from  its  nature,  becomes  the  means  of  his 
passing  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  condition  ;  in  which  through  a  more 
advanced  organism  the  soul  may  live  a  more  exalted  life. 

This  opinion  may  be  held  either  about  the  original,  or  the  fallen 
condition  of  man.  If  about  the  original  condition,  it  involves  the 
position  that  the  body  of  man  was  created  mortal,  and  that  its  death, 
as  a  penalty,  was  hot  something  superadded  when  man  sinned  ;  but  is 
simply  the  natural  condition  of  man'slife  used  by  God  as  penalty,  and 
so  made  known  to  man. 


459  Abstract  of  Theology. 

If  held,  however,  only  as  to  man's  present  natural  condition,  it 
would  not  necessarily  involve  an  original  mortality. 

As  to  this  opinion,  in  either  form,  as' well  as  to  the  former,  it  is 
necessary  that  it  recognize  death  simply  as  the  ordinary  method  of 
man's  passing  into  another  life;  for  in  respect  to  each  of  them  the  ex- 
emption of  some  shows  that  the  end  may  be  by  other  means  accom- 
plished. It  derives  some  support  from  the  analogy  of  the  necessity  of 
death  in  the  seed  for  its  change  to  a  higher  form  presented  in  1.  Cor. 
15:36-38. 

3.  Death  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  necessary  for  a  life  oi  faith, 
rather  than  of  sight,  in  the  Christian.  It  is  thought,  that,  on  this 
account,  it  would  be  injurious  to  make  so  marked  a  distinction  between 
the  righteous,  and  the  wicked,  as  would  exist  in  the  death  of  the  latter 
and  the  change  of  the  former  in  some  other  way."  But  the  reason  for 
this  opinion  is  not  apparent.  It  might  be  true,  were  the  Christian 
personally  changed  in  body  as  soon  as  he  believes.  But  it  would 
not  be,  if  the  change  should  occur  only  at  the  time  when,  otherwise, 
his  death  would  take  place.  Doubtless  the  translation  of  Enoch  was 
one  fitted  to  produce  a  profound  impression  on  his  contemporaries.  It 
certainly  had  had  no  evil  influence  on  his  own  life.  So,  if  the  Christian 
should  have  no  other  certainty  of  exemption  from  death,  than  he  now 
has  of  salvation,  he  could  derive  no  motives  from  that  exemption 
which  would  militate  against  his  life  of  faith.  It  is  much  more  prob- 
ably because  God  does  not  choose  to  continue  the  miraculous  testimony 
to  the  truth  of  Christianity  throughout  all  time.  But  had  He  done 
this,  the  lives  of  Christians  in  the  later  ages  would  have  been  no  less 
lives  of  faith  than  were  those  of  Apostolic  times. 

4.  It  has  been  more  generally  stated  that  Death  is  a  means  of 
chastisement.  It  has  been  shown  that,  while  suffering  is  common  to 
both,  it  is  inflicted  in  punishment,  by  an  angry  God,  in  the  way  of 
penalty  and  in  chastisement,  by  a  loving  Father,  only  for  correction, 
and  discipline;  and  thus,  that  the  same  event,  death,  may  be  a  curse 
to  the  wicked,  and  a  blessing  to  the  righteous.  It  has  been  argued 
that  this  is  the  reason  why  even  a  Christian  man  must  die.  This  is 
true  so  far  as  the  death  of  the  Christian  is  a  cause  of  suffering  and 
pain,  either  in  death  itself,  or  in  his  contemplation  of  it.  It  is  un- 
doubtedly often  a  cause  of  this  kind.  Even  to  the  Christian  it 
assumes  not  always  an  aspect  altogether  pleasant.  He  naturally 
shrinks  from  its  loathsome  embrace.  It  is  an  enemy,  even  if  it  is 
"the  last  enemy,"  and  one  over  which  he   is  "more  than   conqueror." 


Abstract  of  Theology.  460 

But  death  is  not  always  regarded  with  dread.  The  Christian's  thoughts 
sometimes  leap  forward  to  it  with  exultant  joy.  Especially  is  it  true, 
that  seldom,  if  ever,  in  the  hour  of  death  is  the  true  Christian  filled  with 
apprehension  and  gloom.  His  own  death  becomes  no  chastisement  in 
the  event  itself.  God  in  that  hour  gives  such  sustaining  grace  that 
each  of  His  servants  is  hopeful,  peaceful,  joyful,  even  sometimes 
triumphant. 

5.  Whether  able,  or  not,  definitely  to  state  on  what  grounds  the 
Christian  is  subjected  to  death,  we  know  that  it  is  a  blessing  to  him. 
The  inquiry  into  its  cause,  and  the  various  reasons  suggested,  proceed 
apparently  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  an  evil  which  it  would  be 
desirable  had  he  been  spared.  But  the  Scriptures  speak  of  death  as 
among  the  "all  things"  which  belong  to  the  Christian.  1  Cor.  3:22. 
This  does  not  deny  its  possibly  painful  character,  but  asserts  that, 
however  painful,  it  is  made  his  possession,  and  therefore  is  used  for 
his  benefit.  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  universal  law  of  blessing 
to  him  which  the  Apostle  announces  in  Rom.  8:28;  "we  know  that  all 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who  are 
the  called  according  to  His  purpose."  The  principle  of  this,  law, 
however,  admits  either  blessing  or  suffering.  The  suffering  in  connec- 
tion with  death  was  pointed  out  under  the  previous  division.  It  will 
suffice  briefly  to  indicate  here  some  of  the  blessings  also  associated 
with  it. 

(1.)  Death  is  a  blessing  to  the  Christian,  because,  through  its  con- 
templation, his  sanctification  and  purification  in  this  life  is  carried 
forward.  This  contemplation  of  it  includes  all  the  aspects  in  which 
it  presents  itself,  whether  painful  or  otherwise. 

(2.)  It  is  a  blessing,  because  in  it  he  looks  forward  to  the  attain- 
ment of  final  freedom  from  sin,  and  perfect  sanctification. 

(3.)  It  is  a  blessing,  because  he  recognizes  it  as  the  portal  to  the 
possession  of  eternal  life. 

(4.)  Death  is  a  blessing,  because  it  gives  him  an  opportunity  of 
giving  strong  testimony  in  favour  of  Christ  and  his  religion. 

(5.)  It  is  felt  to  be  a  blessing,  because  it  opens  the  doors  to  imme- 
diate conscious  personal  presence  with  his  Saviour. 

These  points  are  obvious  and  need  not  be  elaborated. 


461  Abstract  of  Theology. 

II.     Immortality. 

When  the  immortality  of  the  soul  is  spoken  of,  its  unending  future 
life  is  usually  meant.  This  is  the  immortality  which  is  common  to  the 
righteous,  and  the  wicked.  The  righteous,  however,  possess,  also 
that  true  immortality  which  the  Scriptures  teach  to  be  that  of  the 
true  life  of  the  soul. 

1.  The  unending  life  of  the  soul  has  been  argued  upon  various 
grounds. 

(1.)  Reason  alone  has  been  supposed  by  many  to  furnish  adequate 
arguments  in  proof  of  its  truth. 

(a.)  The  longing  of  the  soul  for  immortal  existence  has  been  deemed 
to  be  an  instinct  implanted  within,  which  gives  assurance  of  its  gratifica- 
tion. But,  while,  with  a  few,  there  may  have  been  aspirations  after  a 
nobler  and  better  life  than  that  of  earth,  it  may  be  questioned  whether, 
in  the  vast  multitude  of  men,  there  is  more  than  a  shrinking  from  the 
loss  of  such  life  as  is  possessed  in  the  present  stage  of  existence.  The 
instinct  seems,  therefore,  to  be  rather  that  dread  of  death  which  is 
not  unknown  to  the  mere  animal,  and  which  is  given  for  the  protec- 
tion of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  not  as  a  basis  of  hope  of  that  which 
may  be  hereafter. 

(b.)  The  inequality,  which  is  so  manifest  in  the  apportionment  of 
good  and  evil  to  the  characters  and  conduct  of  men  on  earth,  has* 
almost  universally,  led  to  the  belief  of  a  future  life,  in  which  these 
will  be  duly  adjusted.  But,  by  these  facts,  is  taught  merely  a  future 
life,  and  not  one  necessarily  of  an  unending  duration;  but  only  of  suf- 
ficient length  for  such  adjustment.  It  is  the  Word  of  God  alone  that 
teaches  that  the  bliss  or  woe,  which  is  the  portion  of  man  at  death, 
will  continue  forever.  It  must  be  acknowledged,  however,  that,  as 
universal  as  has  been  the  belief  in  a  state  of  future  rewards  and  pun- 
ishments, has  also  been  the  opinion  that  it  shall  never  end. 

(c.)  This  general  belief  in  an  unending  life,  has  also  been  accounted 
for  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  an  intuitive  perception  of  the  mind. 
But  it  does  not  appear  that  such  knowledge  as  reason  can  give  of 
what  the  soul  is,  and  of  what  endless  existence  means,  awakens  at 
once  the  conviction  that  the  soul  must  exist  forever.  The  most 
thoughtful  men,  who  have  been  guided  by  nature  only,  have  been 
afflicted  with  doubts,  and  alternate  hopes,  and  fears,  without  attaining 
more  than  earnest,  or,  at  most,  confident  expectation,  much  less  such 
knowledge  of  a  continuous  future,  as  would  result  from  the  existence 
of  an  intuitive  conception. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  462 

(d.)  The  capacity  of  indefinite  progress  in  the  mental  and  moral 
powers  of  men,  has  seemed,  to  many,  to  indicate  a  stage  of  being  in 
which  it  may  be  developed.  Bat  no  one  will  assert  that  there  is  here 
more  than  an  indication,  which  is  opposed  by  the  evidence  of  the 
great  waste  in  the  productions  of  nature,  and  which,  therefore, 
needs  confirmation  from  some  more  decisive  source  to  become  other 
than  a  mere  expectation. 

(e.)  Some  metaphysicians  have  argued  the  indestructible  nature 
of  the  soul  from  its  pure  simplicity.  They  have  believed  it  to  be  on- 
compounded,  and,  therefore,  incapable  of  dissolution,  and  consequent 
destruction.  This  is  based  upon  the  belief  that  it  is  purely  spiritual, 
and  that  simplicity  is  a  necessary  attribute  of  spirit.  But  these  facts 
are  difficult  to  prove.  They  are  by  no  means  undisputed  among  those 
who  rely  on  reason  alone.  It  is  from  the  Scriptures  that  we  learn  the 
different  origin  of  body  and  soul,  and  that  the  latter  came  not  from 
matter.  Philosophy  has  not  always  regarded  the  soul  as  a  unit.  The 
terms  "soul,"  "mind,"  and  "spirit,"  indicate  a  tendency  to  recognize, 
at  least,  some  threefold  aspects  in  the  human  spirit,  in  accordance 
with  which,  even  while  asserting  the  absolute  unity  of  the  soul,  Mental 
Philosophy  has  recognized  the  threefold  division  of  the  will,  the  under- 
standing, and  the  affections.  It  is  well  known  that  the  most  of  the 
Grecian  philosophers,  following  Plato,  held  to  a  distinction  between 
psuche,  (the  animal  life  or  soul,)  and  nous  and  pneurna,  (the  rational 
spirit).  Even  some  Christian  writers  of  our  own  day  have  maintained 
the  same  views.  In  this  state  of  uncertainty,  therefore,  reason  cannot 
speak  convincingly  of  an  ever  continuing  life  of  man,  on  the  ground  of 
the  simplicity,  and  consequent  indestructibility,  of  his  spiritual 
nature. 


It  appears,  therefore,  that,  from  reason  alone,  all  that  can  be  at- 
tained, even  as  to  a  merely  future  state,  is  expectation  ;  or  at  most 
belief  upon  uncertain  grounds.  It  is  true  that,  if  it  could  be  estab- 
lished that  the  soul  dies  with  the  body,  certain  hopes,  and  fears  would 
remain  unaccounted  for,  and  certain  problems  of  divine  government 
would  be  unexplained  ;  but  these  could,  at  most,  only  produce  convic- 
tion of  some  future  state  ;  and  would  prove  nothing  as  to  its  unending 
or  even  indefinite  duration. 

(2.)  The  Scriptures,  however,  teach  plainly  the  continued  existence 
of  all  men  after  death. 


463  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(a.)  It  is  every  where  assumed  as  a  fact,  neither  to  be  doubted,  nor 
proved;  but  that  will  be  at  once  received  without  question. 

(b.)  The  cases  of  Enoch  and  Elijah  gave  signal  proof  of  another 
world  than  this  into  which  even  men  might  enter.  But  they 
furnished  no  evidence  that  any  other  than  these  two  would  go  thither. 
They  simply  showed  that  the  possible  existence  of  men,  otherwise  than 
on  this  earth,  has  been  actually  realized  in  these  servants  of  God. 
But,  so  far  from  thus  furnishing  conclusive  proof  of  the  future  life  of 
other  men,  the  fact  that  these  were  not  removed  through  death,  but 
by  extraordinary  means,  natually  suggested  the  possibility  that  ex- 
emption from  death  is  necessary  to  that  life,  and  that  all  those  who  go 
down  to  the  grave  perish  altogether.  It  was  Only  to  those  otherwise 
taught  of  the  continued  existence  of  the  soul,  that  their  removal  gave 
confirmatory  proof  of  such  immortality.  In  like  manner,  we  are 
taught  the  same  truths  by  the  presence  of  Moses,  and  Elijah,  at  the 
scene  of  the  Transfiguration.  The  appearance  at  various  times  of  angels 
to  men  furnishes  additional  proof  of  another  world.  The  resurrection 
and  ascension  of  Jesus  Christ  confirm  most  conclusively  the  doctrine 
of  a  future  life. 

(c.)  The  Scriptures  teach,  in  the  account  of  the  creation  of  man, 
that  his  soul  did  not  originate  from  the  dust ;  but  was  a  direct  spirit- 
ual creation  of  God.  Gen.  2:7.  They  make  further  statements  about 
the  difference  between  soul,  and  body,  confirmatory  of  the  distinction 
made  in  their  creation.  Gen.  25:8;  35:29;  Ecc.  12:7;  Matt.  10:28; 
Acts  7:59. 

(d.)  They  make  express  reference  to  the  existence  of  the  soul  after 
death.  2  Sam.  12=23;  Job  19:25-27.  [Conant  translates  this  passage. 
"But  I,  I  know  my  Redeemer  lives,  and  in  aftertime  will  stand  upon 
the  earth ;  and  after  this  my  skin  is  destroyed,  and  without  my  flesh, 
shall  I  see  God.  Whom  I,  for  myself,  shall  see,  and  my  eyes  behold, 
and  not  another,  when  my  reins  are  consumed  within  me].  Matt. 
22:32:  25:46;  Luke  16:19-31;  John  11:25;  2  Cor.  5=1-4;  Jude.  14.15. 

(e.)  They  make  known  that  this  future  life  is  the  lot  of  the  wicked, 
as  well  as  the  righteous  ;  teaching  that  it  is  one  of  happiness  to  the 
latter,  and  of  condemnation  and  misery  to  the  former.  Matt.  20:23  ; 
25:46;  John  6=47;   12:25;   1  Cor.  15:17-20. 

(f.)  They  declare  the  continuance  of  this,  at  least  until  the  day  of 
the  Resurrection  and  Final  Judgment.  Job.  21:30;  Ecc,  3:17;  Luke 
14:14;  John  5=28.29;  Acts  24:15;  Rom.  14=10;  1  Cor.  15:51.52; 
2  Cor.  5=10;  1  Thess.  4=13-17. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  464 

(g.)  They  represent  the  decisions  of  the  judgment  day  as  fixing  the 
destinies  of  men,  for  an  unending  existence.  The  evidence  ol  this 
teaching  will  be  given  in  the  discussion  of  "The  Judgment  Day." 

The  Scriptures  are  thus  seen  to  teach  conclusively  the  doctrine  of 
an  unending  future  life  of  all  men.  This,  as  has  been  stated,  is  what 
is  common!}7-  referred  to  as  the  immortality  of  the  soul. 


Before  passing  from  this  part  of  the  discussion,  special  attention  is 
called  to  the  following  statements  of  what  is  included  in  this  kind  of 
immortality. 

1.  Unending  existence  essentially  belongs  to  spiritual  natures. 
When,  therefore, -the  Scriptures  have  taught  that  the  soul  is  a  spirit, 
the  way  is  prepared  for  the  metaphysical  argument  based  upon  the 
simplicity  of  the  soul,  and  its  consequent  indestructibility.  It  is  com- 
mon, therefore,  to  speak  of  the  natural  immortality  of  the  soul.  By 
this  is  meant,  that,  because  of  its  nature,  it  has  an  unending  life.  It 
has  no  elements  of  dissolution  in  it.  Life  belongs  to  it,  because  it  is 
spirit.  Just  as  God  has  ni£ide  extension,  and  divisibility,  properties  of 
matter,  so,  has  He  made  unending  life  a  natural  property  of  spirit. 

2.  But  this  essential  property  of  spirit  must  ever  be  recognized  as 
one  conferred  upon  it.  It  is  because  God  has  so  made  spirit,  that  it 
has  this  unending  life.  It  is  not  a  property  that  belongs  to  it  from 
any  necessity  in  God,  or  out  of  God.  It  is  the  result  of  His  purpose, 
or  will,  and  of  His  power.  He  has  made  spirit  to  be  thus,  because  He 
has  so  willed.  Doubtless,  had  He  otherwise  chosen,  the  result  could 
have  been  different.  To  believe  otherwise  is  to  put  an  unjustifiable 
limit  upon  His  power,  and  upon  His  absolute  freedom  of  will,  as  to  all 
outward  matters.  It  thus  appears  that  they  speak  falsely,  even  blas- 
phemously, who  say  that  God  could  not  destroy,  or  annihilate  spirit, 
if  He  should  choose.  That  which  prevents  such  annihilation,  is  that 
He  has  not  so  chosen,  and  will  not  so  choose. 

The  impossibility  is  not  in  the  lack  of  power,  but  in  the  unchange- 
ableness  of  His  will.  This  is  no  imperfection  of  inability,  but  the 
highest  perfection  of  immutability. 


The  immortality,  which  has  been  thus  far  discussed,  is  that  which 
is  common  to  both  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  In  the  beginning  of 
this  part  of  this  lecture,  it  was  stated^that  the  righteous  possess  also 
that  immortality  which  is  the  true  life  of  the  soul.     The  death  of  the 


465  Abstract  of  Theology. 

soul,  and  its  life,  are  set  forth  in  the  Word  of  God  as  something  dis- 
tinct,  not  only  from  that  of  the  body,  but  even  from  the  unending 
natural  life  of  the  soul.  The  spiritual  death  of  the  soul  has  been 
described  in  the  lecture  on  the  Effects  of  Adam's  Sin,  pp.  261-266,  as 
something  different  from  natural  death,  and  as  constituting  the  most 
fearful  of  the  penalties  inflicted  because  of  sin.  It  was  there  shown 
that  the  Scriptures  describe  it  in  the  various  aspects  of  alienation 
from  God,  loss  of  God's  favour,  and  corruption  of  the  moral  nature. 
The  true  immortality  of  the  Christian  consists  in  the  removal  of  all 
these  evils,  and  the  bestowment  upon  him  of  their  corresponding  bless- 
ings. That  this  is  done,  and  that  this  is  the  condition  into  which  he  is 
thus  brought  will  abundantly  appear  from  the  following  passages  of 
Scripture.  Matt.  10:39;  16:35.  (cf.  Mark  8:35);  18:9.  (parallel' pass- 
ages, Mark  9:45;  Luke  9:24  ;  17:33;  John  12:25);  19:17;  John  3:36; 
5:24.40;  6:33.35.50-58.63;  20:31 ;  Rom.  6:4 ;  8:6.13;  2  Cor.  3:6 ; 
Eph.  4:18;  1  John  3:14;  5;12. 

The  contrast  in  immortality,  between  the  righteous,  and  the  wicked, 
is  very  marked.  "The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wickedness;  but 
the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  Prov.  14:32.  "When  a  wicked 
man  dieth,  his  expectation  shall  perish."  Prov.  11:7.  But  "blessed  are 
the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord";  *  *  *  their  works  do 
follow  them."     Rev.  14:13. 

The  happiness  of  this  immortality  of  the  Christian  is  the  greater 
because  it  is  a  state  in  which  he  is  confirmed  forever.  The  law  of  this 
condition,  both  of  the  righteous,  and  the  wicked, is  laid  down  in  Rev. 
22:11.  "He  that  is  unrighteous,  let  him  do  unrighteousness  still :  and 
he  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  made  filthy  still :  and  he  that  is  righteous, 
let  him  do  righteousness  still:  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  made 
holy  still."  [Canterbury  Revision.]  As  the  wicked  shall  not  change 
his  state,  so  shall  not  the  righteous,  his.  The  day  of  his  trial  and 
probation  is  over,  and  he  stands  secure  of  the  bliss  of  heaven,  confirmed 
by  the  unfailing  promises  of  God.  The  scenes,  through  which  he  has 
passed  on  earth,  fill  him  with  no  apprehensions  that  his  weakness  and 
insufficiency,  will  disable  him  from  performing  the  perfect  service  of 
heaven.  The  recollection  of  Adam's  trial  will  suggest  to  him  no  pos- 
sibility that  he  will  be  subjected  to  a  test  which  will  dissolve  forever 
the  bonds  which  unite  him  to  God.  Even  the  sin  of  the  angels  will 
not  alarm  him.  For  he  is  now  assured  of  that  "eternal  life  which  God, 
that  cannot  lie,  promised  before^  the  world  began."  Tit.  1:2.  This  is 
immortality  indeed.    This,  and  not  mere  continued  life,  is  the  life  and 


Absteact  of  Theology.  466 

immortality  which  he  confers,  "who  hath  abolished  death,  and  hath 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel."  2  Tim. 
1:10. 

III.     The  Intermediate  State. 

The  Scriptures  teach  that  the  soul  and  body  that  have  been  sepa- 
rated in  death,  will  be  reunited  at  the  Judgment  Day.  Meantime,  the 
body  crumbles  into  dust,  and  appears  to  be  totally  destroyed.  The 
spirit  has  returned  unto  God  who  gave  it.  Ecc.  12:7.  Hence,  at  his 
martyrdom,  we  hear  the  first  dying  Christian  "calling  upon  God,  and 
saying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."     Acts  7:59. 

It  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  methods  of  God  in  His  revelations 
to  man  to  answer  the  many  inquiries  which  curiosity  might  suggest 
as  to  this  intermediate  state  of  the  soul.  But  much  more  is  taught 
about  it  than  would  at  first  be  imagined.  Such  facts  as  are  given  are 
valuable  to  confirm  and  strengthen  faith,  and  to  give  consolation. 
Those  may  first  be  mentioned  which  are  common  to  the  righteous,  and 
the  wicked,  and  these  may  be  followed  by  separate  statements  of  the 
things  wherein  they  differ. 

1.  As  to  those  respects  in  which  the  condition  of  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked  is  the  same. 

(1.)  The  soul  exists  without  a  body.  Unquestionably  it  has  not 
the  body  which  it  had  on  earth.  But  some  have  thought  that  it  has 
some  kind  of  a  body,  some  spiritual  body,  which  merely  corresponds 
to,  and  is  only  thus  identified  with  that  of  this  life.  But  Paul's 
discussion  of  the  resurrection  shows,  that  the  "spiritual"  body  is  one 
that  is  to  be  raised  out  of  the  grave  in  which  the  natural  body  was 
buried,  and  that  it  is  "at  the  last  trump"  that  "the  dead  shall  be 
raised."     1  Cor.  15:44.52-54. 

Some  have  argued,  that  body  of  some  kind  is  necessary  to  give 
location  to  these  spirits.  But  a  spirit  may  have  location  without 
occupying  space  as  a  body  does.  Here  may  be  recalled  the  quotation 
made  by  Hodge  from  Turretine  as  to  the  different  relations  that 
bodies,  created  spirits,  and  God,  sustain  to  space;  given  on  page  75  of 
this  volume. 

(2.)  The  condition  is  consequently  one  of  an  imperfect  life.  It  is 
the  life  of  the  spirit  only,  and  not  that  of  the  man.  Human  nature 
is  composed  of  both  body  and  spirit ;  and  his  body  is  as  truly  a  part 
of  a  man  as  is  his  soul.  The  condition,  therefore,  in  which  disembodied 
spirits  exist,  is  not  that  of  perfect  men,  but  only  of  human  spirits. 
This,  which  is  an  inference  which  may  be   drawn   from   the   two-fold 


467  Abstract  of  Theology. 

nature'of  man,  is  supported  by  the  manner  in  which  the  Scriptures 
refer. to  persons  in  this  intermediate  state.  They  are  not  spoken  of 
as  "men,"  but  as  "souls,"  and  "spirits."     Heb.  12:23;  Rev.  6=9;  20=4. 

Another  proof  of  this  want  of  perfection  of  this  condition  is  seen 
in  the  fact  that  the  saints  attain  full  entrance  into  their  joy,  and  the 
wicked  full  infliction  of  their  woe,  only  after  the  resurrection.  Matt. 
13:40-43.49.50;  25=34.41.46;  1  Cor.  15=44-54. 

(3.-)  Both  righteous  and  wicked  have  conscious  life.  This  might 
have  been  inferred  from  the  nature  of  spirit,  which  must  always  be  in 
a  state  of  conscious  existence.  But  it  is  a  plain  teaching  of  the  Bible. 
Luke  16:22-31.  The  word  here  translated  "Hell,"  in  the  King  James 
version  is  "Hades";  which  means  the  place  of  departed  spirits,  and,  as 
the  scene  occurs  after  the  death  of  Lazarus,  and  before  the  final  judg- 
ment, so  must  it  be  assigned  to  the  intermediate  state.  In  this  the  rich 
man  is  represented  as  in  conscious  torment. 

The  conscious  condition  of  the  righteous  is  taught  in  2  Cor.  5=1-8; 
Phil.  1=21-24;  and  also  in  the  passages  connected  with  Paradise. 
Luke  23:42.43;  2  Cor.  12:4;  Rev.  2:7;  22:2. 

(4.)  Neither  the  righteous  nor  the  wicked  are  under  probation  in 
this  intermediate  state.  Luke  16:22-31;  2  Cor.  5:10;  Rev.  22:11. 
Even  if  the  language  in  1  Pet.  3:19.20  and  4=6  teaches,  as  some  have 
thought,  that  our  Lord  went  to  the  place  of  departed  spirits,  and 
preached  to  them ;  so  that  to  those  who  had  died  up  to  the  time  of 
his  death  was  given  a  probation  in  the  gospel  preached  to  them  by 
him  ;  that  would  be  but  a  single  instance  of  a  favour  shown  to  those 
who  died  before  his  crucifixion ;  and,  so  far  from  proving  a  probation 
beyond  the  grave,  would,  from  its  exceptional  character,  imply  the 
contrary. 

2.     The  aspects  of  the  intermediate  state  peculiar  to  the  righteous. 

(1.)  It  is  a  condition  of  happiness.  Paul  declared  that  "to  die  is 
gain,"  and  to  depart  this  life  far  better  than  to  remain  in  it.  Phil.  1:21-24. 
He  wrote  to  Timothy,  looking  forward  exultingly  to  the  hour  of  his 
death.  2  Tim.  4:6-8.  He  also  referred  to  his  longing  for  this  future,  as 
possessed  by  him  in  common  with  his  brethren.  2  Cor.  5:1-8.  In 
the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  the  happiness  of  the  latter 
is  described  by  his  being  in  Abraham's  bosom.     Luke  16=23. 

(2.)  It  is  a  condition  in  which  the  believer  is  present  with  Christ. 
This  is  also  taught  in  all  the  passages  referred  to  in  the  previous  para- 
graph, except  the  last;  and  constitutes  in  each  of  them  the  ground  of 
the  happiness  which  they  declare. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  468 

(3.)  The  believer  is  also  said  to  be  in  Paradise.  Whatever  this 
may  mean,  whether  only  a  condition  or  a  place,  it  is  unquestionably 
true  that  it  is  intended  to  convey  the  idea  of  the  enjoyment  of  very 
great  happiness.  The  passages  in  which  Paradise  is  mentioned  are, 
Luke  23:43;  2  Cor.  12:4  ;  Rev.  2:7.  That  these  teach  that  it  is  a 
place,  can  only  be  denied  on  the  ground  that  very  highly  figurative 
language  is  used.  Only  the  first  of  these,  however,  refers  to  the  pres- 
ence of  Christ  with  any  one,  and  this  contains  only  his  promise  to  the 
thief  on  the  cross,  "To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise."  But 
the  location  of  Paradise  as  made  known  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  2  Cor. 
12:1-4,  taken  in  connection  with  this  first  passage,  makes  it  more  than 
probable  that  it  is  the  place  where  the  saints  are  with  Christ.  The 
Scriptures  teach,  that  "Christ  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on 
the  right  hand  of  God."  Mark  16=19  ;  Luke  24:51 ;  Acts  1:11 ;  Acts 
2:33.34;  Acts  7:55.56;  Eph.  1:20;  Heb.  10:12;  1  Pet.  3:22.  We  are 
also  taught,  that  he  must  there  remain,  until  the  times  of  restitution  of 
all  things."  Acts  3:21.  Now,  in  the  account  Paul  gives  of  his  ecstatic 
vision  in  2  Cor.  12:1-4,  he  tells  us  that  he  was  "caught  up  to  the  third 
heaven,"  and  "caught  up  into  Paradise,"  which  locates  Paradise  either 
in,  or  above  the  third  heaven,  or  makes  the  two  identical.  So  also 
Rev.  2=7,  taken  in  connection  with  Rev.  22=2,  and  21:10-27,  states  that 
the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  Paradise  of  God,"  is  "in 
the  midst  of  the  street,"  of  "that  great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem,  de- 
scending out  of  heaven  from  God,  having  the  glory  of  God,"  in  which 
was  no  temple ;  "for  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the 
temple  of  it,"  and  is  "on  either  side  of  the  river,"  "a  pure  river  of 
water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God, 
and  of  the  Lamb."  The  place  of  the  abode  of  the  saints  is  with 
Christ  who  is  in  the  heavens  with  God.  It  is  to  that  place  that  most 
probably  the  name  of  Paradise  is  given  in  the  Scriptures. 

(4.)  In  that  abode,  the  saints  are  not  probably  inactive.  Some 
have  thought  this  because  their  condition  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  "rest," 
and  "sleep."  But  evidently,  the  former  of  these  terms  is  used  simply  to 
declare  the  end  of  the  toils,  and  labours  of  this  life,  and  the  enjoyment 
of  exemption  from  their  present  spiritual,  as  well  as  temporal  trials. 
This  does  not  imply  that  there  are  not  intellectual  and  spiritual  duties 
and  meditations  suitable  to  that  abode,  such  as  may  give  due  scope 
to  that  activity,  which  seems  essential  to  personal  conscious  spirits. 
The  "sleep"  more  probably  refers  to  the  appearance  of  the  body  in 
death,  and  is  beautifully  expressive  of  the  calm  repose  with  which 
the  Christian  sinks  into  final  dissolution. 


469  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(5.)  Neither  is  the  intermediate  state  a  place  of  cleansing  from 
sin.  That  it  is  so,  is  held  by  the  Church  of  Rome.  That  church 
teaches,  that,  at  death,  all  unbaptized  adults,  and  all  who  have 
fallen  into,  and  continued  in  mortal  sin  after  Baptism,  go  immediately 
to  Hell.  All  who  have  been  baptized,  and  remain  in  union  with  that 
Church,  and  have  attained  a  life  of  Christian  perfection,  go  imme- 
diately to  Heaven.  Unbaptized  infants  occupy  what  is  called  "the 
limbus  infantum,"  a  place  in  the  higher  part  of  Hell,  which  the 
flames  do  not  reach,  and  suffer  only  a  "paenam  damni  (penalty  of  loss), 
and  have  no  share  in  the  paenam  sensus"  (penalty  of  actual  suffering) 
which  afflicts  adult  sinners."  But  "the  great  mass  of  partially  sanc- 
tified Christians,  dying  in  fellowship  with  the  church,  yet  still  encum- 
bered with  imperfections,  go  to  purgatory,  where  they  suffer,  more  or 
less  intensely,  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period,  until  their  sins  are  both 
atoned  for  and  purged  out,  when  they  are  translated  to  heaven,  during 
which  intermediate  period  they  may  be  efficiently  assisted  by  the 
prayers  and  labours  of  their  friends  on  earth." 

"They  confess  that  this  doctrine  is  not  taught  distinctly  in  Scripture, 
but  maintain,  1st,  that  it  follows  necessarily  from  their  general  doc- 
trine of  the  satisfaction  for  sins :  2d,  that  Christ  and  the  Apostles 
taught  it  incidentally,  *  '  *  *  *  They  refer  to  Matt.  12:32 ; 
1  Cor.  3=15."     Hodge's  Outlines  of  Theology,  pp.  556,  557. 

But,  the  first  of  these  passages  is  manifestly  but  a  strong  way  of 
declaring  that  the  sin  referred  to  shall  never  be  pardoned,  without 
authorizing  the  inference  that  there  are  other  sins  which  will  be  par- 
doned in  the  world  to  come.  The  second  passage,  by  the  various 
things  which  are  built  upon  the  true  foundation  which,  if  false,  or 
insufficient,  shall  be  burned,  refers  not  to  personal  character,  but 
to  doctrinal  sentiment. 

This  doctrine  of  Purgatory  is  based  upon  the  very  unscriptural 
theory  of  salvation  through  personal  works,  and  sufferings,  which  the 
Church  of  Rome  holds,  in  connection  with  sacramental  grace,  to  be- 
supplementary  to  the  meritorious  work  of  Christ.  While  it  has  no 
support  from  Scripture,  it  is  opposed  to  all  that  the  Scriptures  teach 
about  the  intermediate  state  of  the  righteous. 

3.     The  aspects  of  the  intermediate  state  peculiar  to  the  wicked. 

The  Scripture  teaching  here  is  much  more  meagre.  The  four 
statements  already  mentioned,  in  which  their  condition  and  that  of 
the  righteous  are  similar,  comprise  almost  all  that  is  said.  As  peculiar 
to  them,  however,  may  be  added, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  470 

(1.)  That  Christ,  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus, 
speaks  of  (a)  their  condition  as  one  of  torment,  Luke  16:23-25.28, 
(b)  from  which  there  is  no  escape  to  the  condition  of  bliss  of  the 
righteous,  v.  26,  and  (c)  as  endured  in  a  place  of  torment,  vv.  23:28. 

(2.)  Those  who  interpret  1  Pet.  3:19.20  as  referring  to  a  personal 
preaching  by  Christ  to  the  dead  in  Hades,  necessarily  hold  that  the 
wicked  are  "in  prison."  But,  otherwise,  we  have  no  other  proof  than 
seems  to  be  conveyed  in  the  "impassable  gulf"  mentioned  in  Luke 
16:26. 

(3.)  It  is  a  place  in  which  they  are  reserved  for  punishment  in  the 
day  of  judgment.     2  Pet.  2=9. 

(4.)  The  only  place  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the  wicked  during 
the  intermediate  state  is  Hades,  or  the  place  of  departed  spirits,  which 
is  always  translated  Hell  in  the  King  James  version,  but  is  transferred 
in  the  Canterbury  Revision.  The  passages  in  which  Hades  is  used 
are  Matt.  11:23;  16=18;  Luke  10:15;  16=23;  Acts  2=27.31 ;  Rev.  1=18.; 
6:8;    20=13.14. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  472 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XL. 


Christ's   Second   Coming,   and    the 
Resurrection. 

The  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  is  not  his  last  manifestation  in 
the  flesh  to  men  on  earth.  The  Scriptures  speak  of  another  appearing, 
in  connection  with  which  is  taught  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and 
the  final  judgment.  Each  of  these  subjects  demands  special  discussion. 
In  some  works  on  theology,  the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection  is  first 
treated  because  of  its  intimate  connection  with  death,  and  immortality; 
and  because  it  terminates  the  intermediate  state.  But,  inasmuch  as 
the  coming  of  Christ  will  precede  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  it 
seems  best  that  that  be  first  considered. 

I.     The  Second  Coming  of  Christ. 

1.     The  fact  is  distinctly  revealed. 

Whatever  doubts  any  may  have  about  the  passages  sometimes  quoted 
as  teaching  it  in  the  Old  Testament,  there  can  be  none  that  it  is  clearly 
made  known  in  the  New. 

(1.)  It  was  taught  by  our  Lord.  Matt.  16:28;  24:36-40;  27=64; 
Mark  13:26;  14=62;  Luke  21:27. 

(2.)  It  is  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles  and  other  inspired  writers. 
1  Cor.  1:7;  15=23;  1  Thess.  2:19;  3=13;  4:15;  5=23;  2  Thess.  2=1.8; 
Heb.  9=28;  James  5=7.8;  2  Pet.  3=4  ;  1  John  2=28. 


473  Abstract  of  Theology. 

2.  The  manner  of  it  is  distinctly  set  forth. 

(1.)  It  will  be  a  personal  appearance.  It  is  not  questioned  that 
Christ  may  be  said  to  come  in  other  ways  than  personally.  The  hour 
of  death  is  admitted  to  be  the  way  in  which  he  comes  at  present  to  his 
saints,  at  what  is  to  them  the  end  of  time.  But  the  Scriptures  teach 
such  an  especial  personal  final  coming,  as  can  only  be  fulfilled  in  the 
bodily  appearance  of  Christ  to  men.  Mark  8:38 ;  Acts  1:11;  Heb. 
9=26-28.     1  Thess.  4:16. 

(2 )  His  coming  will  be  "without  sin  unto  salvation"  as  contrasted 
with  that  time  in  which  "he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice 
of  himself,"  and  was  "offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many."  Heb.  9:26-28. 

(3.)  It  will  be  an  appearance  with  power  and  glory  ;  "for  the  Lord 
himself,  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel  and  with  the  trump  of  God,"  1  Thess.  4=16,  "with  ten  thou- 
sand of  his  saints,"  Jude  14,  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  Matt.  16:27, 
and  "in  his  own  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him,"  Matt.  25:31, 
fulfilling  to  believers  their  expectation  of  "the  glorious  appearing  of 
the  great  God  and  our  Saviour."    Tit.  2=13. 

(4.)  It  will  be  instantaneous,  and  unexpected.  It  is  indeed  to  be 
preceded  by  signs,  both  spiritual,  and  physical.  But,  as  with  those 
in  the  days  of  Noah,  few  will  recognize  these  signs.  Matt.  24:37-39  ; 
Luke  17:28.  Even  to  these  the  coming  will  be  instantaneous  ;  as  a 
flash  of  lightning,  Matt.  24:27 ;  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  1  Thess.  5:2 ; 
Rev.  16:15. 

3.  The  time  of  Christ's  coming.  This  is  represented  as  pecu- 
liarly unknown.  Christ  declared  that  even  the  Son  knew  not  when 
it  would  be.  It  is  hidden  from  all  men.  Matt.  24:36;  Mark  13:32. 
Our  Lord  rebuked  the  disciples,  just  before  his  ascension,  for  question- 
ing him  again  upon  this  subject.  Acts.  1:7.  The  apostle  Paul  in- 
deed wrote  to  the  Philippians,  "The  Lord  is  at  hand,"  Phil.  4:5,  and 
Jesus  Christ  announced,  "The  time  is  at  hand,"  Rev.  L3,  and  to  the 
church  at  Philadelphia  sent  the  message:  "Behold  I  come  quickly," 
Rev.  3:11.  This  is  again  repeated  unto  his  servants  in  Rev.  22:7.12.20. 
But,  that  these  expressions,  if  they  refer,  as  they  apparently  do,  to  his 
second  coming,  were  not  intended  to  teach  what  man  would  call 
an  early  coming,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  this  second  coming 
has  been  delayed  over  eighteen  hundred  years.  The  apostle  Peter 
gave  those  in  his  day,  who  were  troubled  about  this  delay,  the  true 
solution,  writing  them,  "beloved,  be  not  ignorant  of  this  one  thing, 
that  one  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand 
years  as  one  day."     2  Pet.  3:8. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  474 

4.  The  aspects  in  which  he  will  come. 

(1.)  Christ  always  spake  of  his  coming  as  that  of  the  Son  of  Man. 
By  this  he  himself  taught  the  same  truth  with  which  afterward  the 
angel  at  the  ascension  reassured  the  disciples  who  stood  "gazing  up 
into  heaven,"  namely,  that  he  that  shall  come  then  shall  be  the  "same 
Jesus"  which  was  taken  up.  It  will  then  be  in  human  form  that  he 
will  appear,  and  with  the  same  sympathizing  human,  as  well  as  divine 
love  towards  his  own,  which  he  so  wonderfully  displayed  while  on 
earth. 

(2  )  But  the  apostle  Peter,  at  Pentecost,  said,  "Let  all  the  house  of 
Israel  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye 
have  crucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ."  Acts  2:36.  Hence,  the  apos- 
tles, almost  exclusively,  speak  of  Christ  as  Lord  in  connection  with 
his  second  coming.  This  was  their  common  name  ior  Christ,  and  thus 
they  recognized  the  glorious  reward  bestowed  upon  him  for  the  salva- 
tion wrought  for  them,  and  the  "all  power"  given  unto  him  in  heaven 
and  earth. 

(3.)  It  is  as  the  Judge  of  the  whole  earth  that  he  shall  appear, 
both  as  Son  of  Man,  and  as  Lord ;  thus  giving  confidence  to  those  who 
know  him,  and  have  believed  in  him;  and  striking  with  terror  those 
who  have  rejected  his  love. 

(4.)  He  also  comes  as  King,  to  take  final  possession  of  his  king- 
dom, to  share  its  blessings  and  glory  with  all  his  willing  subjects,  and 
to  inflict  punishment  upon  all  who  have  refused  to  have  him  reign 
over  them. 

5.  The  signal  events  which  that  coming  will  introduce. 

These  are  the  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  and  the 
change  of  those  of  the  saints  who  are  still  alive;  the  judgment  of  all 
men ;  and  the  bestowment,  according  to  the  highest  equity,  of  his 
due  reward,  or  punishment,  upon  every  one  of  mankind. 

II.     The  Resurrection  of  the  Body. 

The  first  in  point  of  time  of  the  events  which  accompany  the 
second  coming  is  the  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  the  dead. 

1.  This  fact  is  the  teaching  both  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Testa- 
ments. 

It  is  admitted  that  some  places,  in  which  resurrection  is  mentioned, 
may  speak  only  of  a  reappearance  upon  the  stage  of  being  of 
those  who  have  died,  and  do  not  necessarily  assert  the  resurrection  of 
the  body.     Thus  our  Lord's  reply  to  the  Sadducees,  Luke  20:37,  only 


475  Abstract  of  Theology. 

involves  the  idea  of  continued  life.  So  also  his  language  in  Luke 
14:14;  John  6:39;  and  that  to  Martha,  and  her  reply,  John  11:23.24. 

It  may  also  be  acknowledged  that,  sometimes,  the  life  and  death,  in 
connection  with  which  resurrection  is  taught,  is  only  spiritual,  and 
that  of  the  soul  only.  This  seems  to  be  the  case  in  John  5=24-26, 
although  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is  not  unnaturally  spoken  of  in 
the  verses  immediately  succeeding. 

There  are  also  places  in  which  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is  spoken 
of,  but  not  the  general,  or  final  resurrection.  These  may  be  quoted 
only  as  showing  that  such  a  resurrection  is  not  impossible.  Thus,  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  refers  to  the  faith  of  Abraham  in  the  power  of 
God  "to  raise"  Isaac  "up  even  from  the  dead."  Heb.  11:19.  We  are 
also  told  that,  after  the  death  of  Christ,  "the  graves  were  opened ;  and 
many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept,  arose,  and  came  out  of  the 
graves  after  his  resurrection,  and  went  into  the  holy  city  and  appeared 
unto  many.  Matt.  27:52.53.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  himself  is 
taught  to  be  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  Acts  2=24-31 ;  13:34-37,  and 
a  proof,  not  only  of  the  possibility  of  a  resurrection  from  the  dead, 
1  Cor.  15=12-18,  but  even  an  assurance,  and  earnest  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  bodies  of  his  people.     1  Cor.  15=20-23.35-45.48-54. 

But  there  are  enough  passages,  of  no  doubtful  import,  both  in  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments,  which  establish  a  general  resurrection  of 
the  bodies  of  all  men,  as,  Isa.  26=19;  Dan.  12:2.13;  Hos.  13:14;  and 
John  5=28.29;  Rom.  8=11.22.23;  1  Cor.  15:20-23.42-45.48-54 ;  Phil. 
3:21 ;  1  Thess.  4=13-17.  The  last  two  passages  only  refer,  indeed,  to 
the  change  in  the  body ;  the  last  one  to  the  change  in  those  who  shall 
not  die,  but  remain  at  the  coming  of  Christ ;  but  their  appositeness  is 
readily  recognized. 

2.  The  resurrection  wrill  not  be  confined  to  the  righteous  only ;  but 
will  include  the  wicked  also. 

The  New  Testament  treats  sometimes  exclusively  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  righteous.  This  is  not  unnatural;  for  all  hope  connected 
with  it  is  confined  to  them.  So  blessed  is  that  hope,  that  it  was  fit 
that  it  should  be  frequently  held  out  for  their  encouragement  and 
comfort.  Especially  the  connection  between  their  resurrection  and 
that  of  Christ,  as  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  sleep,  tended  to  lead 
them  into  the  joys  produced  by  the  consciousness  of  union  with  him, 
and  their  triumph  with,  and  through  him.  This  was  not  to  be  con- 
fined to  their  spiritual  resurrection  with  him  to  newness  of  spiritual 
life;  and  this  fact  needed  to  be  enforced,  lest  that  of  the  body  should 


Abstract  of  Theology.  476 

be  forgotten  in  their  experience  of  that  of  the  soul.  The  objections 
to  it  also  arose  in  connection  with  Christian  hope.  It  is  not  strange 
that  some  should  have  denied  it,  even  among  the  people  of  God,  as 
the  Apostle  wrote  to  the  Corinthians  was  true  of  some  of  them* 
1  Cor.  15:12.  The  doctrine  was  too  wonderful  to  believe.  Perhaps 
they  had  scientific  objections  to  it  in  that  day,  as  there  have  been  in 
other  ages  of  Christianity,  even  down  to  our  own  times.  We  are  not 
to  be  surprised,  also,  that  others  should  have  declared  that  it  was 
past  already,  and  overthrown  the  faith  of  some.  2  Tim.  2:18.  It 
became  necessary,  therefore,  that  it  should  be  especially  emphasized 
to  the  Christian  believers  of  that  day.  With  the  single  exception  of 
"those  that  remain,"  who  were  to  be  "changed,"  it  is  expressly  announced 
as  the  joyful  destiny  of  all  believers.  Thus,  Paul  wrote  to  the  Cor- 
inthians that  "as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive."  That  this  assertion  related  only  to  believers  is  evident,  not 
only  from  the  natural  construction  of  the  original  Greek,  but  from  the 
fact  that  his  language  is  limited  in  the  context  to  them  "that  are  Christ's 
at  his  coming."  1  Cor.  15:22.23.  In  like  manner,  also,  comforting 
the  Thessalonians  as  to  the  Christian  dead,  he  assigns  as  a  reason  why 
they  should  "sorrow,  not  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope,"  that 
"if  wTe  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him";  asserting  the  change  in 
those  that  shall  remain  on  earth,  and  stating  that  "the  dead  in  Christ 
shall  rise  first."     1  Thess.  4:13-18. 

But,  that  this  teaching  about  the  righteous,  was  not  intended  to 
exclude  the  resurrection  of  the  wicked,  is  plain  enough  from  other 
places.  Thus,  our  Lord  said  "all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  his 
voice,  and  shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resur- 
rection of  life;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of 
damnation."  John  5:28.29.  -What  is  also  especially  significant,  in 
view  of  his  teachings  exclusively  elsewhere  as  to  the  resurrection  of 
the  just,  is  that  Paul,  in  his  address  before  Felix,  confessed  that  he 
had  "hope  toward  God,  *  *  *  that  there  shall  be  a  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  the  unjust."  Acts  24:15.  In  the 
vision  of  John  of  the  day  of  judgment  he  saw  that  "the  sea  gave  up 
the  dead  that  were  in  it,  and  death  and  hell  (Hades)  delivered  the 
dead  which  were  in  them,  *  *  *  *  and  whosoever  was  not 
found  written  in  the  book  of  life  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  Rev. 
20:13-15.  These  passages  show  distinctly  a  resurrection  of  the  wicked 
from  the  grave  also,  and,  therefore,  a  resurrection  of  their  bodies. 


477  Abstract  of  Theology. 

3.     The  nature  of  the  resurrection  body. 

We  are  told  nothing  as  to  the  nature  of  the  resurrection  bodies 
of  the  wicked.  But  enough  is  said  as  to  those  of  the  Saints  to 
show  that  their  change  will  be  most  blessed. 

The  all  embracing  fact  is  distinctly  declared  that  they  shall  be  like 
unto  that  of  their  Lord.  If  we  knew  the  precise  nature  of  his  body 
we  should  know  the  nature  of  those  of  all  his  saints.  But  it  is 
enough  to  know  that  he  will  "fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humilia- 
tion, that  it  may  be  conformed  to  the  body  of  his  glory."  Phil.  3:21. 
[Canterbury  Revision].  We  are  taught  many  things,  however,  about 
the  resurrection  body  ;  the  chief  source  of  information  being  the  fif- 
teenth chapter  of  1st  Corinthians,  where  Paul  states, 

(a.)     that  it  will  be  incorruptible, 

(b.)     that  it  will  be  immortal, 

(c.)     that  will  it  will  be  a  glorified  body, 

(d.)     that  it  will  be  raised  in  power, 

(e.)  that  it  will  be  identical  with  the  present  body.  That  which  is 
raised  is  the  "it"  which  is  sown.  It  is  "this  corruptible"  that  "puts 
on  incorruption,"  this  "mortal"  that' "puts  on  immortality." 

(f.)  Yet  it  is  an  identity  which  exists  not  without  a  great  change, 
v.  51. 

(g.)  Yet  with  no  greater  change  than  occurred  in  the  body  of 
Christ.  It  is  his  image  which  is  to  be  borne  instead  of  that  of  Adam, 
v.  49. 

(h.)  When  Paul  asserts  that  "flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  God,"  v.  50,  he  means  only  to  deny  that  a  corrupt  and 
mortal  body  can  thus  inherit,  and  not  to  assert  that  such  inheritance 
is  not  true  of  a  glorified  body  of  material  substance,  from  which  all 
corruption  and  mortal  elements  have  been  removed. 

(i.)  We  consequently  see  wThat  he  means  by  the  spiritual  body  in 
vv.  44-46,  where  he  contrasts  it  with  the  "natural,"  and  declares 
the  resurrection  body  to  be  "spiritual."  It  is  not  spiritual  in  the 
sense  that  it  is  not  material;  for  it  is  composed  of  matter.  But,  it  is 
spiritual,  as  being  fitted  for  the  spiritual  life  hereafter,  as  it  had  pre- 
viously been  natural,  as  fitted  for  the  animal  life  of  this  world.  This 
is  the  pneumatic  body  as'opposed  to  the  psychical.  As  the  first  body 
had  been  suited  to  the  present  life,  and  could  not  be  used  in  the  life 
to  come  without  change  ;  so  the  resurrection  body  is  suited  to  the  life 
to  come,  and  not  to  the  present  stage  of  being.  Hence  it  is  that  the 
change,  with  or  without  death,  does  not  take  place  until  the  time  of 
reunion  in  which  the  pneumatic  life  is  to  begin. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  478 

4.  There  shall  be  a  general  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  the 
righteous,  and  the  wicked  at  the  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment. 

(1.)  The  rewards  of  the  righteous  are  especially  associated  with 
Christ's  coming  in  the  great  day.  Matt.  16:27;  Luke  12:37;  1  Cor. 
1:7.8;  1  Thess.  3:13;  2  Thess.  1:7.10;  1  Pet.  5:4;   1  John  2:28;  4:17. 

(2.)  The  suffering  and  punishment  of  the  wicked  are  also  intimately 
connected  with  the  day  of  Christ's  coming  to  judgment.  John  12:48; 
2  Pet.  2:9;  Rev.  1:7. 

(3.)  There  are  passages  also  in  which  both  the  reward  of  the  right- 
eous, and  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  are  set  forth  unitedly  in  connec- 
tion with  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Matt.  16:24-27;  24:36-51; 
Mark  13:24-27;  Rom.  2:1-16;  1  Cor.  4:5;  1  Pet.  5=7-9;  2  Pet.  2:9. 

(4.)  The  righteous,  and  the  wicked  are  judged  together.  Ecc.  3:17  ; 
Dan.  12:2;  Matt.  16=27;  Acts  17:31;  Rom.  2:1-16;  2  Cor.  5:10; 
Heb.  9:27. 

-    (5.)     The  resurrection  of  the  dead  occurs  at  the  same  time  with  the 
judgment.     Dan.  12:2;  Rev.  20=12.13. 

(6.)  The  resurrection  and  the  change  that  occurs  in  it  are  also 
associated  with  the  coming  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  15=52;  Phil,  3=21; 
1  Thess.  4=16. 

(7.)  The  judgment,  and  the  coming  of  Christ,  take  place  in  imme- 
diate conjunction.    Matt.  16=27;  25:31-46;  2  Pet.  3:7-10. 

(8.)  The  resurrection  of  both  just,  and  unjust,  shall  occur  at  the 
same  time.     Dan.  12=2;  John  5:28.29;  Acts  24:15. 

(9.)     The  unjust  are  reserved  unto  the  day  of  judgment.  2  Pet.  2=9. 

(10.)  At  the  time  of  Christ's  coming,  the  world  is  to  be  destroyed, 
and  the  promise  fulfilled  of  "new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness."  2  Pet.  3:8-13.  But,  that  day  is  also  the 
day  of  "judgment,  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men";  for  which  the 
heavens  and  earth  which  are  now  *  *  *  are  kept  in  store, 
reserved  unto  fire,"  v.  7. 

These  statements  show  that  the  general  teaching  of  the  Word  of 
God  is  that  the  Lord  will  come ;  that  at  his  coming  there  shall  be  a 
general  resurrection  of  the  just  and  unjust,  who  shall  be  judged  ac- 
cording to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  Not  only  is  it  not  taught  that 
there  are  two  resurrections  of  the  body,  the  one  of  the  righteous  at 
the  second  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  the  other  of  the  wicked  at  the 
general  judgment,  after  an  interval  of  one  thousand  years;  but  the 
judgment  and  the  coming  of  the  Lord  are  recognized  as  contempora- 


479  Abstract  of  Theology. 

neous,  The  day  of  both  events  is  called  by  various  names,  some  of 
which  are  repeated  more  than  once:  as  "the  day,"  1  Cor.  3:13;  "that 
day,"  Matt.  7=22;  "the  day  of  judgment,"  2  Pet.  2:9  ;  "the  day  of 
God,"  2  Pet.  3:12;  "the  day  of  the  Lord,"  1  Thess.  5:2;  "the  day  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Cor.  1:8;  "the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,"  Phil. 
L6;  "the  day  of  Christ,"  Phil.  2:16;  "the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus," 
1  Cor.  5:5  ;  "the  last  day,"  John  6=39  ;  "the  grea't  day,"  Jude  6  ;  "the 
great  day  of  his  wrath,'  Eev.  6:17  ;  "the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation 
of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  2:5  ;  "that  great  and  notable 
day  of  the  Lord/'  Acts  2:20 ;  "the  day  when  God  shall  judge  the 
secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  2=16;  "the  day  wherein  the 
Son  of  Man  cometh,"  Matt.  25:13;  "the  day  when  the  Son  of  Man 
is  revealed,"  Luke  17:30;  "the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
1  Thess.  3:13;  "the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Tim. 
6:14;  "the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Pet.  113  ;  "the  glorious 
appearing  of  the  Great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  Tit.  2:13, 
etc. 

There  is,  however,  one  passage  of  Scripture  which  some  claim 
teaches  one  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  the  just,  and  another  of  those 
of  the  unjust;  and  places  them  at  a  wide  interval  apart,  with  numer- 
ous intervening  events.  Those  who  maintain  this  view  hold  that  the 
thousand  years  of  the  Millenium  succeed  the  second  coming  of  Christ, 
and  the  resurrection  of  the  righteous.  This  passage  constitutes  the 
twentieth  chapter  of  the  book  of  Revelation.  It  is  the  record  of  that 
vision,  in  which  John  saw  the  angel  bind  Satan,  in  the  bottomless  pit, 
for  a  thousand  years;  during  which  the  souls  of  the  saints  lived,  and 
reigned  with  Christ.  "This,"  says  John,  "is  the  first  resurrection." 
On  those  having  part  in  it,  "the  second  death  hath  no  power."  When 
the  thousand  years  are  expired,  Satan  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison, 
and  go  out  to  deceive  the  nations.  When  the  number  of  the  forces 
which  he  gathers,  which  are  like  the  sands  of  the  sea,  surround  the 
camp  of  the  saints,  these  forces  will  be  devoured  by  fire  from  Heaven, 
and  the  devil  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone.  Then  appears  the 
great  white  throne,  and  the  judgment  of  the  dead,  according  to  their 
works,  and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  small  and  great,  and 
the  judgment  of  the  dead  out  of  the  books.  And  then  death  and 
Hades  are  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  "This,"  says  John,  "is  the  second 
death." 

It  is  readily  admitted  as  to  this  passage  that  whatever  is  truly  taught 
in  it  must  be  accepted  as  the  word  of  God.     But, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  480 

(1.)  We  must  be  careful  how  we  receive  any  interpretation  which 
does  not  accord  with  the  rest  of  Scripture.  Before  doing  so,  we  should 
examine  thoroughly  both  the  interpretation  we  wish  to  accept,  and  the 
views  attained  from  other  parts  of  the  Word  of  God.  We  know  that 
Scripture  cannot  contradict  itself,  when  rightly  interpreted.  All  its 
parts  must,  therefore,  be  carefully  compared  to  see  in  what  interpre- 
tation they  agree. 

(2  )  If,  after  the  best  efforts  to  harmonize  this  with  the  other  por- 
tions of  God's  Word,  it  should  seem  to  be  irreconcileable  with  them, 
the  apparent  interpretation  of  this  passage  should  yield  to  that  of 
others  ;  not  so  much  because  it  is  one  only,  as  compared  with  a  greater 
number;  but  because  it  is  found  in  a  book  of  highly  figurative  prophecy, 
in  which  the  literal  interpretation  is  not  so  justly  to  be  pressed,  as  in 
others,  which  are  not  of  this  character,  and  in  which  the  literal  mean- 
ing is  more  apt  to  be  the  mind  of  the  Spirit. 

(3  )  The  language  of  this  passage,  however,  is,  at  least,  in  some 
respects,  opposed  to  the  idea  of  two  resurrections  of  the  body  ;  the 
first,  that  of  the  saints  to  reign  with  Christ  for  a  thousand  years,  and 
the  second,  that  of  the  wicked  to  judgment. 

(a.)  Because  those  who  are  represented  as  belonging  to  the  first 
resurrection,  are  not  spoken  of  as  clothed  in  resurrection  bodies;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  John  declares  simply  that  he  saw  "the  souls  of  them 
that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  etc."  v.  4. 

(b.)  It  is  not  only  not  said  that  those  who  partake  of  the  first 
resurrection  are  not  among  the  dead,  who  are  subsequently  delivered  up 
by  death,  and  Hades  to  be  jndged,  v.  13,  but  it  is  implied  that  they 
are  by  the  universal  terms  used  when  John  says  that  he  "saw  the 
dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God,"  v.  12.  But,  if  this  be  true, 
then  there  must  be  either  two  resurrections  of  the  bodies* of  the 
saints,  or  one  of  the  resurrections  at  least  cannot  be  of  the  body. 

(c.)  Especially  is  it  not  taught  that  the  resurrection  to  judgment 
is  confined  to  the  wicked,  nor  that  the  first  resurrection  is  of  the 
bodies  of  all  the  saints;  because  along  with  the  books  "which  were 
opened,"  "another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life;  and 
the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things,  which  were  written  in  the 
books,  according  to  their  works,"  v.  13;  "and  whosoever  was  not 
found  written  in  the  book  of  life  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  v.  15. 
This  language  implies  that,  among  those  then  raised  and  judged,  there 
were  some  whose  names  were  written  in  the  book  of  life.  Con- 
sequently, reference  must  here  be  made  to  the  general  resurrection 


481  Abstract  of  Theology. 

and  judgment,  taught  elsewhere  as  contemporaneous,  and  the  "first 
resurrection  cannot  be  that  of  the  body;  or  only  some  of  the  saints 
partake  of  the  first  resurrection  ;  or  there  must  be  two  resurrections 
of  the  bodies  of  the  saints.  The  first  of  these  is  the  only  interpreta- 
tion that  accords  with  what  is  elsewhere  taught. 

(4.)  The  interpretation  of  this  passage  which  makes  it  harmonious 
with  all  other  Scripture  is, 

(a.)  That  the  first  resurrection  is  the  spiritual  resurrection  of  the 
soul  from  the  death  of  sin,  of  which  the  Scriptures  elsewhere  speak 
so  plainly  as  being  a  passage  from  death  unto  life.  [See  John  5:24-26 ; 
Rom.  6:2-7;  Eph.  2:1.5;  5=14;  Phil.  3:10.11 ;  Col.  2:12.13 ;  Uohn 
3:14;  5=11.12.] 

(b.)  That  the  second  death,  which  has  no  power  over  those  which 
have  part  in  the  first  resurrection,  constitutes  the  punishment  of  those 
condemned  at  the  judgment  day,  which  consists  in  their  being  cast, 
both  body  and  soul,  into  the  lake  of  fire. 

(c.)  The  thousand  years  of  the  binding  of  Satan  is  a  period  of 
time,  of  unknown,  perhaps  of  indefinite  length,  possibly  from  the  time 
of  Christ's  conquest  of  Satan,  in  his  death,  resurrection,  and  ascen- 
sion, or  possibly  from  some  other  period,  even  perhaps  of  a  later 
epoch  in  the  history  of  Christianity,  during  which  Satan  is  restrained 
from  the  exercise  of  the  power  he  might  otherwise  put  forth  against 
man ;  the  thousand  years  terminating  at  some  time  prior  to  the  day 
of  Christ's  second  coming  ;  at  which  time  Satan  shall  be  loosed  to 
comsummate  his  evil  deeds  by  such  assaults  upon  the  saints  as  shall 
bring  down  the  final  vengeance  of  God  at  the  appearing  of  Christ  in 
glory. 

(d.)  The  judgment  and  the  resurrection,  in  vv.  12.13,  are  general, 
and  are  those  of  the  last  day  which  immediately  follow  the  coming  of 
Christ, 


Abstract  of  Theology.  482 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XLI 


THE  FINAL  JUDGMENT. 

The  partial  processes  of  God's  judgments  are  not  only  constantly 
occuring,  but  are  often  distinctly  manifested.  Hence  many  expres- 
sions of  Scripture,  in  which  His  judgments  are  spoken  of,  have  no 
certain  reference,  and  others,  no  reference  at  all,  to  the  final  judgment 
of  all  men.  But,  in  numerous  other  places,  such  a  judgment  is  made 
known.  We  are  taught  the  appointment  of  a  time,  when  there  will 
be  a  public,  general  judgment  of  all  the  righteous,   and  the  wicked. 

I.       A    SPECIAL    TIME    APPOINTED    FOR    IT. 

It  is  expressly  declared  that  "He  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which 
He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness."  Acts  17=31.  The  numer- 
ous designations  of  the  day  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  of  his  judg- 
ment of  men,  were  pointed  out  in  the  preceding  lecture.  Among 
those  peculiar  to  the  judgment  are  "the  day  of  judgment,"  2.  Pet. 
2:9  ;  "the  great  day,"  Jude  6;  "the  great  day  of  His  wrath,  Rev. 
6=17  ;  "the  day  of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of 
God,"  Rom.  2:5 ;  and  "the  day  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of 
men  by  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  2=16. 

The  duration  of  the  time  thus  appointed  cannot  be  determined. 
The  indefinite  meaning  of  the  word  "day"  forbids  any  statement  of 
even  its  probable  length.  It  has  been  argued  that,  from  the  vast 
numbers  to  be  judged,  and  the  many  events  connected  with  the  life 
of  every  man,  it  will  comprise  a  long  period  of  time.  But  the  rapid- 
ity with  which,  in  some  conditions,  the  mind  will  run  over  the  course 


483  Abstract  of  Theology. 

of  a  long  life,  in  a  moment  of  time,  shows  that  a  period  of  even  ex- 
ceeding brevity  may  suffice  for  a  full  revelation  and  judgment  of  all 
persons  and  events.  The  indefiniteness  of  the  word  should,  however, 
caution  us  against  the  assumption  that  the  day  must  be  of  only  a  few 
hours  duration. 

II.  The  judgment  will  be  public  and  general. 

This  has  been  denied  by  some  who  think  that  the  judgment  of  each 
man  occurs  at  death.  These  hold  that  to  confine  the  judgment  to 
that  at  death  only,  is  not  contrary  to  the  real  meaning  of  Scripture, 
which  they  suppose  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  literal  language  used, 
but  in  such  an  interpretation  as  will  accord  with  the  fact  that  the  des- 
tiny of  each  man  is  fixed,  and  that  consciously  to  himself,  at  death. 
They  think  that  the  indefiniteness  of  the  word  "day"  permits  a  con- 
tinuous process  of  judgment  extending  over  the  whole  period  connected 
with  the  deaths  of  men. 

The  chief  basis  of  this  theory  is  that  the  certainty  attained  at  the 
death  of  each  man,  as  to  his  position  towards  God,  makes  unnecessary 
any  further  judgment,  because  his  case  has  thus  been  already  judged. 
But  we  have  very  little  knowledge  of  the  amount  of  that  certainty, 
especially  in  the  case  of  the  wicked.  The  righteous  man,  because  of 
his  presence  with  Christ,  doubtless  knows  that  his  salvation  is  secure; 
but  who  can  tell  what  alternate  hopes  and  fears  may  constitute 
a  part  of  the  torture  of  the  wicked  in  the  intermediate  state?  But, 
even  if  he  is  also  certain  of  his  fate,  there  may  be  weighty  reasons  for 
a  public  manifestation  of  his  position.  Even  "the  angels  that  sinned," 
whose  condition  in  this  respect  is  certainly  equally  ascertained,  are 
said  to  be  "reserved  unto  judgment,"  as  well  as  unjust  men  whom  the 
Lord  reserves  "unto  the  day  of  judgment  to  be  punished."  2  Pet. 
2:4.9.  It  may  be  that  the  day  of  judgment  is  appointed,  in  order 
that  the  full  sentence,  as  to  the  reward  or  punishment  of  each  man, 
may  be  uttered,  when  he  stands  clothed  in  the  resurrection  body,  in 
which  these  are  to  be  suffered,  or  enjoyed  during  all  the  future. 
Other  purposes  will  be  subsequently  suggested  in  connection  with  the 
vindication  of  God,  and  the  manifestation  of  the  causes  and  circum- 
stances of  His  action;  which,  independently  of  any  relation  of  the 
judgment  to  any  individual  man,  make  a  public  judgment  day  not 
unsuitable.  The  certainty  of  that  publicity  will  appear  from  the 
person  of  the  Judge.  But,  in  addition  to  all  other  considerations,  the 
Scriptures  use  language  about  the  judgment  day,  and  its  events,  which 


Abstract  of  Theology.  484 

cannot  justly  be  interpreted,  otherwise,  than  as  teaching  it  to  be  public 
in  the  sight  of  all,  and  general  to  all,  not  particular  to  each  man. 
The  declarations  of  its  universally  sudden  appearance,  of  the  angels 
and  the  glory  which  shall  attend  the  descending  Judge,  of  the  con- 
vulsions of  nature,  of  the  burning  up  of  the  world,  of  such  a  gather- 
ing of  all  nations  as  permits  a  separation  before  all  into  two  dis- 
tinct classes,  and  the  fact  that  some  will  rise  up  in  special  con- 
demnation of  others;  these,  and  other  statements,  are  utterly  incon- 
sistent with  only  a  particular  judgment  of  each  at  death.  Especially 
is  it  impossible  to  reconcile  the  statement,  that  the  resurrection  of  men 
will  precede  the  final  judgment,  with  any  theory  which  makes  this 
occur  at  death.  All  of  this  is  independent  of  the  further  reply 
which  may  be  urged,  that  no  indefiniteness  of  the  word  "day"  would 
permit  the  idea  that  a  time,  appointed  within  the  life  of  mankind, 
should  extend  throughout  the  whole  period  of  that  life.  It  ought 
at  least,  to  be  a  somewhat  limited  portion  of  the  time  which  contains 
it. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  £his  judgment  will  be  so 
general  as  to  include  all  mankind.  Whatever  different  opinions  may 
be  held  as  to  its  being  at  death  to  each  one,  or  at  one  special  time 
to  all,  or  that  the  time  is  longer,  or  shorter,  or  long  enough  to  include 
the  thousand  years  which  the  millenarians  suppose  tointervenebetween 
the  judgment  of  the  righteous,  and  the  end  of  judgment  in  that  of  the 
wicked  ;  it  is  admitted  by  all  that  the  judgment  will  be  universal. 
The  Scripture  asserts  this  very  plainly.  Before  the  Judge  "shall  be 
gathered  all  nations."  Matt.  25=32.  "Every  one  of  us  shall  give  ac- 
count of  himself  to  God."  Rom.  14:12.  It  states  that  it  shall  even  in- 
clude all  the  true  people  of  God,  1  Cor.  3=12-15,  and  shall  even  be  so 
universal  as  to  embrace  the  angels  who  kept  not  their  first  estate. 
2  Pet.  2:4 ;  Jude  6. 


III.     The  Person  op  the  Judge. 

God  alone  is  competent  to  perform  this  office  of  Judge  in  the  great 
day.  He  alone  has  the  right  to  judge.  He  alone  has  the  necessary 
qualifications.  Chief  among  these,  is  that  perfect  rectitude  of  char- 
acter, by  which  only  can  justice  be  exercised  with  due  regard  to  the 
law,  and  those  under  it,  according  to  strict  principles  of  equity. 
Equally  important,  however,  is  that  complete  knowledge  of  the  law, 
which  leaves  unknown,  neither  its  requirements,  nor  its  penalties,  nor 


485  Abstract  of  Theology. 

its  rewards,  nor  its  possible  relaxations.  He  also  has  that  omniscience 
by  which  all  things  are  known  to  Him,  even  the  innermost  secrets  of 
men;  not  their  actions  only,  but  their  inward  thoughts,  and  hidden 
motives,  even  their  natures,  and  the  possibilities  of  those  natures. 
This,  which  is  essential  to  due  judgment,  can  be  found  only  in  Him 
who  searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts,  and  thus  knows  what  is  in  men. 
His,  too,  is  the  infinite  wisdom  which  can  make  due  application  of  the 
law,  in  all  its  aspects,  to  the  whole  conduct,  and  character  of  those  to 
be  judged;  and  His  the  infinite  power  to  execute  that  law,  as  well  in 
the  bestowment  of  its  rewards,  as  in  the  infliction  of  its  punishments. 

Hence  the  Scriptures  speak  of  God  as  "the  judge  of  all,"  Heb. 
12:23;  and  of  His  judgment,  according  to  truth  and  righteousness, 
which  cannot  be  escaped,  Rom.  2:2.3.5.  In  the  Apocalyptic  vision, 
John  "saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God''  when  the 
books  were  opened  for  judgment.     Rev.  20:12.13. 

But  this  judgment  is  not  by  God,  as  God.  Jesus  told  the  Jews  that 
"the  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto 
the  Son."  John  5:22.  The  cause  of  this  is  that  the  Son  is  not  only 
divine,  but  human,  and  that  his  relation  to  humanity  endows  him 
with  peculiar  qualifications  for  this  office,  which,  like  those  for  the 
salvation  of  man,  could  not  be  possessed  by  one  only  divine.  Christ, 
therefore,  taught  his  disciples  that -the  judge  would  be  the  "Son  of 
Man,"  Matt,  16:27.28;  25:31-34,  and  declared  to  the  Jews,  that  the 
Father  "hath  given  him  [His  Son]  authority  to  execute  judgment  also, 
because,  he  is  the  Son  of  Man."  John  5:27.  Indeed,  it  would  seem 
that  the  judgment  is  to  be  exercised  peculiarly  by  Christ  as  man  ; 
for  it  is  at  least  especially  announced  of  him  in  this  nature.  Peter 
preached  to  Cornelius,  concerning  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  that  "he  was 
ordained  of  God  to  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead."  Acts  10:42. 
Paul  wrote  of  "the  day  when  G-od  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by 
Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  2:16;  and  encouraged  the  Corinthians  by  declar- 
ing that  "we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ," 
2  Cor.  5:10,  and,  on  Mars'  Hill,  announced  that  God  had  "appointed 
a  day  in  the  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that 
man  whom  He  hath  ordained."     Acts  17=31. 

We  cannot  hope  to  understand  all  the  reasons  for  this  appointment 
of  Christ,  as  Son  of  Man,  to  the  judgment  of  all.  They  are  connected, 
in  part,  with  the  position  of  King,  and  Lord,  to  which  he  has  been 
assigned  for  the  complete  triumph  of  His  kingdom,  and  the  manifest- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  486 

ation  of  God's  power  and  grace.  They  are  also  doubtless  associated 
with  the  relation  which,  as  man,  he  occupies  to  mankind,  and  espec- 
ially to  the  church  of  "first  born  ones."  But  it  is  certain  that,  by  the 
connection  of  the  office  of  judge  with  Christ  as  man,  is  removed 
every  obstacle  in  the  wTay  of  a  public,  visible  judgment.  Since  it  is 
the  Son  of  God  who  is  the  Son  of  Man,  all  that  makes  it  necessary 
that  God  be  the  judge  is  found  in  him.  Bat  as  man,  the  judge  is  no 
longer  the  invisible  God,  who  can  only  be  seen  in  His  works  of  Crea- 
tion, and  Providence;  but  God  in  Christ,  the  Godman,  in  his  visible 
material  form,  who,  therefore,  can  be  manifested  before  the  eyes  of 
all,  in  a  judgment  which  is,  not  simply  general,  as  inclusive  of  all,  but 
public,  as  openly  manifested  before  all.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the 
person  of  the  judge  adds  another  reason  to  those  heretofore  men- 
tioned why  any  judgment  which  occurs  at  death  will  be  supplemented 
by,  and  consummated  in,  the  final  judgment  of  the  last  day. 


IV.     The  Purposes  of  this  Public  Judgment. 

Still  further  proof  of  the  same  fact,  will  appear  from  some,  at  least, 
of  the  purposes  of  this  public  judgment. 

1.  In  the  purpose  fulfilled  by  the  revelation  of  it  to  men  in  this 
life.  The  conviction  of  such  a  judgment  to  come  produces  a  decided 
influence  for  good  upon  the  conduct  of  men  in  this  life.  Doubtless  is 
it  on  this  account  that  it  is  taught  so  plainly,  and  so  frequently,  and 
in  so  many  ways,  that  none  should  fail  to  be  impressed  with  the  cer- 
tainty of  its  occurrence.  This  would,  indeed,  in  no  small  degree,  be 
accomplished  by  the  knowledge  of  a  private,  and  individual  judgment 
at  the  hour  of  death.  But  it  is  manifest  that  this  effect  is  greatly 
enhanced  by  the  terrors,  and  solemnities,  with  which  the  Bible  clothes 
the  scenes  of  that  day.  That  its  publicity  is  in  itself  fearful,  is  evi- 
dent from  the  extent  with  which  even  those  shrink  from  a  revelation 
of  their  sins,  wTho,  as  believers  in  Jesus,  confidently  hope  for  a  favour- 
able sentence  from  God.  The  question  so  frequently  asked  whether 
the  sins,  as  well  as  the  good  works,  of  God's  people  will  then  be 
revealed  is  the  fruit  of  this  apprehension. 

It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  influence  of  the  expectation  of  this 
judgment  is  unimportant,  as  compared  with  the  purposes  connected 
with  its  actual  occurrence.  These  are  to  be  found  in  the  manifesta- 
tions of  God,  and  Christ,  and  of  men  in  that  great  day. 


487  Abstract  of  Theology. 

2.     The  purposes  that  appear  in  connection  with  the  day  itself. 

(I.)     As  to  God, 

(a.)  It  will  furnish  a  worthy  arena  for  the  display  of  the  attributes 
of  God.  A  continuous  purpose  of  God,  in  connection  with  His  intel- 
ligent creatures,  has  been  to  make  known  to  them  the  glory  of  His 
character.  This  is  assigned  as  a  reason  even  of  His  spiritual  quick- 
ening of  His  people  together  with  Christ.  Eph.  2.4-7.  Now,  no 
mention  can  be  made  of  any  one  of  His  attributes,  which  He  has 
thus  far  revealed,  which  will  not,  at  the  judgment  day,  be  signally 
displayed.  This  will  be  especially  true  of  His  vindicatory  justice 
the  perfection  of  which  has  been,  in  some  degree,  dimmed,  while, 
because  of  His  forbearance  and  grace,  He  has  delayed  the  due  pun- 
ishment of  sin.  Hence,  this  day  is  called  "the  great  day  of  His 
wrath,"  Rev.  6=17,  and  "ihe  day  of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  right- 
eous judgment  of  God/'  Rom.  2:5.  Yet,  how  signally  will  then,  also, 
appear  the  wisdom  of  His  purpose,  the  truth  and  faithfulness  of  His 
promises,  His  power  to  accomplish  His  will,  His  universal  benevolence, 
His  sacrificing  love,  His  unbounded  mercy,  His  delivering  power,  His 
conquering  grace,  and,  not  to  attempt  to  enumerate  further,  every- 
thing that  can  be  imagined  as  constituting  that  holiness  which,  in  one 
word,  embraces  all  moral  perfection. 

(b.)  The  wisdom  and  equity  of  God,  in  His  providential,  and  gra- 
cious dealings  with  men,  will  then,  also,  be  apparent.  These  often 
give  rise  to  perplexity,  even  in  those  who  most  firmly  believe  in  God 
as  One  Who  does  all  things  justly,  and  well.  In  this  life  men  are 
called  to  exercise  faith  in  God  in  all  these  matters.  That  faith  will 
be  vindicated  by  the  manifestations  at  that  time  both  of  His  character 
and  acts.  The  inequalities  of  this  life,  and  the  prosperity  of  the 
wicked,  and  the  adversity  of  the  righteous,  will  then  be  not  only 
equalized,  but  all  will  clearly  see  the  wisdom,  justice,  and  goodness 
of  God,  in  giving  them  a  place  here  in  His  providential  government. 
It  is  more  than  probable  that,  in  the  full  exhibition  of  all  His  pur- 
poses in  Creation,  and  Grace,  that  insoluble  problem  of  this  life, — the 
presence  of  sin,  in  a  world  created,  and  governed  by  an  Almighty, 
and  Holy  God, — will  become  a  manifestation  of  unspeakable  glory  in 
God.  Then,  too,  will  appear,  even  more  plainly  than  now,  the  right- 
eousness of.  His  choice  of  some  to  salvation,  and  condemnation  of 
others  for  sin;  and,  also,  the  full  responsibility  of  men  for  every  sin, 
even  when  their  circumstances,  and  previous  action  have  rendered  cer- 
tain the  things  which  they  will  do.      Then,  too,  will  be  seen  such  suf- 


Abstract  of  Theology.  488 

cieccy,  in  each  man,  of  the  light  possessed,  if  he  had  walked  therein, 
and  of  his  power  for  good,  if  he  had  exercised  it,  as  makes  him  guilty 
in  the*  sight  of  God,  and  worthy  of  the  punishment  which  He  will 

inflict. 

(2.)     As  to  Christ. 

But  it  is  not  simply  the  revelation  of  God;  but  of  God  in  Christ. 

(a.)  In  that  wonderful  combination  by  which  the  created  spirit, 
and  even  created  matter  of  human  nature,  were,  through  the  making 
flesh  of  the  divine  word,  John  1:14,  enabled  to  do  that  work  which 
neither  man,  nor  God  could  separately  do.  Where,  but  on  the 
throne  of  judgment,  could  this  personage  be  seen  by  any  except  those 
who  are  made  partakers  of  his  glory.  How  fit  is  his  appearance  to 
fill  with  anguish  those  who  have  rejected  him,  and  with  exultation, 
and  praise  all  those  who  have  trusted  in  him.  He  appears  not  only 
as  Judge,  but  as  King,  and  Lord,  also,  whose  dominion  as  Lord  is  now 
shown  to  be  universal,  and  whose  kingship,  in  the  hearts  of  his  people, 
he  now  rewards  by  welcoming  them  to  entrance  into  his  joy,  and  par- 
ticipation in  his  glory. 

(b  )     The  glory  of  Christ's  work  will  also  then  appear. 

In  its  displays  of  the  Divine  attributes;  of  truth,  in  the  fulfilment 
in  him  of  the  threatened  curse  of  sin  for  all  those  saved  by  him  ;  of 
inexorable  justice,  which  requires  that  honouring  of  the  law,  not  only 
in  obedience,  but  also  in  penalty,  exacted  even  from  the  Son  of  God, 
from  him  that  is  the  fellow  of  Jehovah;  and  of  love  and  mercy, 
which  demand  to  be  exercised  even  at  the  cost  of  the  most  fearful 
sacrifice.  Preeminently  will  the  glory  of  that  wrork  be  seen  in 
the  harmony  displayed  in  the  exercise  of  these  attributes;  of  justice 
in  a  way  of  mercy  and  love;  of  each  of  these  in  a  way  of  justice, and 
of  all  of  them  in  a  way  of  holiness  and  truth.  The  judgment 
clay  will  clearly  exhibit  these  perfections,  and  their  harmony,  to  all 
the  intelligences  of  God. 

The  glory  of  that  work  will  also  be  seen  in  the  manifested  conquest 
of  Satan.  For  the  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  God,  he  has 
long  been  permitted  to  exercise  power  and  malignity.  It  will,  at  the 
judgment  day,  appear  that  it  was  always  done  by  the  sufferance  of 
God,  Who  chose  not  to  conquer,  and  punish  him,  and  his  angels,  except 
through  the  Son  of  Man.  The  fact  that  this  victory  over  him  has  not 
been  one  of  divine  power,  but  has  been  wrought  out  by  the  Son  of  God 
in  his  human  nature,  renders  the  defeat  of  Satan  more  signal  and  more 
humiliating  to  him.  It  is  a  complete  avengement  of  the  temptation 
of  the  first  Adam. 


489  Abstract  of  Theology. 

The  delivering  power  from  sin  shown  in  the. work  of  Christ  will  also 
exhibit  its  glory  in  a  peculiar  manner. 

We  can  imagine  an  angel  willing  to  undertake  the  conquest  of  Sa- 
tan at  the  command  of  God.  Bat,  here  was  work  which  no  angel  would 
have  attempted,  nor  even  had  any  hope  of  accomplishing.  .  There 
were  many  problems,  in  connection  with  it,  which  could  not  be  solved. 
How  is  the  penalty  incurred,  to  be  endured,  or  to  be  escaped?  HoW 
is  the  righteousness  demanded,  to  be  fulfilled,  now  that  man  has  be- 
come a  sinner?  How  can  sin  be  eradicated,  and  an  unholy  nature  be 
restored  to  its  purity,  and  original  righteousness?  How  is  another  to 
secure  these  things  in  men  ?  And,  if  not  secured  in  them,  how  can  the 
sin  of  a  sinner,  both  in  action  and  in  condition  be  hidden  from  God? 
How  can  God  be  just,  and  yet  justify  the  ungodly? 

Christ  has  solved  all  these  problems,  and  more  than  done  all  the 
work  which  was  needed.  The  sinner,  united  by  faith  to  Christ,  has 
now  an  assured  safety,  an  unfailing  righteousness,  a  more  than  suffi- 
cient satisfaction,  a  covert  utterly  impenetrable  by  the  wrath  or  jus- 
tice of  God;  and  will  stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  in  the 
presence  of  men  and  angels,  to  manifest  His  Saviour's  power  in  eradi- 
cating sin,  by  the  good  works  wrought  out  by  his  disciple  in  mortal 
flesh,  even  under  the  higher  law  of  Christian  duty. 

(3.)     As  to  man. 

With  respect  to  man  especially,  the  purposes  of  the  judgment  day 
make  it  fit  that  it  should  be  general,  and  public. 

(a.)     Because  then  will  be  revealed  the  character  and  acts  of  men. 

It  is  set  forth  as  a  day  when  "every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of 
himself  to  God,"  Rom;  14=10,  which  shall  comprise  "every  idle  word 
that  men  shall  speak."  Matt.  12:35.  This  is  to  be  at  that  time  "when 
God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men."  Rom.  2:16.  The  object  of  this 
trial  is  not  to  ascertain  what  men  have  done,  but  to  make  manifest  to 
those  who  are  judged,  as  well  as  to  all  others,  the  things  which  are 
already  known  to  God.  To  this  end,  even  sins  unknown  to  the  offend- 
ers, and  good  deeds  forgotten  by  the  righteous,  will  be  brought  to 
light.  Matt.  25:31-46.  We  are  told  that  the  Lord  "will  both 
bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will  make  manifest 
the  counsels  of  the  hearts:  and  then  shall  each  man  have  his  praise 
from  God."     1  Cor.  4=5.     [Canterbury  Revision] 

(b.)     Because  then  will  judgment  be  made  as  to  each  individual. 

For  this  cause  is  it  that  "we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ;  that  every  one  may   receive   the   things   done   in    his 


Abstract  of  Theology.  490 

body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad." 
2  Cor.  5:10  ;  Rom.  14=10.  The  very  name  of  the  day  shows  the  object 
of  its  appointment,  and  the  nature  of  the  transactions  in  this  direc- 
tion, which  will  then  occur.  The  descriptions  of  the  judgment  day, 
however  figurative  they  may  be  supposed  to  be,  mark  this  as  an  un- 
doubted teaching  of  God's  word.  The  wicked  are  condemned,  because 
both  of  character  and  conduct.  How  this  may  be,  can  easily  be  under- 
stood. But  the  righteous  are  accepted,  und  rewarded,  upon  the  same 
grounds.  The  reason  of  this  is  not  so  apparent.  It  doubtless  is  based 
upon  the  meritorious  work  of  Christ,  through  which,  by  faith,  they 
have  been  justified  by  God  even  in  this  life.  But  the  references  to 
their  own  personal  acts,  show,  also,  a  personal  justification  in  that 
great  day.  This  is  the  justification  by  works,  seen  in  them  even  while 
on  earth.  It  is  the  manifestation  of  the  life  giving  principle  imparted 
to  them  on  earth  in  regeneration,  and  exhibited  by  them  during  the 
processes  of  sanctification.  The  good  works  are  the  fruits  of  that  vital 
union  with  Christ,  by  which  "the  life  also  of  Jesus"  is  "made  manifest 
in  our  mortal  flesh."     2  Cor.  4:10;  cf.  Gal.  2:20,  and  Rom.  8:1-4. 

In  the  judgment,  unto  which  men  will  thus  be  brought  in  the  last 
day,  there  will  be  account  taken  of  the  light  and  knowledge  which 
they  have  possessed.  The  Heathen  will  be  judged  by  a  different  law 
from  that  which  will  be  applied  to  those  who  have  had  the  light  of 
revelation.  Paul  plainly  teaches  that  the  former  have  a  law  under 
which  they  live,  Rom.  2=14.15,  in  want  of  conformity  to,  and  violation 
of  which,  they  are  ''worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  1:32;  and  that  they  are 
judged  only  by  the  law  which  they  have.  Rom.  2=12.  Christ  taught 
the  same  truth,  generally,  as  applied  to  all  ihe  various  degrees  of 
knowledge,  when  he  spoke  of  the  servants,  to  be  beaten  with  few,  or 
many  stripes  according  to  their  knowledge  of  their  Lord's  will.  Luke 
12:47.48.  He  also  taught  it  especially,  in  comparing  the  degrees  of 
guilt,  and  condemnation  of  those  who  enjoy  the  knowledge  of  the 
gospel,  and  those  who  lived  before  its  proclamation.  Matt.  12:41.42  ; 
Luke  11:29-32.  cf.  John  12:47.48. 

(c.)  That  the  judgment  is  public  and  general  is  seen  in  what  is 
said  of  the  public  bestowment  of  rewards  and  punishments. 

The  nature  of  these  will  be  subsequently  considered.  What  is  now 
referred  to  is  only  the  publicity  of  their  bestowment. 

The  language  here  may  perhaps  be  figurative;  but  must  mean  some- 
thing; and  can  mean  no  less  than  the  publicity  of  the  awards  Christ 
will  give.     No  private  judgment   at   death    would    account    for   the 


491  Abstract  of  Theology. 

statements,  that  all  are  to  be  gathered  before  Christ,  and  are  to  be 
separated  by  him  into  those  on  the  right  hand,  and  those  on  the 
left,  Matt.  25:32.33;  nor  for  the  declaration  that,  "in  the  end  of 
this  world,  "the  Son  of  Man  shall  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do 
iniquity,"  Matt.  13:41,  nor  for  that  farther  teaching  in  v.  49,  that 
"the  angels  shall  come  forth  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  the 
just." 


VI.  The  Place  of  the  Final  Judgment. 

It  is  evident  from  what  we  have  already  seen,  that  the  judgment 
scenes  will  occupy  some  place  in  the  universe  of  God.  Christ  is  to 
appear  as  the  Son  of  Man,  and,  therefore,  clothed  in  the  body  of 
his  human  nature,  although  that  body  will  then  have  been  glorified. 
The  bodies  of  men,  both  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  will  be 
previously  raised,  so  that  they  shall  be  judged  in  the  body  for  the 
deeds  done  in  the  body.  The  bodies  then,  both  of  the  Lord,  and  of 
all  men,  will  not  only  occupy  space;  but  will  so  occupy  it  as  to  be 
mutually  recognized  as  being  in  space. 

The  place  may  also  be  believed  to  be  in  some  connection  with  our 
present  Earth.  It  is  fit  that  this,  which  has  been  the  scene  of  all  the 
events  which  will  culminate  in  the  judgment  day,  shall  also  be  the 
place  of  that  final  trial.  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that,  as  the  first 
coming  of  the  Lord  was  to  this  earth,  to  bear  sin  for  the  redemption 
of  man;  so  his  second  coming  in  triumph,  without  sin  unto  salvation, 
will  be  to  that  part  of  the  universe  which  has  been  thus  signally  dis- 
tinguished as  the  theatre  of  God's  most  gracious  work.  The  state- 
ments of  the  Scriptures  are  indeed  meagre,  but  they  say  nothing 
which  may  not  be  interpreted  in  perfect  consistency  with  this  opinion. 
Yet,  after  all,  the  conclusion  that  the  trial  will  be  in  connection  with 
this  earth,  is  so  much  a  matter  of  inference  only,  as  not  to  forbid  that 
it  may  be  at  some  other  point  in  the  universe.  All  that  we  are 
definitely  told,  is  that  the  saints  "shall  be  caught  up"  *  *  "in  the 
clouds  to  meet  the  Lord,"  1  Thess.  4:17,  and  that  "the  heavens  shall 
pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent 
heat,  the  earth  also,  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up." 
2  Pet.  3:10.  But,  while  this  does  not  deny,  it  does  not  necessarily  teach 
the  destruction  of  the  whole  universe.  The  catastrophe  may  be  lim- 
ited to  this  earth,  and  its  atmosphere,  and   yet   all    the   phenomena 


Abstract  op  Theology.  492 

mentioned  may  occur.  We  also  know  that  combustion  of  matter  is 
not  its  destruction,  but  only  a  change  in  its  form.  This  accords  with 
the  prediction  of  a-  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth,  2  Pet.  3:13,  and 
with  those  expressions  which  refer  to  it  as  a  "restitution  of  all  things," 
Acts  3:21,  [Canterbury  Revision  is  "restoration  of  all  things,"]  and 
teach  "that  the  creation  itself  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God." 
Rom.  8:21.  [Canterbury  Revision].  But,  whether  the  earth  alone  is 
to  be  purified  by  fire,  or,  as  seems  not  so  probable,  the  whole  universe ; 
or  whether  the  judgment  scene  is  to  be  connected  with  earth,  or  with 
some  other  point  in  the  present,  or  in  the  renewed  universe,  it  seems 
certain  that  it  must  be  in  some  place.  The  place  which  is  most  prob- 
able is  in  connection  with  the  point  of  space  now  occupied  by  this 
earth,  and  either  in  the  atmosphere  above  it,  during  or  after  the  con- 
flagration, or  on  the  earth  itself  before  it  shall  be  burned. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  494 


ABSTRACT  OF  THEOLOGY. 


LECTURE  XLII 


The  Final  States  of  the  Righteous, 
and  the  Wicked. 

In  the  last  lecture,  nothing  was  said  specifically  of  the  awards  . 
of  the  judgment  day.  Yet  is  the  public  bestowal  of  these  the  cul- 
minating point  of  interest  in  that  occasion.  Judgment,  without  the 
expression  of  its  results,  in  rewards,  and  punishment,  would  be  empty 
and  vain.  Hence  the  Scriptures  do  not  leave  us  ignorant  of  what 
sentences  will  be  pronounced  upon  the  righteous,  and  wicked,  and  of 
what  will  be  the  final  state  of  each.  Of  necessity,  these  must,  in 
some  respects,  resemble  those  of  the  intermediate  state  ;  of  which  the 
condition  of  the  righteous  and  wicked  after  judgment,  will  be  an  en- 
largement and  a  culmination.  It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  the 
Scriptures  teach  more  fully,  and  emphatically  upon  these  subjects. 

I.     The  Final  State  of  the  Righteous. 

There  is  upon  this  point  little  dispute  as  to  the  meaning  of  the 
Scripture  statements.  As  they  are  numerous,  they  will  best  be  pre- 
sented under  several  classes  of  description. 

1.     The  sentence  of  the  judgment  day  may  be  stated. 

Our  Lord  declared  that  ''then  shall  the  king  say  unto  them  on  his 
right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  pre- 
pared for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.''    Matt.  25:34.    This 


495  Abstract  of  Theology. 

is  called  "life  eternal"  in  v.  46.  As  this  is,  probably,  a  description  of 
the  nature  of  the  blessings  to  be  attained,  rather  than  a  declaration  of 
the  literal  language  that  will  then  be  used,  other  statements  may  here 
be  added  which  are  of  the  same  nature.  One  is  that  given  in  the  par- 
able of  the  talents,  in  which  his  lord  said  to  him  of  the  five  talents, 
"Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant:  thou  hast  been  faithful  over 
a  few  things,  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things  :  enter  thou  into 
the  .joy  of  thy  Lord."  Matt.  25:21.  cf.  Matt.  24:47-.  The  righteous 
are  spoken  of  as  "wheat,"  and  it  is  said  that  the  householder  at  the  har- 
vest time  will  say  to  the  reapers,  "gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn," 
Matt.  13:30.  Our  Lord,  in  his  explanation  of  this,  parable,  says  of 
those  thus  represented  by  the  wheat,  "then  shall  the  righteous  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father,"  v.  43.  Correspond- 
ing to  this  language,  is  the  declaration  of  Peter,  that,  "when  the  chief 
shepherd  shall  appear,  ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not 
away."  1  Pet.  5:4.  There  may  be  added,  also,  the  promises  made  in 
Revelation  to  "him  that  overcometh,"  viz:  to  "eat  of  the  tree  of  life, 
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God,"  Chap.  2:7 ;  "not  to  be 
hurt  of  the  second  death,"  2:11  ;  "to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,"  to 
receive  "a  white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,"  2:17,  "to 
have  power  over  the  nations,"  to  "rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron,"  2:27; 
to  "be  clothed  in  white  raiment,"  and  "walk  with  me  (Christ)  in 
white'"  3=5;  to  be  made  "a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,"  hav- 
ing the  name  of  God,  and  of  the  city  of  God,  the  new  Jerusalem, 
and  the  new  name  of  Christ,  written  upon  him,  3:12;  to  sit  with 
Christ  upon  his  throne,  3:21;  "to  inherit  all  things,"  with  the  prom- 
ise "I  will  be  His  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  son."  21:7.  These 
declarations,  however  figurative,  are  descriptive  of  the  condition  of 
the  saints  in  glory,  and  may,  therefore,  be  appropriately  added  to 
the  sentence  of  their  Lord. 

2.  The  future  state  of  the  righteous,  is  also  stated,  with  refer- 
ence to  his  past  condition  on  earth;    as    "salvation,"  Mark.   16:16; 

1  Thess.  5:9;  2  Tim.  2:10;    "deliverance    from    every    evil    work," 

2  Tim.  4:18;  "redemption,"  Rom.  8:23;. Eph.  4:30;  "liberty,"  John 
8:36;  Rom.  8=21;  "rest,"  Heb.  4:10;  Rev.  14:13;  "deliverance  from 
earthly  sufferings,  such  as  hunger,  thirst,  tears,  etc.,"  Rev.  7=16.17; 
"night,"  Rev.  21:25;  22:5;  "sin,"  Rev.  21:27. 

3.  It  is  also  described,  with  reference  to  present  possessions,  as 
blessedness,  Matt.  25:34 ;  perfect  knowledge,  1  Cor.  13:12;  holiness, 
1  Thess.  3:13;    Rev.  21:27;    glory,  Rom.  8=18;    2  Cor.  4:17;    2  Tim. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  496 

2=10;  1  Pet.  5=4;  life,  Mark  8=35  ;  9:43.45.47;  John  5:29 ;  Rom. 
8:13  ;  crown  of  life,  James  1:12;  eternal  or  everlasting  life,  Matt.  19:29  ; 
25:46;  John  6:27.47.54;  Rom.  2=7. 

4.  Declarations  are  made  which  connect  the  believer  with  Christ, 
viz:  as  of  his  being  with  Christ,  1  Thess.  4:17  ;  in  the  presence  of  his 
glory,  Jude  24;  beholding  his  glory,  John  17=24;  conformed  to  his 
glorious  body,  Phil.  3:21 ;  exhibiting  the  riches  of  his  grace,  Eph.  2:7  ; 
Christ  glorified  in  them,  2  Thess.  1:10  ;  entering  into  the  joy  of  their 
Lord,  Matt.  25:21.23  ;  reigning  with  Christ,  2  Tim.  2:12,  etc. 

5.  Statements  are  made  about  their  activity  in  the  heavenly  life. 
The  rest  of  Heaven  is  not  a  state  of  inactivity.  This  is  pointed  oat 
in  the  very  passage  which  speaks  of  this  rest  as  a  peculiar  blessedness: 
1  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth  :  yea, 
saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours,  (toil,  trouble, 
sufferings,  pain,  weariness);  for  their  works  (deeds,  works,  especially 
those  of  necessity  or  duty,)  [see  Lexicon  of  Liddell  and  Scott,]  follow 
with  them."  Rev.  14=13.  [Canterbury  Revision].  Here  we  are  taught 
that,  while  they  rest  from  onerous  and  painful  toil,  they  continue  to 
be  actively  employed.  We  may  not  know  what  all  of  these  employ- 
ments shall  be.  They  will  be  such  as  will  be  suited  to  their  intellect- 
ual and  moral  nature  and  position.  The  statements  of  the  book  of 
Revelation  give  us  an  insight  into  what  some  of  them  may  be.  The 
servants  of  God  are  there  depicted,  as  serving  God,  Rev.  7:15;  22:3  ; 
as  giving  praises  in  song,  Rev.  14:2.3  ;  15:3.4  ;  19=5.6  ;  as  engaged  in 
prayers  of  adoration,  Rev.  6:9-13;  7:11.12;  of  thanksgiving,  Rev. 
11:17;  and  in  acts  of  humiliation,  Rev.  4:10. 

6.  The  blessedness  of  the  future  state  of  the  righteous,  is  also  set 
forth  in  connection  with  the  place  of  their  abode. 

This  is  usually  called  Heaven.    It  is  readily  admitted  that  the  word 
"heaven"  is  used  otherwise  than  for  the  abode  of  God,  and  Christ,  and 
angels,  and  the  future  dwelling  place  of  the  saints.     But  in  numerous 
places  it  has  only  this  special  signification.     The  following  selection  of 
passages  will  suffice.     Matt.  5:12.45  ;  6:20;  Luke  6:23  ;   15:7;  22=43 
John  3:13;    6:38;    Rom.  1:18 ;    1  Cor.  15:47 ;  2  Cor.  5:1  ;  Eph,  1:10 
3:15;    Phil.  3:20;    1  Thess.  1:10;    4:16;    2  Thess.  1:7 ;    Heb.  9:24 
1  Pet.  1:4  ;  3:22. 

The  plain  teaching  of  these  passages,  and  of  others  that  might  be 
mentioned,  is  that  Heaven  is  a  place  and  not  merely  a  condition  of 
happiness. 


497  Abstract  of  Theology. 

The  same  fact  is  justly  argued  from  its  being  the  abiding  place  of 
Christ.  His  human  body  must  occupy  a  specified  place  in  space.  It 
has'  been  replied  to  this  argument  that,  "since  deity  and  humanity  are 
indissolubly  united  in  Christ's  single  person,  it  is  difficult  to  consider 
Christ's  body  as  limited  to  place,  without  vacating  his  person  of  its 
divinity."  But  this  objection  is  made  in  forgetfulness  of  the  fact  that 
Christ,  in  his  divine  relation,  is  not  limited  by  his  human  nature, 
much  less  by  his  human  body.  This  was  shown  by  him,  while  on 
earth,  when,  in  conversation  with  Nicodemus,  he  spake  of  himself  as 
being  in  Heaven,  John  3=13,  although  his  body  was  manifestly  on 
earth.  Was  his  ubiquity  as  God  interfered  with  by  his  location  then 
in  space  as  man  ?  It  was  in  like  manner,  that  Christ  saw  Nathaniel 
under  the  fig  tree,  when  he  was  not  bodily  present.     John  1:48. 

No  similar  objection,  however,  can  be  made  to  an  argument  to  the 
same  effect,  drawn  from  the  bodies  of  the  saints.  Heaven  cannot  be 
regarded  as  only  a  state,  in  which  they  have  communion  with  Christ 
and  God,  but  must  be  accepted  as  the  place  of  their  abode,  in  their 
glorified  bodies,  in  which  they  dwell  with  each  other,  and  rejoice  in 
the  state  of  happiness,  and  glory,  which  is  also  theirs. 

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  location  of  Heaven.  That 
this  earth,  in  its  renewed  condition,  may  be  the  future  Heaven  is 
favoured  by  Rom.  8:19-23;  2  Pet,  3=5-13,  and  Rev.  21=1-3.  But  these 
passages  are  entirely  too  indefinite  and  doubtful  to  give  any  certainty, 
or  even  very  strong  probability  on  this  point. 

Heaven  is  spoken  of  in  certain  descriptive  terms.  It  is  called  "a 
better  country,  that  is  an  heavenly.''  Heb.  11=16.  It  is  the  place  in 
which  we  shall  have  "a  building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with 
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens,"  2  Cor.  5:1.2;  and  "a  place"  among  the 
"many  mansions"  in  the  "Father's  house;"  John  14=2.  It  is  called 
"the  kingdom,"  Matt.  13:43;  25:34.  It  is  possible  that  Heaven  is 
also  meant  by  the  "Jerusalem  which  is  above,"  Gal.  4:26,  and  "the 
new  Jerusalem  which  cometh  down  out  of  Heaven,"  Rev.  3=12, 
and  the  holy  Jerusalem,  Rev.  21:10;  as  well  as  by  Paradise,  Luke 
23=43;  2  Cor.  12:4;  Rev.  2:7,  cf.  Rev.  21=10-27. 

7.  The  blessedness  of  this  state  of  the  righteous  is  made  supreme 
by  the  fact  that  it  will  last  forever.  It  will  never  end  ;  it  will  never 
be  diminished.  If  there  be  any  change,  it  will  be  from  its  increase: 
because  of  better  intellectual  perception,  and  knowledge  of  God,  and 
of  divine  things;  because  of  a  constantly  and  increasingly  endearing 
communion  with  God  in  Christ;  because  of  an  increased  capacity  to 


Abstract  of  Theology.  498 

behold  the  glory  of  Christ;  and  because  of  a  greater  exaltation  of  the 
spiritual  nature  in  the  worship  and  service  of  the  Lord.  There  is  no 
reason  why  there  may  not  be  such  increase  in  beings,  whose  natures 
can  never  attain  the  infinity  of  excellence,  and  complete  fulness  which 
belong  only  to  God. 

This  perpetuity  of  the  happiness  of  the  saints  is  stated  in  various 
ways. 

(1.)  It  is  called  "eternal  life,"  and  "everlasting  life"  in  the 
King  James  version,  which  are  translations  of  the  same  Greek 
words.  They  are  translated  "eternal  life,"  or  "life  eternal"  in  Matt. 
25:46;  Mark  10:30;  John  3=15;  10:28;  12:25;  17:2;  Acts  13:48 ; 
Eom.  2=7;  5:21;  6:23;  1  Tim.  6:12.19;  Tit.  1=2;  3:7;  1  John  1:2; 
2:25;  5:11-13;  Jude  21.  They  are  translated  "everlasting  life,"  or 
"life  everlasting"  in  Matt.  19=29  ;  Luke  18=30;  John  3:16,36;  414 ; 
5:24;  6=27:  40:47;  Rom.  6=22;  Gal.  6=8;  1  Tim.  1=16.  The  Greek 
should  have  been  translated  in  all  these  places  by  the  same  word  ;  and 
the  better  word  would  have  been  everlasting,  because  only  a  relative 
eternity,  or  what  is  called  eternity  a  parte  post,  belongs  to  created 
things.     God  alone  has  true  eternity.     [See  pages  71-73]. 

(2.)  It  is  declared  to  be  "for  ever,"  John  6:51.58;  and  "for  ever 
and  ever,"  Rev.  22:5. 

(3.)  Similar  expressions  are  also  used,  as  "everlasting  habitations," 
Luke  16:9;  "eternal  weight  of  glory,"  2  Cor.  4=17;  "glory  in  the 
church  by  Christ  Jesus  throughout  all  ages,  world  without  end,"  Eph. 
3:21  ;  "everlasting  consolation,"  2  Thess.  2:16;  "salvation  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory,"  2  Tim.  2:10;  "eternal  salvation," 
Heb.  5:9;  "eternal  redemption,"  Heb.  9:12;  eternal  inheritance," 
Heb.  9:15,  "eternal  glory,"  1  Pet.  5:10;  "everlasting  kingdom  of 
our  Lord,  and   Saviour   Jesus  Christ,"  2  Pet.  1:11. 

(4.)  In  John  4:14  ;  8.51.52;  and  10:28,  it  is  declared  oi  believers 
that  "they  shall  never  thirst,"  "never  see  death,"  "and  never  perish," 
by  which  is  taught  the  same  everlasting  condition  expressed  in  the 
three  preceding  classes.  Reference  is  made  in  these  passages  to  the 
spiritual  life  of  the  soul. 

The  numerous  declarations  of  everlasting  life  and  happiness,  thus 
classified  above,  make  certain  what  might  have  been  inferred  from 
the  scriptural  statements  of  the  natural  immortality  conferred  upon 
Spirit;  which  forbids  its  annihilation  ;  and  from  the  security,  against 
the  spiritual  death  of  the  soul,  arising  from  the  gracious  wTork  of 
Christ  wrought  out,  for,  and  in  the  believer,  through  which  he  is  forever 


499  .    Abstract  of  Theology. 

delivered  from  the  condemnation,  and  presence  of  sin,  and  clothed  in 
the  unfailing  righteousness  of  God.  The  same  blessing  is  unquestion- 
ably attained  through  the  relation  borne  to  Christ  by  the  saints,  as 
constituting  the  church  of  first  born  ones,  which  is  his  bride,  Eph. 
5:23-33,  and  also  that  body,  of  which  he  is  the  head,  which  is  declared  to 
be  "the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  Eph.  1:22.  The  vital 
connection  between  Christ  and  his  people  has  no  elements  of  dissolu- 
tion, and,  therefore,  everlasting  must  be  that  cause  of  their  existence 
announced  by  him  when  he  said,  "because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 
John  14:19. 


II.     The  Final  State  of  the  Wicked. 

The  judgment  day  is  no  less  signally  to  be  marked  by  the  punish- 
ment decreed  against  the  wicked,  than  by  the  blessings  conferred  upon 
the  righteous.  These,  also,  are  set  forth  in  the  Bible,  in  fearful  words 
of  warning ;  and  should  be  effective  for  driving  men  to  Christ  for  sal- 
vation, while  the  day  of  probation  continues. 

1.  We  have  here  the  sentence  to  be  uttered  against  those  who  are 
still  in  sin.  It  occurs  in  the  same  chapter  with  that  of  the  righteous. 
Christ  tells  us  that  "then  shall  he  (the  King)  say,  also,  unto  them  on 
the  left  hand,  "Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  pre- 
pared for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  *  *  *  and  these  shall  go 
away  into  everlasting  punishment."  Matt.  25:41.46.  A  similar  sen- 
tence occurs  in  Luke  13:27,  "I  tell  you,  I  know  you  not  whence  ye 
are  ;  depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity." 

The  different  elements,  included  in  this  sentence,  are  also  taught  of 
the  wicked  elsewhere  in  the  Scriptures  ;  some  examples  of  which  may 
be  here  added. 

(1.)  Punishment.  "He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned," 
Mark.  16:16 ;  "the  resurrection  of  damnation,"  John  5:29;  "taking 
vengeance  on  them  *  *  *  who  shall  be  punished,"  1  Thess. 
1:8.9  ;  "reserve  the  unjust  unto  the  day  of  judgment  to  be  punished," 
2  Pet.  2:9. 

.  (2.)  Pain  :  (a.)  as  expressed  by  fire.  Matt,  13:42.50;  18:8.9;  Mark. 
9:43-48;  2  Thess.  1:8;  2  Pet.  3:7;  (b.)  fire  and  brimstone,  Rev.  14:10; 
19:20;  20:10;  21:8;  (c.)  flame,  Luke  16:24;  (d.)  "their  worm  dieth 
not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched,"  Mark  9:44.46.48;  cf.  Luke  3:17  ; 
(e.)  "tribulation  and  anguish,"  Matt.  24:21.29  ;  Pom.  2:8.9. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  500 

(3.)  Deprivation:  "severed  from  among  the  just,"  Matt.  13:49  ; 
"outer  darkness,"  Matt:  25:30;  "thrust  out  from  the  kingdom,"  Luke 
13:28  ;  "shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,"  1  Cor.  6:9  ;  "no  rest," 
Rev.  14=11;  "blackness  of  darkness  forever,"  Jude  13. 

(4)  The  punishment  and  suffering  are  recognized  by  those  pun- 
ished by  "weeping  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  Matt.  8:12; 
13:50  ;25:30  ;  Luke  13:28.  The  Rich  Man  is  represented  as  acknowl- 
edging his  torments.     Luke  16:24. 

2.     The  nature  of  this  punishment. 

(1.)  It  is  unwarrantable  to  take  for  granted  that  it  will  not  be  in  part 
physical.  The  wicked  will  go  from  the  judgment  seat  with  the  bodies 
which  belong  to  them  in  their  resurrection  state.  We  know  not  what 
will  be  the  nature  of  these  bodies,  and,  therefore,  have  no  right  to 
affirm  that  they  may  not  be  capable  of  physical  pain.  That  the  lan- 
guage of  Scripture,  as  to  fire  and  brimstone,  is  figurative,  is  true. 
But  men  are  not  authorized,  on  that  account,  to  deny  that  some  phy- 
sical pain,  and,  that  of  a  most  excruciating,  and  agonizing  charac- 
ter, will  form  a  part  of  the  agony  and  woe  of  the  hereafter  of  the  sin- 
ner. So  far  from  men  drawing  comfort  from  any  conviction  they 
may  have  that  there  will  not  be  literal  fire,  they  should  only  the  more 
be  filled  with  dread,  and  apprehension,  of  some  fearful  condition, 
which  the  Scriptures  here  attempt  to  describe  by  terms  which  express 
the  severest  anguish  men  can  endure  in  the  body ;  the  statements 
made,  evidently  falling  far  short  of  telling  the  nature  of  a  punishment 
which  our  present  condition  forbids  that  we  should  understand.  In  the 
range  of  animal  life  here  on  earth,  we  know  that  the  higher  the  or- 
ganism the  more  keenly  is  it  alive  to  suffering  as  well  as  enjoyment. 
This  teaches  us  to  expect  that  the  bodily  enjoyments  of  the  saints 
will  far  surpass  anything  ever  experienced  on  earth.  If  the  resurrec- 
tion bodies  of  the  wicked  are,  in  any  degree,  higher  than  those  of 
this  world,  the  only  result  will  be  to  make  them  capable  of  anguish 
utterly  inconceivable  by  men  in  their  present  state. 

.(2.)  The  spiritual  agony,  then  to  be  endured,  is  equally  be- 
yond the  possibility  of  present  expression.  We  may  say  that  it  will 
necessarily  consist  in  certain  evils;  but  who  can  tell  how  great  those 
evils  will  then  be  realized  to  be.  Some  of  them  may  be  suggested  : 
as,  consciousness  of  an  unclean  and  unholy  nature;  when  there  is  no 
way  to  cleanse  or  escape  it:  conviction  of  the  nature,  and  ill  desert  of 
sin;  when  sinful  habits  have  such  prevalence  and  control  that  sin 
must  still  be  committed  willingly,  yet  with  horror  of  what   is  done; 


501  Abstract  of  Theology. 

— indications  of  which  are  seen  in  men  in  this  life,  who,  by  debauch- 
ery, or  drunkenness,  are  driven  forward  to  evil  even  against  their 
will — :  remorse  for  past  indulgencies,  for  neglected  opportunities,  for 
rejections  of  Christ; — especially  as  then  will  be  seen  how  nigh  unto 
each  one  had  come  the  kingdom  and  grace  of  God — :  knowledge  of 
banishment  perpetually  from  the  presence  of  Christ,  and  deprivation 
of  the  favour  and  love  of  God  : — these,  and  evils  like  unto  them,  with 
the  mutual  reproaches  of  the  damned,  for  the  influences  of  each  other, 
by  which  such  evil  has  come,  will  make  a  Hell  compared  with  which, 
all  the  torture  men  have  ever  known  in  this  life  will  be  looked  back 
to,  as  though  it  were  Heaven  itself. 

3.     The  place  of  this  punishment. 

There  are  three  words  used  in  Scripture  which  are  translated  "Hell" 
in  the  King  James  version,  viz:  Hades,  Tartarus,  and  Gehenna. 
Hades  is  simply  transferred  in  the  Canterbury  Revision.  It  is  used 
for  the  general  place  of  departed  -spirits,  both  righteous  and  wicked. 
In  no  place  is  punishment,  or  torment,  associated  with  it,  except  in 
Luke  16=23,  in  the  parable  of  the  Rich  Man  and  Lazarus.  This  is  to 
be  explained,  in  accordance  with  the  use  of  the  word  in  all  other  pas- 
sages, by  the  fact  that,  as  Hades  contains  the  wicked,  as  well  as  the 
righteous,  and  as  the  wicked  there  are  in  a  state  of  suffering,  so  the 
rich  man  in  Hades  was  tormented,  while  Lazarus  who  was  in  the 
same  general  abode,  was  enjoying  the  blessed  state  expressed  by  his 
being  in  Abraham's  bosom. 

The  word  Tartarus  appears  only  as  a  participle  (t.artarosas)  of  the 
verb  (tartaroo),  which  means  to  cast  down  to  Tartarus.  The  place  in 
which  it  is  found  is  2  Pet.  2=4,  which  the  Canterbury  Revision  trans- 
lates "For  if  God  spared  not  angels  when  they  sinned,  but  cast  them 
down  to  hell,  and  committed  them  to  pits  of  darkness,  to  be  reserved 
unto  judgment."  The  Revisors  point  out  in  the  margin  that  the  word 
Hell  is  expressed  in  the  Greek  by  Tartarus.  This  passage  evidently 
has  respect  to  the  condition  of  these  angels  before  the  judgment  day. 

The  places  in  which  Gehenna  occurs  are  Matt,  5:22.29.30  ;  10:28; 
18:9  ;  23:15.33 ;  Mark  9:43.45.47  ;  Luke  12:5,  and  James  3:6.  All  of 
them  refer  to  torture  and  punishment  hereafter.  This  is  distinctly 
associated  with  the  punishment  of  the  judgment  day,  in  Mark  18:9, 
by  the  preceding  verse  where  "eternal  fire"  is  used  as  the  equivalent 
term  to  Gehenna;  in  Matthew  23:33,  where  Christ  asks  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees,  "How  shalFye  escape  the  damnation  of  Hell  (Gehenna);" 
in  Mark  9:43,  where^the  language  is  "to  go  into  Hell  (Gehenna),  the 


Abstract  of  Theology.  502 

unquenchable  fire,"  [Canterbury  Revision,]  and  in  Luke  12:5,  in  which 
Christ  says,  "Fear  Him  which,  after  He  hath  killed,  hath  power  to  cast 
into  Hell  (Gehenna)." 

It  has  not  been  inaptly  remarked  that  Gehenna  is  used  by  Christ 
himself  in  all  of  the  twelve  passages  in  which  it  occurs  in  the  New 
Testament,  except  James  3:6. 

4.     The  duration  of  this  punishment. 

The  New  Testament  teaching  upon  this  subject  is  that  it  will  endure 
throughout  all  the  infinite  future.     This  is  expressed  in  various  ways. 

(1.)     By  the  term  eis  ton  aiona,  "forever." 

This  occurs  about  thirty  times  in  the  New  Testament.  An  earnest 
and  learned  opponent  of  the  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment,  (Oxen- 
ham,  in  "What  is  Truth  as  to  Everlasting  Punishment?"  p.  101),  has 
been  able  to  point  out  only  one  place  in  the  New  Testament  where  he 
thinks  the  meaning  of  "forever"  cannot  be  applicable  to  this  form  of 
words.  It  is  the  language  of  Paul  in  1  Cor.  8:13,  translated  in  the  King 
James  version,  "I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth."  But  "I  will 
eat  no  flesh  forever"  is  just  as  suitable  an  idea,  as  that  substituted  in 
the  translation  for  the  .true  meaning  of  this  phrase.  For  any  other 
use,  Oxenham  is  obliged  to  refer  to  the  Septuagint,  where  he  claims 
that  it  is  used  of  "duration,  throughout  the  age  of  the  Mosaic  dis- 
pensation," "of  the  world,"  "of  a  family,"  and  "of  the  political  con- 
dition of  slavery."  But  this  application  accords  with  that  very  deriv- 
ation, made  by  the  best  lexicographers,  which  makes  aion  equivalent 
to  the  Latin  aevum,  but,  which,  also,  is  the  basis  of  the  very  idea  of 
eternity  which- is  the  sole  meaning  of  eis  ton  aiona  in  the  later  Hel- 
lenistic Greek  of  the  New  Testament. 

This  term  is  applied  in  two  places  only  to  the  punishment  of  the 
wicked,  viz:  2  Pet.  2:17-,  and  Jude  13. 

(2.)  Other  similar  expressions  to  the  first  are  used  where  plural 
forms  of  aion  appear,  as  eis  aionas  aionon ;  eis  tous  aionas  ton  aionon. 
"forever  and  ever"  in  Rev.  19:3  and  20:10.  The  plural  forms  only 
intensify,  and  certainly  do  not  diminish  the  duration. 

(3.)  The  word  aionios.  This  word  occurs  about  seventy  times  in 
the  New  Testament,  and  invariably  in  the  sense  of  eternal  or  ever- 
lasting duration.  Just  as  the  English  word  "eternal"  refers  to  the  true 
eternity,  which  is  in  God  alone,  so  is  this  word  applied  to  God  in 
Rom.  16:26;  and  to  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Heb.  9:14.  In  like  manner,  as 
we  inadequately  divide  eternity  into  eternity  a  parte  post,  and  eternity 
a  parte  ante,  meaning  by  each   indefinite,   unlimited,   and  illimitable 


503  Abstract  of  Theology. 

duration  in  the  past,  or  in  the  future,  from  the  present,  or  some  other 
fixed  period  of  time ;  as  from  the  time  of  Christ's  appearance  on  earth  ; 
so,  this  word  is  used  for  each  of  these  two  kinds  of  eternity.  It  has 
no  other  application  in  the  New  Testament  than  to  one  or  another  of 
these  three  forms  of  eternity.  As  applied  to  the  endless  life  of  the 
righteous,  or  wicked,  it  signifies  the  future  eternity,  or  eternity  a 
parte  post. 

Those  who  oppose  the  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment,  suppose  that 
there  are  many  ages,  or  periods,  of  the  existence  of  man,  and  they  at- 
tempt to  explain  the  language  used  accordingly.  But,  while  the  phrases 
upon  which  this  opinion  is  based,  might,  as  a  matter  of  language,  mean 
this,  there  is  no  evidence  from  Scripture  of  the  existence  of  any  such 
several  periods.  The  only  distinction  clearly  made,  is  that  between 
the  di'spensation  prior  to  the  time  of  Christ,  and  that  since  his  day ; 
the  Scriptures  evidently  regarding  that  as  the  central  point,  unto 
which  all  things  tended  in  the  past,  and  from  which,  all  things  pro- 
ceed in  the  future. 


It  is  not  to  be  overlooked,  that  these  words,  which  express  the  eter- 
nity of  the  punishment  of  the  wicked,  are  those  by  which  the 
eternal  life  of  the  righteous  is  also  made  known.  As  that  is  unend- 
ing in  its  happiness,  so  this  is  in  its  punishment,  and  suffering.  These 
words  express  as  strongly,  as  the  Greek  language  can,  the  everlasting 
duration  of  the  destiny  assigned  to  each  at  the  judgment  day. 

This  is  questioned  by  Oxenham,  who  says,  p.  114,  "There  are  sev- 
eral ways,  in  which  Almighty  God  could  have  expressed  this  endlessness 
of  future  punishment,  if  He  desired  to  tell  us  that  it  would  be  endless  ; 
ways,  about  the  meaning  of  which  there  could  be  no  mistake ;  ways,  in 
which,  in  Holy  Scripture,  He  has  expressed  the  endlessness  of  things 
which  will  be  endless:  e.  g.  of  his  own  dominion,  God  declared  by  the 
prophet  Daniel  that  it  was  'an  everlasting  dominion,  which  shall  not 
pass  away,  and  His  Kingdom  that  which  shall  not  be  destroyed, 
Dan.  7:14.  Of  the  endless  life  of  the  blessed,  our  Lord  declared,  Luke 
20:36,  neither  can  they  die  any  more.  By  the  angel  Gabriel,  Luke 
1:33,  God  announced,  that  of  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  there 
shall  be  no  end.  Where  is  any  such  language  used  of  the  Kingdom 
of  Darkness,  or  of  future  punishment,  or  of  the  wicked?  Where  is 
said  of  the  lost,  that  they  can  live  no  more0  Whe.rek  of  future 
punishment,  that  of  it  there  shall  be  no  end?'  " 


Abstract  of  Theology.  504 

To  this  it  may  be  replied, 

(a.)  That,  if  no  similar  instances  can  be  given  relative  to  future 
punishment,  and  the  wicked,  so  far  as  any  of  these, expressions  are 
used  of  the  righteous,  they  are  explanatory  of  the  kind  of  eternity 
ascribed  to  their  happiness;  and,  as  this  is  described  by  the  same 
words  as  that  of  the  misery  of  the  wicked,  in  all  other  cases,  these 
instances  teach  us  the  meaning  of  these  common  words,  when  applied 
to  the  wicked,  by  thus  explaining  them  when  applied  to  the  righteous. 

(b.)  That  the  same  ingenuity,  and  quibbling,  which  attempts  to 
deprive  the  expressions  used  of  their  true  meaning,  would  be  applied 
in  like  manner  to  such  terms  as  these. 

If  a  similar  passage  to  that  from  Daniel  could  be  presented,  we 
should  immediately  have  pointed  out  to  us,  that  it  was  to  the  Son  of 
Man  that  the  kingdom  was  given,  and  that,  of  this  very  kingdom 
which  "shall  not  pass  away,'"  we  are  told  that  "then  cometh  the 
end  when  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God  ;  even  the 
Father;  when  He  shall  have  put  down  all  rule,  and  all  authority 
and  power."     1  Cor.  15:24. 

(c.)  But  there  are  like  instances  which  may  be  adduced.  In  Luke 
20:36,  "neither  can  they  die  any  more,"  the  impossibility  of  dying  is 
expressed  by  lioude  dunantai."  Corresponding  to  this  is  the  language 
used  by  our  Lord  to  the  Pharisees  in  John  9:21,  "Ye  shall  seek  me, 
and  shall  die  in  your  sin  :  whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come'  (ou  dunasthe 
elthein). 

Parallel  to  the  expression  in  Luke  1:33,  "there  shall  be  no  end," 
ouk  estai  telos,  is  "the  endless  genealogies,"  (genealogiais  aperantois) 
in  1  Tim.  1:4;  for,  although  different  words  are  used  to  express  endless- 
ness in  the  Greek,  they  are  of  equal  force.  Oxenham  is  himself  au- 
thority for  the  strong  meaning  of  aperantois,  for  he  refers  to  "apeiron 
(a  and  peras)"  from  which  aperantos  is  likewise  formed,  as  mean- 
ing "without  a  limit,"  and  says  of  it  and  others  "by  these  and  by  sev- 
eral other  words  and  expressions  of  unmistakable  meaning,  Almighty 
God  could  have  expressed  the  endlessness  of  future  punishment,  if  He 
had  desired  to  do  so,"  p.  115.  ¥et,  had  he  used  this  word,  or  others 
of  the  same  form,  how  quickly  should  we  have  been  referred 
to  the  endless  genealogies  as  exegetical  of  them. 

With  respect  to  the  two  final  questions  of  Mr.  Oxenham,  the  pas- 
sage in  1  Cor.  6:9,  may  be  suggested  as  one  that  fully  meets  them. 
"Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  Kingdom  of 
God,"  (see  also  verse  10).     The  same  expression  occurs  in  Gal.  5:21. 


505  Absteact  of  Theology. 

The  insincerity  with  which  such  questions  are  asked  is  seen  in  the  fact 
that,  when  these  and  similar  passages  are  presented,  these  opponents 
resort  to  the  assumption  that  the  unrighteous  will  not  always  be  un- 
righteous, and  that  only  so  long  as  unrighteous  shall  they  not  inherit ; 
but  that  they  may  do  so  after  their  unrighteousness  has  passed  away# 
They  will  attempt  to  maintain  the  possibility  of  this  in  the  face  of 
such  a  passage  as  Rev.  22:11,  "He  that  is  unrighteous,  let  him  do  un- 
righteousness still :  and  he  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  made  filthy  still." 
[Canterbury  Revision]. 

(4.)  Here  may  properly  be  added  three  other  expressions  as  to  the 
unending  nature  of  the  punishment  of  the  wicked. 

(a.)  Aidios :  which  appears  in  the  "eternal  Godhead"  of  Rom.  1:20, 
and  in  the  everlasting  chains  of  the  angels  which  kept  not  their  first 
estate  in  Jude  6.  As  the  wicked  are  sentenced  to  the  "everlasting 
fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  this  passage  has  probable 
reference  to  the  duration  of  the  punishment  of  both  devils  and  wicked 
men. 

(b )  Asbestos,  (unquenchable  fire).  Oxenham  claims  that  all  that 
is  involved  in  this  word  is  that  the  fire  "is  unquenched,"  and  that  the 
language  does  not  forbid  a  time  when  it  may  be  quenched.  This  word 
occurs  in  three  undisputed  places  in  Scripture,  Matt.  3:13  ;  Mark  9:43, 
and  Luke  3:17,  and  in  three  others,  Mark  9:44.45.46,  which  Westcott 
and  Hort  omit  from  their  text,  and  which  are  also  omitted  in  the  Can- 
terbury Revision.  Mark  9:48  has  a  different  form  of  the  same  word. 
Oxenham  objects  to  the  translation  "unquenchable,"  and  insists  upon  the 
meaning  "is  unquenched"  ;  but  the  duration  of  the  punishment,  and 
the  propriety  of  the  translation  "unquenchable"  is  shown  by  the  words, 
"where  their  worm  dieth  not,"  used  in  connection  with  the  expression 
in  verse  48. 

(c.)  Ou  teleutai,  "does  not  end,"  "ceases  not,"  is  declared  of  the 
worm  in  Mark  9:48.  Teleutai  corresponds  exactly  in  meaning,  as  well 
as  in  root,  with  the  telos  in  the  ouk  estai  telos  in  Luke  1:33,  which 
Oxenham  regarded  as  so  strongly  expressive  of  endlessness,  as  to  chal- 
lenge the  finding  of  such  a  term  applied  to  the  future  punishment  of 
the  wicked. 

5.     Objections  and  opposing  theories. 

The  objections  to  this  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment,  and  the  op- 
posing theories,  may  be  briefly  stated  and  replied  to. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  506 

First,  the  objections. 

(1.)  It  is  objected,  that  the  punishment  is  disproportioned  to  the 
sin.     But, 

(a)  No  one  but  God  can  know  what  is  the  real  desert  of  sin,  and 
if  He  has  plainly  taught  us,  that  it  deserves  eternal  punishment,  we 
.may  be  sure,  that  the  infliction  of  such  punishment  must  be  right,  and 
in  accordance  with  what  it  merits.  The  question  is  simply,  What 
does  God  say  ?  and  upon  this  point  He  has  taught  us  plainly, 

(b.)  The  objection  is  based  upon  the  idea  that  all  the  sin  that  will  be 
punished  is  that  committed  in  this  life.  It  is  true  that  men  will  be  only 
judged  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  But  these  will  not  constitute 
all  the  sins  which  will  be  punished  hereafter.  A  part  of  the  penalty 
of  the  sins,  of  this  life,  is  such  a  corrupted  nature,  as  will  make  men 
sin  in  the  life  to  come.  The  Scriptures  teach,  that  there  will  be  sin- 
ful acts  and  habits  after  death.  Rev.  22:11.  [See  Canterbury  Revi- 
sion]. Ever  continuing  sin  will  deserve  ever  continuing  punishment. 
If  sin  is  worthy  of  any  punishment  at  all,  and  if,  at  every  moment  sin 
is  committed,  punishment  may  be  forever,  without  assuming  that  any 
one  or  more  sins  will  cause  everlasting  infliction. 

(c.)  Mark  3:29  tells*  of  an  eternal  sin.  [See  Canterbury  Revision, 
and  the  Greek  text  of  Westcott  and  Hort]. 

(d.)  The  objection  supposes,  that  the  punishment  of  the  damned 
is  something  actively  inflicted  by  God,  and  not  the  working  out,  and 
result  of  the  natures  of  men.  It  will  doubtless  consist,  in  great  part, 
in  their  sinful,  and  corrupt  natures,  which  will  still  work  out  sin,  and  thus 
continue  to  separate  irom  the  favour,  and  complacent  love  of  God. 
The  only  probable  exception  will  be  "remorse,"  arising  from  the  memory 
of  past  sins,  and  neglected  opportunities;  and  these  are  not  active  in- 
flictions of  God,  but  the  results  of  former  sin. 

(2.)  It  is  said,  that  God  is  too  merciful  to  inflict  everlasting  punish- 
ment.    But, 

(a.)  God,  in  declaring  that  He  will  inflict  it,  thus  declares  that  He 
is  not  too  merciful  to  do  so. 

(b.)  God  teaches  us  that,  while  He  takes  no  delight  in  such  punish- 
ment, it  is  demanded  by  justice,  which  is  as  unbounded  an  attribute 
of  His  nature  as  mercy. 

(c.)  God  has  given  signal  exhibitions  in  His  providential  gov- 
ernment, that  He  can,  and  will  punish  severely.  As  a  moral 
Governor  His  punishment  must  be  proportioned  to  the  offense.  His 
merciful  disposition  cannot  interfere  with  His  righteous  action.     Even 


507  Abstract  of  Theology. 

in  the  salvation  of  those  saved  through  Christ,  it  is  necessary  that 
He  should  be  just  in  justifying  the  believer  in  Jesus. 

(3.)  It  is  claimed  that  provision  has  been  made  in  Christ  for  the 
certain  salvation  of  all  men. 

If  this  be  so,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  God's  justice  in  the  bestow- 
ment  of  salvation.     But,  that  such  is  not  the  case  is  manifested, 

(a.)  By  the  fact  that  salvation  is  offered  only  on  the  condition  of 
repentance,  and  faith.  None,  therefore,  can  have  part  in  that  salva- 
tion except  those  who  fulfil  this  condition. 

(b.)  Regeneration  is  declared  to  be  essential  to  entrance  into  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  Those  who  are  not  thus  born  again  can,  therefore, 
have  no  part  in  his  salvation. 

(c.)  Not  only  is  holiness  declared  to  be  essential  to  admission  to 
Heaven,  but  it  is  foretold,  expressly,  that  certain  classes  of  unholy 
men,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  burneth  with  fire,  and 
brimstone;  and,  at  the  head  of  the  list  given,  are  "the  fearful  and  un- 
believing."    Rev.  22:8. 

(d.)  While  the  value  of  Christ's  work  is  indeed  ample  for  all,  we 
are  taught  that  its  benefits  are  not  bestowed  upon  all.  There  are 
special  sins  mentioned  which  will  exclude  those  who  commit  them 
irom  all  hope  of  salvation.  Matt.  12:31 ;  Luke  12:10;  Heb.  6:4-6, 
cf.  verse  9  ;  10:26.27,  cf.  verses  28-31.  But  the  assertions  made  about 
the  certain  punishment  of  those  who  commit  these  particular  sins, 
are  not  stronger  than  the  declarations  of  the  certain  damnation  of  all 
the  finally  impenitent  and  unbelieving. 

(4.)  Inasmuch,  as  it  is  asserted  in  1  Tim.  2:3.4,  that  "God  our  Sa- 
viour *  *  *  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth  ;"  it  is  even  claimed,  that  it  is  the  purpose  of 
God  to  save  all. 

That  tlie  word  "thelei"  translated  "will  have,"  often  involves  pur- 
pose, or  determination  on  the  part  of  God,  is  readily  admitted,  as  well 
as  that,  if  it  means  this  here,  all  men  will  be  saved  according  to  that 
purpose.  But  such  purpose  cannot  be  concluded  from  this  passage 
alone,  unless  it  accords  with  what  is  elsewhere  taught;  much  less,  when 
it  is  in  direct  opposition  to  the  general  tenor  of  the  Bible,  as  well  as 
to  distinct  statements  to  the  contrary.  The  reason  for  this  is  that 
this  word  does  not  always  mean  "will,"  in  the  sense  of  purpose,  but 
sometimes  also  in  that  of  a  mere  "wish."  There  are  many  cases  in 
Scripture,  in  which  God  is  said  to  wish  what,  not  only  He  does  not 
purpose  to  accomplish,  but  what  actually  fails  to  take  place. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  508 

There  are  numerous  examples  in  which  this  word  has  only  this 
meaning  of  "wish":  thus  as  used  in  general  of  men  only,  Matt.  7  12; 
12:38;  15:28;  of  Christ,  Matt.  23:37 ;  Mark  14=36;  Luke  13:34;  John 
17:24;  and  of  God,  1  Cor.  15:38;  Heb.  10=5.8.  Thelema,  the  corres- 
ponding noun  is  used  as  expressive  simply  of  this  "wish"  of  God  in 
Mark  3:35;  Rom.  2=18;  Eph.  6:6;  and  in  other  places. 

(5.)  It  is  further  objected  that  God  must  forgive  those  who  are 
truly  penitent,  and  that  the  wicked,  in  the  full  knowledge  of  God, 
and  sin,  afforded  by  the  next  world,  must  certainly  repent. 

(a.)  This  objection  arises  from  a  misconception  of  the  nature  of 
the  repentance  acceptable  to  God.  It  is  not  mere  sorrow  for  sin ;  es- 
pecially for  its  effects,  of  which  probably  Hell  will  be  full ;  it  is 
reformation  of  character,  turning  away  from  sin,  and  seeking  holiness. 
Sorrow  accompanies  it,  but  does  not  constitute  it.  It  is  not  awakened 
by  the  painful  effects  of  sin,  but  by  conviction  of  its  evil  nature.  How 
can  such  sorrow  arise  in  those  who  have  learned  to  love  sin?  or  such 
reformation,  in  those  who  are  confirmed  in  habits  of  sin?  Remorse 
for  the  past,  loathings  of  their  then  condition,  even  desires  to  over- 
come the  power  which  enchains  them,  may  abundantly  exist,  but,  as 
often  occurs  in  this  life,  where  passion,  and  appetite  get  .the  mastery 
of  men,  pleasure  will  be  taken  in  sin,  and  evil  appetites  indulged, 
even  when  it  is  hated  with  all  the  bitterness  of  a  despairing  soul. 

On  the  other  hand,  wThat  is  the  teaching  of  Scripture  as  to  God's, 
readiness  to  accept  the  penitent  after  the  day  of  opportunity  has 
passed  away?  What  does  the  case  of  Esau  teach,  Heb.  12=16.17? 
What  is  meant  to  be  taught  by  the  language  of  Wisdom,  Prov.  1=24-28  ? 
Did  Christ  accept,  did  God  forgive  the  wretched,  sorrowing,  remorse- 
ful Judas?  or  was  his  penitence  permitted  to  plunge  him  into  the  fur- 
ther sin  of  suicide?  Even  here  on  earth,  where  the  day  of  probation 
ordinarily  ends  only  in  death,  such  rejection  of  such  sorrow  for  sin  is 
possible.  Who  shall  dare  to  say  that  it  is  impossible  in  the  hereafter? 
"For,  if  they  do  these  things  in  the  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in 
the  dry?"     Luke  23:31.     [Canterbury  Revision]. 

(b.)  "Punishment  appears  to  have  very  little,  if  any,  tendency,  to 
work  reformation  in  offenders.  It  often  deters  from  crime,  but  it 
rarely  brings  one  to  genuine  repentance," 

(c.)  "During  the  middle  state,  if  at  any  time  after  this  life,  a 
return  to  God  might  be  expected ;  yet  the  language  of  Scripture  does 
not  permit  us  to  expect  it  then."  Hovey's  Manual  of  Sys.  Theol.,  p. 
362. 


509  Abstract  of  Theology. 

(d.)  The  experience  of  this  life  shows  that,  for  any  violation,  even 
of  physical  law,  the  penalty  attached  to  it  must  be  endured,  and,  that 
no  sorrow  for  what  has  been  done,  nor  determination  to  avoid  such 
action  in  the  future,  will  release  from  the  evil  which  follows.  Why 
should  it  be  supposed  that,  after  the  judgment,  law  will  be  less  inex- 
orable than  now,  or  that  penitence  and  reformation  will  then,  of  them- 
selves, avail  any  more  than  they  do  now?  Even  in  this  life,  repent- 
ance and  faith  have  no  value,  nor  power  in  themselves,  but  are  only 
effective  as  conditions  upon  which  the  salvation  in  Christ  is  offered. 
But  the  Bible  carefully  warns  men  that  this  offer,  on  these  conditions, 
is  only  made  in  this  life.  To  suppose  it  possible  in  the  hereafter,  re- 
quires not  only  the  possibility  of  repentance  and  faith,  then,  but  also 
that  salvation  through  Christ  will  then  be  still  attainable.  This 
can  only  be  upon  the  supposition  that  men  will  have  a  future  proba- 
tion, and  the  same,  or  other  means  of  grace,  than  those  here  afforded. 

(6.)  In  further  objection,  therefore,  it  is  assumed  that  another  pro- 
bation will  then  be  enjoyed.  The  strongest  form  in  which  this  objection 
is  urged,  is  that, inasmuch  as  despite  the  positive  threatenings  of  God  to 
our  first  parents  that  they  should  die,  He  had  purposed  to  provide  re- 
demption for  at  least  a  part  of  mankind,  therefore,  despite  the  pos- 
itive statements  as  to  the  future  condemnation  and  punishment  of  the 
wicked,  there  may  still  be  mercy  in  store,  and  final  deliverance  from 
the  presence  and  taint  of  sin,  as  well  as  its  punishment. 

The  replies  afforded  to  this  are  obvious. 

(a.)  The  case  quoted,  affords  a  warning  to  those  who  teach  con- 
trary to  what  God  teaches.  Our  first  parents  were  even  then ,  before  their 
sin,  assured  that  the  threatened  sentence  would  not  be  executed.  But 
this  came  from  Satan,  who  is  declared  by  Christ  to  be  "a  liar  and  the 
father  thereof."  John  8=44.  [Canterbury  Revision].  Those,  who, 
upon  any  other  authority  than  God,  call  in  question  any  statement 
which  He  makes,  should  feel  that  they  do  it  at  the  peril  of  their  own 
souls,  and  that  of  those  whom  they  teach.  Matt.  15:8.9.13.14; 
23=13.15.16  ;  Luke  6=39.  Those  who  deny  a  doctrine  which  they 
know  is  taught  in  God's  word,  or  attempt  by  any  subterfuge,  or  mere 
supposition,  to  induce  others  to  reject  it,  act  precisely  the  part  of  Sa- 
tan in  the  transaction  of  the  fall. 

(b.)  The  penalty  which  God  threatened  has  actually  been  inflicted 
upon  all  mankind.  Even  the  death  of  the  body  has  only  thus  far 
been  escaped  by  two  of  the  race.  But  spiritual  death,  the  death  of 
the  soul,  manifestly  the  especial  death  of  the  curse,  for  this  alone  was 


Abstract  of  Theology.  510 

inflicted  upon  the  day  of  transgression,  has,  in  the  corrupted  and 
sinful  nature,  become  the  so  called  "natural"  state  of  mankind.  The 
objection  evidently  supposes  that  eternal  death  was  also  threatened 
against  Adam.  But  this  is  not  true.  It  becomes  a  part  of  the 
penalty,  only  because  it  is  the  consequence  of  moral  corruption,  and 
depravity,  which  must  continue  to  deserve  punishment,  and  also  to 
work  out  sin  deserving  of  still  further  punishment,  unless  some 
means  of  deliverance  from  this  corruption  shall  arise.  Eternal  death, 
therefore,  was  not  a  penalty  threatened  against  Adam  but  only  a  conse- 
quential penalty,  resulting  from  what  was  threatened,  and  which, 
therefore,  may  be  escaped  through  the  deliverance  in  Christ. 

But  eternal  death  is  threatened  against  the  finally  impenitent 
of  the  present  probation.  The  case  of  Adam,  therefore,  teaches 
us  that  it  will  assuredly  be  inflicted  upon  them.  As  God  did  not  withhold 
the  flood  of  corruption,  and  misery,  which  the  corrupted  nature  has 
brought  upon  mankind, — the  deliverance  of  any  from  which  demanded 
the  gift,  and  the  suffering  of  His  own  Son — ,  we  may  be  assured  that, 
in  like  manner,  He  will  inflexibly  allow  eternal  punishment  to  come 
upon  all  against  whom  He  has  threatened  it. 

(c.)  When  all  suspicion,  that  God  may  intend  something  different 
from  what  He  says  in  His  threats  to  prevent  sin,  has  been  removed 
by  perceiving  that  He  has,  to  the  letter,  fulfilled  His  threat  against 
Adam;  we  are  prepared  to  give  due  weight  to  what  He  teaches  about 
the  possibility  of  future  probation. 

To  the  question  of  one  asking,  '"Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved?" 
Christ  replied,  "Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  for  many,  I 
say  unto  you,  shall  seek  to  enter  in  and  shall  not  be  able."'  Luke 
13:24.  [See  the  context  which  shows  reference  to  entrance  into  the 
kingdom  in  the  future  world].  The  exhortation  of  Isaiah  55:6,  "Seek 
ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found"  implies  a  time  when  He  may 
not  be  found.  This  exhortation  has  reference  to  the  new  and  ever- 
lasting covenant  of  the  sure  mercies  of  David.  [See  verse  3].  How 
distinctly  does  the  hortatory  question  of  Heb.  2:1-3,  apply  here  ;  when 
we  see,  not  merely  how  steadfast  has  been  the  word  spoken  by  angels, 
but  how  literally  fulfilled  has  been  that  uttered  by  God.  Well  may  all 
ask,  "How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation?"  The 
intimate  connection  between  this  passage,  and  the  exhortation  against 
the  hardening  of  the  heart  in  the  present  moment  in  Hebrews  3:7-11, 
are  worthy  of  especial  note,  as  well  as  the  warning  of  verse  12,  and  the 
continued  exhortations,  and  warnings,  as  far  as',  and  beyond  chap.  4:7, 


511  Abstract  of  Theology. 

which  declares  of  the  present  period  of  probation,  "He  again  defineth 
a  certain  day,  saying  in  David,  after  so  long  a  time,  To  day,  as  it  hath 
been  before  said,  To  day,  if  ye  shall  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts."  [Canterbury  Revision].  The  declaration,  "Behold  now  is  the 
accepted  time;  behold  now  is  the  day  of  salvation,"  2  Gor.  6=2,  with 
the  context,  in  like  manner  teaches  that  the  present  is  the  only  period 
of  probation. 

(d.)  It  may  be  questioned  whether  very  many  persons,  who  die 
impenitent,  do  not  come  under  some  one  of  the  forms  of  sin  which  are 
specifically  declared  unpardonable,  viz:  wilful  sins,  Heb.  10:26;  fall- 
ing away,  Heb,  6:4-6;  and  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  Matt. 
12:32.  Certainly  they  all  come  under  the  declaration  of  Christ  of 
"everlasting  punishment." 

(e.)  Nor  should  such  passages  be  forgotten  here  as  Luke  16:26, 
which  teaches  that,  even  in  Hades,  there  is  an  impassable  gulf  between 
the  righteous  and  the  wicked;  as  John  8:21,  in  which  Christ  told  the 
Pharisees  that  they  could  not  come  to  him  in  the  future  world ;  and 
Rev.  22:10.11,  which  teaches  the  continued  unrighteous,  and  unholy 
condition,  and  conduct  of  the  finally  impenitent.  The  language  of 
Christ  about  Judas,  Matt.  26:24,  is  not  quoted  against  all,  because 
spoken  oi  one  man  only,  though  none  can  tell  of  how  many  others  it 
may  be  true.  But,  there  are  doubtless  very  many  liable  to  the  sim- 
ilar woe  denounced  by  Christ;  that  "it  were  better  that  a  millstone 
were  hanged  about  his  neck  and  that  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth 
of  the  sea."     Matt.  6:6;  Mark  9=42;  Luke  17:2. 

Second,  the  opposing  theories. 

There  are  different  forms  in  which  the  objections  to  the  eternal  pun- 
ishment of  the  wicked  take  the  shape  of  doctrinal  theories. 

(1.)  The  theory  of  annihilation.  This  does  not  deny  that  the 
punishment  will  be  eternal;  but  only  that  there  will  be  eternal  con- 
scious pain.  But  it  supposes,  that  the  death  of  the  sinner  is  absolute 
annihilation  of  being,  and  that  in  this  sense  only  is  it  an  eternal  pun- 
ishment. This  theory  admits  that  the  soul  may  suffer  hereafter,  for 
a  longer,  or  shorter  time,  according  to  its  deserts,  but  that  there  will 
be  a  time  when  existence  will  absolutely  cease.  The  object  of  those 
who  hold  this  theory,  is  not  opposition  to  everlasting  punishment, 
on  the  ground  that  God  cannot  justly  punish  so  severely,  or  is  too 
merciful  to  do  so,  but  to  escape  the  idea  that  sin  and  misery  will 
always  exist  under  the  government  of  God. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  512 

This  theory  claims  Scriptural  support  from  the  use  of  such  words 
as  speak  of  the  condition  of  the  wicked  hereafter.  One  of  these,  is 
apolcia,  translated  sometimes  "perdition,"  and  sometimes  "destruc- 
tion," in  both  the  King  James  version  and  the  Canterbury  Revision.  It 
appears,  in  reference  to  the  future  punishment  of  the  wicked,  among 
other  places  in  John  17:12;  Rom.  9:22;  Phil.  3:19'  Heb.  10:39;  2 
Pet.  3:7. 

But  this  word  is  very  far  from  having  the  idea  of  annihilation.  It 
is  simply  an  equivalent  to  our  English  words  destruction,  loss,  ruin, 
misfortune.  In  Matt.  26=8;  Mark  14:4,  it  is  used  of  the  ointment 
poured  upon  Christ's  head,  and  translated  "waste."  In  all  other  pas- 
sages, it  apparently  refers  to  the  future  condition  of  the  wicked.  But 
these  two  show/that  it  does  not  mean  annihilation,  as  indeed  it  does 
not  elsewhere,  either  in  Classic,  or  Hellenistic  Greek.  The  verb  apol- 
lumi,  signifies  no  more  than  to  destroy  utterly,  and  is  chiefly  used 
in  Homer  for  death  inflicted  in  battle.  [See  Liddell  and  Scott's  Lexi- 
con.] 

Another  word  is  olethros.  This  occurs  in  connection  with  the  pun- 
ishment of  the  wicked,  in  three  of  four  places  in  the  New  Testament, 
viz:  in  1  Thess.  5:3;  2  Thess.  1:9:  and  1  Tim.  6:9.  In  none  of  these  does 
it  mean  more  than  destruction,  by  which  word  it  is  rendered  in  both 
translations,  not  only  in  these  places,  but  also  in  !l  Cor.  5:5.  This 
last  place  is  that  in  which  Paul  directs  the  Corinthians  to  "deliver" 
the  incestuous  man  "unto  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that 
the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Surely  no  one 
imagines  that  the  annihilation  of  the  flesh  is  meant. 

Neither  does  this  word  mean  any  greater  destruction  than  is  in- 
volved in  death. 

Another  expression  is  "the  second  death  ;"  "And  death  and  Hades 
were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death,  even  the 
lake  of  fire."     Rev.  20:14.     [Canterbury  Revision]. 

The  lake  of  fire,  the  casting  into  which  is  here  said  to  be  the  "sec- 
ond death,"  is  expressly  set  forth  as  the  place  in  which  "the  beast 
and  the  false  prophet"  are  ;  and  in  which  they  "shall  be  tormented  day 
and  night  forever  and  ever,"  verse  10.  There  is  certainly  no  annihi- 
lation here,  for  annihilation  is  inconsistent  with  torment  continued 
forever. 

It  may  be  stated  in  general,  as  to  all  the  places  which  speak  of  the 
destruction  and  death  of  the  soul,  that  reference  is  made  to  its  spirit- 
ual loss  of  God's  favour,  and  of  holiness,  and  not   to  the  extinction  of 


513  Abstract  of  Theology. 

its  being.  This  extinction  would  be  contrary  to  the  natural  immor- 
tality conferred  on  spirit.  It  is  not  even  true,  so  far  as  we  can 
know,  that  even  matter  will  ever  be  annihilated.  What  is  called  its 
destruction  is  simply  such  change  of  form  as  makes  it  unfit  for  the 
uses  for  which  it  had  been  so  formed.  Thus  we  speak  of  the  utter 
destruction  of  a  house,  of  machinery,  of  an  animal,  not  meaning  the 
annihilation  of  the  matter  which  composed  it ;  but  the  destruction  of 
the  form  in  which  that  matter  appeared,  and  which  was  essential  for 
its  use.  In  like  manner,  the  death  of  the  soul  means  its  becoming 
unfit  for  the  uses  for  which  it  was  made  ;  viz  :  for  happiness,  for  holi- 
ness, for  the  service  of  God,  for  the  complacent  love  of  God,  and  for  the 
reflection  of  his  image.  Such  an  utter  deprival  of  all  the  faculties 
for  which  the  moral  nature  of  man  was  made,  may  well  be  called  its 
death,  even  its  utter  destruction. 

(2.)     Restorationism. 

This  is  based  upon  three  different  grounds,  each  of  which  may  be 
held  separately,  or  any  two,  or  all  of  them,  together.  Two  of  these 
have  been  sufficiently  considered  in  the  replies  already  made  to  the 
objections  against  the  Scripture  doctrine. 

One  of  these  is  that  reformation  of  life  will  hereafter  take  place 
among  some,  at  least,  of  the  condemned,  through  natural  ability,  and 
sufficient  grace,  and  the  influences  of  the  Spirit;  and  that  thus  these  will 
be   made   holy,    and   therefore   acceptible  to  God. 

The  other  is  that  the  benefits  of  the  work  of  Christ  will,  after 
this  life,  also,  be  imparted  to  men,  and  if  this  is  done,  salvation  must 
ensue. 

It  is  to  be  noticed,  however,  that,  when  the  objections,  previously 
answered,  are  put  in  the  form  of  a  theory,  the  idea  that  there  can  be 
no  everlasting  punishment,  is  modified,  so  as  to  assert,  only,  that  all 
but  a  few,  will  be  saved.  This  is  done  to  escape  the  cases  of  Judas 
and  others  already  mentioned.  But,  in  so  doing,  all  the  principles, 
upon  which  the  possibility  of  such  future  salvation  is  based,  have  to 
be  abandoned,  and  the  theory  becomes  a  mere  supposition,  without 
any  support,  presented  in  the  face  of  positive  declarations  of  the 
Word  of  God  to  the  contrary. 

The  third  ground  upon  which  Restorationism  is  imagined,  is  that 
the  Scriptures  speak  of  such  restoration.  The  chief  passage  supposed 
to  teach  this  is  Acts  3:20.21,  "that  he  may  send  the  Christ  who  hath 
been  appointed  for  you,  even  Jesus:  whom  the  heaven  must  receive 
until   the  times  of  restoration   of  all   things,"  [Canterbury  Revision]. 


Abstract  of  Theology.  514 

The  passage  itself  fixes  the  period  of  the  time  of  restoration,  which  is 
at  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  This  precedes  the  judgment,  and 
thus  necessarily  that  of  the  restoration  supposed  by  these  parties. 

Another  passage  is  Eph.  1:9.10,  which  speaks  of  God  "having  made 
known  unto  us  the  mystery  of  His  will,  according  to  His  good  pleas- 
ure, which  He  purposed  in  him  unto  a  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of 
the  times,  to  sum  up  all  things  in  Christ,  the  things  in  the  heavens, 
and  the  things  upon  the  earth."  The  fulness  of  times  here  is  prob- 
ably the  present  dispensation,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  some  new 
period.  See  Gal.  4:4,  "when  the  fulness  of  the  time  came,  God  sent 
forth  His  Son,  etc.,"  cf.  Heb.  1:2;  9=10;  1  Pet.  1:20.  So,  again,  in 
Col.  1:19.20,  it  is  said  to  have  been  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father, 
"through  him  (Christ)  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  himself,  having 
made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross;  through  him  I  say, 
whether  things  upon  the  earth,  or  things  in  the  heavens."  This 
place  is  also  quoted  to  show  that  all  will  be  finally  saved. 

This  use  made  of  these  two  passages,  Eph.  1:9.10  and  Col.  1:19:20, 
to  build  up  a  doctrine,  without  other  support  from  the  Word  of  God, 
and  so  contrary  to  so  much  that  is  therein  taught,  is  a  warning  against 
the  pernicious  manner  in  which  isolated  passages  of  the  Word  of  God 
are  separated  from  their  contexts,  and  used  to  establish  preconceived 
theories.  Both  of  them  occur  in  epistles  written  exclusively  to  pro- 
fessed Christians.  The  subject  of  both  of  them  is  the  Church  of 
Christ.  The  all  things  in  Heaven,  or  Earth,  mentioned  in  each  of 
these  epistles,  are  those  only  which  are  connected  with  the  church.  So 
far  as  persons  are  referred  to,  they  are  those  who  constitute  "the 
whole  family  in  Heaven  and  Earth'"  Eph.  3=15,  called  also  "the  gen- 
eral assembly  and  church  of  the  first  born  (first  born  ones),"  Heb. 
12:22.  They  have,  therefore,  not  the  remotest  reference  to  any  future 
restoration  to  holiness,  and  happiness,  and  God,  of  those  condemned 
at  the  judgment. 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  July  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 


Cranberry  Township  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  009  087  181  A       »   Ef? 


ZJfcl 


KMCOBg^ 


i^ta 


'.Vilv.V<X'l^7 


Sffi 


ISfly^ 

ll'V-yj 

L^ 

L^jjLji 

ft&  AWJ 

/  V '. V  v  y 


■/.w  u; 


^V 


y/iHAwMi\§ 

w4^r«  JimIm 

w^ 


^m£ 


w&itfatmHMMm  iy-r 


K 


^ 


^M 


mwvvw 

