Martin Luther

The Freedom of a
Christian

1

The Freedom of a Christian
Martin Luther (1483-1546) forged the modern alliance between
individual conscience and the sovereignty of the secular nation-state.
He was born into a family that had risen from peasantry into the
middle class. Almost struck by lightning in a summer thunderstorm,
he vowed to become a monk if his life were preserved. He joined the
Augustinian monastery in Erfurt in 1505 and was ordained two years
later. The Elector of Saxony, Frederick the Wise, founded a new
university at Wittenberg, where Luther became a professor.
Lecturing on Saint Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, Luther discovered
his core doctrine: that we are justified by faith alone. No amount of
religious devotion or moral action could make us good: the goodness
of Christ becomes “imputed” to us by grace alone. He had always
suffered from crippling spiritual anxiety, and this insight cured him.
To fund the building of St. Peter’s Basilica and to help the
Archbishop-Elector of Mainz pay for his office, Pope Leo X (a
Medici) authorized, in a territory neighboring Luther’s, the sale of
indulgences—documents serving to remit the temporal punishment
owed due to one’s sins. Luther protested the abuse of indulgences
with his Ninety-five Theses of 1517. Pope Leo excommunicated him
in 1520 (the year The Freedom of a Christian was written), and the
Holy Roman Emperor Charles V declared Luther an outlaw at the
Diet of Worms in 1521. Luther ended up advancing the Reformation
by an appeal to secular rulers, rather than to the common people:
this suppressed the social-revolutionary potential in his reform and
folded church into state.
3
Martin Luther
Letter of Dedication to Mayor M¨uhlphordt
To the learned and wise gentleman, Hieronymus M¨uhlphordt, mayor
of Zwickau, my exceptionally gracious friend and patron, I, Martin
Luther, Augustinian, present my compliments and good wishes.
My learned and wise sir and gracious friend, the venerable Master
Johann Egran, your praiseworthy preacher, spoke to me in terms of
praise concerning your love for and pleasure in the Holy Scripture,
which you also diligently confess and unceasingly praise before all men.
For this reason he desired to make me acquainted with you. I yielded
willingly and gladly to his persuasion, for it is a special pleasure to
hear of someone who loves divine truth. Unfortunately there are many
people, especially those who are proud of their titles, who oppose the
truth with all their power and cunning. Admittedly it must be that
Christ, set as a stumbling block and a sign that is spoken against, will
be an offense and a cause for the fall and rising of many [I Cor. 1:23;
Luke 2:34].
In order to make a good beginning of our acquaintance and friendship,
I have wished to dedicate to you this treatise or discourse in German,
which I have already dedicated to the people in Latin, in the hope that
my teachings and writings concerning the papacy will not be consid
ered objectionable by anybody. I commend myself to you and to the
grace of God. Amen. Wittenberg, 1520.
An Open Letter to Pope Leo X
To Leo X, Pope at Rome, Martin Luther wishes salvation in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Amen.
Living among the monsters of this age with whom I am now for the
third year waging war, I am compelled occasionally to look up to you,
Leo, most blessed father, and to think of you. Indeed, since you are
occasionally regarded as the sole cause of my warfare, I cannot help
thinking of you. To be sure, the undeserved raging of your godless flat
terers against me has compelled me to appeal from your see to a future
council, despite the decrees of your predecessors Pius and Julius, who
with a foolish tyranny forbade such an appeal. Nevertheless, I have
never alienated myself from Your Blessedness to such an extent that
I should not with all my heart wish you and your see every blessing,
for which I have besought God with earnest prayers to the best of
my ability. It is true that I have been so bold as to despise and look
down upon those who have tried to frighten me with the majesty of
your name and authority. There is one thing, however, which I can
4
The Freedom of a Christian
not ignore and which is the cause of my writing once more to Your
Blessedness. It has come to my attention that I am accused of great
indiscretion, said to be my great fault, in which, it is said, I have not
spared even your person.
I freely vow that I have, to my knowledge, spoken only good and
honorable words concerning you whenever I have thought of you. If I
had ever done otherwise, I myself could by no means condone it, but
should agree entirely with the judgment which others have formed of
me; and I should do nothing more gladly than recant such indiscretion
and impiety. I have called you a Daniel in Babylon; and everyone
who reads what I have written knows how zealously I defended your
innocence against your defamer Sylvester. Indeed, your reputation
and the fame of your blameless life, celebrated as they are throughout
the world by the writings of many great men, are too well known and
too honorable to be assailed by anyone, no matter how great he is. I
am not so foolish as to attack one whom all people praise. As a matter
of fact, I have always tried, and will always continue, not to attack
even those whom the public dishonors, for I take no pleasure in the
faults of any man, since I am conscious of the beam in my own eye.
I could not, indeed, be the first one to cast a stone at the adulteress
[John 8:1–11].
I have, to be sure, sharply attacked ungodly doctrines in general, and
I have snapped at my opponents, not because of their bad morals, but
because of their ungodliness. Rather than repent this in the least, I
have determined to persist in that fervent zeal and to despise the judg
ment of men, following the example of Christ who in his zeal called his
opponents “a brood of vipers,” “blind fools,” “hypocrites,” “children
of the devil” [Matt. 23:13, 17, 33; John 8:44]. Paul branded Magus
[Elymas, the magician] as the “son of the devil,... full of all deceit
and villainy” [Acts 13:10], and he calls others “dogs,” “deceivers,” and
“adulterers” [Phil. 3:2; II Cor. 11:13; 2:17]. If you will allow people
with sensitive feelings to judge, they would consider no person more
stinging and unrestrained in his denunciations than Paul. Who is more
stinging than the prophets? Nowadays, it is true, we are made so sen
sitive by the raving crowd of flatterers that we cry out that we are
stung as soon as we meet with disapproval. When we cannot ward off
the truth with any other pretext, we flee from it by ascribing it to a
fierce temper, impatience, and immodesty. What is the good of salt
if it does not bite? Of what use is the edge of a sword if it does not
cut? “Cursed is he who does the work of the Lord deceitfully ...”
[Jer. 48:10].
Therefore, most excellent Leo, I beg you to give me a hearing after I
5
Martin Luther
have vindicated myself by this letter, and believe me when I say that
I have never thought ill of you personally, that I am the kind of a
person who would wish you all good things eternally, and that I have
no quarrel with any man concerning his morals but only concerning the
word of truth. In all other matters I will yield to any man whatsoever;
but I have neither the power nor the will to deny the Word of God.
If any man has a different opinion concerning me, he does not think
straight or understand what I have actually said.
I have truly despised your see, the Roman Curia, which, however,
neither you nor anyone else can deny is more corrupt than any Babylon
or Sodom ever was, and which, as far as I can see, is characterized by a
completely depraved, hopeless, and notorious godlessness. I have been
thoroughly incensed over the fact that good Christians are mocked in
your name and under the cloak of the Roman church. I have resisted
and will continue to resist your see as long as the spirit of faith lives
in me. Not that I shall strive for the impossible or hope that by my
efforts alone anything will be accomplished in that most disordered
Babylon, where the fury of so many flatterers is turned against me;
but I acknowledge my indebtedness to my Christian brethren, whom
I am duty-bound to warn so that fewer of them may be destroyed by
the plagues of Rome, at least so that their destruction may be less
cruel.
As you well know, there has been flowing from Rome these many
years—like a flood covering the world—nothing but a devastation of
men’s bodies and souls and possessions, the worst examples of the
worst of all things. All this is clearer than day to all, and the Roman
church, once the holiest of all, has become the most licentious den of
thieves [Matt. 21:13], the most shameless of all brothels, the kingdom
of sin, death, and hell. It is so bad that even Antichrist himself, if he
should come, could think of nothing to add to its wickedness.
Meanwhile you, Leo, sit as a lamb in the midst of wolves [Matt. 10:16]
and like Daniel in the midst of lions [Dan. 6:16]. With Ezekiel you
live among scorpions [Ezek. 2:6]. How can you alone oppose these
monsters? Even if you would call to your aid three or four well learned
and thoroughly reliable cardinals, what are these among so many?
You would all be poisoned before you could begin to issue a decree for
the purpose of remedying the situation. The Roman Curia is already
lost, for God’s wrath has relentlessly fallen upon it. It detests church
councils, it fears a reformation, it cannot allay its own corruption; and
what was said of its mother Babylon also applies to it: “We would
have cured Babylon, but she was not healed. Let us forsake her” [Jer.
51:9].
6
The Freedom of a Christian
It was your duty and that of your cardinals to remedy these evils,
but the gout of these evils makes a mockery of the healing hand,
and neither chariot nor horse responds to the rein [Virgil Georgics
i. 514]. Moved by this affection for you, I have always been sorry,
most excellent Leo, that you were made pope in these times, for you
are worthy of being pope in better days. The Roman Curia does not
deserve to have you or men like you, but it should have Satan himself
as pope, for he now actually rules in that Babylon more than you do.
Would that you might discard that which your most profligate en
emies boastfully claim to be your glory and might live on a small
priestly income of your own or on your family inheritance! No persons
are worthy of glorying in that honor except the Iscariots, the sons
of perdition. What do you accomplish in the Roman Curia, my Leo?
The more criminal and detestable a man is, the more gladly will he use
your name to destroy men’s possessions and souls, to increase crime,
to suppress faith and truth and God’s whole church. O most unhappy
Leo, you are sitting on a most dangerous throne. I am telling you the
truth because I wish you well.
If Bernard felt sorry for Eugenius at a time when the Roman See,
which, although even then very corrupt, was ruled with better prospects
for improvement, why should not we complain who for three hundred
years have had such a great increase of corruption and wickedness? Is
it not true that under the vast expanse of heaven there is nothing more
corrupt, more pestilential, more offensive than the Roman Curia? It
surpasses beyond all comparison the godlessness of the Turks so that,
indeed, although it was once a gate of heaven, it is now an open mouth
of hell, such a mouth that it cannot be shut because of the wrath of
God. Only one thing can we try to do, as I have said: we may be able
to call back a few from that yawning chasm of Rome and save them.
Now you see, my Father Leo, how and why I have so violently attacked
that pestilential see. So far have I been from raving against your person
that I even hoped I might gain your favor and save you if I should
make a strong and stinging assault upon that prison, that veritable
hell of yours. For you and your salvation and the salvation of many
others with you will be served by everything that men of ability can
do against the confusion of this wicked Curia. They serve your office
who do every harm to the Curia; they glorify Christ who in every way
curse it. In short, they are Christians who are not Romans.
To enlarge upon this, I never intended to attack the Roman Curia
or to raise any controversy concerning it. But when I saw all efforts
to save it were hopeless, I despised it, gave it a bill of divorce [Deut.
7
Martin Luther
24:1], and said, “Let the evildoer still do evil, and the filthy still be
filthy” [Rev. 22:11]. Then I turned to the quiet and peaceful study of
the Holy Scriptures so that I might be helpful to my brothers around
me. When I had made some progress in these studies, Satan opened
his eyes and then filled his servant Johann Eck, a notable enemy of
Christ, with an insatiable lust for glory and thus aroused him to drag
me unawares to a debate, seizing me by means of one little word which
I had let slip concerning the primacy of the Roman church. Then
that boastful braggart, frothing and gnashing his teeth, declared that
he would risk everything for the glory of God and the honor of the
Apostolic See. Puffed up with the prospect of abusing your authority,
he looked forward with great confidence to a victory over me. He was
concerned not so much with establishing the primacy of Peter as he was
with demonstrating his own leadership among the theologians of our
time. To that end he considered it no small advantage to triumph over
Luther. When the debate ended badly for the sophist, an unbelievable
madness overcame the man, for he believed that it was his fault alone
which was responsible for my disclosing all the infamy of Rome.
Allow me, I pray, most excellent Leo, this once to plead my cause and
to indict your real enemies. You know, I believe, what dealings your
legate, cardinal of St. Sisto, an unwise and unfortunate, or rather, an
unreliable man, had with me. When out of reverence for your name I
had placed myself and my cause in his hands, he did not try to establish
peace. He could easily have done so with a single word, for at that
time I promised to keep silent and to end the controversy, provided my
opponents were ordered to do likewise. As he was a man who sought
glory, however, and was not content with such an agreement, he began
to defend my opponents, to give them full freedom, and to order me to
recant, even though this was not included in his instructions. When
matters went fairly well, he with his churlish arbitrariness made them
far worse. Therefore Luther is not to blame for what followed. All the
blame is Cajetan’s, who did not permit me to keep silent, as I at that
time most earnestly requested him to do. What more should I have
done?
There followed Karl Miltitz, also a nuncio of Your Holiness, who ex
erted much effort and traveled back and forth, omitting nothing that
might help restore the order which Cajetan had rashly and arrogantly
disturbed. He finally, with the help of the most illustrious prince,
the Elector Frederick, managed to arrange several private conferences
with me. Again I yielded out of respect for your name, was prepared
to keep silent, and even accepted as arbiter either the archbishop of
Trier or the bishop of Naumburg. So matters were arranged. But
8
The Freedom of a Christian
while this arrangement was being followed with good prospects of suc
cess, behold, that other and greater enemy of yours, Eck, broke in
with the Leipzig Debate which he had undertaken against Dr. Karl
stadt. When the new question of the primacy of the pope was raised,
he suddenly turned his weapons against me and completely upset our
arrangement for maintaining peace. Meanwhile Karl Miltitz waited.
The debate was held and judges were selected. But again no decision
was reached, which is not surprising, for through Eck’s lies, tricks, and
wiles everything was stirred up, aggravated, and confused worse than
ever. Regardless of the decision which might have been reached, a
greater conflagration would have resulted, for he sought glory, not the
truth. Again I left undone nothing that I ought to have done.
I admit that on this occasion no small amount of corrupt Roman
practices came to light, but whatever wrong was done was Eck’s fault,
who undertook a task beyond his capacities. Striving insanely for
his own glory, he revealed the shame of Rome to all the world. This
man is your enemy, my dear Leo, or rather the enemy of your Curia.
From his example alone we can learn that no enemy is more pernicious
than a flatterer. What did he accomplish with his flattery but an evil
which not even a king could have accomplished? The name of the
Roman Curia is today a stench throughout the world, papal authority
languishes, and Roman ignorance, once honored, is in ill repute. We
should have heard nothing of all this if Eck had not upset the peace
arrangements made by Karl von Miltitz and myself. Eck himself now
clearly sees this and, although it is too late and to no avail, he is
furious that my books were published. He should have thought of this
when, like a whinnying horse, he was madly seeking his own glory and
preferred his own advantage through you and at the greatest peril to
you. The vain man thought that I would stop and keep silent out of
fear for your name, for I do not believe that he entirely trusted his
cleverness and learning. Now that he sees that I have more courage
than that and have not been silenced, he repents of his rashness, but
too late, and perceives—if indeed he does finally understand—that
there is One in heaven who opposes the proud and humbles the haughty
[I Pet. 5:5; Jth. 6:15].
Since we gained nothing from this debate except greater confusion
to the Roman cause, Karl Miltitz, in a third attempt to bring about
peace, came to the fathers of the Augustinian Order assembled in their
chapter and sought their advice in settling the controversy which had
now grown most disturbing and dangerous. Because, by God’s favor,
they had no hope of proceeding against me by violent means, some of
their most famous men were sent to me. These men asked me at least
9
Martin Luther
to show honor to the person of Your Blessedness and in a humble letter
to plead as my excuse your innocence and mine in the matter. They
said that the affair was not yet in a hopeless state, provided Leo X out
of his innate goodness would take a hand in it. As I have always both
offered and desired peace so that I might devote myself to quieter and
more useful studies, and have stormed with such great fury merely for
the purpose of overwhelming my unequal opponents by the volume and
violence of words no less than of intellect, I not only gladly ceased but
also joyfully and thankfully considered this suggestion a very welcome
kindness to me, provided our hope could be realized.
So I come, most blessed father, and, prostrate before you, pray that if
possible you intervene and stop those flatterers, who are the enemies
of peace while they pretend to keep peace. But let no person imagine
that I will recant unless he prefer to involve the whole question in
even greater turmoil. Furthermore, I acknowledge no fixed rules for
the interpretation of the Word of God, since the Word of God, which
teaches freedom in all other matters, must not be bound [II Tim.
2:9]. If these two points are granted, there is nothing that I could
not or would not most willingly do or endure. I detest contentions.
I will challenge no one. On the other hand, I do not want others
to challenge me. If they do, as Christ is my teacher, I will not be
speechless. When once this controversy has been cited before you and
settled, Your Blessedness will be able with a brief and ready word to
silence both parties and command them to keep the peace. That is
what I have always wished to hear.
Therefore, my Father Leo, do not listen to those sirens who pretend
that you are no mere man but a demigod so that you may command
and require whatever you wish. It will not be done in that manner
and you will not have such remarkable power. You are a servant of
servants, and more than all other men you are in a most miserable and
dangerous position. Be not deceived by those who pretend that you
are lord of the world, allow no one to be considered a Christian unless
he accepts your authority, and prate that you have power over heaven,
hell, and purgatory. These men are your enemies who seek to destroy
your soul [I Kings 19:10], as Isaiah says: “O my people, they that call
thee blessed, the same deceive thee” [Isa. 3:12]. They err who exalt
you above a council and the church universal. They err who ascribe to
you alone the right of interpreting Scripture. Under the protection of
your name they seek to gain support for all their wicked deeds in the
church. Alas! Through them Satan has already made much progress
under your predecessors. In short, believe none who exalt you, believe
those who humble you. This is the judgment of God, that “... he
10
The Freedom of a Christian
has put down the mighty from their thrones and exalted those of low
degree” [Luke 1:52]. See how different Christ is from his successors,
although they all would wish to be his vicars. I fear that most of them
have been too literally his vicars. A man is a vicar only when his
superior is absent. If the pope rules, while Christ is absent and does
not dwell in his heart, what else is he but a vicar of Christ? What is
the church under such a vicar but a mass of people without Christ?
Indeed, what is such a vicar but an antichrist and an idol? How much
more properly did the apostles call themselves servants of the present
Christ and not vicars of an absent Christ?
Perhaps I am presumptuous in trying to instruct so exalted a per
sonage from whom we all should learn and from whom the thrones
of judges receive their decisions, as those pestilential fellows of yours
boast. But I am following the example of St. Bernard in his book,
On Consideration, to Pope Eugenius, a book every pope should know
from memory. I follow him, not because I am eager to instruct you,
but out of pure and loyal concern which compels us to be interested
in all the affairs of our neighbors, even when they are protected, and
which does not permit us to take into consideration either their dig
nity or lack of dignity since it is only concerned with the dangers they
face or the advantages they may gain. I know that Your Blessedness is
driven and buffeted about in Rome, that is, that far out at sea you are
threatened on all sides by dangers and are working very hard in the
miserable situation so that you are in need of even the slightest help
of the least of your brothers. Therefore I do not consider it absurd if
I now forget your exalted office and do what brotherly love demands.
I have no desire to flatter you in so serious and dangerous a matter.
If men do not perceive that I am your friend and your most humble
subject in this matter, there is One who understands and judges [John
8:50].
Finally, that I may not approach you empty-handed, blessed father, I
am sending you this little treatise dedicated to you as a token of peace
and good hope. From this book you may judge with what studies I
should prefer to be more profitably occupied, as I could be, provided
your godless flatterers would permit me and had permitted me in the
past. It is a small book if you regard its size. Unless I am mistaken,
however, it contains the whole of Christian life in a brief form, provided
you grasp its meaning. I am a poor man and have no other gift to
offer, and you do not need to be enriched by any but a spiritual gift.
May the Lord Jesus preserve you forever. Amen.
Wittenberg, September 6, 1520.
11
Martin Luther
The Freedom of a Christian
Many people have considered Christian faith an easy thing, and not
a few have given it a place among the virtues. They do this because
they have not experienced it and have never tasted the great strength
there is in faith. It is impossible to write well about it or to understand
what has been written about it unless one has at one time or another
experienced the courage which faith gives a man when trials oppress
him. But he who has had even a faint taste of it can never write,
speak, meditate, or hear enough concerning it. It is a living “spring
of water welling up to eternal life,” as Christ calls it in John 4 [:14].
As for me, although I have no wealth of faith to boast of and know
how scant my supply is, I nevertheless hope that I have attained to
a little faith, even though I have been assailed by great and various
temptations; and I hope that I can discuss it, if not more elegantly, cer
tainly more to the point, than those literalists and subtile disputants
have previously done, who have not even understood what they have
written.
To make the way smoother for the unlearned—for only them do I
serve—I shall set down the following two propositions concerning the
freedom and the bondage of the spirit:
A Christian is a perfectly free lord of all, subject to none.
A Christian is a perfectly dutiful servant of all, subject to all.
These two theses seem to contradict each other. If, however, they
should be found to fit together they would serve our purpose beauti
fully. Both are Paul’s own statements, who says in I Cor. 9 [:19], “For
though I am free from all men, I have made myself a slave to all,” and
in Rom. 13 [:8], “Owe no one anything, except to love one another.”
Love by its very nature is ready to serve and be subject to him who
is loved. So Christ, although he was Lord of all, was “born of woman,
born under the law” [Gal. 4:4], and therefore was at the same time a
free man and a servant, “in the form of God” and “of a servant” [Phil.
2:6–7].
Let us start, however, with something more remote from our subject,
but more obvious. Man has a twofold nature, a spiritual and a bodily
one. According to the spiritual nature, which men refer to as the soul,
he is called a spiritual, inner, or new man. According to the bodily
nature, which men refer to as flesh, he is called a carnal, outward,
or old man, of whom the Apostle writes in II Cor. 4 [:16], “Though
our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewed
every day.” Because of this diversity of nature the Scriptures assert
12
The Freedom of a Christian
contradictory things concerning the same man, since these two men in
the same man contradict each other, “for the desires of the flesh are
against the Spirit, and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh,”
according to Gal. 5 [:17].
First, let us consider the inner man to see how a righteous, free, and
pious Christian, that is, a spiritual, new, and inner man, becomes what
he is. It is evident that no external thing has any influence in producing
Christian righteousness or freedom, or in producing unrighteousness or
servitude. A simple argument will furnish the proof of this statement.
What can it profit the soul if the body is well, free, and active, and
eats, drinks, and does as it pleases? For in these respects even the
most godless slaves of vice may prosper. On the other hand, how will
poor health or imprisonment or hunger or thirst or any other external
misfortune harm the soul? Even the most godly men, and those who
are free because of clear consciences, are afflicted with these things.
None of these things touch either the freedom or the servitude of the
soul. It does not help the soul if the body is adorned with the sacred
robes of priests or dwells in sacred places or is occupied with sacred
duties or prays, fasts, abstains from certain kinds of food, or does any
work that can be done by the body and in the body. The righteousness
and the freedom of the soul require something far different since the
things which have been mentioned could be done by any wicked person.
Such works produce nothing but hypocrites. On the other hand, it will
not harm the soul if the body is clothed in secular dress, dwells in un
consecrated places, eats and drinks as others do, does not pray aloud,
and neglects to do all the above-mentioned things which hypocrites
can do.
Furthermore, to put aside all kinds of works, even contemplation, med
itation, and all that the soul can do, does not help. One thing, and
only one thing, is necessary for Christian life, righteousness, and free
dom. That one thing is the most holy Word of God, the gospel of
Christ, as Christ says, John 11 [:25], “I am the resurrection and the
life; he who believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live”; and John
8 [:36], “So if the Son makes you free, you will be free indeed”; and
Matt 4 [:4], “Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds from the mouth of God.” Let us then consider it certain and
firmly established that the soul can do without anything except the
Word of God and that where the Word of God is missing there is no
help at all for the soul. If it has the Word of God it is rich and lacks
nothing since it is the Word of life, truth, light, peace, righteousness,
salvation, joy, liberty, wisdom, power, grace, glory, and of every in
calculable blessing. This is why the prophet in the entire Psalm [119]
13
Martin Luther
and in many other places yearns and sighs for the Word of God and
uses so many names to describe it.
On the other hand, there is no more terrible disaster with which the
wrath of God can afflict men than a famine of the hearing of his Word,
as he says in Amos [8:11]. Likewise there is no greater mercy than when
he sends forth his Word, as we read in Psalm 107 [:20]: “He sent forth
his word, and healed them, and delivered them from destruction.” Nor
was Christ sent into the world for any other ministry except that of the
Word. Moreover, the entire spiritual estate—all the apostles, bishops,
and priests—has been called and instituted only for the ministry of
the Word.
You may ask, “What then is the Word of God, and how shall it be
used, since there are so many words of God?” I answer: The Apostle
explains this in Romans 1. The Word is the gospel of God concerning
his Son, who was made flesh, suffered, rose from the dead, and was
glorified through the Spirit who sanctifies. To preach Christ means to
feed the soul, make it righteous, set it free, and save it, provided it
believes the preaching. Faith alone is the saving and efficacious use
of the Word of God, according to Rom. 10 [:9]: “If you confess with
your lips that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised
him from the dead, you will be saved.” Furthermore, “Christ is the
end of the law, that every one who has faith may be justified” [Rom.
10:4]. Again, in Rom. 1 [:17], “He who through faith is righteous
shall live.” The Word of God cannot be received and cherished by any
works whatever but only by faith. Therefore it is clear that, as the
soul needs only the Word of God for its life and righteousness, so it is
justified by faith alone and not any works; for if it could be justified by
anything else, it would not need the Word, and consequently it would
not need faith.
This faith cannot exist in connection with works—that is to say, if
you at the same time claim to be justified by works, whatever their
character—for that would be the same as “limping with two differ
ent opinions” [I Kings 18:21], as worshiping Baal and kissing one’s
own hand [Job 31:27–28], which, as Job says, is a very great iniq
uity. Therefore the moment you begin to have faith you learn that
all things in you are altogether blameworthy, sinful, and damnable, as
the Apostle says in Rom. 3 [:23], “Since all have sinned and fall short
of the glory of God,” and, “None is righteous, no, not one; ... all
have turned aside, together they have gone wrong,” Rom. 3 [:10–12].
When you have learned this you will know that you need Christ, who
suffered and rose again for you so that, if you believe in him, you may
through this faith become a new man in so far as your sins are forgiven
14
The Freedom of a Christian
and you are justified by the merits of another, namely, of Christ alone.
Since, therefore, this faith can rule only in the inner man, as Rom.
10 says, “For man believes with his heart and so is justified,” and
since faith alone justifies, it is clear that the inner man cannot be
justified, freed, or saved by any outer work or action at all, and that
these works, whatever their character, have nothing to do with this
inner man. On the other hand, only ungodliness and unbelief of heart,
and no outer work, make him guilty and a damnable servant of sin.
Wherefore it ought to be the first concern of every Christian to lay
aside all confidence in works and increasingly to strengthen faith alone
and through faith to grow in the knowledge, not of works, but of
Christ Jesus, who suffered and rose for him, as Peter teaches in the
last chapter of his first Epistle, I Pet. [5:10]. No other work makes
a Christian. Thus when the Jews asked Christ, as related in John 6
[:28], what they must do “to be doing the work of God,” he brushed
aside the multitude of works which he saw they did in great profusion
and suggested one work, saying, “This is the work of God, that you
believe in him whom he has sent” [John 6:29]; “for on him has God
the Father set his seal” [John 6:27].
Therefore true faith in Christ is a treasure beyond comparison which
brings with it complete salvation and saves man from every evil, as
Christ says in the last chapter of Mark [16:16]: “He who believes and
is baptized will be saved; but he who does not believe will be con
demned.” Isaiah contemplated this treasure and foretold it in Chapter
10: “The Lord will make a small and consuming word upon the land,
and it will overflow with righteousness” [Cf. Isa. 10:22]. This is as
though he said, “Faith, which is a small and perfect fulfilment of the
law, will fill believers with so great a righteousness that they will need
nothing more to become righteous.” So Paul says, Rom. 10 [:10], “For
man believes with his heart and so is justified.”
Should you ask how it happens that faith alone justifies and offers us
such a treasure of great benefits without works in view of the fact that
so many works, ceremonies, and laws are prescribed in the Scriptures,
I answer: First of all, remember what has been said, namely, that
faith alone, without works, justifies, frees, and saves; we shall make
this clearer later on. Here we must point out that the entire Scrip
ture of God is divided into two parts: commandments and promises.
Although the commandments teach things that are good, the things
taught are not done as soon as they are taught, for the commandments
show us what we ought to do but do not give us the power to do it.
They are intended to teach man to know himself, that through them
he may recognize his inability to do good and may despair of his own
15
Martin Luther
ability. That is why they are called the Old Testament and constitute
the Old Testament. For example, the commandment, “You shall not
covet” [Exod. 20:17], is a command which proves us all to be sinners,
for no one can avoid coveting no matter how much he may struggle
against it. Therefore, in order not to covet and to fulfil the command
ment, a man is compelled to despair of himself, to seek the help which
he does not find in himself elsewhere and from someone else, as stated
in Hosea [13:9]: “Destruction is your own, O Israel: your help is only
in me.” As we fare with respect to one commandment, so we fare with
all, for it is equally impossible for us to keep any one of them.
Now when a man has learned through the commandments to recog
nize his helplessness and is distressed about how he might satisfy the
law—since the law must be fulfilled so that not a jot or tittle shall
be lost, otherwise man will be condemned without hope—then, being
truly humbled and reduced to nothing in his own eyes, he finds in him
self nothing whereby he may be justified and saved. Here the second
part of Scripture comes to our aid, namely, the promises of God which
declare the glory of God, saying, “If you wish to fulfil the law and not
covet, as the law demands, come, believe in Christ in whom grace,
righteousness, peace, liberty, and all things are promised you. If you
believe, you shall have all things; if you do not believe, you shall lack
all things.” That which is impossible for you to accomplish by trying
to fulfil all the works of the law—many and useless as they all are—you
will accomplish quickly and easily through faith. God our Father has
made all things depend on faith so that whoever has faith will have
everything, and whoever does not have faith will have nothing. “For
God has consigned all men to disobedience, that he may have mercy
upon all,” as it is stated in Rom. 11 [:32]. Thus the promises of God
give what the commandments of God demand and fulfil what the law
prescribes so that all things may be God’s alone, both the command
ments and the fulfilling of the commandments. He alone commands,
he alone fulfils. Therefore the promises of God belong to the New
Testament. Indeed, they are the New Testament.
Since these promises of God are holy, true, righteous, free, and peace
ful words, full of goodness, the soul which clings to them with a firm
faith will be so closely united with them and altogether absorbed by
them that it not only will share in all their power but will be satu
rated and intoxicated by them. If a touch of Christ healed, how much
more will this most tender spiritual touch, this absorbing of the Word,
communicate to the soul all things that belong to the Word. This,
then, is how through faith alone without works the soul is justified by
the Word of God, sanctified, made true, peaceful, and free, filled with
16
The Freedom of a Christian
every blessing and truly made a child of God, as John 1 [:12] says:
“But to all who ... believed in his name, he gave power to become
children of God.”
From what has been said it is easy to see from what source faith derives
such great power and why a good work or all good works together
cannot equal it. No good work can rely upon the Word of God or live
in the soul, for faith alone and the Word of God rule in the soul. Just
as the heated iron glows like fire because of the union of fire with it,
so the Word imparts its qualities to the soul. It is clear, then, that a
Christian has all that he needs in faith and needs no works to justify
him; and if he has no need of works, he has no need of the law; and
if he has no need of the law, surely he is free from the law. It is true
that “the law is not laid down for the just” [I Tim. 1:9]. This is that
Christian liberty, our faith, which does not induce us to live in idleness
or wickedness but makes the law and works unnecessary for any man’s
righteousness and salvation.
This is the first power of faith. Let us now examine also the second.
It is a further function of faith that it honors him whom it trusts with
the most reverent and highest regard since it considers him truthful
and trustworthy. There is no other honor equal to the estimate of
truthfulness and righteousness with which we honor him whom we
trust. Could we ascribe to a man anything greater than truthfulness
and righteousness and perfect goodness? On the other hand, there
is no way in which we can show greater contempt for a man than to
regard him as false and wicked and to be suspicious of him, as we
do when we do not trust him. So when the soul firmly trusts God’s
promises, it regards him as truthful and righteous. Nothing more
excellent than this can be ascribed to God. The very highest worship
of God is this that we ascribe to him truthfulness, righteousness, and
whatever else should be ascribed to one who is trusted. When this is
done, the soul consents to his will. Then it hallows his name and allows
itself to be treated according to God’s good pleasure for, clinging to
God’s promises, it does not doubt that he who is true, just, and wise
will do, dispose, and provide all things well.
Is not such a soul most obedient to God in all things by this faith?
What commandment is there that such obedience has not completely
fulfilled? What more complete fulfilment is there than obedience in
all things? This obedience, however, is not rendered by works, but by
faith alone. On the other hand, what greater rebellion against God,
what greater wickedness, what greater contempt of God is there than
not believing his promise? For what is this but to make God a liar or
to doubt that he is truthful?—that is, to ascribe truthfulness to one’s
17
Martin Luther
self but lying and vanity to God? Does not a man who does this deny
God and set himself up as an idol in his heart? Then of what good are
works done in such wickedness, even if they were the works of angels
and apostles? Therefore God has rightly included all things, not under
anger or lust, but under unbelief, so that they who imagine that they
are fulfilling the law by doing the works of chastity and mercy required
by the law (the civil and human virtues) might not be saved. They
are included under the sin of unbelief and must either seek mercy or
be justly condemned.
When, however, God sees that we consider him truthful and by the
faith of our heart pay him the great honor which is due him, he does us
that great honor of considering us truthful and righteous for the sake
of our faith. Faith works truth and righteousness by giving God what
belongs to him. Therefore God in turn glorifies our righteousness. It is
true and just that God is truthful and just, and to consider and confess
him to be so is the same as being truthful and just. Accordingly he
says in I Sam. 2 [:30], “Those who honor me I will honor, and those
who despise me shall be lightly esteemed.” So Paul says in Rom. 4 [:3]
that Abraham’s faith “was reckoned to him as righteousness” because
by it he gave glory most perfectly to God, and that for the same reason
our faith shall be reckoned to us as righteousness if we believe.
The third incomparable benefit of faith is that it unites the soul with
Christ as a bride is united with her bridegroom. By this mystery,
as the Apostle teaches, Christ and the soul become one flesh [Eph.
5:31–32]. And if they are one flesh and there is between them a true
marriage—indeed the most perfect of all marriages, since human mar
riages are but poor examples of this one true marriage—it follows that
everything they have they hold in common, the good as well as the
evil. Accordingly the believing soul can boast of and glory in whatever
Christ has as though it were its own, and whatever the soul has Christ
claims as his own. Let us compare these and we shall see inestimable
benefits. Christ is full of grace, life, and salvation. The soul is full of
sins, death, and damnation. Now let faith come between them and
sins, death, and damnation will be Christ’s, while grace, life, and sal
vation will be the soul’s; for if Christ is a bridegroom, he must take
upon himself the things which are his bride’s and bestow upon her the
things that are his. If he gives her his body and very self, how shall
he not give her all that is his? And if he takes the body of the bride,
how shall he not take all that is hers?
Here we have a most pleasing vision not only of communion but of a
blessed struggle and victory and salvation and redemption. Christ is
God and man in one person. He has neither sinned nor died, and is
18
The Freedom of a Christian
not condemned, and he cannot sin, die, or be condemned; his righ
teousness, life, and salvation are unconquerable, eternal, omnipotent.
By the wedding ring of faith he shares in the sins, death, and pains of
hell which are his bride’s. As a matter of fact, he makes them his own
and acts as if they were his own and as if he himself had sinned; he
suffered, died, and descended into hell that he might overcome them
all. Now since it was such a one who did all this, and death and hell
could not swallow him up, these were necessarily swallowed up by him
in a mighty duel; for his righteousness is greater than the sins of all
men, his life stronger than death, his salvation more invincible than
hell. Thus the believing soul by means of the pledge of its faith is free
in Christ, its bridegroom, free from all sins, secure against death and
hell, and is endowed with the eternal righteousness, life, and salva
tion of Christ its bridegroom. So he takes to himself a glorious bride,
“without spot or wrinkle, cleansing her by the washing of water with
the word” [Cf. Eph. 5:26–27] of life, that is, by faith in the Word of
life, righteousness, and salvation. In this way he marries her in faith,
steadfast love, and in mercies, righteousness, and justice, as Hos. 2
[:19–20] says.
Who then can fully appreciate what this royal marriage means? Who
can understand the riches of the glory of this grace? Here this rich and
divine bridegroom Christ marries this poor, wicked harlot, redeems her
from all her evil, and adorns her with all his goodness. Her sins cannot
now destroy her, since they are laid upon Christ and swallowed up by
him. And she has that righteousness in Christ, her husband, of which
she may boast as of her own and which she can confidently display
alongside her sins in the face of death and hell and say, “If I have
sinned, yet my Christ, in whom I believe, has not sinned, and all his
is mine and all mine is his,” as the bride in the Song of Solomon [2:16]
says, “My beloved is mine and I am his.” This is what Paul means
when he says in I Cor. 15 [:57], “Thanks be to God, who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,” that is, the victory over sin
and death, as he also says there, “The sting of death is sin, and the
power of sin is the law” [I Cor. 15:56].
From this you once more see that much is ascribed to faith, namely,
that it alone can fulfil the law and justify without works. You see that
the First Commandment, which says, “You shall worship one God,”
is fulfilled by faith alone. Though you were nothing but good works
from the soles of your feet to the crown of your head, you would still
not be righteous or worship God or fulfil the First Commandment,
since God cannot be worshiped unless you ascribe to him the glory
of truthfulness and all goodness which is due him. This cannot be
19
Martin Luther
done by works but only by the faith of the heart. Not by the doing
of works but by believing do we glorify God and acknowledge that he
is truthful. Therefore faith alone is the righteousness of a Christian
and the fulfilling of all the commandments, for he who fulfils the First
Commandment has no difficulty in fulfilling all the rest.
But works, being inanimate things, cannot glorify God, although they
can, if faith is present, be done to the glory of God. Here, however,
we are not inquiring what works and what kind of works are done,
but who it is that does them, who glorifies God and brings forth the
works. This is done by faith which dwells in the heart and is the
source and substance of all our righteousness. Therefore it is a blind
and dangerous doctrine which teaches that the commandments must
be fulfilled by works. The commandments must be fulfilled before any
works can be done, and the works proceed from the fulfilment of the
commandments [Rom. 13:10], as we shall hear.
That we may examine more profoundly that grace which our inner
man has in Christ, we must realize that in the Old Testament God
consecrated to himself all the first-born males. The birthright was
highly prized for it involved a twofold honor, that of priesthood and
that of kingship. The first-born brother was priest and lord over all
the others and a type of Christ, the true and only first-born of God
the Father and the Virgin Mary and true king and priest, but not
after the fashion of the flesh and the world, for his kingdom is not of
this world [John 18:36]. He reigns in heavenly and spiritual things and
consecrates them—things such as righteousness, truth, wisdom, peace,
salvation, etc. This does not mean that all things on earth and in hell
are not also subject to him—otherwise how could he protect and save
us from them?—but that his kingdom consists neither in them nor of
them. Nor does his priesthood consist in the outer splendor of robes
and postures like those of the human priesthood of Aaron and our
present-day church; but it consists of spiritual things through which
he by an invisible service intercedes for us in heaven before God, there
offers himself as a sacrifice, and does all things a priest should do, as
Paul describes him under the type of Melchizedek in the Epistle to
the Hebrews [Heb. 6–7]. Nor does he only pray and intercede for us
but he teaches us inwardly through the living instruction of his Spirit,
thus performing the two real functions of a priest, of which the prayers
and the preaching of human priests are visible types.
Now just as Christ by his birthright obtained these two prerogatives,
so he imparts them to and shares them with everyone who believes in
him according to the law of the above-mentioned marriage, according
to which the wife owns whatever belongs to the husband. Hence all of
20
The Freedom of a Christian
us who believe in Christ are priests and kings in Christ, as I Pet. 2 [:9]
says: “You are a chosen race, God’s own people, a royal priesthood,
a priestly kingdom, that you may declare the wonderful deeds of him
who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.”
The nature of this priesthood and kingship is something like this:
First, with respect to the kingship, every Christian is by faith so ex
alted above all things that, by virtue of a spiritual power, he is lord
of all things without exception, so that nothing can do him any harm.
As a matter of fact, all things are made subject to him and are com
pelled to serve him in obtaining salvation. Accordingly Paul says in
Rom. 8 [:28], “All things work together for good for the elect,” and in
I Cor. 3 [:21–23], “All things are yours whether ... life or death or
the present or the future, all are yours; and you are Christ’s....” This
is not to say that every Christian is placed over all things to have and
control them by physical power—a madness with which some church
men are afflicted—for such power belongs to kings, princes, and other
men on earth. Our ordinary experience in life shows us that we are
subjected to all, suffer many things, and even die. As a matter of fact,
the more Christian a man is, the more evils, sufferings, and deaths he
must endure, as we see in Christ the first-born prince himself, and in
all his brethren, the saints. The power of which we speak is spiritual.
It rules in the midst of enemies and is powerful in the midst of op
pression. This means nothing else than that “power is made perfect in
weakness” [II Cor. 12:9] and that in all things I can find profit toward
salvation [Rom. 8:28], so that the cross and death itself are compelled
to serve me and to work together with me for my salvation. This is
a splendid privilege and hard to attain, a truly omnipotent power, a
spiritual dominion in which there is nothing so good and nothing so
evil but that it shall work together for good to me, if only I believe.
Yes, since faith alone suffices for salvation, I need nothing except faith
exercising the power and dominion of its own liberty. Lo, this is the
inestimable power and liberty of Christians.
Not only are we the freest of kings, we are also priests forever, which
is far more excellent than being kings, for as priests we are worthy to
appear before God to pray for others and to teach one another divine
things. These are the functions of priests, and they cannot be granted
to any unbeliever. Thus Christ has made it possible for us, provided
we believe in him, to be not only his brethren, co-heirs, and fellow
kings, but also his fellow-priests. Therefore we may boldly come into
the presence of God in the spirit of faith [Heb. 10:19, 22] and cry
“Abba, Father!” pray for one another, and do all things which we see
done and foreshadowed in the outer and visible works of priests.
21
Martin Luther
He, however, who does not believe is not served by anything. On the
contrary, nothing works for his good, but he himself is a servant of all,
and all things turn out badly for him because he wickedly uses them
to his own advantage and not to the glory of God. So he is no priest
but a wicked man whose prayer becomes sin and who never comes
into the presence of God because God does not hear sinners [John
9:31]. Who then can comprehend the lofty dignity of the Christian?
By virtue of his royal power he rules over all things, death, life, and
sin, and through his priestly glory is omnipotent with God because he
does the things which God asks and desires, as it is written, “He will
fulfil the desire of those who fear him; he also will hear their cry and
save them” [Cf. Phil. 4:13]. To this glory a man attains, certainly not
by any works of his, but by faith alone.
From this anyone can clearly see how a Christian is free from all things
and over all things so that he needs no works to make him righteous
and save him, since faith alone abundantly confers all these things.
Should he grow so foolish, however, as to presume to become righteous,
free, saved, and a Christian by means of some good work, he would
instantly lose faith and all its benefits, a foolishness aptly illustrated
in the fable of the dog who runs along a stream with a piece of meat
in his mouth and, deceived by the reflection of the meat in the water,
opens his mouth to snap at it and so loses both the meat and the
reflection.
You will ask, “If all who are in the church are priests, how do these
whom we now call priests differ from laymen?” I answer: Injustice is
done those words “priest,” “cleric,” “spiritual,” “ecclesiastic,” when
they are transferred from all Christians to those few who are now
by a mischievous usage called “ecclesiastics.” Holy Scripture makes
no distinction between them, although it gives the name “ministers,”
“servants,” “stewards” to those who are now proudly called popes,
bishops, and lords and who should according to the ministry of the
Word serve others and teach them the faith of Christ and the freedom
of believers. Although we are all equally priests, we cannot all publicly
minister and teach. We ought not do so even if we could. Paul writes
accordingly in I Cor. 4 [:1], “This is how one should regard us, as
servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God.”
That stewardship, however, has now been developed into so great a
display of power and so terrible a tyranny that no heathen empire or
other earthly power can be compared with it, just as if laymen were not
also Christians. Through this perversion the knowledge of Christian
grace, faith, liberty, and of Christ himself has altogether perished, and
its place has been taken by an unbearable bondage of human works
22
The Freedom of a Christian
and laws until we have become, as the Lamentations of Jeremiah [1]
say, servants of the vilest men on earth who abuse our misfortune to
serve only their base and shameless will.
To return to our purpose, I believe that it has now become clear that
it is not enough or in any sense Christian to preach the works, life, and
words of Christ as historical facts, as if the knowledge of these would
suffice for the conduct of life; yet this is the fashion among those who
must today be regarded as our best preachers. Far less is it sufficient
or Christian to say nothing at all about Christ and to teach instead
the laws of men and the decrees of the fathers. Now there are not
a few who preach Christ and read about him that they may move
men’s affections to sympathy with Christ, to anger against the Jews,
and such childish and effeminate nonsense. Rather ought Christ to be
preached to the end that faith in him may be established that he may
not only be Christ, but be Christ for you and me, and that what is
said of him and is denoted in his name may be effectual in us. Such
faith is produced and preserved in us by preaching why Christ came,
what he brought and bestowed, what benefit it is to us to accept him.
This is done when that Christian liberty which he bestows is rightly
taught and we are told in what way we Christians are all kings and
priests and therefore lords of all and may firmly believe that whatever
we have done is pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God, as I have
already said.
What man is there whose heart, upon hearing these things, will not
rejoice to its depth, and when receiving such comfort will not grow
tender so that he will love Christ as he never could by means of any
laws or works? Who would have the power to harm or frighten such
a heart? If the knowledge of sin or the fear of death should break in
upon it, it is ready to hope in the Lord. It does not grow afraid when
it hears tidings of evil. It is not disturbed when it sees its enemies.
This is so because it believes that the righteousness of Christ is its
own and that its sin is not its own, but Christ’s, and that all sin is
swallowed up by the righteousness of Christ. This, as has been said
above, is a necessary consequence on account of faith in Christ. So
the heart learns to scoff at death and sin and to say with the Apostle.
“O death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting? The
sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks be to
God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ” [I Cor.
15:55–57]. Death is swallowed up not only in the victory of Christ but
also by our victory, because through faith his victory has become ours
and in that faith we also are conquerors.
Let this suffice concerning the inner man, his liberty, and the source of
23
Martin Luther
his liberty, the righteousness of faith. He needs neither laws nor good
works but, on the contrary, is injured by them if he believes that he is
justified by them.
Now let us turn to the second part, the outer man. Here we shall
answer all those who, offended by the word “faith” and by all that
has been said, now ask, “If faith does all things and is alone sufficient
unto righteousness, why then are good works commanded? We will
take our ease and do no works and be content with faith.” I answer:
not so, you wicked men, not so. That would indeed be proper if we
were wholly inner and perfectly spiritual men. But such we shall be
only at the last day, the day of the resurrection of the dead. As long
as we live in the flesh we only begin to make some progress in that
which shall be perfected in the future life. For this reason the Apostle
in Rom. 8 [:23] calls all that we attain in this life “the first fruits of
the Spirit” because we shall indeed receive the greater portion, even
the fulness of the Spirit, in the future. This is the place to assert that
which was said above, namely, that a Christian is the servant of all and
made subject to all. Insofar as he is free he does no works, but insofar
as he is a servant he does all kinds of works. How this is possible we
shall see.
Although, as I have said, a man is abundantly and sufficiently justified
by faith inwardly, in his spirit, and so has all that he needs, except
insofar as this faith and these riches must grow from day to day even
to the future life; yet he remains in this mortal life on earth. In this life
he must control his own body and have dealings with men. Here the
works begin; here a man cannot enjoy leisure; here he must indeed take
care to discipline his body by fastings, watchings, labors, and other
reasonable discipline and to subject it to the Spirit so that it will obey
and conform to the inner man and faith and not revolt against faith
and hinder the inner man, as it is the nature of the body to do if it is
not held in check. The inner man, who by faith is created in the image
of God, is both joyful and happy because of Christ in whom so many
benefits are conferred upon him; and therefore it is his one occupation
to serve God joyfully and without thought of gain, in love that is not
constrained.
While he is doing this, behold, he meets a contrary will in his own flesh
which strives to serve the world and seeks its own advantage. This the
spirit of faith cannot tolerate, but with joyful zeal it attempts to put
the body under control and hold it in check, as Paul says in Rom. 7
[:22–23], “For I delight in the law of God, in my inmost self, but I see in
my members another law at war with the law of my mind and making
me captive to the law of sin,” and in another place, “But I pommel
24
The Freedom of a Christian
my body and subdue it, lest after preaching to others I myself should
be disqualified” [I Cor. 9:27], and in Galatians [5:24], “And those who
belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and
desires.”
In doing these works, however, we must not think that a man is justi
fied before God by them, for faith, which alone is righteousness before
God, cannot endure that erroneous opinion. We must, however, re
alize that these works reduce the body to subjection and purify it of
its evil lusts, and our whole purpose is to be directed only toward the
driving out of lusts. Since by faith the soul is cleansed and made to
love God, it desires that all things, and especially its own body, shall
be purified so that all things may join with it in loving and praising
God. Hence a man cannot be idle, for the need of his body drives him
and he is compelled to do many good works to reduce it to subjection.
Nevertheless the works themselves do not justify him before God, but
he does the works out of spontaneous love in obedience to God and
considers nothing except the approval of God, whom he would most
scrupulously obey in all things.
In this way everyone will easily be able to learn for himself the limit and
discretion, as they say, of his bodily castigations, for he will fast, watch,
and labor as much as he finds sufficient to repress the lasciviousness
and lust of his body. But those who presume to be justified by works do
not regard the mortifying of the lusts, but only the works themselves,
and think that if only they have done as many and as great works as are
possible, they have done well and have become righteous. At times
they even addle their brains and destroy, or at least render useless,
their natural strength with their works. This is the height of folly and
utter ignorance of Christian life and faith, that a man should seek to
be justified and saved by works and without faith.
In order to make that which we have said more easily understood, we
shall explain by analogies. We should think of the works of a Christian
who is justified and saved by faith because of the pure and free mercy
of God, just as we would think of the works which Adam and Eve did
in Paradise, and all their children would have done if they had not
sinned. We read in Gen. 2 [:15] that “The Lord God took the man
and put him in the garden of Eden to till it and keep it.” Now Adam
was created righteous and upright and without sin by God so that he
had no need of being justified and made upright through his tilling
and keeping the garden; but, that he might not be idle, the Lord gave
him a task to do, to cultivate and protect the garden. This task would
truly have been the freest of works, done only to please God and not
to obtain righteousness, which Adam already had in full measure and
25
Martin Luther
which would have been the birthright of us all.
The works of a believer are like this. Through his faith he has been
restored to Paradise and created anew, has no need of works that he
may become or be righteous; but that he may not be idle and may
provide for and keep his body, he must do such works freely only to
please God. Since, however, we are not wholly recreated, and our faith
and love are not yet perfect, these are to be increased, not by external
works, however, but of themselves.
A second example: A bishop, when he consecrates a church, confirms
children, or performs some other duty belonging to his office, is not
made a bishop by these works. Indeed, if he had not first been made
a bishop, none of these works would be valid. They would be foolish,
childish, and farcical. So the Christian who is consecrated by his
faith does good works, but the works do not make him holier or more
Christian, for that is the work of faith alone. And if a man were not
first a believer and a Christian, all his works would amount to nothing
and would be truly wicked and damnable sins.
The following statements are therefore true: “Good works do not make
a good man, but a good man does good works; evil works do not make
a wicked man, but a wicked man does evil works.” Consequently it is
always necessary that the substance or person himself be good before
there can be any good works, and that good works follow and proceed
from the good person, as Christ also says, “A good tree cannot bear
evil fruit, nor can a bad tree bear good fruit” [Matt 7:18]. It is clear
that the fruits do not bear the tree and that the tree does not grow on
the fruits, also that, on the contrary, the trees bear the fruits and the
fruits grow on the trees. As it is necessary, therefore, that the trees
exist before their fruits and the fruits do not make trees either good or
bad, but rather as the trees are, so are the fruits they bear; so a man
must first be good or wicked before he does a good or wicked work,
and his works do not make him good or wicked, but he himself makes
his works either good or wicked.
Illustrations of the same truth can be seen in all trades. A good or
a bad house does not make a good or a bad builder; but a good or
a bad builder makes a good or a bad house. And in general, the
work never makes the workman like itself, but the workman makes
the work like himself. So it is with the works of man. As the man
is, whether believer or unbeliever, so also is his work—good if it was
done in faith, wicked if it was done in unbelief. But the converse is not
true, that the work makes the man either a believer or an unbeliever.
As works do not make a man a believer, so also they do not make
26
The Freedom of a Christian
him righteous. But as faith makes a man a believer and righteous,
so faith does good works. Since, then, works justify no one, and a
man must be righteous before he does a good work, it is very evident
that it is faith alone which, because of the pure mercy of God through
Christ and in his Word, worthily and sufficiently justifies and saves
the person. A Christian has no need of any work or law in order to be
saved since through faith he is free from every law and does everything
out of pure liberty and freely. He seeks neither benefit nor salvation
since he already abounds in all things and is saved through the grace
of God because in his faith he now seeks only to please God.
Furthermore, no good work helps justify or save an unbeliever. On
the other hand, no evil work makes him wicked or damns him; but the
unbelief which makes the person and the tree evil does the evil and
damnable works. Hence when a man is good or evil, this is effected not
by the works, but by faith or unbelief, as the Wise Man says, “This
is the beginning of sin, that a man falls away from God” [Cf. Sirach
10:14–15], which happens when he does not believe. And Paul says in
Heb. 11 [:6], “For whoever would draw near to God must believe....”
And Christ says the same: “Either make the tree good, and its fruit
good; or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad” [Matt. 12:33], as if he
would say, “Let him who wishes to have good fruit begin by planting
a good tree.” So let him who wishes to do good works begin not with
the doing of works, but with believing, which makes the person good,
for nothing makes a man good except faith, or evil except unbelief.
It is indeed true that in the sight of men a man is made good or evil
by his works; but this being made good or evil only means that the
man who is good or evil is pointed out and known as such, as Christ
says in Matt. 7 [:20], “Thus you will know them by their fruits.”
All this remains on the surface, however, and very many have been
deceived by this outward appearance and have presumed to write and
teach concerning good works by which we may be justified without
even mentioning faith. They go their way, always being deceived and
deceiving [II Tim. 3:13], progressing, indeed, but into a worse state,
blind leaders of the blind, wearying themselves with many works and
still never attaining to true righteousness [Matt. 15:14]. Of such people
Paul says in II Tim. 3 [:5, 7], “Holding the form of religion but denying
the power of it ... who will listen to anybody and can never arrive at
a knowledge of the truth.”
Whoever, therefore, does not wish to go astray with those blind men
must look beyond works, and beyond laws and doctrines about works.
Turning his eyes from works, he must look upon the person and ask
how he is justified. For the person is justified and saved, not by works
27
Martin Luther
or laws, but by the Word of God, that is, by the promise of his grace,
and by faith, that the glory may remain God’s, who saved us not by
works of righteousness which we have done [Titus 3:5], but by virtue
of his mercy by the word of his grace when we believed [I Cor. 1:21].
From this it is easy to know how far good works are to be rejected or
not, and by what standard all the teachings of men concerning works
are to be interpreted. If works are sought after as a means to righteous
ness, are burdened with this perverse leviathan, and are done under
the false impression that through them one is justified, they are made
necessary and freedom and faith are destroyed; and this addition to
them makes them no longer good but truly damnable works. They are
not free, and they blaspheme the grace of God since to justify and to
save by faith belongs to the grace of God alone. What the works have
no power to do they nevertheless—by a godless presumption through
this folly of ours—pretend to do and thus violently force themselves
into the office and glory of grace. We do not, therefore, reject good
works; on the contrary, we cherish and teach them as much as possible.
We do not condemn them for their own sake but on account of this
godless addition to them and the perverse idea that righteousness is to
be sought through them; for that makes them appear good outwardly,
when in truth they are not good. They deceive men and lead them
to deceive one another like ravening wolves in sheep’s clothing [Matt.
7:15].
But this leviathan, or perverse notion concerning works, is unconquer
able where sincere faith is wanting. Those work-saints cannot get rid
of it unless faith, its destroyer, comes and rules in their hearts. Nature
of itself cannot drive it out or even recognize it, but rather regards it
as a mark of the most holy will. If the influence of custom is added and
confirms this perverseness of nature, as wicked teachers have caused
it to do, it becomes an incurable evil and leads astray and destroys
countless men beyond all hope of restoration. Therefore, although it
is good to preach and write about penitence, confession, and satisfac
tion, our teaching is unquestionably deceitful and diabolical if we stop
with that and do not go on to teach about faith.
Christ, like his forerunner John, not only said, “Repent” [Matt. 3:2;
4:17], but added the word of faith, saying, “The kingdom of heaven
is at hand.” We are not to preach only one of these words of God,
but both; we are to bring forth out of our treasure things new and
old, the voice of the law as well as the word of grace [Matt. 13:52].
We must bring forth the voice of the law that men may be made to
fear and come to a knowledge of their sins and so be converted to
repentance and a better life. But we must not stop with that, for that
28
The Freedom of a Christian
would only amount to wounding and not binding up, smiting and not
healing, killing and not making alive, leading down into hell and not
bringing back again, humbling and not exalting. Therefore we must
also preach the word of grace and the promise of forgiveness by which
faith is taught and aroused. Without this word of grace the works of
the law, contrition, penitence, and all the rest are done and taught in
vain.
Preachers of repentance and grace remain even to our day, but they
do not explain God’s law and promise that a man might learn from
them the source of repentance and grace. Repentance proceeds from
the law of God, but faith or grace from the promise of God, as Rom.
10 [:17] says: “So faith comes from what is heard, and what is heard
comes by the preaching of Christ.” Accordingly man is consoled and
exalted by faith in the divine promise after he has been humbled and
led to a knowledge of himself by the threats and the fear of the divine
law. So we read in Psalm 30 [:5]: “Weeping may tarry for the night,
but joy comes with the morning.”
Let this suffice concerning works in general and at the same time
concerning the works which a Christian does for himself. Lastly, we
shall also speak of the things which he does toward his neighbor. A
man does not live for himself alone in this mortal body to work for
it alone, but he lives also for all men on earth; rather, he lives only
for others and not for himself. To this end he brings his body into
subjection that he may the more sincerely and freely serve others, as
Paul says in Rom. 14 [:7–8], “None of us lives to himself, and none of
us dies to himself. If we live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we
die to the Lord.” He cannot ever in this life be idle and without works
toward his neighbors, for he will necessarily speak, deal with, and
exchange views with men, as Christ also, being made in the likeness of
men [Phil. 2:7], was found in form as a man and conversed with men,
as Baruch 3 [:38] says.
Man, however, needs none of these things for his righteousness and sal
vation. Therefore he should be guided in all his works by this thought
and contemplate this one thing alone, that he may serve and benefit
others in all that he does, considering nothing except the need and the
advantage of his neighbor. Accordingly the Apostle commands us to
work with our hands so that we may give to the needy, although he
might have said that we should work to support ourselves. He says,
however, “that he may be able to give to those in need” [Eph. 4:28].
This is what makes caring for the body a Christian work, that through
its health and comfort we may be able to work, to acquire, and lay by
funds with which to aid those who are in need, that in this way the
29
Martin Luther
strong member may serve the weaker, and we may be sons of God, each
caring for and working for the other, bearing one another’s burdens
and so fulfilling the law of Christ [Gal. 6:2]. This is a truly Christian
life. Here faith is truly active through love [Gal. 5:6], that is, it finds
expression in works of the freest service, cheerfully and lovingly done,
with which a man willingly serves another without hope of reward;
and for himself he is satisfied with the fullness and wealth of his faith.
Accordingly Paul, after teaching the Philippians how rich they were
made through faith in Christ, in which they obtained all things, there
after teaches them, saying, “So if there is any encouragement in Christ,
any incentive of love, any participation in the Spirit, any affection and
sympathy, complete my joy by being of the same mind, having the
same love, being in full accord and of one mind. Do nothing from
selfishness or conceit, but in humility count others better than your
selves. Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also
to the interests of others” [Phil. 2:1–4]. Here we see clearly that the
Apostle has prescribed this rule for the life of Christians, namely, that
we should devote all our works to the welfare of others, since each has
such abundant riches in his faith that all his other works and his whole
life are a surplus with which he can by voluntary benevolence serve
and do good to his neighbor.
As an example of such life the Apostle cites Christ, saying, “Have
this mind among yourselves, which you have in Christ Jesus, who,
though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a
thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant,
being born in the likeness of men. And being found in human form
he humbled himself and became obedient unto death” [Phil. 2:5–8].
This salutary word of the Apostle has been obscured for us by those
who have not at all understood his words, “form of God,” “form of a
servant,” “human form,” “likeness of men,” and have applied them to
the divine and the human nature. Paul means this: Although Christ
was filled with the form of God and rich in all good things, so that
he needed no work and no suffering to make him righteous and saved
(for he had all this eternally), yet he was not puffed up by them and
did not exalt himself above us and assume power over us, although he
could rightly have done so; but, on the contrary, he so lived, labored,
worked, suffered, and died that he might be like other men and in
fashion and in actions be nothing else than a man, just as if he had
need of all these things and had nothing of the form of God. But he
did all this for our sake, that he might serve us and that all things
which he accomplished in this form of a servant might become ours.
30
The Freedom of a Christian
So a Christian, like Christ his head, is filled and made rich by faith
and should be content with this form of God which he has obtained by
faith; only, as I have said, he should increase this faith until it is made
perfect. For this faith is his life, his righteousness, and his salvation: it
saves him and makes him acceptable, and bestows upon him all things
that are Christ’s, as has been said above, and as Paul asserts in Gal.
2 [:20] when he says, “And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith
in the Son of God.” Although the Christian is thus free from all works,
he ought in this liberty to empty himself, take upon himself the form
of a servant, be made in the likeness of men, be found in human form,
and to serve, help, and in every way deal with his neighbor as he sees
that God through Christ has dealt and still deals with him. This he
should do freely, having regard for nothing but divine approval.
He ought to think: “Although I am an unworthy and condemned
man, my God has given me in Christ all the riches of righteousness
and salvation without any merit on my part, out of pure, free mercy,
so that from now on I need nothing except faith which believes that
this is true. Why should I not therefore freely, joyfully, with all my
heart, and with an eager will do all things which I know are pleasing
and acceptable to such a Father who has overwhelmed me with his
inestimable riches? I will therefore give myself as a Christ to my
neighbor, just as Christ offered himself to me; I will do nothing in
this life except what I see is necessary, profitable, and salutary to my
neighbor, since through faith I have an abundance of all good things
in Christ.”
Behold, from faith thus flow forth love and joy in the Lord, and from
love a joyful, willing, and free mind that serves one’s neighbor willingly
and takes no account of gratitude or ingratitude, of praise or blame,
of gain or loss. For a man does not serve that he may put men under
obligations. He does not distinguish between friends and enemies or
anticipate their thankfulness or unthankfulness, but he most freely and
most willingly spends himself and all that he has, whether he wastes
all on the thankless or whether he gains a reward. As his Father does,
distributing all things to all men richly and freely, making “his sun
rise on the evil and on the good” [Matt. 5:45], so also the son does
all things and suffers all things with that freely bestowing joy which
is his delight when through Christ he sees it in God, the dispenser of
such great benefits.
Therefore, if we recognize the great and precious things which are
given us, as Paul says [Rom. 5:5], our hearts will be filled by the Holy
Spirit with the love which makes us free, joyful, almighty workers and
conquerors over all tribulations, servants of our neighbors, and yet
31
Martin Luther
lords of all. For those who do not recognize the gifts bestowed upon
them through Christ, however, Christ has been born in vain; they go
their way with their works and shall never come to taste or feel those
things. Just as our neighbor is in need and lacks that in which we
abound, so we were in need before God and lacked his mercy. Hence,
as our heavenly Father has in Christ freely come to our aid, we also
ought freely to help our neighbor through our body and its works, and
each one should become as it were a Christ to the other that we may
be Christs to one another and Christ may be the same in all, that is,
that we may be truly Christians.
Who then can comprehend the riches and the glory of the Christian
life? It can do all things and has all things and lacks nothing. It is lord
over sin, death, and hell, and yet at the same time it serves, ministers
to, and benefits all men. But alas in our day this life is unknown
throughout the world; it is neither preached about nor sought after;
we are altogether ignorant of our own name and do not know why we
are Christians or bear the name of Christians. Surely we are named
after Christ, not because he is absent from us, but because he dwells
in us, that is, because we believe in him and are Christs one to another
and do to our neighbors as Christ does to us. But in our day we are
taught by the doctrine of men to seek nothing but merits, rewards, and
the things that are ours; of Christ we have made only a taskmaster
far harsher than Moses.
We have a pre-eminent example of such a faith in the blessed Virgin.
As is written in Luke 2 [:22], she was purified according to the law
of Moses according to the custom of all women, although she was not
bound by that law and did not need to be purified. Out of free and
willing love, however, she submitted to the law like other women that
she might not offend or despise them. She was not justified by this
work, but being righteous she did it freely and willingly. So also our
works should be done, not that we may be justified by them, since,
being justified beforehand by faith, we ought to do all things freely
and joyfully for the sake of others.
St. Paul also circumcised his disciple Timothy, not because circumci
sion was necessary for his righteousness, but that he might not offend
or despise the Jews who were weak in the faith and could not yet grasp
the liberty of faith. But, on the other hand, when they despised the
liberty of faith and insisted that circumcision was necessary for righ
teousness, he resisted them and did not allow Titus to be circumcised,
Gal. 2 [:3]. Just as he was unwilling to offend or despise any man’s
weak faith and yielded to their will for a time, so he was also unwill
ing that the liberty of faith should be offended against or despised by
32
The Freedom of a Christian
stubborn, work-righteous men. He chose a middle way, sparing the
weak for a time, but always withstanding the stubborn, that he might
convert all to the liberty of faith. What we do should be done with
the same zeal to sustain the weak in faith, as in Rom. 14 [:1]; but we
should firmly resist the stubborn teachers of works. Of this we shall
say more later.
Christ also, in Matt. 17 [:24–27], when the tax money was demanded
of his disciples, discussed with St. Peter whether the sons of the king
were not free from the payment of tribute, and Peter affirmed that
they were. Nonetheless, Christ commanded Peter to go to the sea and
said, “Not to give offense to them, go to the sea and cast a hook, and
take the first fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth you will
find a shekel; take that and give it to them for me and for yourself.”
This incident fits our subject beautifully for Christ here calls himself
and those who are his children sons of the king, who need nothing;
and yet he freely submits and pays the tribute. Just as necessary and
helpful as this work was to Christ’s righteousness or salvation, just so
much do all other works of his or his followers avail for righteousness,
since they all follow after righteousness and are free and are done only
to serve others and to give them an example of good works.
Of the samenature are the precepts which Paul gives in Rom. 13 [:1–7],
namely, that Christians should be subject to the governing authorities
and be ready to do every good work, not that they shall in this way
be justified, since they already are righteous through faith, but that
in the liberty of the Spirit they shall by so doing serve others and
the authorities themselves and obey their will freely and out of love.
The works of all colleges, monasteries, and priests should be of this
nature. Each one should do the works of his profession and station,
not that by them he may strive after righteousness, but that through
them he may keep his body under control, be an example to others
who also need to keep their bodies under control, and finally that by
such works he may submit his will to that of others in the freedom of
love. But very great care must always be exercised so that no man in
a false confidence imagines that by such works he will be justified or
acquire merit or be saved; for this is the work of faith alone, as I have
repeatedly said.
Anyone knowing this could easily and without danger find his way
through those numberless mandates and precepts of pope, bishops,
monasteries, churches, princes, and magistrates upon which some ig
norant pastors insist as if they were necessary to righteousness and
salvation, calling them “precepts of the church,” although they are
nothing of the kind. For a Christian, as a free man, will say, “I will
33
Martin Luther
fast, pray, do this and that as men command, not because it is neces
sary to my righteousness or salvation; but that I may show due respect
to the pope, the bishop, the community, a magistrate, or my neigh
bor, and give them an example. I will do and suffer all things, just as
Christ did and suffered far more for me, although he needed nothing
of it all for himself, and was made under the law for my sake, although
he was not under the law.” Although tyrants do violence or injustice in
making their demands, yet it will do no harm as long as they demand
nothing contrary to God.
From what has been said, everyone can pass a safe judgment on all
works and laws and make a trustworthy distinction between them and
know who are the blind and ignorant pastors and who are the good
and true. Any work that is not done solely for the purpose of keeping
the body under control or of serving one’s neighbor, as long as he asks
nothing contrary to God, is not good or Christian. For this reason
I greatly fear that few or no colleges, monasteries, altars, and offices
of the church are really Christian in our day—nor the special fasts
and prayers on certain saints’ days. I fear, I say, that in all these we
seek only our profit, thinking that through them our sins are purged
away and that we find salvation in them. In this way Christian liberty
perishes altogether. This is a consequence of our ignorance of Christian
faith and liberty.
This ignorance and suppression of liberty very many blind pastors
take pains to encourage. They stir up and urge on their people in
these practices by praising such works, puffing them up with their
indulgences, and never teaching faith. If, however, you wish to pray,
fast, or establish a foundation in the church, I advise you to be careful
not to do it in order to obtain some benefit, whether temporal or
eternal, for you would do injury to your faith which alone offers you
all things. Your one care should be that faith may grow, whether it
is trained by works or sufferings. Make your gifts freely and for no
consideration, so that others may profit by them and fare well because
of you and your goodness. In this way you shall be truly good and
Christian. Of what benefit to you are the good works which you do
not need for keeping your body under control? Your faith is sufficient
for you, through which God has given you all things.
See, according to this rule the good things we have from God should
flow from one to the other and be common to all, so that everyone
should “put on” his neighbor and so conduct himself toward him as
if he himself were in the other’s place. From Christ the good things
have flowed and are flowing into us. He has so “put on” us and acted
for us as if he had been what we are. From us they flow on to those
34
The Freedom of a Christian
who have need of them so that I should lay before God my faith and
my righteousness that they may cover and intercede for the sins of my
neighbor which I take upon myself and so labor and serve in them as
if they were my very own. That is what Christ did for us. This is true
love and the genuine rule of a Christian life. Love is true and genuine
where there is true and genuine faith. Hence the Apostle says of love
in I Cor. 13 [:5] that “it does not seek its own.”
We conclude, therefore, that a Christian lives not in himself, but in
Christ and in his neighbor. Otherwise he is not a Christian. He lives
in Christ through faith, in his neighbor through love. By faith he
is caught up beyond himself into God. By love he descends beneath
himself into his neighbor. Yet he always remains in God and in his
love, as Christ says in John 1 [:51], “Truly, truly, I say to you, you will
see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending
upon the Son of man.”
Enough now of freedom. As you see, it is a spiritual and true freedom
and makes our hearts free from all sins, laws and commands, as Paul
says, I Tim. 1 [:9], “The law is not laid down for the just.” It is
more excellent than all other liberty, which is external, as heaven is
more excellent than earth. May Christ give us this liberty both to
understand and to preserve. Amen.
Finally, something must be added for the sake of those for whom noth
ing can be said so well that they will not spoil it by misunderstanding
it. It is questionable whether they will understand even what will be
said here. There are very many who, when they hear of this freedom
of faith, immediately turn it into an occasion for the flesh and think
that now all things are allowed them. They want to show that they
are free men and Christians only by despising and finding fault with
ceremonies, traditions, and human laws; as if they were Christians be
cause on stated days they do not fast or eat meat when others fast, or
because they do not use the accustomed prayers, and with upturned
nose scoff at the precepts of men, although they utterly disregard all
else that pertains to the Christian religion. The extreme opposite of
these are those who rely for their salvation solely on their reverent ob
servance of ceremonies, as if they would be saved because on certain
days they fast or abstain from meats, or pray certain prayers; these
make a boast of the precepts of the church and of the fathers, and
do not care a fig for the things which are of the essence of our faith.
Plainly, both are in error because they neglect the weightier things
which are necessary to salvation, and quarrel so noisily about trifling
and unnecessary matters.
35
Martin Luther
How much better is the teaching of the Apostle Paul who bids us take
a middle course and condemns both sides when he says, “Let not him
who eats despise him who abstains, and let not him who abstains pass
judgment on him who eats” [Rom. 14:3]. Here you see that they who
neglect and disparage ceremonies, not out of piety, but out of mere
contempt, are reproved, since the Apostle teaches us not to despise
them. Such men are puffed up by knowledge. On the other hand, he
teaches those who insist on the ceremonies not to judge the others, for
neither party acts toward the other according to the love that edifies.
Wherefore we ought to listen to Scripture which teaches that we should
not go aside to the right or to the left [Deut. 28:14] but follow the
statutes of the Lord which are right, “rejoicing the heart” [Ps. 19:8].
As a manis not righteous because he keeps and clings to the works and
forms of the ceremonies, so also will a man not be counted righteous
merely because he neglects and despises them.
Our faith in Christ does not free us from works but from false opinions
concerning works, that is, from the foolish presumption that justifi
cation is acquired by works. Faith redeems, corrects, and preserves
our consciences so that we know that righteousness does not consist
in works, although works neither can nor ought to be wanting; just as
we cannot be without food and drink and all the works of this mortal
body, yet our righteousness is not in them, but in faith; and yet those
works of the body are not to be despised or neglected on that account.
In this world we are bound by the needs of our bodily life, but we
are not righteous because of them. “My kingship is not of this world”
[John 18:36], says Christ. He does not, however, say, “My kingship is
not here, that is, in this world.” And Paul says, “Though we live in
the world we are not carrying on a worldly war” [II Cor. 10:3], and in
Gal. 2 [:20], “The life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son
of God.” Thus what we do, live, and are in works and ceremonies, we
do because of the necessities of this life and of the effort to rule our
body. Nevertheless we are righteous, not in these, but in the faith of
the Son of God.
Hence the Christian must take a middle course and face those two
classes of men. He will meet first the unyielding, stubborn ceremoni
alists who like deaf adders are not willing to hear the truth of liberty
[Ps. 58:4] but, having no faith, boast of, prescribe, and insist upon
their ceremonies as means of justification. Such were the Jews of old,
who were unwilling to learn how to do good. These he must resist, do
the very opposite, and offend them boldly lest by their impious views
they drag many with them into error. In the presence of such men it
is good to eat meat, break the fasts, and for the sake of the liberty
36
The Freedom of a Christian
of faith do other things which they regard as the greatest of sins. Of
them we must say, “Let them alone; they are blind guides.” According
to this principle Paul would not circumcise Titus when the Jews in
sisted that he should [Gal. 2:3], and Christ excused the apostles when
they plucked ears of grain on the sabbath [Matt. 12:1–8]. There are
many similar instances. The other class of men whom a Christian will
meet are the simple-minded, ignorant men, weak in the faith, as the
Apostle calls them, who cannot yet grasp the liberty of faith, even if
they were willing to do so [Rom. 14:1]. These he must take care not
to offend. He must yield to their weakness until they are more fully
instructed. Since they do and think as they do, not because they are
stubbornly wicked, but only because their faith is weak, the fasts and
other things which they consider necessary must be observed to avoid
giving them offense. This is the command of love which would harm
no one but would serve all men. It is not by their fault that they are
weak, but by that of their pastors who have taken them captive with
the snares of their traditions and have wickedly used these traditions
as rods with which to beat them. They should have been delivered
from these pastors by the teachings of faith and freedom. So the Apos
tle teaches us in Romans 14: “If food is a cause of my brother’s falling,
I will never eat meat” [Cf. Rom. 14:21 and I Cor. 8:13]; and again,
“I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean
in itself; but it is unclean for any one who thinks it unclean” [Rom.
14:14].
For this reason, although we should boldly resist those teachers of
traditions and sharply censure the laws of the popes by means of which
they plunder the people of God, yet we must spare the timid multitude
whom those impious tyrants hold captive by means of these laws until
they are set free. Therefore fight strenuously against the wolves, but
for the sheep and not also against the sheep. This you will do if
you inveigh against the laws and the lawgivers and at the same time
observe the laws with the weak so that they will not be offended, until
they also recognize tyranny and understand their freedom. If you wish
to use your freedom, do so in secret, as Paul says, Rom. 14 [:22], “The
faith that you have, keep between yourself and God”; but take care not
to use your freedom in the sight of the weak. On the other hand, use
your freedom constantly and consistently in the sight of and despite
the tyrants and the stubborn so that they also may learn that they
are impious, that their laws are of no avail for righteousness, and that
they had no right to set them up.
Since we cannot live our lives without ceremonies and works, and the
perverse and untrained youth need to be restrained and saved from
37
Martin Luther
harm by such bonds; and since each one should keep his body under
control by means of such works, there is need that the minister of
Christ be far-seeing and faithful. He ought so to govern and teach
Christians in all these matters that their conscience and faith will not
be offended and that there will not spring up in them a suspicion and a
root of bitterness and many will thereby be defiled, as Paul admonishes
the Hebrews [Heb. 12:15]; that is, that they may not lose faith and
become defiled by the false estimate of the value of works and think
that they must be justified by works. Unless faith is at the same time
constantly taught, this happens easily and defiles a great many, as has
been done until now through the pestilent, impious, soul-destroying
traditions of our popes and the opinions of our theologians. By these
snares numberless souls have been dragged down to hell, so that you
might see in this the work of Antichrist.
In brief, as wealth is the test of poverty, business the test of faith
fulness, honors the test of humility, feasts the test of temperance,
pleasures the test of chastity, so ceremonies are the test of the righ
teousness of faith. “Can a man,” asks Solomon, “carry fire in his
bosom and his clothes and not be burned?” [Prov. 6:27]. Yet as a
man must live in the midst of wealth, business, honors, pleasures, and
feasts, so also must he live in the midst of ceremonies, that is, in the
midst of dangers. Indeed, as infant boys need beyond all else to be
cherished in the bosoms and by the hands of maidens to keep them
from perishing, yet when they are grown up their salvation is endan
gered if they associate with maidens, so the inexperienced and perverse
youth need to be restrained and trained by the iron bars of ceremonies
lest their unchecked ardor rush headlong into vice after vice. On the
other hand, it would be death for them always to be held in bondage
to ceremonies, thinking that these justify them. They are rather to
be taught that they have been so imprisoned in ceremonies, not that
they should be made righteous or gain great merit by them, but that
they might thus be kept from doing evil and might more easily be
instructed to the righteousness of faith. Such instruction they would
not endure if the impulsiveness of their youth were not restrained.
Hence ceremonies are to be given the same place in the life of a Chris
tian as models and plans have among builders and artisans. They are
prepared, not as a permanent structure, but because without them
nothing could be built or made. When the structure is complete the
models and plans are laid aside. You see, they are not despised, rather
they are greatly sought after; but what we despise is the false estimate
of them since no one holds them to be the real and permanent struc
ture.
38
The Freedom of a Christian
If any man were so flagrantly foolish as to care for nothing all his
life long except the most costly, careful, and persistent preparation
of plans and models and never to think of the structure itself, and
were satisfied with his work in producing such plans and mere aids
to work, and boasted of it, would not all men pity his insanity and
think that something great might have been built with what he has
wasted? Thus we do not despise ceremonies and works, but we set
great store by them; but we despise the false estimate placed upon
works in order that no one may think that they are true righteousness,
as those hypocrites believe who spend and lose their whole lives in zeal
for works and never reach that goal for the sake of which the works are
to be done, who, as the Apostle says, “will listen to anybody and can
never arrive at a knowledge of the truth” [II Tim. 3:7]. They seem to
wish to build, they make their preparations, and yet they never build.
Thus they remain caught in the form of religion and do not attain unto
its power [II Tim. 3:5]. Meanwhile they are pleased with their efforts
and even dare to judge all others whom they do not see shining with
a like show of works. Yet with the gifts of God which they have spent
and abused in vain they might, if they had been filled with faith, have
accomplished great things to their own salvation and that of others.
Since human nature and natural reason, as it is called, are by nature
superstitious and ready to imagine, when laws and works are pre
scribed, that righteousness must be obtained through laws and works;
and further, since they are trained and confirmed in this opinion by
the practice of all earthly lawgivers, it is impossible that they should of
themselves escape from the slavery of works and come to a knowledge
of the freedom of faith. Therefore there is need of the prayer that the
Lord may give us and make us theodidacti, that is, those taught by
God [John 6:45], and himself, as he has promised, write his law in our
hearts; otherwise there is no hope for us. If he himself does not teach
our hearts this wisdom hidden in mystery [I Cor. 2:7], nature can only
condemn it and judge it to be heretical because nature is offended by
it and regards it as foolishness. So we see that it happened in the
old days in the case of the apostles and prophets, and so godless and
blind popes and their flatterers do to me and to those who are like
me. May God at last be merciful to them and to us and cause his face
to shine upon us that we may know his way upon earth [Ps. 67:1–2],
his salvation among all nations, God, who is blessed forever [II Cor.
11:31]. Amen.