Series 


Enchiridion 
of 
Commonplaces 


Translated by Ford Lewis Baftles 


oti Eck 


Enchiridion of Commonplaces 


Enchiridion of Commonplaces 


Against Luther 
and Other Enemies 
of the Church 


John Eck 


Translated by 
Ford Lewis Battles 


BAKER BOOK HOUSE 
Grand Rapids, Michigan 


Copyright 1979 by 
Baker Book House Company 


ISBN: 0-8010-3252-7 


PHOTOLITHOPRINTED BY CUSHING - MALLOY, INC. 
ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
1979 


PREFACE 


This first English translation of John Eck, Enchiridion Looorum Com- 
munium, was made in December 1975 - January 1976, as the textbook for a 
course entitled, "The Reformation in Dialogue," offered at Duquesne Uni- 
versity. To Father Charles J. Fenner, Chairman of the Graduate Depart- 
ment of Religion, who invited me to teach, encouraged me to undertake the 
translation project, and who made arrangements for the initial printing 


and publication of the book, go my grateful thanks. 


Much of the draft translation was dictated to my wife, Marion, whose 
discriminating eye saved me from more egregious blunders than those whioh 
have found their way into the pages of this translation. I am deepiy in 
her debt. 


The first edition of the translation was made from the 1529 edition, 
partially collated with the 1532 edition, and completely checked against 
the 1572 edition, the only editions available to me at that time. I ac- 
knowledge assistance from the now defunct Case Memorial Library of Hart- 
ford, Connecticut; Barbour Library, Pittsburgh, Pa; and, for additional 
texts used in annotation, from the Centre for Reformation and Renaissance 
Studies of the University of Toronto, and the Center for Reformation 


Studies of St, Louis, Missouri. 


A complete revision of the original translation was made possible 
by the provision of a microfilm of the 1541 Ingolstadt edition, on which 
the present edition rests. Reoently, Dr. Pierre Fraenkel, Directeur de 
l'Institut d'Histoire de la Reformation, Geneva, oompleted (after twelve 
years of labor) a definitive edition of the Enchiridion, to appear 
in Corpus Catholicorum, Muenster i.W. Sinoe this edition was not yet 
available to the translator, l'Institut (through the good offices of Dr. 
Gerald Hobbs) kindly supplied the 1541 microfilm, considered by the editor 
to be the best of the many editions printed. There are, however, some 
significant passages in the 1529 and/or 1532 editions, later suppressed by 
the author or his successors, which have been included, enclosed within 


brackets and marginally annotated. 


05830 


Preface (2) 


Chapter 38, On Private Masses (an issue that came to a head at the In- 
perial Diet of Ratisbonne in 1541) and was subsequently dropped from the 
text, has been included. The 1541 (eighth) edition is headed by a dedication 


to Cardinal Alexander Farnese, also translated here. 


Among the various persons who assisted the translator, he would mention 
the following typists: Edward Sieger, Priscilla Boyd, Ethel Brunger, Adrianna 
J. De Ridder; also Peter De Klerk, Theological Librarian at Calvin Theological 
Seminary, Grand Rapids, Michigan, for providing a print of the 1541 text, and 


for many other helps. 


Particular thanks go to the Director of the Jagiellonian Library at the 
University of Krakow, Poland, Prof. dr. hab. Wladyslaw Serczyk and to his 
staff for the identification of a reference to Maciej from Miechow, Chronica 
Polonorum (pp. 264, 269, below); and to Tadeusz %. Korsak, Esq., of Pittsburgh 
who, through Dr. Feliks Gross of the Polish American Library in New York City, 
forwarded the translator's query to Krakow. 


This, the third edition, undertaken by Baker Book House, contains further 


improvements, including additional notes. 


The translator's purpose has been to provide, in English, Eck's classic 
controversial work; it lays no claim to definitiveness. The translator has, 
however, precisely identified many, but not all, of the sources used by Eck. 
These are largely indicated in the text, within square brackets; sometimes 
at the foot of the page. Most of the additional end-notes refer to the coun- 
ter-positions held by Luther, Zwingli, Calvin, and others, which are sketched 
by the author in the sections of the Enchiridion, entitled “Objections of 
the Heretics." These references are provided chiefly for the convenience of 


students desirous of reconstructing for themselves the theological dialogue. 


16 June 1979 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Introduction Oh, WO cee ie Taber MeMRECNrD we te ep ache, Galen 
Ibacbleatcory Wyppitels: “8 5 a 8 6 56 5 5 0 eo a uo 
Chapter 1: Concerning the Church and Her Authority 
Cnapiee 29 On Gomaeiis 5 5 5 2 so oo 6 a 
Chapter 3: On the Primacy of the Apostolic and 
POOLITEMSCC ia cee eile ene Sessa 
Chapter 4: That the Heretics Rashly Oppose the 
CHORES 5 5 5 9 5 5 On 6 6G 4 a 
Chapter 5: Concerning Faith and Works . . 
Chapter 6: Concerning Confirmation ........ 
Chapter 7: Concerning the Sacrament of Order ... 
Cmepicsie ES Om Clemsccciieg 1 5 » 6 » 6 6 6 ou 6 
(Gmeyiese Le ii GEeeeielA so . o 6 0 6 5 a 4 6 
Chapter 10: On the Eucharist under Both Kinds .. 
Chapter 1l: Concerning Marriage .....4... 
Chapter 12: Concerning Extreme Unction.. . 
Chapter 13: On Human Constitutions ...... 
Chapter 14: On Feasts and Fasts ....4.4.4+4+4+e-. 
Chapter 15: Concerning the Veneration of the Saints 
Chapter 16: Concerning the Images of the Crucified 
ela Gis ae Gewese » 5 ao 5 6 6 6 6 8 6 6 
Chapter 17: On the Sacrifice of the Mass... 
Chapter 18: Concerning Vows .. 
Chapter 19: Concerning the Celibacy of the Clergy 
Chapter 20: Concerning Cardinals and Legates of the 
AMIOREONIE BES o 6 oo 6 9 6 oo ooo 8 
Chapter 21: Concerning Excommunication . ...... 
Chapter 22: Concerning the War against the Turks .. 
Chapter 23: Concerning the Immunity and Wealth 
Of EhEVChYrch ee 
Chapter 24: On Indulgences . ....+ +++ ++-e-. 


1* 


100 
110 


U22 
127 
134 
142 


148 
150 
155 


159 
165 


Chapter 25: 
Chapter 26: 
Chapter 27: 
Chapter 28: 


Chapter 29: 


Chapter 30: 
Chapter 31: 
Chapter 32: 
Chapter 33: 
“Chapter 34: 


Chapter 35: 
Chapter 36: 
Chapter 37: 


Chapter 38: 


(2) 


On Purgatory oe te th 
Concerning Annates oes gh a 
Concerning the Burning of Heretics . 


Disputations with Heretics Are to Be 
WEEK GA Oo 8 Oo 0 Oo GO oD Oo 8 6 


That Under the Eucharist Is the True 
ISGXOIS) (OE (CHOEPSISIE =o G8 6 6 


Concerning the Baptism of Children 

On Free Will... . 

On Prayer and the Canonical Hours . 
On Plurality of Priests and on Tithes 


On the Building of Churches and Their 
WEG aNsyewh Go Go fF oO 6 6 6 8 6 bo # 


On the (Indelible) Stamp (Character) 
On Transubstantiation ........ 


That Masses Are to Be Said in Latin, 
NOG invGerman ceed eres 


On Private Masses .....+e+6-s 


Gerentepyesl eles 4 6 5 0 5 59 OF o be Oo 0 o © ob 


Author Index 


170 
175 
178 


186 


191 
201 
210 
220 
234 


244 
254 
258 


264 
270 
285 
295 


INTRODUCTION 


1. The Life of John Eck (1486-1541) 


a. Early Years. Hans Maier was born at Egg (Eck) on the 
Gunz, in Swabia in November 1486, the son of a peasant, Michael 
Maier, who was the bailiff of the village. After 1505, he tock 
the surname "Eckius,'’ from his native place. Eck's earliest 
studies were under the direction of his uncle Martin Maier, the 
parish priest at Rothenburg on the Neca: When he was twelve 
years of age, his uncle sent him to the University of Heidelberg, 
then to the Universities of Tubingen, Cologne, and lastly Freiburg- 
im-Breisgau. The twelve years of university study were a time of 
rapid success, doubtless contributing to Eck's supreme self- 
confidence which marked his later career. Made sententiarius in 
1506, ordained priest at Strasbourg in 1508, he was in 1510 doc- 
tor of theology, and was in that year called to the chair of the- 


ology, at the University of Ingolstadt in Bavaria. 


He had already published in 1507 his Logices exercitamenta, 
which marked him as opposed to the scholastic philosophy, and 
inclining to the modernist side, an attitude which earned him the 
opposition of the university senate at Freiburg. Hence his ac- 
ceptance of the Duke of Bavaria's invitation to the theological 
chair at Ingolstadt. Entrusted by a ducal commission with the task 
of finding a via media between rival philosophical factions, Eck 
published commentaries on Aristotle which became university text- 
books. Eck mastered both Greek and Hebrew and made a study of 
geography. His driving energy and prodigious memory, coupled with 
his argumentative skill, put his vast learning at the service of 


the Church. 


Eck's earliest theological investigation was concerned with 
the doctrine of predestination and grace, his Chrysopassus pre- 
destinationis (1514). In this work, which 0. Chadwick, (The 


Reformation, p. 94), perhaps too harshly calls “an intellectual 


1s 


exercise to train his youthful mind," Eck, following St. Bona- 


venture, accepts conditional predestination and reprobation. 


The wideness of his pursuits is iilustrated by the fact 
that in the same year he championed the lending of money at 
interest against Cochlaeus and Adelmann; he debated this topic 
publicly at Augsburg, advocating a 5% rate; and again the follow- 
ing year (1515) at Bologna. His adversaries called him "the 
theologian of the Fuggers"; actually his success did win him the 
patronage of that banking family. His long treatise on usury has 
remained unpublished. Also in 1515 he debated on predestina- 
tion. in 1516 he again entered the lists in Vienna. Eck also 


attacked Erasmus’ Annotationes in Novum Testamentum. 


b. The Conflict with Martin Luther. Eck and Luther began 
a friendly correspondence early in 1517. However, when Martin 
Luther brought forth his 95 Theses on indulgences, he sent a 

copy to Eck, who did not respond directly, but circulated against 
Luther his Obelisci (obeliscus is a mark placed on the margin of 
a book to flag a suspected passage). Luther countered in March 
1518 with his Asterisci (asteriscus is a small star, a typo- 
graphical mark placed before imperfect, deficient passages of 
authorey, © Both writings are marked by vehement language. Eck 


did not answer Luther's Asterisci. 


Andreas Bodenstein Carlstadt now entered the quarrel. As 
dean of the theological faculty of the University of Wittenberg, 
he wrote 370 theses to defend his faculty against the insult of 
Eck. Although Eck realized his attack on Luther in the Obelisci 
had been excessive and so wrote his regrets to Carlstadt, things 
had gone too far, and a confrontation was inevitable. Hence Eck 
brought forth counter-theses and challenged Carlstadt to debate. 
It took nearly a year to make arrangements for the debate, which 
was held at Leipzig, 27 June~ 14 July 1519. During the months 


of preparation for the debate, Eck first set forth twelve theses, 


Qe 


eleven on indulgences, and one on papal supremacy, the latter 
clearly a challenge to Luther rather than Carlstadt. To Luther's 
twelve counter-theses, Eck responded with a revised list, in- 


cluding a thirteenth thesis on free will, directed against Carlstadt. 


Luther's party set out from Wittenberg to Leipzig in a group 
of wagons, the first two of which Carlstadt occupied with his 
reference books, followed by Luther and Melanchthon. The party was 
surrounded by almost 200 armed students and others. Just before 
they reached their destination Carlstadt's wagon broke down, scat- 


tering his learned tomes in the mud. 


The debate was held in the auditorium of the castle. The 
ground rules for the disputation favored Eck: there were to be 
no stenographers; the theological faculties at Erfurt and Paris 
were to judge the debate; lastly, no books were to be admitted-— 


a harsh blow at Carlstadt. 


The first seven days of the debate were occupied with argu- 


ments between Eck and Carlstadt over the freedom of the will, 


Eck asserting the necessity of the concurrence of grace and will 


for all meritorious actions. In the second week Eck and Luther 
debated the primacy of the pope and the apostolic origin of that 
office; in the third week they turned to penance, purgatory, 
indulgences, and the power of the priest to grant absolution. 
The iast three days of the disputation were taken up with new 
topics between Eck and Carlstadt. Eck, lionized by the Leip- 


gzigers, was declared the victor by the Leipzig theologians. 


Eck's position in the debate against Luther was vo luminously 
elaborated in his On the Primacy of Peter against Luther (Ingol- 
stadt, 1520). Although in this work, and in the debate that 
preceded it, Eck made a brilliant use of patristic and conciliar 
materials, Luther said of him that although he was "a man vari- 
ously and richly learned in human knowledge and scholastic opin- 
ions, he was a miserable debater on the Sacred Scriptures" 


(Pelikan, Luther the Expositor, p. 111). 


3% 


The chief immediate outcome of the debate, however, was the 
framing and promulgation of the papal bull, Exsurge Domine, in 
which Eck took a large part, and nearly lost his life in trying 
to publish it in Saxony. Eck continued to hound Luther, making 
frequent journeys to Rome; in the period 1522-26 he published 
eight major works against the Reformation. These include: On 
Penance and Secret Confession, On the Sacraments, On Purgatory, 
On Satisfaction, On the Beginning of Penance. During this time 
he virtually established the Senate of the University of Ingol- 
stadt as an inquisition, responsible for the persecution of 


heretics. 


In 1525 his best-known work and principal treatise appeared 


2 
at Landshut, Enchiridion locorum communium, ostensibly directed 


against the Loci Communes of Philip Melanchthon, although Luther 
is of course his prime target. The Enchiridion went through 46 
editions between 1525-1576, and 91 editions to 1600. ‘To this we 


will turn in more detail later in this introduction. 


c. The Conflict with the Zwinglians. In 1526 Eck turned his 
attention to the Swiss Reformers, addressing himself to the euchar- 
istic teachings of Zwingli and Oecolampadius. Eck hoped to debate 
with Zwingli in person, but the latter, afraid a safe conduct would 
net be honored, was represented by Oecolampadius, the Reformer 

of Basel, and Berchthold Haller, the Reformer of Berne. Eck was 
assisted by Thomas Murner. In characteristic Swiss fashion, 

the disputation, which began on 19 May in the Church at Baden, 

was attended by the scholars and representatives of the Swiss 
Confederation, Catholic and Protestant. Two secretaries were 
elected from each side to transcribe the debate under oath. Four 
chairmen were then elected from the representatives of the various 
towns, who accepted a five-fold agenda. Eck presented seven 

brief propositions: transubstantiation (1,2), intercession of 

the saints (3), images (4), purgatory (5), baptism and original 


sin (6,7). Following the debate the judges voted to condemn 


Zwingli. Thus Eck had a part in maintaining a religiously divided 
Switzerland as well as a divided Germany. Also, the Baden dispute 
served to confirm the Zwinglians in their memorial view of the 
Supper against not only the Roman Catholics, but against the 


Lutherans as well. 


(1527) as well as other treatises and sermons which, translated in- 


to German, were published at Ingolstadt csibe seems” 


d. Later Disputations: Augsburg and After. Eck's next 
major appearance was at the Diet of Augsburg in 1530 where, in 
response to the Confessio Augustana drafted by Philip Melanchthon, 
he debated with Melanchthon and was a major author (with 20 other 
Catholic theologians) of the Confutatio Romana (rewritten 5 times 
at the insistence of the Emperor) to which Melanchthon's Apology 
of the Augsburg Confession (1531) was in reply. The Confutatio 
expressed agreement with the Lutherans on Civil Government, the 
Return of Christ in Judgment, and the Cause of Sin, and partial 
agreement on Free Will. Areas of disagreement included: Communion 
in both Kinds, the Marriage of Priests, the Mass, Confession, 
Fasting, Vows, and the Authority of Bishops. During this period 


he published his Refutation of Zwingli's Articles. 


Eck made a complete translation of the Bible into German 
which appeared in 1537. At the colloquies of Hagenau, Worms, 
and Regensburg (1540-41) Eck stood firm against the Catholic 
supporters of Conciliation, Contarini, Pflug, and Gropper, even 
as Luther stood against the more irenic Bucer and Melanchthon. 
Thus, in their intransigence, Luther and Eck proved to be kindred 
spirits after all, although at opposite ends of the dispute. The 
Interim was as stoutly opposed by Eck from the Catholic side as 
it was by Luther and Calvin from the Protestant. Out of these 
conversations came Eck's last works, directed primarily against 


Martin Bucer, the Reformer of Strasbourg, Apology for the Catholic 


Princes (Ingolstadt, 1542), and Replica Eckii (1543). 


5x 


As with Luther, conflicting pictures of Eck's character have 
come down to us. Over against Protestant strictures about his 
drunkenness, unchastity, greed, and ambition, is the more Catholic 
picture of a devoted pastor and teacher who as parish priest at 
Ingolstadt preached in a six-year period 476 sermons. He also 
left, in his Cure of Souls, a precise account of his pastoral 
work. Concurrently, he held the chair of theology for 30 years 


at the University of:Ingolstadt, and served as its vice-chancellor. 


Eck died 10 February 1543, worn out with his incessant 
battling for what he held to be the true faith., A collection of 
his writings against Luther, the Opera contra Ludderum, in four 
volumes was published in 1530-35. Professor Gerald Hobbs has 
written me that (1975) with the resumption of the Corpus Cathol- 
icorum, there will appear @ critical edition of Eck, Enchiridion, 


under the direction of Professor Frankel at Geneva. 


e. Bibliographic note: The material for this biographical 
essay was drawn from A. Humbert, "Joannes Eck," Dictionnaire de 
Théologie Catholique, cols. 2056f; "Eck, Johann Maier," Encyclo-- 
pedia Britannica, llth ed. 8.884f; H. J. Grimm, Career of the 
Reformer, Luther's Works, vol. 31; The Reformation Era 1500-1650; 
G. H. Williams, The Radical Reformation; 0. Chadwick, The Reforma- 
tion; R. Banton, Here I Stand (also the source for the picture of 
Eck printed on the cover); H. Hillerbrand, The Reformation; 


J. Pelikan, Luther the Expositor; also various works of Eck. 


2. The Enchiridion 


a. Text. Originally made from a composite text, derived 
from the 1529, 1532 and 1572 editions, it has been totally re- 
vised for the second edition from the 1541 Ingolstadt edition. 
However, some rejected passages from the 1529 and 1532 editions 
have been included in this translation. They are marked in the 


margin as are the folios of the 1541 text. 


6* 


The present translation may be presumed to be provisional 
in nature; the underlying text, although not a critically estab- 
lished one, is sufficiently accurate to set forth Eck's views 
without distortion. Numerous references to Canon Law (mainly to 
Gratian) have been collated with Friedberg's standard text of the 
Corpus Juris Canonici, to which reference is made by volume and 
column number. Time did not permit the proving of all the numerous 
patristic references, except where there was some critical question. 
All Scripture was conformed to the Vulgate, and the English trans- 


lation generally follows the standard Duay-Rheims version. 


b. The Work of Tilmann. Beginning in the 1529 editicn, 
Eck invited his colleague, F. Tilmann, Prior of the Dominican 
Convent, Cologne, to provide both brief notes and longer escur- 
suses to buttress his arguments. These interpolations are most 
clearly shown in the edition of 1532: beginnings by *, ends by 
awd. The translator has not tried to mark all these, but the 


longer additions are noted. Some of these were suppressed or 
shortenel in the edition of 1541. 


c. Additions and Relation to Other Works of Eck. The earlier 
editions of the Enchiridion reflect Eck's indefatigable dialogues 
with his opponents. The 1529 edition, itself a substantial en- 
largement of the earlier editions of 1525ff (Chapters 29-33 were 
added at the ee was in turn expanded, both within existing 
chapters (e.g., Chapter 2, On Councils) and by the addition of 
other chapters (e.g., Chapter 9, On Satisfaction). Subsequent 
to 1532, still other chapters were added (e.g., Chapters 34-36). 
The edition of 1541 further adds Chapter 37, On the Masses not 
to be Said in German, and Chapter 38, On Private Masses. As these 
additions were made, Eck added also references to specialized 
polemic works by other Catholic controverstalists, but also some 
from his own pen that had appeared chiefly in the decade 1520- 
1530: On the Primacy of Peter (1520), On Repentance, On Con- 
fession, On Images, On the Sacrifice of the Mass (1526), On 


Purgatory (1523), and various Homilies. 


7* 


d. Eck's Method. Such system as Eck displays in the Enchiri- 
dion is confined largely to the shape of the individual chapters, 
which really reflect the propositional method of dealing with 
his opponents in the various disputes: Leipzig (1519), Baden 
(1526), Augsburg (1530), etc. Nowhere does he deal with the 
sacraments in general, to take one example. The discussion of the 
Eucharist is distributed among Chapters 10, 17, 29, and 36. The 
treatment of the other sacraments is found in Chapters 6, 7, ll, 
12, and 35. Sometimes related topics are handled in contiguous 
chapters, as Authority (Ch. 1), Councils (Ch. 2), Papal Primacy 
(Ch. 3); or Confession (Ch. 8) and Satisfaction (Ch. 9); Indul- 
gences (Ch. 24) and Purgatory (Ch. 25); Veneration of the Saints 
(Ch. 15), and Images of the Saints (Ch. 16). But Eck is neither 
a true scholastic nor a systematic theologian; he is a consummate 
controversialist who has at his finger-tips a vast supply of texts, 
scriptural, patristic, and conciliar. Im a sense the very reten- 
tiveness of his memory is an obstacle to more sustained theologiz- 


ing. 


In most chapters, Eck begins with a group of texts set in 
Vulgate canonical order; then he passes to texts from the fathers 
and from later Christian writers, as well as from councils. Many 
of these non-Biblical texts are taken verbatim from the Decretals 
of Gratian or of Gregory IX, or at least suggested by the canonists. 
A full source study would probably disclose that still more texts 
have been supplied from the canonists; in the present translation 
only explicit references or other obvious implicit ones have 
been given. Eck's chief historical source is Cassiodorus' 
Tripartite History. He cites occasionally the Glossa Ordinaria 


for Scriptural Exegesis. There are a few references to Roman law. 


That Eck is abreast of the texts made available since the 
invention of printing is seen in his citation of Ignatius (in the 


long recension, of course, including letters later proved spurious), 


8x 


and his extensive use of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, an 
author already cast in question by Erasmus, Luther, and others. 
These intermixed pseudonymous and genuine early texts are espe- 
cially used to buttress the authority of the Roman Church and to 
claim antiquity for practices questioned on historical grounds by 


the Reformers. 


The principal supporting texts having been set forth, Eck now 
briefly states the chief contrary arguments of his opponents. 
These are, in the final section of the chapter, refuted seriatim. 
Sometimes, however, a chapter is divided into several axiomata 
or propositions, each separately dealt with (e.g., Chapter 1, The 


Church and Her Authority). 


It is obvious from the topical organization of the Enchiridion 
that the earlier chapters reflect the fundamental initial debates 
with Luther and his followers. Melanchthon is mentioned only once: 
Eck left td other Catholic controversialists the task of speci- 
fically refuting him.® Later chapters turn in more detailed fashion 
to Carlstadt, Zwingli and Oecolampadius. Bucer is mentioned only 
once, and Calvin of course not at all, for the Enchiridion was a 
completed book before he came on the Reformatory scene in 1536. 
Certain topics reflect Eck's concern with regard to the Anabaptists. 
Especially poignant is his critique of his former pupil and pro- 
tege, Balthasar Hubmaier, whose burning as a heretic at Vienna in 


1528 is twice mentioned. 


A study of Eck's argumentation in relation to his opponents 
will open up for the student the whole Protestant-Roman Catholic 
dialogue from its inception in 1517 to the period immediately 
preceding the Council of Trent. This is the chief purpose of 


this provisional translation. 


ox 


NOTES 


ce Chapter 38, below. 


“Petrus Mosellanus, Cratio de variorum linguarum cognitione 
paranda, (Basel: Froben, 1519) fol. E 2%: "Origen, instructed 
in the Hebrew language, if anything varied in the translation from 
the very sources of Scripture, confuted it with obelisks or marked 
it with asterisks." Quoted at WA 1.278n. 


one Augsburg, July 1530, Eck produced in three days' time 
against Zwingli, the following short tract: Repuisio Articu- 


peared earlier in the same month. Zwingli's De Convitiis Eckii 
may be found in Schuler-Schultheis, Opera Zwingli, vol. 4, 

pp. 19-29. For an account of Eck's dealing with Zwingli, 
Oecolampadius and others, see G. R. Potter, gwingli (1976) es- 
pecially pp. 44, 137, 153-155, 209, 228, 231, 234, 236, 256, 
333, 358, and 404. 

Paysite Calvin, who also attended the Colloquy, wrote at 
Ratisbonne (Regensburg) (1 Jan. 1541) a satirical poem, the 
Epinicion,* in which Eck is excoriated. Writing to Farel Calvin 
said: "Picture to yourself a barbarous sophist flaunting him- 
self stolidly among illiterates, and you have a half-part of Eck." 
Even less flattering language was used by Calvin in his Dedica- 
tion of the Hebrews Commentary (1549) toward Eck. 


Nene the "Preface to the Addition," after Ch. 28, below, 
which introduces (as of 1529) the added Chs. 29-33, known as the 
Auctarium. 


Srhe best known of these is Johann Cochlaeus, Philippics, 
which went through several editions (1534ff). 


*Epinicion vv. 101-102 (OS 1.498): 
"Eccius hesterno ruber atque inflatus Zaccho 
Praebeat hue duris terga subacta flagris." 
“Let Eck, ruddy and bloated with yesterday's wine, 
Submit hither a back subjugated to harsh whips." 


10* 


To the Most Reverend Father in Christ, and Most Renowned Lord, 
Alexander Farnese, + Cardinal Deacon of the Holy Church of the Title 
of St. Lawrence in Damascus, and Vice Chancellor, Prince and Most 


Pious Patron, John Eck commends himself. 


Under the patronage of Our Most Holy Lord Paul III, I had published 
my Enchiridion of Commonplaces against the Lutherans, in the seventh 
revision, yet when the copies were about to be sold, not only my German 
friends, but also Italian and Spanish ones begged me to undertake an 
eighth edition. The new issue concerning the abrogation of private 
masses, which not only the Protestants but also those who at least con- 
fess by mouths among ecutive, ¢ are striving strenuously to propagate, 
was urging me; for so the devil toils to wipe out a thing most pleasing 
to God and most useful to the Church; and this plague is beginning to 
rage in such a manner, that a cee recently was not ashamed to press 
an unlearned book upon the Divine Emperor, the Apostolic Legate, the men 
of the Holy Roman Empire: in which he calis in doubt whether a Mass 
ought to be celebrated without communicants and has advised that each wor- 


shiper should be permitted freedom. 


peneunele rightly says, "Anyone judges well what he knows well." 
One devoid of theology wished to prescribe the things all Germany is to 
believe. But the mind of Electors, princes and states was wiser: on 
account of this and many other mistakes, they rejected the book, giving 
their reasons also. Hence the Ratisbonne Conferences made no progress 
in the course of the faith; and betrayed the expectation of most of the 
faithful. Therefore, I added an increment quite extensive, so that it 
markedly exceeded the limits of a mere handbook pone eee Your 
Eminence has here the origin and cause of the whole German disturbance: 
and on the other hand also the invincible defense of the Apostolic 
Church: for I have in no lazy manner wrestled for twenty-three petit 
in this ring. Hail to you! Attend to the business of faith as strictly 
as you can, and promote a general accueil I trust that the Lord God 


; 9 
Almighty may grant you long life. 


Ingolstadt 15 August ee 


AS 


DEDICATORY EPISTLE 


To the Most Reverend Father in Christ, and Most Godly Prince and 
Lord, Dr. Conrad a Tungen, Most Worthy Bishop of Wurzburg, and Duke of 
East Franconia, His Most Worshipful Lord, Johannes Eck sends greeting. 

St. Paul gives thanks to God in his prayers, 0 Most Reverend Father 
and Prince, when he hears of the charity of Philemon and of the faith 
which he had in the Lord Jesus, and toward all his saints [Philemon 
vy. 4-5]. For Paul, supremely conscious of the secrets of God, had an 
insight that the faith of any man shines before God when he strives to 
conform it as much as possible to the saints and friends of God, just as 
Israeli believed not only the Lord but also Moses his servant [Ex 14:31]. 
And all good and sincere men have earnestly distinguished themselves 
from the time of Christ's passion even to the present day, but not more 
than befits wise men [Rom 12:16]. But those who (neglecting this Apos- 
tolic rule) "have walked in wonderful things above themselves" [Ps 130:1] 
and exalted themselves as Lucifer and the noonday demon [cf. Ps 90:6], 
unwilling to believe in the saints! of God, are deceived, and have been 
given over to the precipice of errors, while they are not afraid to de- ~- 
spoil those ancient apostolic men, remarkable in learning, eminent in 
moral character, notable in authority, and famous for miracles. These 
persons (I say) have with poisonous teaching, alien to salvation, de- 
viating from right faith, and devoid of truth, endeavored to inveigh 
against the world. For he who is not convinced by the harmony of the 
succession of holy fathers in the Church, by the profession and unanimous 
verdict of councils, must with insolent and proud rashness dash head- 
long into all sorts of abominable errors. Luther preferred to follow 
this insane and mad rashness, with his confederates, rather than piously 
believe, with Philemon, in the saints of God, and the rule of faith which 
the whole Church observes. For with perverse will he murmurs against the 
ministers of God, the most holy fathers, and the whole Church, putting 
his own judgment (0 utterly blind pride of the vainest of men!) ahead of 


all the foremost men of the Church. At the beginning he sketched out his 


shameful insanity in a few articles to captivate the ears of the people, 
in order that they might thirstily quaff from the cup of error more harmful 
and more virulent things thereafter. He assuredly drove mad the minds of 
many with the light apprenticeship of indulgences, so that afterward 
whatever he stirred up toward them, he drove the wind of error against 
everyone. Thereby it came to pass that from day to day the number of his 
disciples increased, especially when that Mohammedan liberty advanced, in 
which it is wonderful how, being exalted, he was pleased to see his own 
sheep (as David says) prolific [Ps 143:13]. (thus does Jerome consider 
this verse to apply to the heretics.) With our sins so driving to these A5 
things, they bring forth branches and shoots, more pestilential than the 
root, since there is no end to the uprising of sects. 

In this unhappy age of ours we experience, namely, image-smashers, 
image-burners, Capernaites, to whom the blessed body of Christ in the 
Eucharist is a hard word; Catabaptists, who deny the baptism of children, 
and dip adults. And there is daily divers splitting of all these, so 
that mot even rabbits bear offspring more frequently than these heretics. 
But God in his anger permits these things, because we do not together 
with Hosea strongly and with burning devotion pray for God's mercy: 

"that he may give to them, what should he give them? A sterile womb, 

and dried-up breasts" [Hos 9:14]. This phrase terene” most aptly explains 
in relation to the heretics, who glory in the multitude of people, and 

in their children whom they nourish unto destruction, that they may lead AS 
tnem from the Church to the executioner. For the devil slays as many 
children as the heretics have begotten in error. But however greatly 
heresy prevails over the watchmen of Zion, we must not keep silent, but 

we must raise our voice like a trumpet against those Philistines defying 
the battle-line of the living God [f. 1 K 17:45], and we must defend the 
tower of David with all the strength of our heart, ''the tower on which a 
thousand shields hang, and all the armor of strong men" [Cant 4:4]. All 
those famous men who excel in the scriptures, strong men they, have 
strenuously up until now done this. I, too, the least of all, have al- 
ready often fought at a distance, and also hand to hand, with these fanged 
beasts. Hand to hand, by disputing at Leipzig with that dragon's head 
Luther and Carlstadt for twenty dese. while that Most Christian Prince, 


Lord George, Duke of Saxony, sometimes looked on. And in Baden, with the 


Capérnaite+ Oecolampadius, and his followers, with representatives of 

the twelve cantons of Switzerland and four ambassadors of bishops pre- 
sent, I contested for a longer eee From a distance: I tried my hand 
on the heretics with some books published in Germany and in Teen Of 
these the Enchiridion was a book of commonplaces, committed to press four 


4and published at the urging of the Most Reverend Lord 


years thereafter 
Cardinal, Lord Laurence of Champagne, legate of the Apostolic See, in 

order that busier persons who are not lacking great volumes of heroes 

to ponder, may have ready to hand (as the saying goes) something with which 
to counteract the heretics. And the simpler-minded ones, who have to swim 

on the surface, would have a summary of what is to be believed, in order not 
to be led astray by these false apostles. My opinion did not deceive me, 

for so kindly and with eager hands (as the saying goes) was this book snapped 
up by very many, that in this brief interval it has been four times at presses 
in Bavaria. It has also been printed at Tubingen in Swabia. We have also 
seen it imprinted in Parisian, Lyonnaise and Cologne type. Hence my close 
friends have more eagerly urged me to bring out a new edition of the 
Enchiridion. Although I am almost overwhelmed with very many other literary 
projects, and with the business of preaching to the people, and of teaching 
in the schools, my unsuitableness for the task was of small concern to those 
making the request. Therefore, we have revised previous loci, and made ex- 
pansicnas in many places, and have added two new loci after the last augment, 
that the book may seem thoroughly renewed and ewe. However slender and 
slight it may be, I wanted to dedicate it to you, Best of Princes, O Most 
Reverend Bishop, because the evil offspring begotten of the heretics, now 

in one way or another, have savagely attacked you and your Church, and, in 
short, would have brought in contention, if you, performing the duties of 

the wisest of ship-masters, had not, from such great and tempestuous 
waves, with wonderful prudence and indomitable fortitude, taken the im- 
perilled vessel to a tranquil haven. May Almighty and Gracious God, out of 
his ineffable mercy, and thereafter by the intercession of St. Kidanys 

deign stoutly to protect Your Plenitude against the enemies of faith and 
Church, and sweetly to nourish it. Thus, with you as leader and victor, 


may the remaining Catholics and the faithful people be rendered more 


courageous to hold on to, and defend, the true orthodox faith, lest 
they, given over to the mouth of a raging lion [cf. 1 Pt 5:8], should 
sink into hell. May it be yours, I pray, most generous patron, to put 
to good use this our offering, proferred as it is from a sincere heart 
that deeply loves you, and to persevere happily in the business of faith 


once begun. 
Farewell and hail, Glory and Ornament of Leaders. 


Ingolstadt, Bavaria, on the Holiday of Epiphany, A.D. 1529 


Notes 


Dedication 
Page 1 


olezander Farnese was the eldest son of Pier Luigi Farnese, 
first Duke of Parma and brother of Pope Paul III, his namesake and 
uncle, The younger Alexander was born in 1520 and died in 1589, 
the second cardinal of that name after Paul III. 


none Catholics who rejected private masses at this time was 
the German ecumenist theologian, Georg Witzel (1501-73), on whom 
see T. A. Thompson, "The Ecclesiology of Georg Witzel, 1501-1573: 
A Study in the Catholic Reformation," University of Pittsburgh, Ph.D. 
dissertation, 1977, pp. 186f. 


Seca In opposition to the Book submitted to the Diet 
of Ratisbonne, Articles were submitted by the Protestants. See 
note 5, below. 


Nts quisque bene iudicat, quae bene novit." Aristotle. 


the Imperial Diet of Ratisbonne (Regensburg) April-May 1541. 
For Acts, see Opera Calvini (CR) 5.509-684. Among the Articles of 
the Protestants, the eighth topic is: ''Private Masses and the Whole 
Practice of the Sacrament." 


Ochapter 38, On Private Masses, pp. 270-284, below. 


eine 1517, the year Luther's movement began. 


Orne Council of Trent opened in 1545. 
9 + 
“nestorios .. . annos: A reference to the aged Nestor of 
Homer's Iliad. 
10 


Note that the date is of the Assumption of B MV. This dedi- 
cation has been translated from the 1541 Ingolstadt edition, fol. 
A2™ - 43” 


A7 


Dedicatory Epistle 


RD 


Page 
nce 1541; Sanctos 1572: Sermone. 


Page 3 


1 capernaites. Cf. Mt 11:23: "And you, Capernaum, will you be 
exalted to heaven? You shall be brought down to Hades. For if the 
mighty works done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have re- 
mained until this day." Cf. LWAE, 38.72 or 79. Also, ch. 29, p.192 
and ch. 30, p.207 , below. Eck uses the term to refer to those who 
with Zwingli held a significatory interpretation of the formula "hoc 
est corpus meum.” 


2 Terone 
oy June - 14 July 1519. See Introduction, p. Ae above. 


Page 4 


tape p. 3, note 1, above. 


ee p. 6*, note 1, above; and chs. 29-30, passim. 


: 3 * 
“See Introduction, p. 5°, above. 


1525. See p. 6*, above. 
aS 1532 chapters were added on "Satisfaction" (fol. a” E4"), 
“Against the Mass in German" (fol. m9” - M12"); later, chapters on the 
"Building and Decoration of Churches," "The Indelible Sacramental 
Stamp," and "Transubstantiation" were added. The 1541 (Ingolstadt) 
edition carries a final chapter on "Private Masses"! (fol. WA = 254%), 


St. Kilian, an Irish missionary and ascetic, lived at Wurzburg 
n Thuringia (c. 700). He suffered martyrdom. 


Page 5 


Imnis dedicatory epistle, first published within the edition 
of 1529, was reprinted in subsequent editions of the Enchiridion. 


CHAPTER 1 
ON THE CHURCH AND HER auraortty: 


The First Proposition has three members. 


Proposition 1: The Church is the body of Christ, the bride 


of Christ, the Kingdom of Heaven.” 


i. He has subjected all things under His feet, and gives Him- 
self as Head over all the Church, His Body, and its fulness, filling 


all things in all" [Eph 1:22-23]2 


"May you walk worthy of the calling with which you were called, 
with all lowliness and meekness, with patience, forbearing one an- 
other in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond 
of peace. One body and one Spirit, even as you were called in one 
hope of your calling. One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and 
Father of all, who is over all and through all and in us all" 


[Eph 4:1-6]. 


ii. The proof of the second part of the first proposition, name— 


ly, the Church is the Bride of Christ. 


“One is my dove, my perfect one, she is the only one of her 
mother, she is the chosen one of her who bore her" [Cant 6:9]. "A 
garden enclosed is my sister, my bride, a garden enclosed, a fountain 


sealed" [Cant 4:12]. 


“Wives, submit yourselves to your husbands, as unto the Lord. For 
the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the Head ot 
the Church, and He is the Savior of the body. But just as the Church 
is subject to Christ, so also are wives subject to their husbands 
in all things. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ has loved 
the Church, and gave Himself for her, that He might sanctify her, 
cleansing her by the layer of water in the Word of life, that He 
might present her to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or 
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that she should be holy and without 
blemish" [Eph 5:22-27].¢ 


8 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Of Jerusalem like a bride adorned for her husband [Rev ANB || 5 


"But you are the body of Christ, and members one of another" 
[1 Cor 10:17; 12:12; Rom 12:5). : 


Thus therefore the Church is one, not outwardly, but in- 
wardin ese the ark of Noah was one [1 Pt. 3:20f£] which was the 
figure of the one Church; outside that one sealed Church no one 
is saved, just as men cutside the ark perished. Christ is no biga-— 
mist: the Church of the apostles and ours are one Church. Before 
Luther was born, there was the Church that believed the Mass a 
sacrifice, seven sacraments, etc. She was the bride of Christ. 
Therefcre now let us remain with that same Church, and not be 
joined to the Church of the wicked. Christ, because He loves the 
Church His bride, did not leave her, neither for five hundred nor 
a thousand years. How then would the Head desert His body for so 
long a time?” When He forsook the Synagogue, less loved on account 
of sins, only seventy years in the physical captivity of Babylon, 
how would He forsake His bride one thousand years in captivity of 


errors? 


iii. Proof of the third part of the proposition, namely, the 
Church is the kingdom of heaven: "For the kingdom of heaven is 
like unto 4 man that is a householder, who went out early in the 


morning to hire laborers for his vineyard" [Matt 20:1]. 


"The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain king, who 
made a marriage feast for his son, and sent forth his servants to 
call them that were bidden to the marriage feast . . ." [Matt 22:2]. 
"Then is the kingdom of heaven like ten virgins who took their 
lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom, and the bride; five 


of these moreover were foolish..." [Matt 23:1f]. 
You will find many similar parables. 


Application inferring three corollaries: 
1. If the Church is here called the kingdom of heaven, how 


could error and falsehood reign in that kingdom for a thousand 


1. ON THE CHURCH AND HER AUTHORITY 9 


years? For the kingdom of heaven is the kingdom of truth. 

2. It is clear that God goes out even until evening to 
bring in workers [cf. Mt 20:6f]; but the Lutherans believe on the 
contrary that no one was brought in for a thousand years, except 
their idol, Luther. 

3. It is clear that the Church here on pilgrimage has been 
gathered from good and bad, for Christ clearly says that there are 
wise and foolish virgins [cf. Mt 25:2ff], good and bad fish 
[Mt 13:44-52]. See Gregory, Homilies, [1.11.4; 1.12.3: PL 76.1116, 
1120]. 


Proposition 2: The Church does not err, not only because 
she always has Christ as her Bridegroom, but 
also because she is ruled by the teaching 
authority of the Holy Spirit who never for- 


sakes her. 


"I shall ask my Father, and He will give you another comforter" 
{Jn 14:16]. 
"Holy Father, preserve in thy name those whom thou hast sent 


to me" [Jn 17:11]. 


"Moreover, I pray not only for those apostles, but also for 


those who are going to believe through their words, in me" [Jn 17:20]. 


“The Church of the living God is the pillar and foundation of 
truth" [1 Tim 3:15]. How then can it err? 

"T have yet many things to say to you, but you cannot hear 
them now. When He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He shall teach 
you all truth" [Jn 16:12£]. Here the Lutheran must show us the 
Gospel, the teaching authority of the Holy Spirit, promised in the 
Church. 

"And you need not that any one teach you; but as His anoint— 
ing teaches you concerning all things, and is true, and is no 
lie" [1 Jn 2:27]. Therefore, the anointing of the Holy Spirit 
always teaches the Church. 

"and behold I am with you always, even to the end of the 


world" [Mt 28:20], said Christ (who is the way, the truth, and the 


ale 


10 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


life) to His disciples. It is clear that the Church as the 
pillar of truth, with Christ as leader and the Holy Spirit as 
teacher, does not err. How much less believable is it then 
that the whole Church would err for a thousand years, as the 


Lutherans rave! 


Proposition 3: Even as the Church is one, so is there Unity 


in the Church. 


"T beseech you, brethren, to mark those who make decisions 
and offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have learned" 
{Rom 16:17]. Later: "They serve not Christ . .. but their own 
belly." Later: ‘Their pleasing speeches . . . deceive the hearts 


of the innocent" [Rom 16:18]. 


"I beg of you, moreover, brethren, by the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ that all of you say this, and that there not be 
schisms among you; be perfect in the same mind and the same knowl- 
edge" [1 Cor 1:10]. The Lutherans cause new schisms and fight 
both among themselves and with others, so that now Carlstadt has 
broken off, and Egranus* and Luther, and Zwingli, and the Cata- 
baptists. "For God is not a God of dissension but of peace, just 


as I teach in all the Churches of the saints" {1 Cor 14:33]. 


Rather therefore is it to be believed that Cod inspires a 
true understanding of Scripture to the concord and unity of the 
Church, than to one private man such as Luther or Zwingli or 
Osiander: nay, it follows, that what Holy Mother Church defines 
or accepts is not to be believed with less firmness or held in 


less veneration than if it were expressed in Scripture. 


“Whatever things were written were written for our ins truc- 
tion, that through patience and through comfort of the scriptures 
we might have hope. Now the God of comfort and of patience grant 
you to be of the same mind one with another according to Christ 


Jesus; that with one accord you may with one mouth glorify God, 


*Johann Egran, Pastor at Zwickau. See Luther, Letter of Dedication, 
The Freedom of a Christian. Eck's 1541 edition does not carry his 
name. 


1. ON THE CHURCH AND HER AUTHORITY IAL 


in prayer to God" {Rom 15:5-6]. Almighty everlasting God, by whose 


Spirit the whole body of the Church is sanctified and ruled. 


Paul subjoins, after the reckoning of the mystical body: 
“Be of the same mind one towards another; set not your mind on 


lofty things, but condescend to things that are lowly'[Rom 12;16]. 


"If there is any consolation in Christ, if any consolation 
of charities, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of com- 
passion, fulfill my joy, that you be of the same mind, having the 


same charity, being of one mind. . ." [Phil 2:1f]. 


My people have done two evil things: "They have forsaken the 
fountain of the water of life, and they have dug for themselves 
leaky cisterns, which cannot contain water" [Jer 2:13]. Thus the 
Lutherans, leaving the true and living fountain of the Church, dig 
leaky cisterns of heretics, of Wyclif, Hus, the Albigenses, and 
others. In vain God sent His Son, in vain the Holy Spirit, in 
vain the apostles, martyrs, doctors, confessors, if through Luther 
alone the light of truth was to be opened. Why then did God not 


send one Luther for all? 


Proposition 4: It is clear that, representatively, the 
Church is her prelates and leaders gathered 


together. 


"and the king turned his face about, and blessed all the Church 
of Israel, and all the Church of Israel stood," etc. [1 K 8:14]. 
Note “the Church of Israel"; what alone would be more representative 
is clear from the beginning of this chapter: "Then all the elders 
of Israel were assembled, with the heads of the tribes, and the 
leaders of the families of the children of Israel unto King Solomon," 


aree., [il % Sgilll. 


Objections of the Heretics. 
1. The authority of Senmenre greater than that of the 


Church. For the Church ought to be ruled according to Scripture. 


For the Word of God yields to no one. 


Vv 


12 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


2. It is not lawful for either the Church or any man to go 
against Scripture. 

3. One does not say that what the Pope with the Cardinals 
and the bishops determines has been determined by the Church, be- 
cause the Church is the congregation of all believers and the con- 
nection in true faith by which the just man lives. 

4. The Church of God is in the Spirit alone, because she 
is believed, and thus hidden. 

5. Luther says that he is of the Church, and believes the 
Church is with him, where he is preacher. So also Zwingli, 


Caristadt, Pelican, Soblerus, Hubmaier Pacimontanus* etc. 


Disposal of Objections. 

1. Christ did net write any book, nor did He bid the dis- 
ciples or apostles to write one, yet He gave many precepts con- 
cerning the Church; hence when about to send apostles out to 
plant the Church, He did not say, "Go write," but "Go into the 
whole world and preach the Gospel to every creature" [Mt. 24:14]. 
Therefore the law was written on tablets of stone, but the Gospel 
on hearts. "Since you are a letter of Christ, sent out by us, 
and written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not 
in tablets of stone, but in the physical tablets of the heart" 

[2 Cor 3:3]. Jeremiah agrees: "Behold, the day is coming, says 
the Lord, and I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, 
and with the house of Judah, not like the covenant I made with your 
fathers, etc., but this will be one which I shall make with the 
house of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I shall give my 
law in their inward parts, and in their heart I shall write it, and 
I will be their God and they will be my people" [Jer 31:31-33]. 
Jerome: Why is it necessary to take into one's hands what the 
Church does not receive? 

2, The Church is older than Scripture, for when the Apostles 
began to preach, there was no written Gospel, nc ‘etter of Paul, 
and yet there was the Church dedicated by Christ's blood. 

*Hubmaier Pacimontanus: "Balthasar Hubmaier, «wo now calls himself 
'Friedberger' Pacimontanus=Friedberger 1481-1528 (see ch. 16, p. 124, 
below). Hubmaier, born at Friedberg near Augsburg, was originally a 


protege of Eck, at Freiburg, then Ingolstadt where Eck delivered the 
oration upon his receiving the doctorate.2 


1. ON THE CHURCH AND HER AUTHORITY 3) 


Thus the apostles without the Scripture of the New Testament 
chose Matthias [Acts 1:22ff], ordained seven deacons [Acts 6:3]; 
Peter caused Ananias and Sapphira to die [Acts 5:1ff]. Even 
though the apostles were very diligent in sowing the Word of God, 
yet very few things are found written by them. It follows logi- 
cally that they taught many more things than they wrote; the things 
taught have equal authority with the things written. 

3. Scripture is not authentic without the Church's authority: 
for the canonical writers are members of the Church. Hence against 
a heretic wishing to contend against the Church's constitution and 
custom one objects with the very weapons whereby he wishes to con- 
tend against the Church. He is going to quote the canonical Scrip- 
tures of the four Gospels, and the Pauline Episties. Let the objec- 
tion immediately be raised against him: how does he know that 
these Scriptures are canonical except from the Church, for why does 
he believe the Gospel of Mark, who did not see Christ, to be 
canonical, and not the Gospel of Nicodemus, who saw and heard Christ, 
as John testifies [Jn 3:1ff]? So why has the Gospel of Luke the 
disciple been received, and the Gospel of Bartholomew the apostle 
been rejected, unlees we humbly confess the authority of the Church 
with the Blessed Augustine, something gener genatimes taught, that 
the Church could judge concerning the Scriptures. 

Therefore it thus is clear that the Church is older than Scrip- 
ture, and Scripture would not be authentic without the Church's 


see Hence, Augustine, Against the Epistle Called Funda- 


mental, 5.6 [PL 42.176]: "I would not have believed the Gospel un- 
less the authority of the Suueet ned moved me to do Sy ae 


below on Scripture at Chapter 4. 


i. Scripture teaches: "Remember to hallow the Sabbath day; 
six days shall you labor and do all your work, but the seventh 
day is the Sabbath day of the Lord your God," etc. * Yet the Church 
has changed the Sabbath into Sunday on its own authority, on which 


you have no Scripture. 


*Ex 20:8ff 


14 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


ii. Christ said to His disciples on the mountain: "I 
have not come to abolish the law but to fulfill it" [Matte 5:17]. 
And yet the Church of the apostles in council boldly made pro- 
nouncement on the cessation of legal matters. 

iii. im the final chapter of Matthew, Christ said to the 
disciples: "Go therefore and teach all nations, baprizing them 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, 
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you’ [Matt 28:19£]. Here Christ gave the form of baptizing ex- 
plicitly in the name of the Trinity, and yet the primitive Church 
changed this form of baptizing to "in the name of Christ Jesus." 


"says Peter, "and let each one of you be baptized in the 


“Repent, 
name of Jesus Christ in forgiveness of your sins" [Acts 2238))." 
And in Acts 8 [:12] it is said that the Samaritans were baptized 
by Philip in the name of Jesus. And in Acts 19 [:5]: “When these 
things were heard they were baptized by Philip in the name of 


Jesus," 


that is, by Paul. 

iv. Scripture is defined in the gounede "It seemed good to 
the Holy Spirit and to us" [Acts 15:28] etc., "that you should 
abstain from sacrifices offered to idols, and blood and things 
strangled" [v. 29], This matter, so clearly defined and expressed, 
the Church by her authority changed, because she uses both blood 
and strangled meat. 

Note the power of the Church over seripture.” See below, 
Chapter 13, On Human Constitutions. 

v. Now if you wish to live more according to the scriptures 
than according to the authority of the Church, now all the Jews 
coming to baptism would be held to the law of Moses, for thus 
they would find in the Scriptures that apostles and other converts 
have lived. James and the elders spoke to Paul returning from the 
Gentiles: "See, brother, how many there are among the Jews who 
have believed, and all are emulators of the law. Moreover, they 
have heard of you, that you teach all the Jews that are among the 


Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise 


1. ON THE CHURCH AND HER AUTHORITY 1) 


their children, nor to walk according to their custom. What is 
it therefore? The multitude must needs come together, for they 
will hear that you have come. Do therefore this which we say to 
you. We have four men that have a vow on them; having taken them, 
purify yourself with them, and be at charge for them, that they 
may shave their heads, and all shall know that there is no truth 
in the things about which they had been informed concerning you, 
but you walk and yourself keep the law. Moreover, concerning those 
of the Gentiles who believed, we have written, adjudging that they 
should keep themselves from idols, from what is sacrificed, from 
blood and what isstrangled, and from fornication" [Acts 21:20-25]. 
Here, Paul, with many thousands, kept at one behest of the law of 
St. James. 

Would you, 0 Luther, converted from the Jews today, rather 
live according to those scriptures, or according to the authority 


of the Church? 


We confess the Church to be the congregation of all the 
faithful who are of the body of Christ, and when primates and 
leaders of any province decide anything, the whcle province is 
said to have decided it. Thus the prelates of the Church are 
called "the Church," because they represent her and their subjects. 
Otherwise the Church could never be gathered. "But if he does not 
hear you. . . tell the Church; but if he does not hear the Church, 
let him be to you as a Gentile and publican" [Matt 18:16f]. Ac- 
cording to Luther's view, if anyone wanted to tell the Church, he 
would have to traverse the whole earth. Chrysostom [Hom. in 
Mt, 60.2: PG 58.586] explains: "It clearly refers to the prelates 
that is, presidents, because he will soon give the power of binding 


' "Tf you perceived a case 


and loosing to the apostles as prelates.’ 
before you difficult and ambiguous to judge, between blood and 
blood, between cause and cause, between leper and non-leper, and 
you saw the judgment to be a matter of controversy within your 
gates: rise up and go up to the place which the Lord your God has 


chosen and come to the priests of the tribe of Levi, to the judge 


10° 


10 


16 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


that shall be in those days, and inquire of him, who will judge 

the truth of the judgment for you, and you shall do what they say, 
who are in charge of the place the Lord has chosen, and they will 
teach you according to his law, and you will’ follow their decision, 
and turn aside neither to the right nor to the left. But he who 

in his pride refuses to obey the authority of the priest, who is 

at that time ministering to the Lord your God, that man will die 
by the decree of the judge, and you shall remove the evil from 
Israel, and ali the people hearing it will fear, so that none shall 
henceforth be swollen with pride” [Dt 17:8-13]. See the power of 
the priest under the law. How much more power do you think the 
priest under the Gospel has, and ponder the penalty of the dis~ 


obedient. 


"And when Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension against 
them, the brethren decided that Paul and Barnabas and certain 
others of them should go up to the apostles and presbyters in 
Jerusalem about this question" [Acts 15:2]. See how the Deu- 
teronomy c. 17 passage was fulfilled. And what was the Church? 
Not the whole congregation, but they went up to the apostles and 


presbyters who represented the Church.’ 


4, If the Church is hidden, how did Christ enjoin the tell- 
ing it to the Church, and if he did not hear the Church, etc. 
But if it were hidden, what could be said to it, or how would 
it hear? Likewise the Church is the body of Christ, and the 
Christians are its members [Rom H2355 IL (Cee MOgiIAs I2eilPs 
Eph 1:23; 5:30; Col 1:24]. Let Luther say whether they were hid- 
den and only mathematically the Church, when Paul said: "Now you 


are the body of Christ, and members each in his part" [1 Cor 12:27]. 


It is the way of heretics to have caverns and caves and 
lurking places: the Church puts the lamp upon a lampstand 
{Lk 8:16]. The Church is shown to you in councils, in the Apos- 
tolic See, in bishops and leaders of individual Churches. For if 


the Church were only mathematical, the brother of Paul (Timothy) 


1. ON THE CHURCH AND HER AUTHORITY 17 


would not have praise through all the Churches [2 Cor 1:1]. David 
would not have said: ‘''With you is my praise in the great church" 
[Ps 21:26], "and in the seat of the elders let them praise him'' 
[Ps 106:32]. For this see Augustine on the First Epistle of John, 


‘ 1 
the first tractate at the end. 


5. What Luther says, all the heretics have said. Accordingly 
Augustine inveighs against the Donatists, who wanted to confine the 
universal Church to the carnerstone of a few heretics. See more 
in Johann Cochlaeus, On the Authority of the eatiecn and John 
Fisher. Among the older writers see Juan qerrceteaee who wrote 


extensively on behalf of the Church. 


iz 


15 


12 


82: 


CHAPTER 2 
1 
ON COUNCILS 
Because the Authority of the Church Rests Chiefly in Councils, 


We Shall Now Deal in a Proper Order concerning Councils. 


Proposition 1: Examples are found of the convening of coun- 
cils in the Church [both by the Fathers of 
the Old Testament and] by the Apostles in 


the New Testament. 


[In the Old Testament an example is inferred where it is said: 
“leading men of the synagogue, and whe in the time of assembly were 
called by name” [Num 16:2]. "Obededom and his sons were assigned 
to the south, in which part of the house was the council of the 
elders" (1 Ch 25:16). 


[But in the New Testament one reads in the Acts of the Apostles 
of more councils being convened. I first mention one, after the 
ascension of the Lord, concerning the election of Matthias, where 
"Peter rising up in the midst of the brethren said... Men, 
brethren, the scripture must needs be fulfilled of which the Holy 
Spirit spoke before through the mouth of David concerning Judas, 


who was the leader of those who apprehended Jesus" [Acts LEIS} 


[The second council was convened over the establishment of 
deacons for the ministry of the daily dispensation: "Then the 
Apostles, calling together the multitude of the disciples, said: 

It is not fitting that we should leave the word of God and serve 
tables. Therefore, select from among you seven men of godd reputa- 
tion, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, for us to appoint over 
this business" [Acts 6:2f]. 


{fhe third council was concerned with the question of observing 
legal matters; of this it is said:] "But there arose some of the 
sect of the Pharisees that believed, saying: They must be circum- 


cized, and be commanded to observe the law of Moses. And the 


18 


2. ON COUNCILS 19 


Apostles and elders assembled to consider this matter" [Acts 
15:5f£], and afterwards a decision was made. "For it has seemed 12 
good to the Holy Spirit and to us, to lay no further burden upon 
you than these necessary things: that you abstain from things 
sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, 
and from fornication; from which things keeping yourselves, you 
shall do well" [Acts 15:28£]. Note the form of the Apostolic 
Council. The Apostles and Elders assembled. The Gentiles did not 
set themselves against the Apostles. Now, by what authority, by 
what scripture, do you, Luther, do this toward councils? Why do 
you deprive us of the freedom given by Christ? For even if in 
deliberating they should cite scripture from Amos ch. 9 [.1ff], 
yet thereby they have brought forward nothing to forbid these 


three; likewise they have added no scripture in the decision. 


Antioch too accepted Jerusalem's decision. Luther despises 
Rome's decision. It ie clear that a council had the power of 
determining that any were necessary for that time, which neverthe- 13 
less was not simply necessary for faith. Why then is the same 
power not today in the Church, as cften as necessity demands it? 
There is the same Christ, the same Spirit, the same faith. Why 


then is there not an equal power of councils? 


[A fourth council was held by the Apostles in Jerusalem to 2 
do away with the suspicion of certain Jews, who thought Paul treated 


the ceremonies of the Law as if they were idolatry [Acts 15]. 


[The fifth council was gathered under Paul at Miletus, con~ 
cerning the rule of the Church, when "Paul sending to Ephesus, 
called the elders of the Church. And when they had come to him 
and were together, he said to them: You know... ." [Acts 20:17]. 


tt 


And later: "Take heed to yourselves, and to the whole flock... 
{Acts 20:28].] Likewise the Apostles celebrated another synod. For, 137 
about to set out to preach the Gospel throughout the earth, accord- 
ing to the Lord's command, meeting together, and each one offering 
his opinions, they handed on the Creed, as it is held from the tra- 


dition of the fathers, which the whole Church holds. For so 


13 


14 


20 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


St. Clement, disciple and successor of the Apostles attests in 

his decrees. Likewise Pope Leo I, writing to Augustine, says: 

"The short and perfect confession of the Catholic Creed has been 
sealed by the decisions of the twelve Apostles." Likewise Ambrose, 
esteeming the key of the kingdom of heaven to be the faith of the 
Apostles, says: "I believe that this key has been fashioned by 
labor of the twelve workmen. For holy faith was conceived by the 
Creed of ‘the twelve Apostles, who as skilled workmen coming to- 
gether as one, fashioned the key by their council. For they called 
that Creed a key, through which the devil's darkness is laid open, 


that the light of Christ may come." 


"Do not transgress the ancient boundaries, which your fathers 


have laid" (Prov 22:28]. 


“Again, I say to you, that if two of you shall consent upon 
earth, concerning anything whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be 
done to them by my Father who is in heaven. For where there are 
two or three gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst 
of them" [Mt 18:19f]. No one can more clearly be proved not to 


have heard the Church than if he did not hear a council. 


In no place is there greater agreement than in a council. In 
no pigce are more gathered in the Lord's name than in general coun- 


cils. 


“Ask the bygone generation, and diligently seek out the memory 
of the fathers, for we are but of yesterday and know nothing, for 
our days on earth are a shadow; they will teach you, and tell you, 
and utter words out of their heart" [Job 8:8-10]. “Wisdom is with 
the elders, and prudence in length of days" [Job 12:12]. Therefore 
let us hear councils and fathers, not heretics recently born and 
apostates. If the authority of councils be taken away, then all 
things in the Church will be ambiguous, doubtful, uncertain, un- 
sure, for at once will all the heresies condemned by councils re- 
turn. But if you fight against them with Scripture, now cut off 


from the authority of the Church, they will reject whatever they 


2. ON COUNCILS 21 


please, as Luther rejected the Epistle of St. James, because it 
was in disagreement with him, and likewise Maccabees. And once 
the heretics did not accept the four Gospels, just as the Mani- 
chees rejected the Old Testament. A matter to be pitied indeed! 
If that notion of the heretics were true, whenever any doubt 
arises concerning the faith, there would be no way of deciding it, 
but each one, according to the prudence of his own head, would 
incline to one side or the other. How then would Christ have suf- 
ficiently provided for His Church through the Gospel Law, which 
nevertheless ought to be utterly perfect? "He that shall contra- 


dict your mouth . .. let him die" [Josh 1:18]. 


"How great things he commanded our fathers, that they should 
make the same known to their children, that another generation 
might know them'' [Ps 77:5f]. Therefore, let us believe the com- 


mandments, and trust the councils and the fathers. 


Augustine, Epistle to Januarius fone. "Those unwritten tra- 
ditions that we preserve, which are observed throughout the earth, 
one is to understand, what by the Apostles themselves or plenary 
Councils (whose authority in the Church is most conducive to sal- 
vation) have been commanded and established to be kept.’ [Gratian, 
Decr., 1.12.11: Fr 1.29] Hence it is utterly insolent madness to 
argue over whether such things are to be done. Therefore the 


Lutherans are insolent and mad. 


Augustine, Against the Donatists, 7.[1.1], assumes that the 
holy Catholic Church is fortified against the Donatists with the 
authority of a plenary council. And Book 1, chapter 18 [.28] ad- 
judges a plenary Council to have the agreement of the entire 


Church. 


Gregory in his Epistles [3.10]: ‘Just as the four bocks cf 

the Evangelists, so also the four Councils do I confess to accept 
* 

and venerate: namely, Nicea, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chal- 


cedon." [Gratian, Decr. 1.15.2, Fr. 1.35.] 


*Constantinople I (A.D. 381) 


14 


Le) 


16" 


16 


ECK ; ENCHERIDION 


ho 
bo 


Proposition 2: The greater Churches (just as they are in 
Council) represent the whole Church. 


This is very often made clear in Exodus .* Take for example 
Ex 19:3, when God willed to give the Law to Moses, He commanded 
him: "These things you shall say to the house of Jacob and tell 
the children of Israel," etc. And yet afterwards of Moses it is 
said: "Moses came, and calling together the chief born of the 


etc. [Ex 19:7]. 


w 


people, he set forth all the words . . 


And although only the elders of the people answered, when 
Moses spoke to them,still the text subjoins: "All the people 
answered together” [Ex 19:8] ete. It was not all the people, un- 


less by representation. 


"Ask your father, and he will declare to you: your elders and 
they will tell you” [Dt 32:7]. Now a stupid people and proud citi- 


zens ask Luther, Zwingli, Mees Osiander, Bucer. 


"Despise not the discourse of the wise elders, . . . but ac- 
quaint yourself with their proverbs. For from them you shall learn 
wisdom and instruction of understanding, and to serve great men 
without blame" [Ececlus 8:9f]. Let not the discourse of the elders 
be passed over, for they have learned from their fathers, since from 


them you shall learn understanding and instruction. 
Objections of the Heretics. 


i. In a council are men: therefore they often deceive and 
are deceived, since "Every man is a liar" [Ps 115:11].** 

2. It is understood that the Council of Carthage under the 
holy man Cyprian with 80 bishops erred concerning the rebaptizing 
of heretics. 

3. Likewise the plenary Council of Rimini of 600 bishops 
erred with Arius. And Ephesus II likewise with Euey eee ean 
Dioscorus. And the Council of Govsesneinopie aden the Emperor 


Constantine on the abolition of images. 


lambrosius Blarer or Blauer (1492-1564), Reformer of Constance, 
2Hieria, A.D. 754 


*Constantine V Copronymus 


2, ON COUNCILS 5) 


4, And also general councils unanimously undertaken deter- 
mined various things, even in those things which are set forth to 
be believed: as the Council of Constance on the primacy of the 


Pope, against the Councils of Nicea and Africa. 
Objections of the Laity evilly infiuenced by the Lutherans. 


Since the Laity are of the Church, and there is no less a ques- 
tion about the salvation of their souls than of the clergy's it is 


fitting that they should take part. 


Disposal of Objections. 

1. We admit that those who assemble in Councils are men, yet 
in a lawful General Council, they are governed by the Holy Spirit 
as their ae ne does not allow them to be deceived. For Paul 
and John, Isaiah and David, were men, yet Paul says in his Epistle 
to the Galatians Cane "Tf an angel from heaven should preach a 
gospel other than what we have preached to you, let him be anathema." 
Therefore the canonical writers wrote infallibly, yet they were men. 
Likewise the fathers in the Councils. 

2. That Council of Carthage was not plenary but particular, 


as Augustine shows against the Donatists: particular councils can 


err, and be corrected by general councils (Aug, Against the Donatists, 


2 [.3.4]. And that the very councils which take piace throughout 
individual regions and provinees, without any doubt yield to the 
authority of plenary councils, convened from the whole Christian 
world, is clear by the evidence of things. 

3, The synod of Rimini was not a council, nor was it lawfully 
gathered. The works of the heretics were forced upon Liberius 
against his will, contrary to the Council of Nicea, with Taurus, 
the prefect, urging by prayers and threats on behalf of the Arians 
at the command of the emperor. And the simple-minded Eastern bishops 
were led astray by the subterfuges of the heretics; afterwards when 
they understood them, they retracted the conclusions of Rimini. So 


also the Synod of Ephesus*in which the heretic Dioscorus presided, 


*Ephesus II (A.D. 449) 


lei 


17 


Vv 


18 


19 


24 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


was not lawfully convened, since the Pope's legates refused to 
approach that evil place, and it was condemned by the Council of 


Chalcedon. 


‘ 


Thus the impious Emperor Constantine*when he was repulsed by 
the pontiff gathered the Synod of Cone eaaetmople. “whites was after- 
ward condemned by the Second Council of Nicea ‘nder the Empress 
Irene; hence likewise Carlstadt, Zwingli, Hetzman, Blarer, repuls- 


ing Luther in this point, have been condemned. 


Note here that general councils, gathered in the Holy Spirit, 
never are found to have departed from the way of truth, most espe- 
cially on defining those matters which pertain to orthodox faith 
and right morals. But councils convoked by the command and assent 
of heretics have always departed from the right faith. Such was 
the Council of Rimini.” Concerning this the Ecclesiastical History, 
LSozomen, 4.16-19], amply speaks. Such also was the Council of 
Milan, convened at the command of Constantius the Arian Emperor, to 
obtain the condemnation of Athanasius, the keenest defender of the 
faith. In this council, the Catholic bishops Dionysius, Eusebius, 
Paulinus, Hilary, and some others, because they would not subscribe 
to the condemnation of Athanasius, were driven into exile, as is 
stated in the Ecclesiastical History, [Sozomen, 4.9]. Of this sort 
also was the Council of Anticon under the Arian Emperor Constantius, 
celebrated in the confession of 40 bishops, where Athanasius was 
ejected from his episcopal see which he held in Alexandria, and con- 
demned to exile: so that thereupon the strength and authority of 
the Council of Nicea might be more readily destroyed, and falsehood 
triumph over truth (more fully recalled in Hist. Tripart., 4.9). 
Similaralso was the council afterwards assembled at Seleucia in 
Isauria of 160 bishops against the Council of Nicea. See Hist. 
Tripart., 5.34. Plenary councils, which are concerned with morals 
and the governance of the Church, have made various decisions ac— 
cording to the quality and condition of times, persons, etc. without 


prejudice to faith. Hence Innocent III speaks as follows on 


*Constantine V, Coprony mus 


2. ON COUNCILS 2D 


consanguinity and affinity [Decr. Greg. IX, 4:14.8; Friedberg, 
2.703.53-57]: “It ought not to be judged reprehensible, if ac- 
cording to the variety of the times, human statutes may vary now 

and again, especially when urgent necessity or evident utility 
demands it, since God Himself made some changes in the New Testa- 
ment from those which He laid down in the oid." So he speaks. 

Yet lawful general councils have not contradicted themselves in 
matters of belief. This is Augustine's view: that previous 

plenary councils are emended by later ones [Against the Donatists, 
2.3.4]. Moreover on the fact that the African and Nicene Councils 
are not in conflict with that of Constantinople, see Ch. 3, below, 

On the Papacy.” 

The laity can take part in councils as witnesses, as defenders, 19” 
as conciliarists, as advisors, as executors, yet since the birth of 
Christ they have never had a definitive voice in councils. In 

Acts 15:2: ". . . they determined that Paul and Barnabas should 

go up, and certain of the other side, to the Apostles and presbyters 
to Jerusalem about this question." Note that they went up to the 
clergy, not to the laity, and no mention is made of laymen in that 


same council. 


In the eighth council, the fourth session, the princes bidden 
to interrogate, said: "As we are following your word, we shall 
interrogate them by virtue of your precept, not .. . by our own 


authority, for this authority belongs to you." 


The Emperor Basil says of the laity: "Although it is not per- 
mitted to them according to the canon to say anything substantial 
concerning ecclesiastical cases, for this is the function of pon- 20 


tiffs and bishops." [Constantinople, AD 869] 


Sozomen [EH. 6.7] relates: "While Valentinian was hastening 
through Thrace toward Rome, then the bishops of Hellespont of 
Bithynia sent a legate Hypatian, the president of Heraclia, seeing 


that he deigned to interest himself in the correction of dogma. 


20 


26 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


He answered: ‘Since I am the least of people, it is not right 
for me to investigate such things. But let the priests to whom 


this duty is assigned gather together wherever they will.'" 


’ 


Ambrose to Valentinian, Against Auxentius: "Tf we examine 
the order of the Scriptures, or histories of the ancients, who is 
there who will refuse in a case involving the faith, that bishops 
are wont to judge concerning Christian emperors, not emperors con- 


cerning bishops?" 


Tne Emperor Marcian in the Chalcedonian Couneil said at the 
synod: "We wish the Council to concern itself with the preserva-— 
tion of the faith, not with displaying power, after the example of 
the mest glorious prince Constantine, in order that, once the truth 
has been found, the multitude, [already] drawn to depraved doctrine, 
may not disagree besides." And again: "There are certain definite 
chapters, which in respect to goods, we reserve to Your Holiness; 
we have determined that it is fitting that these be disposed of 
according te rule by you through this synodical council, rather than 


established by our laws." [Gratian, Decr., 1.96.3: Fr. 1.338] 
The Emperor Basil at the End of the 8th Council. 


“Concerning you laymen, both those in high office and those 
absolutely converted, I do not have anything more to say than that 
we are in no way permitted to undertake discussion of ecclesiastical 
cases, or steadfastly to resist the integrity of the Church, and to 
Oppose a universal council. For such things are the responsibility 
of patriarchs, pontiffs and bishops to investigate and examine, who 
have been assigned the office of governing; who have the power of 
sanctifying and binding and loosing; who have obtained the churchly 
and heavenly keys. These are not our responsibilities: it is we 
who ought to be fed, who need to be sanctified, to be bound or 
loosed from a bond. However much of religion and wisdom a lay per- 
son may manifest, or even if he may be inwardly endowed with all 
virtue, so long as he is a layman, he does not cease being called 


a sheep. This is the reason why, for those of you established in 


2. ON COUNCILS 27 


the order of sheep, pastors have the subtlety of discussing words, 
of seeking and striving after the things which are over us. There- 
fore we must with fear and sincere faith hear them and revere their 
faces, since they are ministers of Almighty God, and possess his 
form, and require nothing more than these things which are of our 
order. Hence by Christ the people are given leave to do not those 
things which princes, kings, tetrarchs or nobles might tell them, 
but ‘whatever the scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses' seat, 

have told you, this observe and practice.'’* But when the heretics 
seek popular applause, Jeremiah's prediction is fulfilled: ‘the 
prophets prophesied a falsehood, as the priests applauded with their 
hands, and my people loved such things, but what will happen to them 
when the end comes?’ [Jer secanfee On these things the Lord speaks 
through Isaiah: '. . . children that will nor hear the laws of God, 
who say to the seers: see not; and to those that behold: Behold 
not, for us those things that are right: speak unto us pleasant 
things, see errors for us. Take away from me the way, turn away 

the path from me, let the Holy One of Israel cease from before us’ 
{Isaiah 30:9-11]." Do the Lutheran people now say this very thing 
to their own false prophets? There is therefore a consummate har- 


mony between the Holy Scriptures, the Church and her councils. 


ZZ 


23 


CHAPTER 3 
4 
ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE 


Becauge the supreme authority (which we contemplate in coun- 
cils and in the Apostolic See is within the Church, it is fitting 
that we briefly affirm the primacy of the Roman Pontiff and of 


Peter. 


After Peter's confession, Jesus says to him: "Blessed are 
you Simon Bar-Jonah, because flesh and blood have not revealed to 
you, but my Father who is in heaven: and I say to you, you are 
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of 
hell will not prevail against her: and I will give to you the 
keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever you bind on earth, 
will be bound also in heaven, and whatsoever you loose on earth, 
will be loosed also in heaven" [Mt 16:17ff]. It is clear how he 
meant to designate the person of Peter, for he set forth his old 
name, Simon, his new name, Peter, the name of his father Bar-Jonah, 
and properly shows this. "You are, and upon this rock," Jerome 


explains: "That is, upon you, and I will give you the keys," etc. 


And through these words the holy fathers attest that the 
primacy was promised to Peter, and upon Peter the Church was to be 
buiit. 

Cyprian, Epist 68.8, to Punlaee and 54.7, to Commeieinet 

Origen, On Matthew, Hom. 6. Jerome, Against the Pelagians 1., 
and On Matthew, 16. 

Ambrose, Sermon Ae 
Augustine, Against the Epistle of Donatus. © 

Chrysostom, On Matthew, Hom. 4. 

Hilary, On Matthew. 

Leo, On the Anniversary of his Assumption of the Pontificate, 
Sermon 3. 


Gregory, Moralia; Epist., to Emperor Maurice. 


28 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE 29 


Cyril, On John, 2.12; Council of Constantinople IV; of Pope 
Nicolas. See our book, On the Primacy of Peter. The power which 
Christ promised to Peter, He gave after the resurrection. 'Jesus 
said to Simon Peter, Simon, son of John, do you love me more than 
these? He said to him: Yes, Lord, you know that I love you. He 
said to him: Feed my sheep" [Jn 21:15]. This he repeated a third 


time: "Feed my sheep." 


To Peter alone as the prince of the Apostles in the presence 
of the other Apostles, He committed the flock: for "to pasture" 
in the Scriptures means "to rule," and in Ez 34:2; Isaiah 44:28; 
56:11; Jer 22:22; Jer 23:1; Ps 72:70f, kings are called "shepherds." 


This is true in Hebrew and in Greek. 


That the primacy was given to Peter through these words, 
Cyprian, De Simplicitate Praelatorum, attests. Jerome in his Dis~ 
course on Peter to Eustochium, Ambrose in his Sermon on Penance, 
and on the Faith of Peter. Chrysostom On John, Hom 8, on Kepentance. 


Augustine, Questions on the New and Old Testaments, Qu. 75. Leo in 


his Sermon on the Lord's Ascension. Gregory, Hom. in Ev., Mk 16, 
and Epist. to Ciranus. Bernard, in his Sermon 3 On the Seven Loaves. 
Bede in his Homilies. 

Peter's primacy is proved from many other passages of Scripture. 
Ik 22:31f£: “Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he 
may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for you, that your faith 
may not fail, and you, being once converted, may confirm your 
brethren.'"' Note that He prays for Peter more than the rest, and 
petitions two things: indefectibility of faith and power to confirm 
the faithful. Thus do the following interpret it: Augustine, 
Chrysostom, Leo, Cyril, Bede. In Mt, Ch. 17, Christ said to Peter: 
"Go to the sea, and cast in a hook; and that fish which shail first 
come up, take; and when you have opened its mouth, you shall find a 
shekel: take that, and give it to them for me and you" [Mt 17:26]. 
It is clear that Christ, with many disciples present, equates only 
Peter with himself in paying tribute. So understand this: Jerome, 


Augustine, Chrysostom, Origen, Ambrose. 


*falso: concilium Chalcedonense octavum. Eck intends the 8th 
Ecumenical Council - Constantinople IV (AD 869). 


24 


24” 


25 


yas) 


Vv 


36 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Mt 10:2, Mk 3:6, Lk 6:14, where the appointment of the 
Apostles is described: by all Peter is named as head, first, that 
Jerome and Chrysostom reckoned on behalf of his primacy on the 
basis of Jn 21 that Peter alone came to cee across the waters of 
the sea. This is the sign of a singular pontificate, says Bernard, 
On Consideration, to Eugenius. And if to the other disciples it is 
commanded that they let down their nets, only to Peter is it said 


"launch out inte the deep" [Ik 5:4]. $0 ponders Ambrose. 


We have now heard from the holy fathers: all attribute the 
primacy to Feter, first promised by the Lord, then after the resur- 
rection set forth over the whole Church. Let some thing be added 


to these prior proofs. 


Dionysius, On the Divine Names, ch. 3. 
thanasius in his Epistles to Marcus, Liberius, and Felix I, sta 


which he abundantly proves the primacy of the Pope. 


Eusebius H.E., 2.14. Augustine On John's Gospel, Tract. 56.* 


Against the Donatists, 2, etc. 
Lactantius, Divine Institutes 7.** 


Paulinue, De S. Feelice. Anselm to Pope Urban. Valentinian, 
Marcian, Phocas, Justinian, Emperors under the title "On the Supreme 


Trinity and the Catholic Faith." 


We have set forth very fully all these matters in our three 
books On the Primacy of Peter to Leo Xx! ana you will find many rare 
items in the large work, Against Luther of Johann Faber, Archducal 


Councillor (now Bishop of Vienna). @ 


Reason persuades that there was a high priest under the old Law, 
whoseauthority was heard [Dt 17 [:9]. And the monarchical rule is 
best: and such is the order in the Church Triumphant. This is 
beautifully confirmed by Gregory Nazianzus: Moses in doubtful times 
provided for the synagogue [Dt 17: 10ff]. Why should not Christ have 
provided for His bride the Church? 


1 1520 


2 Ci, peMeSSWESM Seton. 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE ail 


Gregory, Moralia, 21.15* "(God) created all men equal in 
nature, but by reason of merits, he set some behind others in order 
by a secret dispensation. But this diversity which derives from one 
(mature), is distributed by divine judgment: so that, since every 
man does not walk the way of life, one may be ruled by another.” The 
heretic strongly desires that the Church Militant not have a minis— 
terial head; and that there may come to pass in the Church what is 
written: ‘In those days there was not a king in Israel, but each 


man did what seemed good to him” [Jdg 17:6, 18:1, 31; 21:24]. 
Objections of the Heretics 


1. Christ did not promise or give to Peter the keys for his 
own person, but because he was acting in the person of the Church. 

2. If the Church is built upon Peter the man, the gates of 
hell have already prevailed against him in the voice of one maid- 
servant [Mt 26:69-88], and will daily prevail over his successors 
and sinners. 

3, And since the Church was built upon a rock, but his rock 
was Christ [1 Cor 10:4] it cannot be referred to Peter, ee a fede 
other foundation can no one lay; save that which has been laid” 
[Core sere) e 
4. The primitive Church of the Apostles would not have been 
a Church, since Peter,18 years after Christ had suffered, was still 
in Jerusalem. Where then was the Roman Church? 

5. Peter never was at Rome. 

6. Peter is a member of the Church. 

7. How Could Peter have been the rock, when in Mt 16:18f 


Carist said: "Get behind me, Satan." 
Disposal of the arguments adduced against Peter. 


1. We admit, with Augustine, that the keys were given to the 
Church, yet in the person of Peter, that is, Christ formally gave 
the keys to Peter, for the benefit of the Church; He gave the keys 


not to one, but to mity. Thus Peter acted in the person of the 


*PL 76.208 


26 


26 


27 


Vv 


32 ECK ; ENCHTRIDION 


Church, just as the Emperor of Germany. Therefore certain peu 
sons have the keys, because otherwise there would be no use of 
them. 

2. The gates of hell prevailed against the persons succeeding 
Peter, yet not against the power of Peter. This succession of Peter 
abode in power, although the persons might sin. But when Peter 
denied Christ, the Church had not yet been founded but was to be 
founded on him, because Christ said: "Upon this rock I shall build 
my church," that is to say, after the resurrection. 

3. Even if Christ is the chief rock and primary foundation, 
yet He has vicars and substitutes, secondary rocks. For alongside 
Paul's statement that Christ alone is the foundation stands the 
statement of John [Rev 21:14]: "And the wall of the city had twelve 
foundations, and in them, the twelve names of the twelve apostles, 
and cf the Lamb." 

4. Luther is mistaken that Peter came so late to Rome: for 
he was 5 years in Pontus, and 7 years at Antioch in Asia; after- 
wards he migrated to Rome: although in the 18th pear he came from 
Rome to Jerusalem to the Council. Now, nothing applies to the mat- 
ter. For Peter was the supreme pontiff wherever he was, although 
by the revelation of the Spirit, as St. Marcellus the martyr says, 
he chose a see for himself at Rome. Therefore Peter was for a time 
supreme bishop before he became Bishop of Rome. 

5. This is a new lie of Urban Rigger 2 or another Lutheran, 
that Peter never was at Rome and previously Paul converted those 
of whom he speaks in Gal. 2. St. Jerome attests to that in his 
comment on Rom 1:11, "that I may impart to you some spiritual grace" 
etc. To strengthen, he says, those Romans, hoiding the faith by 
the preaching of Peter. Paul says he wished to strengthen, not so 
much from their having been received by Peter, but that their faith 
might be strengthened by two apostles, witnesses, and doctors: 
otherwise he would have taken care not to build on another's foun- 


dation. 


Of Tiberius. 


e The Reformer of Augsburg. 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE 33 


The very ancient man Hegesippus, whe came to Rome under 
Anicetus in the year of our Lord 160, wrote in Book 3 of On the 
Destruction of Jerusalem, how Nero sought a pretext for killing 
the Apostles, and when the command was given that the Apostles 


be seized, Peter was asked that he give himself over to another. 


Dionysius Bishop of the Corinthians, living at Rome A.D. 50, 
says: "You having admonitior from Peter and Paul, have joined the 
planting (plantation) of the Roman Church." Also both men arriving 
and teaching in this city at the same time, were crowned teo with 
martyrdom in like manner at one and the same time. A certain writer 


named Gaius under Pope Zephyrinus attests the same thing. 


Saint Ignatius, a disciple of John the Evangelist, writes to 
the Tarsians: "What of the fact that Peter was crucified? That 
Paul and James were cut down with swords? That John was banished 
to Patmos?" And in his letter to the Romans: "Not just as Peter and 


Paul do I bid you: for they were Apostles of Jesus Christ, but I 


am the least." Irenaeus, bishop of Lyon, Against Heretics, 3.1., 
says as follows: ‘''Matthew gave the Scripture of the Gospel to the 


Hebrews in their own language, while Peter and Paul proclaimed the 


Gospel at Rome, and founded the Church.” 


And Ch. 3: "By the two most glorious apostles Peter and Paul, 
the Churches of Rome were founded and established." Tertullian, 
living A.D. 150, wrote in Against Marcion, 3. : "To the Romans, 


Peter and Paul left the Gospel with the seal of their own blood.” 
And On the Prescription of Heretics, 36, speaking of Rome, he adds: 


"Where Peter is broughtinto equality with the Lord's OEISSALOIL. 


Eusebius of Caesarea, Hist. 2: says: "In those times of 
Claudius, by the mercy of divine providence, he led Peter, the 
most approved of all the Apostles, and the greatest in magnificence 


of faith and merit of virtue, the prime prince, to the city of Rome." 


And in the book De Temporibus: "In the same year, he was 
seized by Herod." And later: "Peter, a Galilean by birth, the first 


1 Margin (1541 ed.): See Johann Faber *** 


2 pseudonymous epistle (PG 5.887ff). 


28 


29” 


34 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


pontiff of the Christians, after he had first founded the Church 
of Antioch, proceeded to Rome, where preaching the Gospel he 


persevered for 25 years as bishop of the same Galieyo ” 


# 
‘ 
Gaudentius of Brixen, a very ancient writer, says: "On this 


day in the city of Rome, the cruelty of Nero slew both for the 


name of Christ." 


Jerome, On Famous Men, ¢-l1: "Simon Peter, son of John of 
the province of Galilee, of the village cf Bethsaida, brother of 
Andrew the Apostle, and prince of the Apostles, after his episco- 
pate of the Church of Antioch, and preaching ot the dispersion of 
those who had believed in the circumcision in Pontus, Galatia, 
Cappodocia, Asia, and RBythynia, in the second year of the Emperor 
Claudius hastened to Rome to overcome Simon Magus; there he occupied 


the episcopal see for 25 years." 


Dionysius the Areopagite, St. Paul's disciple, attested the 
same to his fellow-disciple Timothy, concerning the passing of the 


Aposties. 


Linus the next pope after Peter, wrote to the Easterns in be- 


half of the martyrdom of Peter in the city. 


Ambrose in Sermon 67, says: "Let us not think it came to pass 
without cause, that on one day, in one place they bore the sentence 
of one tyrant, suffered on one day, so that together they came to 
Christ, in one place, lest Rome should be deprived of either one." 
etc. And further on: "In the city of Rome, which obtained the 
chief position and headship of the nations," he speaks of Peter and 
Paul. Papias of Jerusalem, the hearer of John the Evangelist, at- 


tests that Peter wrote his first canonical epistle at Rome. 


[Paulus Orosius, Hist. 6.6, "in the 805th year since the found- 
ing of the city of Rome, Tiberius Claudius the fourth after Augustus 
began to reign, and remained emperor for 16 years. At the beginning 
of his reign, Peter, Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ came, and 


taught with faithful word faith unto salvation to all believers, and 


* Brescia 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE aS 


confirmed it with mighty virtues. And thereupon there began to be 
Christians at Rome." And in the following chapter: "Nero was the 
first at Rome to inflict torture and death upon the Christians, 

and ordered them to be tortured through all the provinces with equal 
persecutions, and attempting to uproot the very name itself, he 
killed the most blessed Apostles Peter with the cross and Paul with 
the awordae 


This is attested by Athanasius, Marcellus, Damasus, Leo, Bernard, 


and innumerable others. 
* 
[See Johannes Faber, in his work, past the middle.] 


6. We speak of Peter as member and part of the Church, but we 
deny that he could not Bee eens the ministerial head, or vicar of 
the true head. Similarly, it is one thing to act as a private per- 
son; something else, as a public person. And if he is head he is 


undoubtedly a member. 


7. No wonder that Peter, upbraided by Christ because he de- 


cided, contrary to his confession, that Christ should be killed, be- 


cause not yet had he received the keys, not yet had he been confirmed, 


not yet had the fulness of the spirit come upon him. Therefore not 
yet was he the rock, but after the resurrection Christ founded upon 
him the Church, as Jerome expressly states in his Commentary on 


Matthew, at that verse. 


Lastly, Chrysostom and Hilary would not apply the name of 
Satan to Peter, but to the devil, the supporter of this advice. 
Now the fall of the person does not remove the power. Origen, On 
Matthew, Hom. 3, says: "As yet Peter was leaden, and it could hap- 
pen that he would have a revelation from the Father, whereby he 
might profess Christ to be the son of the living God. As yet this 
great mystery was hidden from him, whereby Christ willed to be cru- 
cified for the salvation of the human race, and to rise on the third 


day." 


* Against Luther: cf. p. 30, above. 


1529 


30” 


31 


36 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


For when Luther by "rock" understands faith; faith, just as 
much as grace, is lost in man, and no more is the faith of one man 
than of another man: and thus upon the faith of all the faithful 
has the Church been built. And if all the faithful are the foun- 
dation, what Church will he then give unless he most ineptly says 


the same is founded upon himself? 


Still Other Objections of the Heretics against Peter and 
the Pope. 


1. Peter did not have authority over the Apostles, but the 
Apostles over him, because they sent him and John into Samaria 
{Acts 8:14]. 

2, And Peter did not ever exercise that primacy, as the Pope 
does; the latter does not wish there to be any bishop in the world, 
unless he receives the pallium and confirmation from him. 

3. Peter knew this was forbidden by Christ in Lk 22:24f, when 
a contention broke out over who of them was to be regarded as the 
greatest, Jesus said to them: "The Kings of the Gentiles lord it 
over them; and they that have power over them, are called benefi- 
cent. But you are not so: but he that is greatest among you, let 
him become the least, and he who is the leader, as he who serves." 
It is clear (say the heretics) that it is the Kings of the Gentiles, 
not the pontiffs, who lord it over them. 

4. Mk 10:37£f, when the sons of Zebedee aspired to that power, 
they received the reply: namely, that they should drink of the cup, 
and yet not be certain where they would sit {Mk 10:39]. 

5. In Luke 9:46 and Matthew 18:1ff, He taught them that such 
superiority should be avoided. 

6. Paul withstood Peter [Gal ZS t]) 

7. Pope Victor wishing to excommunicate the Easterns, was 
forbidden to do so by Irenaeus Bishop of Lyon, 

8. Anicetus yielded to Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna. 

9, The Eastern bishops did not obey Pope Julius. 

10. it was the Emperor Constantine IV who determined that the 


pope was first. 


*Byzantine Emperor (668-685). See Liber Pontificalis, ed L. Duchesne 
1.363. Cf. C. Head, Justinian II of Byzantium (1972). Ba Bis 


(1955), 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE 37 


ll. Thus many thousands of martyrs of the Eastern Church 
would have been condemned, likewise Cyprian, Augustine, Nicolas, 
because there never was a pope over the churches of Asia, Greece, 
or Africa. 

12. When did he establish the Antiochian, Constantinopolitan, 
Alexandrian, or Indian bishoprics? 

13. Theophilus of Alexandria and Epiphanius deposed Chrysostom, 32 
and the same Epiphanius excommunicated John of Jerusalem. 

14. The Council of Nicea attests that the bishop takes charge 
of suburban churches. 

15. The same council decreed that bishops were to be ordained 
by provincial bishops, not by the pope. 

16. The same council attributed the primacy to the Jerusalem 
bishopric, not to that of Rome. And Jerusalem was first, because 
“out of Zion went forth the Law" [is 2:3]. 


17. At the Council of Africa IV, the bishop of the prime see 


Lis ' 


was not to be called "prince of bishops’! or anything of that sort, 
but only "bishop of the prime see"; later: not even the Roman 
pontiff is to be called "universal." 
18. Both Pelagius and Gregory rejected the name "universal 
bishop." 
19. The primacy of the pope is proved from the decrees and 
decretals of the Roman pontiffs, books originating within the last 32 


400 years. 


We have gone into these matters more deeply because the 
heretics have shouted more against the rock than they attacked 


anything else. 


Disposal of Objections. 


1. Now we shall say that Peter exercised the primacy, yet 
when you argue that Peter was sent into Samaria, why was he thus 
less than the Apostles? This is the form of argument of the Arians, 
that the Father sent the Son [Jn 6:44; 10:29; Gal 4:4]. Therefore 
the Father is greater than the Son, because the sender is greater 


than the sent. As if Herod who was not greater than the Magi, did 


Lee) 
Cony 


38 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


not send the three Magi, te worship the child, and it is fre- 
quent that the more powerful are sent from the college and the 
Senate by counsel or love, not by the authority of inieriors. 
Hence in Joshua 22:11-14 one reads: "And when the children of 
Israel had heard of it . . . that the children of Ruben and of Gad 
and the half tribe of Manasses had built an altar in the land of 
Canaan, upon the banks of the Jordan, over against the children of 
Israel: they all assembled in Shiloh, to go up and fight against 
them. And in the meantime they sent to them into the land of Gilead, 
Phineas the son of Eleazar the priest, and ten princes with him, one 
of every tribe," that they might censure them for having committed 
this sacrilege. Note that the Sons of Israel, the lesser people, 
sent Phineas, who "was their leader befora the Lord," as stated in 
i Chr 9:20. Therefore it is clear from these Scriptural passages, 
that it is of no consequence to assert: he is sent; therefore he 
is less than the sender or the senders. 

2. Peter carried out his office. We do not wish to recount 
what they recounted in Jn 6:69f; Lk 12:41; Mt UDS272 ike Salse 
Mt 4:18f; Mt 17:23f; Me 18:21; but when in Acts he had already been 
created Pontiff, let us hear what he did: for first he directed the 
ordination of Matthias as an Apostle. "Peter rising up in the midst 
of the brethren, standing, said: ‘Men, brothers. . .' ete. [Acts 
1:15f]. Secondly, on the day of Pentecost, he defended all the 
Apostles. "Peter standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice" 
[Acts 2:14]. Thirdly, with John present he healed the lame man and 
defended him in the presence of the people [Acts 3:1ff]. Fourthly, 
in the council he defended himself and John [Acts 4:5ff£]. Fifthly, 
he pronounced the death sentence on Ananias and Sapphira [Acts 
5:4ff]: this was the greatest indication of coercive authority. 
Sixthly, he condemned the accursed trafficking of Simon [Acts 8:20ff]. 
Seventhly, he was bidden to receive even Gentiles as prelates into 
his power, when he saw "a sheet. . . in which there were beasts and 


"ete., and a voice came to him: “Arise, Peter; kill and 


reptiles,' 
eat" [Acts 10:11-13]. Here he was bidden as head to receive Gentiles 


in the body of the Church. 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE 39 


Eighthly, in the Apostolic Council he was the author of the 
decision suspending the law, as Jerome teaches, and Acts 15:7ff. 
Beware therefore of heretically lying against St. Peter, that he 
did not use the power divinely bestowed upon him, 

Concerning the corollary, it is false, for each patriarch con- 
firmed his own bishops, and the patriarch of Thessalonica confirmed 
his own bishops in Greece, yet did so as the vicar of the pope, as 
is clear from the acts of Pope Leo. 

The heretic supposes that all bishops have the pallium, which 
is false, because regularly archbishops have it, and a few bishops 
by privilege, as the bishop of Bamberg in Germany. [See our 
treatise On the Primacy, 3.15.] On the reason for the pallium see 
St. Gregory, Epist.” 

3. It is agreed that Christ forbade ambition and tyranny, but 
not authority because that is from God, and “he who resists authority, 
resists God's ordinance" [Rom 13:2]. There he wished to teach the 
humility of the president, not to remove his power. In like manner 
from the fact that He was ministering and also taught other chief 
persons to minister, anyone would wrongly infer that Christ had no 
power. And when Christ asked who is the greater among you, it is 
evident that he wished someone else to be greater in power, although 
it happened to him that he was the lesser one by the showing forth 
of ministry. 

4/5. We reply similarly, for he willed, as Jerome says, for 
his followers to reach the pinnacle of virtues, not by power but 
by humility. For those who are in power ought to humble themselves 
within, as if they were not in power, that they may become as little 
children in humility, not in sense and in age. 

6. Paul reproved Peter, because he was holding onto the edifi- 
cation of faith, that is, to the office of the apostolate in which 
they were equals, yet Peter was still prior in rule and authority. 
For even today it often happens that the Pope and other superiors 
are often reproved by inferiors. Indeed, the heretic Luther censures 


all churchly prelates, though he is the supericr of none of these. 


*C£. p. 175, below. 


35 


40 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


7/8. Anicetus was the first to determine that Easter be cele- 
brated on Sunday. First Pius, then Victor, confirmed this, and 
their decision prevailed. At first the Easterns resisted this, be- 
cause from the bidding of St. John, they celebrated on the 14th 
moon of the first month. From Smyrna Polycarp addressed Anicetus 
(Note; Greek to Roman), and recognized that he was performing 
the office of bishop, yet Anicetus could not persuade Polycarp says 
Eusebius in the Church History. Luther the Corrupter says: 
"Anicetus yielded te Polycarp." He wished to excommunicate the 
Easterns resisting Victor, whom Irenaeus warned, not that Victor 
should have no power over the Easterns. For why should the holy 
martyr have concerned himself; but to consider the concord of the 
Church and her peace, he determined that disturbance not arise in 
the Church, 

9. It is wonderful that the heretic leans upon the deed of 
heretics, for those eastern bishops expelled Athanasius and Paul, 
who taking refuge with Pope Julius, after the heretics were ar- 
vaigned and excommumicated, were restored. Here the heretic tumbles 
down, because Pope Julius more than 1100 years ago had authority 
aver the eastern bishops of Asia and Egypt. * 

It is false that Constantine IV first gave the primacy to the 
Roman pontiff, when previously he had it from the Gospel with the 
confirmation of Emperors Constantine, Valentinian, Gratian, 
Theodosius, Marcian, Basil, and others. 

10. Hence it is not inappropriate that the decree of the princes 
yield to the right of the Apostolic See, in order that the temerity 
of the rebels may be restrained. Yet the heretic has erred that 
Constantine IV determined anything in this matter, but he has only 
remitted the confirmation of the elected Pope, which the Emperor 
previously was accustomed to do in his own way. 

ll. None of the holy martyrs withdrew themselves from obedience 
to Peter or his successors where and when it was necessary. The 
heretic is mistaken: but if the pope is supreme, it is necessary 


that all bishops be confirmed by him, for just as it suffices for 


*Add: See our Book on the Papacy. 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE 41 


priests to be confirmed by bishops, so bishops by archbishops, 

primates or patriarchs. So you understand concerning Ambrose, 36 
Augustine, and Nicolas. I believe that because of the pride of 

the bishops in Germany it came to pass that they shook off the 

authority of the primate of Magdeburg. And prior things are clear 


from the eighth council, from the Council of Nicea and cthers. See 


Dist. 64 of the Decretals. It is clear that the bisheps of Africa Grat. 1.64 


were under the Roman pontiff, because from the council of Milevis Ere 


they wrote to Pope Innocent I, seeking confirmation of that. See 
Augustine, Epist. 90, 91. The third and fourth Councils of Carthage 
were confirmed, one by the authority of Pope Zozimus, the other by 
the authority of Boniface, since he sent Bishop Faustinus thither. 
Augustine was concerned with them. The Councils under Cyprian in 
Africa sought approval from Pope Cornelius (Cyprian, Epistles, 1.2; 37 
2.11). Now it was clear that the bishops of Asia, Egypt and Greece 
were under the Roman Pontiff, because it was through the Roman Pon- 
tiff that Athanasius was restored, Chrysostom was restored, Flavian 
was restored, Appiarus in Africa was restored. For abundant evi- 
dence, see our book On the, Primacy.* 

12. It was not necessary for the installation of a bishop to 
take place directly at the hands of the Roman Pontiff, yet that 
those churches were subject to the pope, is clear from the fact that 
he restored bishops ejected from these churches. And today, from 
Pope Leo X, and from Hadrian VI, Asiatic bishops have received con- 
firmation. 

13. How much.can heresy claim? When it has nothing solid for 
itself, it brings forward the utterly wicked ejection of the best 
of bishops, John Chrysostom, who was ejected through the utterly 
greedy and wicked Theophilus of Alexandria, with the help of the 
ungodly Empress Eudoxia. 

The injustice committed against this holy man the heretic takes ag! 
for a lawful act, but remains silent about the fact that he was re- 


stored by Pope Innocent, and the negotiation earried on by the Pope 


*See note on forged papal decretals in Pseudo-Isidorean Collections: 
Lec 21.1130 n27 (Calvin Inst. 1559, 4.7.11) including reference to 


Lo Baye 


38 


42 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


with Alexander Bishop of Antioch; and the Emperor Arcadius re- 
sisting the Pope and Chrysostom, was excommunicated. Go now, 
heretic, and deny that the bishops of Greece were under the Roman 
Pontiff! Concerning John of Jerusalem it is clear from St. Jerome 
that a council had been called at Antioch (for at that time the 
Bishop of Jerusalem was under that Patriarch, and under the Arch- 
bishop of Caesarea) and John was condemned by the synod, in which 
Epiphanius was of preeminent authority. 

14. Canon 6 cf the Council of Nicea goes as follows: "The 
ancient custom persisted in Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis, and the 
Bishop of Alexandria has authority over all these, seeing that it 
is a custom like to that of the Roman bishop. Similarly in Antioch 
and the ether provinces hig honor is to be kept with each and every 
Church" [Gratian Decr. 1.65.6; Fr. 1.251] that this passage does not 
exclude the Reman primacy which the heretic wrongly infers, but that 
the authority of the three patriarchal churches was then confirmed, 
for at that time there were only three patriarchal sees, that is, 
the Roman, the Antiochene, and the Alexandrine. Nay, more strongly 
through that council the primacy of the Roman pontiff is proved, 
first because although Nicea was in Asia, yet Ossius of Cordova, 
presided over the Council in the name of the Pope, and signed first 
not in his own name as all the remaining bishops, but in the Pope's 
name. 

Secondly, because it was decided in the Council of Nicea that 
in case of the deposition of a bishop, appeal could be made from 
the whole world to the Roman Pontiff. Athanasius leaned on him and 
obtained restoration; so did Chrysostom. And when the Church of 
Africa opposed Pope Zozimus in the restoration of Appiarus, once 
made certain of the matter by the Council of Nicea, the Church 
acquiesced. Go, now, heretic and rave that the Nicean Council con- 
troverts the Pope. 

15. On the ordination of bishops, what hes this to do with 


primacy, when today the pope very rarely ordains a bishop or 


3. ON THE PRIMACY OF THE APOSTOLIC AND PETRINE SEE 43 


perchance never, but at the present time three bishops meeting 
together, ordain and consecrate a bishop? (Wese. WeGhoil, Be 1.2Ay|, 

16. Canon 7 of this Council so provides. "For the custom and 
ancient tradition obtained, that the episcopal office was conferred 
upon Elias, that he might have the consequence ef honor, apart from 
the rank of metropolitan” [Gratian, Decr. 1.65.7: Fr. 1.251]. This 
stupid heretic dreams of a primacy attributed to Jerusalem, when as 
yet primacy was not attributed to it, as it permitted it to be sub- 
ject to the Metropolitan who was at Caesarea, as Jerome states. 
Therefore it decreed that Jerusalem was to be honored by ancient 
tradition, but says nothing about primacy, as Jerusalem was first 
in time but not in rank. 

The African Council did not deal with the primacy or with Rome, 
but the African bishops settled among themselves that their primates 
(such were the bishops of Carthage, Numidia, Mauritania, etc.) were 
not to flaunt their glorious titles, and their jurisdiction over 
others. Canon 6 of the Third African Council deals with this and 
nothing else. And the mad heretic when he read in the Decretals 
{[1.99.3: Fr. 1.350f] the words of Gratian attached thereto, believed 
them to be the words of the Council, and they were not. But we will 
shortly speak of the universal bishop. 

18. Gregory and Pelagius did not spurn the primacy of the Roman 
Church, but approved of it, as we have shown very fully in our trea- 
tise On the Primacy of Peter. But they so denied that there could 
be any universal bishop, because there should be a proper ruler of 
each Church. Since thus there could be no cther bishop, the epis- 
copal honor should both be withdrawn from all and referred back to 
one alone. 

That because there was something distinctive in the hier- 
archical order, the holy fathers rightfully rejected it, except 


for the dignity of the Roman Church. 


39 


Vv 


39 


44 ECK : ENCHIRLDION 


19. The Primacy of the Roman Church is proved not only from 
the decrees of the Pontiffs, but from the Gospel, from the holy 
martyrs, councils and doctors. But the heretic is mistaken: he 
believes that there were no other ee ee except after the 
appearance of Gratian's Decretum and the Decretals of Gregory IX, 
despite the fact that there had always been statutes and laws in 
the Church. For example there was once a Codex of canons a 
Decretum of Pathasius, Decretum of Burchardus, a Panormia of Ivo, 


etc. Therefore all things heretical vanish like water bubbles. 
Conclusion. 


Let us all receive the authority of the Church shining in the 
Apostolic See of the Roman See: since Jerome in times difficult 
for the faith consulted her, writing from Asia Minor to Damasus; 
Augustine writing from Africa to Innocent and Boniface; and Cyprian 
writing to Cornelius; Athanasius writing from Egypt to esate and 
Julius? Ambrose writing from Italy, etc. 

Now those defending themselves against rebaptizers draw back 
from their basis, hence they conreee many things not written and 
yet to be adhered to. Zwingli infers from the baptism of Mary 


the baptism of encieren 


ce AD 336 


a Taide Pope (Ciagecs2 ) 


3 peepee eee 


40 


CHAPTER 4 


THAT THE HERETICS RASHLY CPPOSE THE SCRIPTURES 


Besides the above-mentioned things concerning the Church and 


Councils, let us subjoin these matters. 


x 
Axiom 1: That the heretics wish to receive nothing unless 


it be expressly proved through the Scriptures. 


Therefore the Lutherans will not accept the perpetual virginity 
of Mary, just as Helvidius, against whom St. Jerome wrote [Against 
Helvidius: PL 23.193-200]: because it is not proved in the Scrip- 
tures, but more Scriptural passages apparently are on Helvidius' 


side. 


The article in the Creed, "He descended into hell,'' is not ex~ 
pressly proved through the Scriptures. Therefore Luther will not 
believe that article: for if anyone offers in objection that passage 
of Ecclesiasticus 24:45: "I shall penetrate all the lower parts of 417 
the earth," that shameless fellow will say: "he will penetrate by 
power not by place." He hoids that view in common with many Catho- 
lics. If someone were to quote Paul [Eph 4:8] that he ascended, 
what else is this but that he first descended into the lower parts 
of the earth? Immediately he will say: the Apostle was speaking of 
the Son of God descending into the womb of the virgin, who ascended 
to the heights of heaven. But parts of the earth are lower than 
heaven and than the elements. Similarly the Lutherans will not ob- 
serve the Apostles' Creed, the homoousios of Athanasius, person in 
the Godhead, Anna the Mother of Mary, the Lord's Day. By the 
Lutherans! judgment Christ would not well have proved the resur- 
rection of bodies against the Saducees [Lk 20:27f£], for to them 
he did not bring forth the clear text, but because it was said, "The 
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac the God of Jacob [Ex 3:6]; For 
he ig not the God of the dead, but of the living" [ik 20:37£], and Gil 


yet they were then living only according to souls, not according 


to bodies. 


* 1529 Axioma. 1541: propositio 


45 


42° 


42 


46 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Augustine to the Priest Casulanus: ‘In those matters con- 
cerning which divine Scripture has established nothing certain, 
the custom of the people of God and the regulations of the fathers 
are to be considered as law; and just as thé transgressors of the 
divine laws, so also the despisers of church customs, are to be 


restrained." He writes in the same vein to the Granmarian Cresconius 


Not only are those things expressly stated in the Scriptures or 
proved from them to be believed and kept (something the Lutherans 
are willing to do), but also it is necessary to believe and keep 
those things Holy Mother Church believes and observes. For not 
everything has been clearly handed down in the Sacred Scriptures, 
but very many have been left to the Church to determine (which is 
illumined and governed by the Holy Spirit, and on this account can- 
not wander from the path of truth). Hence the Savior said to his 
disciples [Jn 16:12f ]: "I have yet many things to say to you: but 
you cannot bear them new. But when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, 
he will teach you all truth." Therefore the Church observes in its 
rites and ceremonies many things, from the intimate inspiration of 
the Holy Spirit, and the tradition of the Apostles, and of the holy ~° 
fathers, which even if not expressly stated in the Scriptures, yet 
it is wicked to depart from them or take exception to them. Indeed 
these things are most confirmed to them, and on that account are to 
be enforced and observed by all true evangelical and Pauline Chris- 
tians (such do the Lutherans falsely boast themselves to be). 
"Therefore, brethren, stand fast; and hold the traditions which you 


have learned, whether by word, or by our epistle" [2 Thess 2:14]. 


"The rest I shall dispose of when I come" [1 Cor 11:34]. 
Here, speaking of the Sacred Eucharist, he makes clear that he did 
not write down everything, but when he comes to them, he is going 


to set forth the remaining unwritten things. 


“Having more things to write to you, I would not by paper and 
ink, for I hope that I shall be with you, and speak face to face, 


that your joy may be full" [2 Jn v. 12]. 


4. THAT THE HERETICS RASHLY OPPOSE THE SCRIPTURES 47 


"I had many things to write to you, but I would not by ink and 
pen write to you. But I hope speedily to see you and we will speak 


mouth to mouth” [3 Jn v. 13f]. 


Obviously many things both of the Lord's words and his deeds 
we find omitted by the Evangelists which one reads that the Apostles 
either supplied by word or expressed by deed, for Paul says so in 
Acts 20:35: "We ought to remember the word of the Lord Jesus, how he 
said: It is a more blessed thing to give, rather than to receive" 
[Acts 20:35]. These words none of the four Evangelists has written 


down. Also no one expressed anything about the appearance to more 


than 500 brothers at the same time [1 Cor 15:6], which Paul describes. 


In ecclesiastical observances, there are some of the sort which 
it is necessary for all to perform, yet the reason for them is not 
clear to all. I think it not easy for anyone to discover the reason 
why we kneel to pray, and why we turn from all regions of heaven 
to the eastern sector alone to pour out our prayers. Yet the reason 
for this John of Damascus*sets forth in the following words: "Be- 
cause God is light intelligible, and Christ is named the sun of 
righteousness and the eastern star in the Scriptures, the east is 
to be devoted to him for worship. For every more excellent and 
greater good ought to be offered to him, from whom every good is 


kindly given." [(These things are applied to him in no codex of the 


Gospel ,)] 
Axiom 2: The Lutherans contend that the Scriptures are 


clear. 


Therefore laymen and crazy old women treat them in a domi- 


neering manner. 


Peter contradicts this, speaking concerning the Epistle of 
Paul. "In them are some things difficult to understand, which 
untutored and unstable men distort, as for example some scriptures, 
to their own destruction" [2 Pt 3:15f]. Note the difficulty of 
those scriptures, and how (when Paul was living) they were distorted, 


just as the Lutherans do today. 


*Fount of Knowledge, 4.12: 1 Jn 1:5; Mal 4:2; Zech 3:8; Lk 1:78. 


43 


1529 


48 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Jerome to Algasia: "The whole letter of Paul to the Romans 


is wrapped in too great obscurities." 


"But if our Gospel is hidden, it is hidden to those who are 
lost" [2 Cor 4:3]. If the Holy Scripture is so completely open, 
it is a wonder why the holy fathers, who read it so frequently, did 
not understand it for 1200 years, that if it was obscure to Augustine, 
Jerome, Bernard, Thomas, how will it be open to Lutheran laymen? In 
Lk 10:35 "Jesus took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and 
said: .. . Whatever you shall spend over and above, I, at my re- 


turn, will repay you.'' The two pence are the two testaments, then 


what the Apostles and doctors spend over and above, God will repay. 


Axiom 3: Heretics evilly reject any other judge than 


Scripture. 


In the Gld Testament not the law but the high priest was judge. 


"Tf . . . a hard and doubtful matter .. ." [Dt 17:8]. See above, 
Chapter 1. "When there shall be a controversy, (the priests) shall 
stand in my judgment, and judge. . ." [Ez 44:24]. 


And the Catholics also especially admit Scripture, but we dif- 
fer from the heretics in our understanding of it; accordingly it is 
necessary for there to be another judge than Scripture, namely, the 


Church. 


By this example, taken from the modern heretics (who reject any 
other judge than Scripture) is shown how the Lutherans and Oecolam- 
padians and Zwinglians contend over the sacrament of the Eucharist, 
as to whether here is truly and spiritually the body and blood of 
Christ, or only a figure and sign. Who among them will be judge? 
Who will ever bring them into harmony? Scripture or Church? Apart 
from these no other judge can be provided. It is not indeed upon 
Scripture (which each contends to be the judge) that they lay their 
foundation--all the while in the self-same words of Scripture--and 
thus they do not admit Scripture as judge against their own doctrine, 
but make themselves judges over Scripture. Accordingly the Church 


will be the necessary judge, which believes that, when bread and 


4. THAT THE HERETICS RASHLY OPPOSE THE SCRIPTURES 49 


wine have, by the power of Christ's words, been transubstantiated 
in this sacrament, they are the true body and blood of Christ, 


under the species of bread and wine. 


Ps 132:2 [Vg]: "Like ointment upon the head..." ete. So 
also by Christ the Head were the words transmitted to the Apostles; 
again, by the Apostles were they poured out upon the garment, even 45" 
upon all the garment, that is, even to the end of the church which 


is a seamless robe [Jn 19:23]. 


Even the devil quoted Scripture against Christ [Mt 4:6]: "That 
he has given his angels charge over you" etc., but a true under- 
standing he did not possess, as Jerome concludes in Against the 
Luciferians, and the Scriptures consist not in reading as the un- 
tutored crowd of the Lutheran heresy now suppose, but in understand- 
ing. Jerome, Ibid. Therefore Tertullian powerfully demonstrates 
in his book, On the Prescription of Heretics: it is wicked for them 
to be admitted to undertake the citation of the Scriptures. A11 


heretics fled to Scriptures ill understood by them. 


Augustine: Arius quotes 42 passages of Scripture in his own 


support. 


The Lutherans receive the Scriptures just as the Jews do the 
Old Testament, because they insist alone on the literal sense, and 45 
those things contrary to them they twist; hence they are inky 
theologians, according to the shell and the surface. Therefore it 
is a Jewish practice to impugn the Church by the Scriptures. Luther 
in his assertions says: to the proud and impious, Scripture will 
always be occasion for greater blindness: this saying boomerangs 


on the head of its author and of his followers. 


CHAPTER 5 
CONCERNING FAITH AND WORKS 


Proposition 1: That faith does not suffice without works, 
and works are something meritorious for 
1532 eternal life, [from divine fore-ordination] 


and God's accepting grace. 


1529 ["The Lord had regard for Abel and his gifts; for Cain and his 
gifts, He had no regard . . . And the Lord said to Cain: .. . If 
you do well, shail you not receive? But if ill, shall not your sins 


forthwith be present at the door?” [Gen 4:4-5,7].] 


The Lord said to Abraham: "I shall be your exceedingly great 
reward" [Gen 15:1]. 


“Behold, his reward is with him" [ls 40:10]. 
"There is a reward for your work, says the Lord" [Jer 31:16]. 
"Sow for yourselves in justice" [Hos 10:12]. 


46 "The wicked makes an unsteady work, but to him who sows justice 
there is a faithful reward" [Prov 11:18]. "Glorious is the fruit 
of good works" [Wisd 3:15]. ‘The just shall live for evermore; and 
their reward is with the Lord" [Wisd 5:16]. "God Wii vender to the 
just the reward of their iabors" [Wisd 10:17]. "You who fear the 
Lord, believe him, and your reward shall not be made void" [Ecclus 


2:8]. "Whatever your hand is able to do, do it earnestly” [Ecclus 
9:10}. 


"Mercy makes a place for every man, according to the merit of 


his works. . .'"' [Ecclus 16:15]. 


iE shall keep myself from my iniquity. And the Lord will re- 


ward me according to my justice" [Ps 17:24f]. 


"I incline my heart to do thy justifications for ever for the 


sake of reward" [Ps 118:112]. 


50 


5. CONCERNING FAITH AND WORKS SL 


"The Lord will render to you for your work, and you will re- 
ceive a full reward of the Lord God of Israel, to whom you have 


come. . ." [Ruth 2:12]. 


"Be comforted and let not your hands be weakened," that is, 


works, "for there shall be a reward for your work" [2 Chr 15:7]. 


("He who reaps receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life 
everlasting, that both he who sows, and he who reaps, may rejoice 


together" [Jn 4:36].) 


"Be glad and rejoice, for your reward is very great in hea- 


ven" [Mt 5:12]. And again: 


"Be glad in that day and rejoice; for behold, your reward is 
great in heaven" [Lk 6:23]. If reward, therefore, and merit, to 
whom is reward owed? For these terms are to be interchangeably 
used in a relative sense, where one cannot be understood without 


the other. 


[Take heed that you do not do your justice before men, to be 
seen by them. Otherwise you shail not have a reward with your 
Father, who is in heaven. Therefore when you do. CEC. 


{Mt 6:1f].) 


"Not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the kingdom of heaven, but he who does the will of my Father who 


is in heaven" [Mt 7321]. 


"Whoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a 


cup of cold water, he shall not lose his reward" [Mt 10:42]. 


"Call the laborers and pay them their hire" [Mt 20:8], and 


previously; "I will give you what shall be just” [Mt 20:4]. 


"Tf you wish to enter into life, keep the commandments" 


lOsie U3 I7)) 0 


"T hungered and you gave me something to eat" etc. [Mt 


25:35]. "Come, blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom which 


46 


USE) 


47 


4qv 


SH. ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


has been prepared for you from the beginning of the world” 


(Me 25:34]. 


"and they who have done good things, shall come forth unto 
the resurrection of life; but they who have done evil, unto the 


resurrection of judgment" [Jn 5:29]. 


"You are my friends, if you do the things that I command 


you” [Jn 15:14]. 


"God will render te every man according to his works" 


[Rom 2:6]. 


"Glory and honor .. . to everyone who does .. .™ [Rom 


2:10). 


"For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the 


doers of the law shall be justified" [Rom 2:13]. 


"Every man shall receive his own reward, according to his 


own labor" [1 Cor 3:8]. 


"We must all be manifested before the judgment-seat of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that each one may receive the proper things of 
the body, according as he has done, whether it be good or evil" 
2 Come S210]. 


"For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward... ." 
[1 Cor 9:17]. 


- . . Abounding always in the work of the Lord, knowing 
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord" [1 Cor 15:58]. 


"That which is at present momentary and light of our tribu- 
lation, works for us above measure exceedingly an eternal weight 


of glory” [2 Cor 4:17]. 
“What things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap" 


{Gal 6:8]. 


“Whatever you do, do it from the heart, as to the Lord and 
not to men, knowing that you shall receive of the Lord the reward 


of inheritance" [Col 3:23f]. 


5. CONCERNING FAITH AND WORKS 53 


"That you may walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing, 
being fruitful in every good work" [Col 1:10]. 


“To me, to live is Christ, and to die is gain" [Phil 1:21]. 


If gain, therefore merit. 
“With fear and trembling work out your salvation" [Phil 2:12]. 


"God is not unjust, that he should forget your work, and the 
love which you have shown in his name, you who have ministered 


to the saints" [Heb 6:10]. 


"And do not forget doing good and sharing,for by such sacri- 


fices God's favor is obtained" [Heb 13:16]. 


"Look to yourselves, that you lose not the things which you 
have accomplished, but that you may receive a full reward." 
[2 In v. 8] "Little children, let no man deceive you. He who does 


justice is just, even as he is just" [1 Jn 3:7] 


[Note here: works good of their own kind are acceptable to God 
and deserving of eternal life. This is to be understood concerning 
living works, that is, those that proceed from the beginning of a 
spiritual life, which is grace and love. Righteous men, being 
alive, do such works out of faith working through love [Gal 5:6]. 
But it is otherwise concerning dead works (because they do not pro- 
ceed from grace and love) however good they may be of their own 
nature, such do the impious do, namely, fornicators, adulterers, 
and sucn like, works not of grace. (This contradiction according 
to the Apostle's statement he implies to fall under merit.) "But 
if by grace, it is not now by works: otherwise grace is no mere 
grace; [Rom 11:6]. And again: "Not to him who works, the reward 
is not reckoned reaching to grace, but according to debt," [Rom 
4:4], nor are such works meritorious for eternal life. For forni- 
cators and adulterers, thieves and robbers [cf. Eph 5:5] (insofar 
as they falsely claim to be evangelical and Pauline) do not “have 
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God," nor do they 


follow him. But the Lord will judge them. Nevertheless good works 


* Not in the edition of 1541. 


48 


1529 
and 
153% 


~ 


32 


54 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


of this sort although dead, in sinners not blind and hardened, 
but confessing grace. This is clear concerning the publican, 
who imploring forgiveness of his sins through humble and devout 
prayer, went down to his house justified [Lk 18:10ff]. This is 
clear also concerning the Gentile Cornelius, whose prayer was 
heard and whose alms were remembered in God's sight. And by his 
prayer and alms he obtained that he was baptized by Peter sent 
to him together with his relatives and close friends, with the 


Holy Spirit also descending in a visible sign upon them. 


[Also works of this sort, done outside of love, are effective 
in obtaining temporal goods, as is clear of midwives, for whom 
by way of renumeration God has built houses [Ex 1:21], of which 
see Gregory. Their kindness (that is, of midwives), could be re- 
paid as reward in eternal life, but the guilt of falsehood has 
received earthly compensation. So speaks Augustine: that by 
justice and vigorous acts, the Romans merited dominion from God 
[DCD 5:12, 15]. Besides, such works are valuable to avoid the 
transgression of a precept: this is clear concerning the honor 
paid to parents, concerning alms given to a poor man out of en- 
joined penance, and canonical hours recited by a sinner in the 
state of mortal sin. They are valuable too to resist the inclina- 
tion to a misdeed. According to this: "Water quenches a flaming 
fies and alms resists sins" [Ecclus 3:33]. And to habituate man 
to good works, by which it comes to pass that, possessing the habit 
of dcing what is good, yet he does it out of love, who previously 
did it in the state of mortal guilt. Just as in a like case, works 
servilely done out of fear of punishment, induce love. Hence 
Augustine [Enarr. in Ps 127.23] "When through the fear of hell a 
man restrains himself from sin, the habit of righteousness results, 
and what was hard begins to be loved, fear begins to be excluded 
from love, and a chaste fear succeeds, whereby we fear, lest the 


bridegroom tarry, or go away, lest we lack him." Likewise just as 


a brush introduces thread, so fear brings in love, fear is diminished, 


5. CONCERNING FAITH AND WORKS 55 


and conversely. They are valuable, finally, for the relaxation 

of temporal punishment, or the diminishment of eternal punish- 
ment, if they do not induce love. Hence Augustine, in his De 
Poenitentia, ch. 3: If anyone not having love, having been estab- 
lished in any schism, in order not to deny Christ, suffers tribu- 
lations, hunger, persecution, or flames, or beasts or the cross 
itself, for fear of hell, in no wise are these troubles to be blamed. 
Indeed, this longsuffering is to be praised. For we cannot say: 

it were better for him that, by denying Christ, he suffered none of 
those things which he suffered by confessing him, but future judg- 
ment is to be deemed more bearable for him than if by denying 
Christ he suffered none of them. §o what the Apostle says: "“. . 
if I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not love, it 
profits me nothing"' [1 Cor 13:3] is to be understood to apply to 
obtaining the kingdom of heaven, not to undergoing the more bear- 
able judgment of the ultimate punishment. So speaks Aeereetne = 
But if they induce love, these totally free from hell, and meri- 


toriously lead to eternal glory. ] 


{Therefore, sinners ought to be advised that without delay 
they carry out whatsoever their hand can do; they are not to turn 
aside or draw back from good works (something the Lutherans, haters 
of all good, do) and especially that they exercise works of piety 
not toward apostate monks and nuns fornicating and committing 
adultery under the honest title of marriage, but toward the true 
Catholic poor, according to the principle: "Give to the merciful 
and do not support the sinner; benefit the humble and give not to 
the impious" [Ecclus 12:5f]. Daniel so advised Nebuchadnezzar, 
saying: "Therefore, 0 King, let my counsel be acceptable to you, 
and redeem your sins with alms, and your iniquities with works of 
mercy to the poor. . ." [Dan 4:24}. So states St. Gregory 2 whose 
words are quoted at Decr. 2.33.3.5.6 [Fr. 1.1241]. The whole error 


of the Lutherans concerning good works proceeds from ignorance of 


i e ae: 
De vera et falso poenitentia, a pseudo-Augustinian work. 


: The passage cited in the Decretals is from Gregory VII (Roman 
Synod of 1078), dealing with false penance. 


1529 
and 
IS Sz 


56 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


this distinction made in, and founded upon, the Scriptures. 

For they thus argue in substance: Good works are not meritorious 
cf grace; therefore neither of eternal life; therefore they are 
nothing. If they would recognize themselves as sophists, mockers, 
deceivers, they would readily see how sophistical this argument is. 
For they sin under the sway of the sophism of the consequent by 
arguing from the destruction of the antecedent, to the destruction 
of the consequent. So aiso the false Jews (than whom the impious 
Lutherans are far blinder) argued against Christ: This man does 
not keep the Sabbath, therefore he is not of God; therefore he is 
not righteous, but a sinner, having a demon, proving him to be 


guilty of transgressing the Sabbath [Jn 7; 8; etc]. ] 


Proposition 2; The righteous man does not sin in every 
good work, for a good living work is 
meritorious, not dead. See Tom 1, Second 


Homily for Septuagesima Sunday. 


("In Jerusalem also Josaphat appointed Levites, and priest 
and chiefs of the families of Israel, to judge the judgment and 
the cause of the Lord for the inhabitants thereof. And he charged 
them, saying: Thus shall you do in the fear of the Lord faithfully, 
and with a perfect heart. Every cause that shall come to you of 
your brethren, that dwell in their cities, between kindred and 
kindred, wherever there is question concerning the law, the com- 
mandment, the ceremonies, the justifications, show it to them, 
that they may not sin against the Lord, and that wrath may not come 
upon you and your brethren, and so doing you shall not sin" [2 chr 
19:8-10]. "In all these things Job sinned not by his lips, nor 
spoke any foolish thing against God" [Job Tee 2 


"They who work in me, shall not sin, and they who explain me, 


shall have life everlasting" [Ecclus 24:30€]. 


“If a virgin marries, she does not sin' {1 Cor 7:28]. 


5. CONCERNING FAITH AND WORKS 57 


"Bestir yourselves, brothers, that by good works you may make 
sure your calling and election. For doing these things, you shall 48 
not sin at any time. For so an entrance shall be ministered to 
you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior 


Jesus Christ" [2 Pt 1:10f]. 


"Everyone who is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed 
abides in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God" 
[1 In 3:9]. Note that he cannot sin, following the inclination of 
love, according to which he is born of God, because love does not 
act wrongly. 

"These things I write to you, that you may not sin" [1 Jn 2:1]. 
". . . from the good works; which they shall behold in you, let them 
glorify God. . ." [1 Pt 2:12]. ". . . being fruitful in every good 
work. . ." [Col 1:10]. "Awake, ye just, and sin not” [1 Cor 15:34]. 
"Tf your eye is single, not having any part of darkness, your whole 
(that is, the whole accumulation of your works) shall be lightsome” 


[Mt 6:22]. 


Propesition 3: That any faith is empty, because it is 


without works [James 2:20]. 49° 


"What shall it prefit, my brethren, if a man say he has faith, 
but has not works? Shall faith be able to save him?" [James 2:14]. 
Later: "So faith also, if it have not works, is dead in itself" 
[James 2:17]. Later: “But do you want to know, O vain man, that 


faith without works is dead?" [James 2:20]. 
Proposition 4: Faith is a work. 


"What shall we do, that we may work the works of God? Jesus 
answered: This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom 
he has sent" [Jn 6:28f]. And again: "If you are the children of 
Abraham, do the works of Abraham" [Jn 8:39], but the chief work of 
Abraham was faith: "Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to 


him as justice’ [Gen 15:6]. Note that faith is reckoned among works. 


49 


50 


58 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


Proposition 5: It is not enough to believe. 


"Going, therefore, teach all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, teach- 
ing (mot only to believe, but also) to observe all things whatso- 


ever I have commanded you" [Mt 28:19f]. 


It was not sufficient for the blind man that he spread clay 
upon his eyes, but he had to go to the bathing pool of Siloe 
[Jn 9:6]. 


"If I should have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, 
but have not love, I am nothing" [1 Cor 13:2]. Through this 
Augustine On the Trinity, 15:18 , proves that faith does not neces- 


sarily have love attached to it. 


“Therefore, let us work good to all men, especially to those 


of the household of the faith" [Gal 6:10]. 


"I have fought a good fight, I have finished my race, I have 
kept the faith. As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown 
of justice, which the Lord the just judge will render to me on that 
day" [2 Tim 4:7f]. 

"For unto you it is given for Christ, not only to believe in 


him, but also te suffer for him" [Phil 1:29]. 


Proposition 6: Love is better and more perfect than 


faith. 


"Now there remained faith, hope, and love, . .. but the great- 


est of these is love" [1 Cor 13:13]. 
Love remains in blessedness, and is perfected; faith not. 


"Love never falls away" [1 Cor 13:8}. "When that which is 
perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away" 


[1 Cor 13:10}. 


The way of love is more eminent than the way of faith. Hence 
Paul, about to speak of love, says: "And I show to you yet a more 


excellent way" [1 Cor 12:31]. 


5. CONCERNING FAITH AND WORKS 59 
He also says: "The end of the commandment is love’ 
Pk i Th eS)I|o 


Christ, asked concerning the great commandment, answered con- 


cerning love, which is the greatest and first commandment [Mt 22:36]. 


Objections of the Heretics. 


1. "The just man lives by faith" [Rom 1:17]: therefore not 
by works. : 
2. “He who believes in the Son of God is not condemned" 
[1 Jn 5:10]. 
3. You believe because I can do this for you: according to 
your faith let it be done to you [Mt 9:28)" 50° 
4. "Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to him as 


righteousness" [Gen 15:6].° 

5. "He who hears my words and believes him whe sent me, has 
eternal life" [Jn 5:24]. 

6. "Your faith has made you whole" [Mt 9:22]; works are of 
hypocrites. 

7. Love is the fruit of faith. Therefore faith alone suf- 
fices [Aug., (Orginal ee 

8. Paul in his Epistles toe the Romans and to the Galatians, 


contends that man is justified through faith without vets? 
Reply of the Catholics. 


What Augustine says is an undisputed fact: this heresy (it is 
notnew, but very ancient) has arisen from Paul's words badly under- 
stood. 
1. We admit that the just man lives by faith, because faith 
is the foundation of the spiritual edifice, for it is the substance 
of things hoped for. But what the heretic assumes from faith it- Sul 
self, lacerates and falsifies the text, because nowhere does it say 
that the just man lives by faith alone. 
2. To believe in God with the use of Scripture, includes 
cleaving to God through love, according to Augustine {In I Jn. 


Tr. 10]. The younger theologians call this "formed faith." It 


wn 
(Sa 


52 


60 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


is clear from St. Paul: ‘In Christ Jesus neither circumcision 
avails anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith that works by love" 
[Gal 5:6]. Note: Paul does not say any faith whatsoever suffices, 
but that faith which works by love. 

3. It is clear from the second point: although even unformed 
faith could obtain something of temporal advantage, as for example 
the Romans by their virtues obtained a great dignity, according to 
Augustine [DCD, 5:15]. 

And "by faith Rahab the harlot perished not (as the Apostle 
states) with the unbelievers, receiving the spies with peace" 

{Heb 11:31]. So also by her unformed faith accompanied by humble 


and devout prayer, she can through grace obtain justification for 


her sins. 
"For . . . to him who believes in him who justifies the un- 
godly, his faith is reputed for righteousness" [Rom 4:5]. ''For 


he whe comes to God, must believe that he is, for without faith it 
is impossible to please God" [Heb 11:6]. 

4. St. James answers: "Was not Abraham our father justified 
by works, offering up Isaac his son upon the altar? Do you see that 
faith cooperated with his works; and by works faith was made perfect?" 
[James 2:21f]. Further on: "Do you see that by works a man is jus- 


tified; and not by faith only?" [James 2:24]. 


5/6. Similarly, the false charge that works produce hypocrisy 
is why Christ said: "So let your light shine before men, that 
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in 
heaven" (Mt 5:16]. 

And St. Peter in his canonical epistle urges the faithful in 
these words: "Having your conversation good among the Gentiles: 
that whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may, by the 
good works, which they shall behold in you, glorify God. . ." etc. 
il Pie 2eiP]), 

7. He assumes this falsely, because love is a fruit of the 


Spirit, not of faith, and similarly faith is a fruit of the Spirit. 


5. CONCERNING FAITH AND WORKS 61 


Paul says: "But the fruit of the Spirit is, love, joy, peace, 


patience” etc., "faith, modesty" [Gal 5:22f]. 


Nevertheless all Lutherans compelled by the arguments of the 
faithful, begin to distinguish concerning faith. True formed faith 
they call in our vernacular: "den libereichen volltatigen Glauben," 
that is, faith operative of good, which is rich in love and works ; 


others call it “historical faith." Just as Oecolampadius (demegoria) | 


posits some works as living and some as dead. 


i) 
f 


Objections of the Lutherans to the Second Proposition. 


1. "We are all become as one unclean, and all our justices as 
the rag of a menstruous woman" [Is 64:6]. 

2. "There is not a just man on earth who does good and does 
not sin" [Eccl Poe 

3. "Enter not into judgment with thy servant, 0 Lord, for in 
thy sight no man living shall be justified" [Ps 142:2]. 

4. "The evil I would not do, I do; the good I would do, I do 
not" etc. [Rom 7:19]. "But I see another law in my members, fighting 


against the law of my mind" etc. [Rom 7:23]. 


Reply of the Catholics. 


1, Jerome answers: the prophet is speaking of the comparison 
of the righteousness of the law, and of the righteousness of the 


Gospel, for compared with the Gospel, legal purity is uncleanness. 


tt 


Augustine says [Qn the Perfection of Righteousness]: "our 
righteousness compared with divine righteousness is not righteousness, 
just as Christ says: ''No one is good but God alone’ [Lk 18:19], 


because our goodness, compared to God, is not goodness." 


2. The Hebrew text Lof Eccl 7:21] 3 eads: “Will sin" just as the 
eptuagint reads; but by this he does not satisfy, for faciet is also 
uture tense, according to the reading of the Church. 


BZ 


: In a public speech ? 


3 


The text of 1529 fol. D5. read: In the Hebrew there is not the present 


tense, peccat, but the future, peccabit, and St. Augustine accordingly 


so states, just as he has said: "There is no just man who never will sin.” 


ae F " 
"For a just man falls seven times in a day and rises again. 


yet he does not sin in every good work. 


Prov. 24: 


16, 


53 


Vv 


62 ECK: ENCHIRIDION 


Jerome says [Against Jovinian, 1: ]; and Augustine [On the For- 
giveness of Sins, 2:29]. Now the context does not have "who does 
well," as the Lutherans object; but, "who does good." It is one 
thing to de good, but another to do well. , 

3. Augustine answers, setting forth the quoted authority: 
“Enter not into judgment with thy servant' [Ps 142:2]. 'Do not,’ 
he says,' judge me according to thyself who art withoutsin, for 
in thy sight not any living being is justified.' That this is said 
concerning this life, is underetoed without a difficult question. 
And his statement, will not be justified, he refers to that perfec- 
tion of righteousness, which is not in this life." So speaks 
Augustine. David prayed to be judged according to godly righteous- 
ness: ‘Judge me, O Lord, [Ps 7:9; 25:1], but not according to 
rigid righteousness." Augustine, Confessions 9 [13]. 

4. The Apostle himself answers in the following chapter 
{Rom 8:1f]: "There is therefore now no condemnation (that is, sin 
or guilt) in those whe are in Christ Jesus, who walk not according 
to the flesh. For the law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, 
has delivered me from the law of sin and of death." In those who 
believe in Christ, who with their mind serve the law of God, there- 
fore, concupiscence of the flesh, "fighting against the law of my 
mind" [Rom 7:23] cannot be a sin, which nevertheless the Apostle 
calls a sin, because it is caused by sin, and is the penalty of sin. 
And just as Christ was made sin for us, "because he bore our sins 
{that is, the penalties due for our sins) in his body on the cross" 


iL Bie Be2ealo 


CHAPTER 6 
CONCERNING CONFIRMATION * 


Axiom 1: Confirmation is a Sacrament. 


Luther admits baptism to be a sacrament, but denies con- 


firmation. 


Proof by reason: But because in confirmation there is a 
sensible sign, having the infallible assistance of the grace of 


the Holy Spirit, it is accordingly a sacrament. 


Proof by authorities: "When the Apostles, who were in Jeru- 
salem, had heard that Samaria had received the Word of God, they 
sent to them Peter and John, who when they had come, prayed for 
them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit. For he had not yet 
come upon any of them; but they were only baptized in the name of 


the Lord Jesus. Then they laid their hands upon them, and they 


received the Holy Spirit" [Acts 8:14-17]. Concerning the Ephesians: 


"Having heard these things, they were baptized in the name of the 
Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy 
Spirit came upon them" [Acts ose Note that after baptism, 

there was a sensible sign, namely the laying on of hands, whereby 
the grace of the Holy Spirit was conferred, and thus was a sacra- 


ment. 


Axiom 2: And the fact that only the bishops today confirm, 
is confirmed by this text: Philip the Deacon did 
net confirm the Samaritans; but the Apostles Peter 
and John did so [Acts 8:16f].° And it is not be- 
lievable that any gift of grace pertaining to the 
consummation of the elect which was once in the 


Church, is now lacking. 


Dionysius the Areopagite recounts the mysteries of this 
(Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, ch. 4] and says that it was called by 


the Apostles consecration (teleten) by anointing. 


63 


54 


54% 


55) 


bau 


1529 


1541 


64 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Melchiades, Pope and Martyr: "In baptism we are regenerated to 
iife, after baptism we are confirmed for the fray; in baptism we are 
cleansed, after baptism we are strengthened." (Gratian WECTE Sha SIG 45 


Fr. 1.1413, from Pseudo-Isidore, no. 6: Hinschius, p. 245] 


The Council of Orleans: "In order that those of full age, having 
fasted, may come to confirmation, that they may be admonished previously 
te make confession, that, cleansed, they may deserve to receive the gift 
of the Holy Spirit, and because there never will be a Christian, unless 


he be anointed in episcopal confirmation." On this and other matters, 


Jerome: "The bishop, if he lays on his hand, lays it upon those 
who have been baptized into the right faith, who already believe in the 
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, three persons and one substance," 
etc. Further on: But if at this point you may ask, why, baptized in the 
Church, does he not receive the Holy Spirit except by the hands of the 
bishop? Learn that this observance has come down from that authority, 
because after the Lord's ascension the Holy Spirit descended to the Apostles, 
and in many places we find the same commonly practiced. [Jerome, Against 


the Luciferians, 8f: PL 257 1635) 


iWhen the heretics object that Christ did not institute this sacrament, 
it must be said that Christ instituted it as a sacrament not indeed by show- 
ing it forth, but by promising it [Lk 24:49] : "But stay in the city until 
you are invested with power from above." And Jn 16:7: "If I do not go away, 
the Paraclete will not come to you. If however I shall go away I shall send 
him to you." And this is for the reason that in this holy thing is given 
the fulness of the Holy Spirit which was not to be given before Christ's 


resurrection and ascension, according to the words of John. 


Not yet was the Holy Spirit given, for Jesus was not yet glorified,] 


When Christ laid his hands on the chiidren [Mk 10:16] he either 


instituted or hinted at, this sacrament. See Tome 4, Homily 25.* 


*Cf. Edition of 1529, fol. D a lines 3-12. 


CHAPTER 7 
CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF ORDER 


They deny order to be a sacrament. From the Bible let order 


be taught, and the fact that it confers grace with a sensibie sign. 


“Jesus, going up into a mountain, called to himself whom he 


himself wanted, and they came to him. And he made that twelve should 


be with him, and that he might send them to preach" [Mk 3:13£f]. 
“After these things the Lord appointed also seventy-two others; and 


he sent them two by two before his face .. ." [Lk 10:1]. 


"Taking the bread, he gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to 
them saying: This is my bedy, which is given for you; do this in 
2 


memory of me" [Lk 22:19].~ 


Jesus said to the Apostles: ‘Even as the Father sent me, I 
also send you. When he had said these things, he breathed upon 
them, and said to them: Receive the Holy Spirit. Those whose 
sins you forgive, are forgiven them; these whose sins you retain, 


have been retained" [Jn 20:21-23]. 


"You shall be called priests of the Lord, men shall speak of 
* 
you as ministers of our God." {Is 61:6]: to speak of the time 


of the Messiah, 


The Holy Spirit said: "Separate for me Saul and Barnabas, for 


the work whereunte I have taken them. Then they, fasting and pray- 


ing, and laying their hands upon them, sent them away" [Acts 13:2f]. 


"Neglect not the grace that is in you, which was given you 
by prophecy, with laying on of the hands of the presbyters .. . 


Exercise yourself in these matters [1 Tim 4:14f]. 


"Do not lightly lay hands upon any man, nor be partaker of 


other men's sins" [1 Tim 5:22]. 


"Let the presbyters who rule well, be esteemed worthy of 


double honor . . ." [1 Tim 5:17]. 


65 


56 


56 


1529 


mp a 


1529 


66 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


"For this cause I left you in Crete, that you should ordain 


presbyters in every city. . ." [Tit 1:5]. 
"Let those who are of this sort be esteemed" [Phil 2:29]. 


"We beseech you, brothers, to know those who labor among 
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, that you 


esteem them most highly" [1 Theses 5:12]. 


("Every high priest, taken from among men, is ordained for men 
in the things that pertain to God, that he may offer up gifts and 


sacrifices for sins" [Heb 5:1]. 


“Feed the flock of God which is among you" [1 Pt 5:2]. And 
later: "And when the prince of pastors shall appear, you shall 


receive a never fading crown of glory" [1 Pt 5:4]. 


"Take heed to yourselves, and to the whole flock, wherein the 
Holy Spirit has placed you bishops, to rule the Church of God, 
which he has purchased with his own blood [Acts 20:28]. 


Note here that we read that deacons of the tables and of 
widows were appointed by the Apostles. Among these one also reads 
that Stephen [Acts 6:2££] and Philip [Acts 8:5ff], who converted 
the Samaritans, preached. Moreover, the Apostle Paul links the 
deacons of the altar who are ordained to pray and preach to the 
bishops when he says: "To all the saints in Christ Jesus, who are 
at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons" [Phil 1:1], and having 
described the bishop to Timothy, he deseribes of what sort the 
deacon ought to be [1 Tim 3:8-10]. Here you have in the Apostle 
a clear distinction between bishops and deacons. The distinction 
therefore of orders and ministers in the Church, has a solid 
foundation in the Holy Scriptures, concerning which see Tome 4 
Hom 63. [On this see Decr. 1.21.1: Fr. 1.67; and Peter Lombard, 
Sent., 4.24.10.] 


it is clear that there were twelve Apostles and seventy-two 


disciples. The former were succeeded by bishops; the latter by 


7. CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF ORDER 67 


priests (as Bede teaches). The Apostles were baptized, but the 
priests not, except when he made them priests in the Supper, 

giving them the power to consecrate the true body of Christ, and 
after his resurrection, to absolve Christ's mystical body. And 

the sensible sign was in the laying on of hands, and it conferred 
grace. Why then is it rejected by Luther from among the sacraments? 
And that it was not the office of anyone of the people, is clear 


from statements of the prophets. 


"I did not send prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to 
them, yet they prophesied. If they had stood in my counsel, and 
had made my words known to my people, I should have turned them from 
their evil way, and from their very wicked thoughts" [Jer 23:21]. 
Such are the heretics who, if they stood in God's counsel, God would 


have illumined them. 


Concerning Phineas: “Behold I give him the peace of my cove- 
nant . . . and the covenant of the priesthood forever shall be both 
to him and his seed . . ." (Num 25:12]. 


"My covenant was with Levi (says the Lord of hosts). My cove- 


etic. 


nant was with him of life and peace, and I gave him fear,' 
[Mal 2:4f]. “The law of truth was in his mouth; iniquity was not 
found on his lips . . ." [Mal 2:6] " . . .the lips of the priest 
shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth, 
because he is the angel of the Lord of hests" [Mal 2:7]. Note that 


the priestly covenant was with Levi, not with another tribe. 


"Neither does any man take the honor to himself, but he that 
is called by God, as Aaron was" [Heb 5:4]. But one reads that not 
one of the people was called to the priesthood. "The Lord says: 
Aaron... and his sons . .. you shall anoint and sanctify, 


that they may carry out the priestly office for me" [Ex 29:41]. 


We read that the Lord commanded the same thing: when the camp 
was to be removed, the sons of Caath were to carry the things 


wrapped up by Aaron and his sons, and not touch them lest they die 


(Num 4:15]. Hence Dathan, Chore, and Abiron, usurping for themselves 


58 


By) 


68 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


the priestly office (just as the Lutheran laity do today), were 
swallowed up by the earth, and they went down alive into hell, 
and the two hundred and fifty men who sided with them were con- 


sumed by fire’ [Num 16:30, 33, 35]. 


Thus Gza, since beyond the condition of his lot, he put his 
hand to the Ark of God lest it fall, was stricken by the Lord with 


sudden death (2 K 6:6f]. 


Likewise, King Osiah, when he usurped the priestly office 
(that is, to burn incense upon the altar of incense), and, fol- 
lowed by Azariah and the rest of the priests, did not desist, he 
was stricken on the forehead with leprosy, and remained a leper 
unto the day of his death [2 Ch 26:16-21]. Also the drunken king 
Balthazar, drinking from gold and silver vessels which his father 
Nebuchadnezzar had carried off from the Temple of God which is in 
Jerusalem, saw a hand writing on the wall, Mene, Tekel, Phares; 
on the same night he was slain and Darius the Mede succeeded to 


the kingdom [Dan 5:2-31]. 


Hence by canenical sanctifications it is most justly and 
holily forbidden to laymen to handle sacred things, such as the 
cup, the corporal, the consecrated host, and various vestments, 
by Decr. 1.23.25 [Friedburg, 1.86] and 3.1.41 [Fr. 1.1304£]. 
Therefore sacred things of this sort ought mot to be touched or 
offered, except by consecrated men, lest there come the veligeance 


which struck king Balthazar when he transgressed upon this. 


Dionysius, St. Paul's disciple, On the Heavenly Hierarchies, 
5, follows the rite of the Apostles in consecrating bishops, 


presbyters, and deacons. 


Ignatius the disciple of St. John, To the Trallians, extols 
the dignity of the bishops, presbyters, and deacons. He teaches 
the same in his Epistle to the Smyrneans. And in To the Antiochenes* 
he says: "I greet your holy presbyter, I greet your holy deacons, 
I greet your subdeacons, readers, singers, doorkeepers, workers, 


exorcists and confessors." 


* 
A pseudonymous work. 


7. CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF ORDER 69 


Cyprian, Epist. 1:3, at the beginning, mentions the acolyte. 
Note that at the time of the Apostles all these orders existed. 


Jerome rehearses all the orders in his Letter to Rusticus 


Bishop of Narbonne. ([Gratian Decr. 1.93.23: Fr. 1.326] 1 


Objections of the Heretics. 


1. All Christians are priests and by baptism anointed as 
priests. 

2. "You are a chosen people, a royal priesthood" [1 Pt 2:9]. 

3. "Jesus Christ has loved us, and washed us from our sins in 


his own blood, and has made us a kingdom, and priests to God and 
to his Father" [Rev 1:5f; cf 5:10]. 

4. "In one Spirit were we all baptized into one body .. . 
and in one Spirit we have all been made to drink" [1 Cor 12:13]. 
It follows that we are all equally priests. Chrysostom and Jerome 
speak similarly. 

5. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercy of God, 
that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing 
to God, your reasonable service" [Rom 12:1]. Laymen can also do 


this. 
Reply of the Catholics. 


Tertullian thirteen hundred years ago taught that those 
Lutheran ordinations were customary among the heretics, fer they 
make laymen cut of priests and enjoin sacerdotal functions upon 
laymen. Luther presumes that others do not make priests, as did 
Pharaoh and the Gentiles, and just as Scripture recounts concern- 
ing Jeroboam who anew established priests from the people, and 
forebade the peoples‘ going up to Jerusalem [3 K 12:28], sa does 
Luther forbid going up to Rome. 

1. It is clear that all the faithful are priests,*just as 
they are kings, that is spiritually, because God reigns in them 


through freely given leve and they, through the anointing of the 


Friedberg notes: "This letter or booklet on the seven orders of the 
Church is evidently spurious." [Decr. 1.95.6 (Fr.1:333f) ] 


the German Nation (1520), PE 2.66. 


60 


60” 


1529 


70 ECK: ENCHIRIDION 


Holy Spirit rule the forces of the soul, and their senses, and be~ 
sides these needy kings there are also outward Kings and Presidents 
in the Church. Thus all the faithful, because they offer to God 
faith and pravers, etc., are spiritual priests, and that priest- 
hood does not lack ceremonies, but besides this inner priesthood, 
there is one outward priesthood attached in the Church to certain 
persons. Take the example: each believer is the temple of God. 
Paul says: "The temple of God is holy, which you are" [1 Cor 3:17], 
but besides this temple, is the outward temple attached to a cer- 
tain place, in which place the faithful gather. 

2. You have been hardened by the custom of the heretics; now 
you will make even all Jews into priests, because it is said to the 
Jews: "If you will hear my voice, and keep my covenant, you shall 
be my peculiar possession above all people, and a priestly kingdom 
and a holy nation" [Ex 19:5f]. These words were spoken to the whole 
of Israel, that they were kings and priests, in the sense just 
mentioned. [Since therefore St. Peter took authority derived from 
this passage, it follows that same thing that was said of the Jews 
is said of the Christians. | 

Hence St. Augustine explains Rev 20:6 [DcD 20:10]: But these 
a thousand years. He says: This was not spoken of bishops and 
priests alone, who are now properly called priests in the Church, 
but just as we speak of all Christians on account of the mystical 
anointing, so do we speak of all priests, since they are members of 
the one priest. Of them the Apostle Peter says: A holy people, 

a royal priesthood, ete. [1 Pt 2:9]. And Jerome, Against the 
Luciferians, who received a lay sinner who confessed he had erred, 
but not a bishop, unless he gave up the priesthood. Therefore, he 
says, "let a layman lay down the priesthood of a layman, that is, 
baptism (note: lay priesthood)." And further on: "Without anoint- 
ing and its authority neither presbyter nor deacon has the right to 
baptize. This frequently (if necessity demands it) we know is also 


permitted to laymen." So speaks Jerome. 


7. CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF ORDER 71 


You have then a very great difference between priest and 
priesthood, between layman and hierarchy. Therefore the Lutherans, 
deceived by the sophistry of this equivocation, sin, not under- 
standing how in Holy Scripture, the names “priest” and "priesthood" 
are variously ascribed to those who have been selected from the 
people for that office, to pray and sacrifice for their own and 
the people's sins, and to the others over whom they are placed, for 
whom they sacrifice and pray. 

The heretics twist this passage, for even if we are all one 
body in Christ, how dees he so stupidly infer, therefore we are all 
hands, or are all feet, when even in the members themselves there 
is a difference? Therefore alongside the unity of the Church stands 
the difference among the members. 

4, We confess all Christians, even laymen, can offer spiritual 
oblations and thus can be mystical priests, erecting themselves an 
altar of affections toward God, but it does not logically follow 


Boe 
that they are on that account external, hierarchical priests. 


2 1529: second 
2 the word hierarchical was added after 1541: cf. ed. of 1572. 


62 


1529 


CHAPTER 8 
ON conrEsston * 
That Confession is necessary for the sacrament of penitence, 


and is itself enjoined by divine law. 


Christ said to Peter: "To you I shall give the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever you bind on earth, will be 
bound in heaven, and whatscever you loose on earth, will be loosed 
in heaven" [Mt 16:19]. These keys, moreover, are two: of knowledge 
and of mee The key of knowledge is the faculty of discerning 
between one leper and another. Likewise between a leper and a non- 
leper; that is, between one sin and another, and between sin and 
non-sin. But the key ct power is the faculty of loosing and bind- 
ing. For after the cognizance of the case in the forum of peni- 
tential judgment between the confessor and the confessant, which 
is done through the key of knowledge, there remains to hand down 
judgment in the case, which is to loose or to bind, and this is 
done through the key of power. Therefore to deny that confession 
has been commanded by Christ, is to deny that the power of the keys 
has been passed on by Christ--something manifestly against the 
Gospel of Christ. “Whatever you shall bind upon earth, shall be 
bound also in heaven and whatever you shall loose on earth, shall 
be loosed aiso in heaven" [Mt 18:18]. "He breathed on them, say- 
ing: Receive the Holy Spirit. Whose sins you shall forgive, they 
are forgiven; and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained" 
[Jn 20:22£]. [From the last part of this authority, again, it is 
clear that confession is of divine right, just as has been com- 
manded by Christ in this passage. For to retain sins is not else 
than not to forgive them. Therefore the sense of Christ's words 
is: whose sins the priest shall retain, that is not loose, are 
retained, that is are not forgiven in heaven. When therefore any- 


one is by divine right held to pay for his sins it clearly follows 


12 


8. ON CONFESSION 73 


that by God's command that person is obligated to confess his sins 


to the priests. ] 


The twofold power of loosing and forgiving | whiten he ought to 
use, the priest would not know how to use, unless it cleaned him 
of misdeeds. Therefore he put first "Receive the Holy Spirit," 
as if to say: "By the direction of the Holy Spirit, may you loose 


or retain sins on behalf of the one confessing.” 


"Confess your sins one to another, and pray for one another, 
that you may be saved" [James 5:16]. Here James as God's herald, 
announced to men God's commandment concerning the confessing of 
sins, and it is to be understood with precision. [Unless you con- 
fess, you will not be saved. Therefore confession is commanded by 
divine right, but when it is carried cut in shepherding individual 
souls, it is commanded by human ecclesiastical right. For Christ 
left his commandments to the Church, with the Holy Spirit as the 


director, to be determined at a particuiar time. ] 


Besides, the Confession is considered to have been pre- 
figured and done to the Apostles: "Men were baptized in the 


Jordan by John confessing their sins" [Mt 3:6]. 


[Christ said to the cleansed leper: "Go, show yourself to 
the priests, and offer the gift which Moses commanded as a testi- 
mony to them" [Mt 8:4]. He said to the ten leprous men: "Go, 
show yourselves to the priests" [Lk 17:14], whe, althcugh they 
were not priests of the New Testament, yet in them the New Testa- 
ment priesthood was figured. When Lazarus was raised, Jesus said: 


"Loose him and let him go" [Jn 11:44]. 

‘Many of the believers came, confessing and deciaring their 
deeds" [Acts 19:18]. 

"Be not without fear about sin forgiven, and add not sin upon 


sin" [Ecclus 5:5]. 


And it is clear that these statements on confession are plainiy 


received, for the practice of the Church best interprets the Scrip- 


tures. 


1529 


Ue ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


“If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, to for- 


give us our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity" [1 Jn 1:9]. 


"He who hides his sins, shall not prosper; but he who shall 


confess them, shall obtain mercy" [Frov 28:13]. 


Dicnysius, Epist. to Demophilus, censured him because, in con- 
travention to the order of discipline, he threw out a sinner pros- 
trating himself before a priest, when he was reverently confessing 


that he had come to seek a-remedy for his sins. 


Origen: "Now pay attention: You ought more diligently to 
confess your sin; select previously the physician to whom you 
cught to explain the cause of your sluggishness, who knows how to 
be infirm with the infirm, etc., that finally, if he tells you 
anything, 1f he gives you any advice, you may do and follow it." 
{Later:] "If he foresees your sluggishness to be of the kind 
that ought to be exposed in the assembly of the whole church and 
healed, from this perchance also others could be edified, and you 
yourself readily healed. This is to be tended to with much 
deliberation and sufficient counsel of that skilled physician." 


All these statements prove auricular confession. 


Basil, On the Education of the Monks: 'It seems necessary 


for those to whom is entrusted the dispensing of the mysteries, 


to confess their sins." 


Jerome [Epist. 41, 42],*writing against the heretic Montanus, 
asserts: 'This was the impious heresy of the Montanists, that they 
are ashamed to confess their admitted sins before a priest." 

Jerome, On Ecclesiasticus, Ch. 10, says: If the Serpent Devil fixes 
his back teeth (as the proverb has it) on anyone, and with no one 
aware, kills the man with the wicked poison of sin, if the one who 
has been stricken with the mortal wound by the poisonous serpent 
passes over it in silence, and does not do penance, nor wishes to 


confess his wound to his brother and master, the master who has a 


*To Marcella 


8. ON CONFESSION 75 


tongue for healing, cannot easily help him. For if a sick man is 
ashamed to confess his wound to a physician, then the medicine 


does not cure what the physician is ignorant of." 


Cyril, On Leviticus, writes: There are seven steps in for- 
giveness. Among other things he says: There is as yet in the 
seventh, although hard and toilsome, through repentance, for- 
giveness of sins, when the sinner washes his bed with tears 
(Ps 6:6], and his tears become for him bread night and day [Ps 
41:3], when he is not ashamed to point out his sin to the Lord's 
priest, and to seek a remedy, according to him who says: "TI 
have said, I will declare my unrighteousness against me, and thou 
hast forgiven the impiety of my sin" [Ps 31:5]. In this is ful- 
filled what the Apostle James says: "If any man among you is sick, 


let him call in the presbyters of the Church" [James 5:14] etc. 


In a figure of this thing cheice said to the cleansed leper 
"Go, snow yourself to the priest, and offer the gift prescribed 
by Moses; he similarly enjoined the ten lepers" [Mt 8:4; Lk 17:12]. 
To Lazarus revived he said: "Loose him and let him go" [Jn 11:44]. 


See On Repentance, Book ne 
Objections of the Heretics. 


1. In Jn 20:23 nothing is enjoined concerning confession, 
but only to priests, that they may mee ees 
2. James 5 speaks of brotherly confession, for he does not 
say "Confess to a priest" but "to one another’ [James Seno” 
3. Jesus did not say to the woman taken in adultery: "Go 
and confess to a priest," but "Go and sin no more" [Jn 8:11]; 
thus concerning Mary Magdalene [cf Lk 7:37ff]. 
4. Ambrose [Expos. Lk. 10:88] said: "T read Peter's tears, 
I do not read confession." [cf Gratian Decr. 2.33.31.1: Fr. 1.1159}° 
5. In the Tripartite History [9:35] it is related that con- 


fession was abrogated under Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople. 


*See note at end of Chapter. 


65 


65 


76 ECK ; ENCHTRIDION 


Response of the Catholics. 


1. Since at John 20:23 that greatest power is known to 
have been handed on to the priests, by the teaching office of 
the Holy Spirit the Church has learned the use of that power from 
the Apostles themselves. And, as Bernard says, it sufficed to 
show a physician to a sick man, who if he wants to become healthy, 
will seek a physician, 

2. It is indeed true that James did not determine with pre- 
cision to whom one should make confession, for already Christ had 
expressed absolving sinners; therefore it was sufficient for James 
to express what was necessary for absolution, namely confession, 
not precisely indicating the judge. 

3. Not yet did the power of loosing exist in the Church, 
for the reason that confession had not yet been instituted. The 
adulteress and Mary Magdalene were not held to confession. Now 
those things which were done with a special privilege are in 
consequence not te be treated according to the common theory. 

4, One responds similarly, although the argument is not 
read, and is even laughed at by children. He is speaking con- 
cerning the confession of public repentance, not the private 
confession of sins. See at greater length our book, On Con- 


: * 
fession. 


%John Eck, De Poenitentia et Confessione secreta semper in 
Ecclesia Dei observata, Contra Lutherum, Libri ii, 1538), 


CHAPTER 9 
ON SATISFACTION” 


[Whereby he proves axioms. ] 


Axiom 1: After guilt has been forgiven through contrition 
and absolution, the penitent ought to make satis- 


faction for penalty.** 


Adam doubtless was repentant after guilt, yet at that point 
he was not threatened with a penalty by God. "In whatever day 
you shall eat of it, you shall die the death" [Gen 2:17]. Indeed 
after his transgression of the divine commandment, God added over 
and above the threatened penalty of death something else, saying 
to Adam: ''Because you have hearkened to the voice of your wife 
and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded you that you should 
not eat, cursed is the earth in your work; with labor and toil 
shall you eat thereof all the days of your life. Thorns and 
thistles shall it bring forth to you; and you shall eat the herbs 
of the earth. In the sweat of your face shall you eat bread until 
you return to earth out of which you were taken, for dust you are, 
and into dust you shall return" [Gen 3:17-19]. "To the woman also 
he said: I will multiply your sorrow and your conception; in sor- 
row shall you bring forth children, and you shail be under your 
husband's power,'' [Gen 3:16] etc. And just as all cf us have sinned 
in Adam so all of us die in him [cf Rom 5:12], also with the guilt 
of original sin, for which death and the other penalties were in- 


flicted, remitted in baptism. 


"David, after having committed adultery and murder, repentant, 
said to Nathan: ‘I have sinned against the Lord.' And Nathan said 
to him: 'The Lord also has put away your sin'" [Z K 12:13]. Now 


sin is put away, not in order to put away guilt, but for penalty.*** 
*Chapter added 1532 (fol E1* - E4*). 


**kAxiom altered in 1541 ed. 


*kkCondensed and altered 1541. 


77 


1532 


67 


67 


68 


78 ECK :; ENCHIRIDION 


This is more fully explained by Gregory [Eucherius, Conm. II K., 
c. 8; cf. Gregory, Moralia, 9.27] and Augustine [De Pecec. Mer. 
et Remiss., 2.34] [Gratian, Decr. 2.33.3.1.82, 83; Friedberg, 


1.1182). 


. 


And there are many other examples, which point out and prove 
the same thing: Miriam, Moses' sister, after her guilt in mur- 
muring against Moses was forgiven, was stricken with leprosy; nor 
on that very spot when Moses prayed to the Lord for her that she 
might be healed, was she cleansed, but when the Lord commanded 
that for seven days, as a penalty for her sin, she be excluded 


from the camp, for that time the leprosy remained [Num 12:10-15]. 


God foretold that Moses and Aaron would not enter or lead the 
Israelite people into the promised land, on account of the sin of 
disbelief at the water of contradiction [Num 20:24] although doubt- 
less this sin was forgiven these holy men. Joseph's brothers con- 
fessed that they had justly suffered for their misdeed committed 
against their brother, "saying among themselves: We have deservedly 
suffered, because we have sinned against our brother," etc. [Gen 
42:21]. Eli, because he reproved the sins of his sons less than he 
ought, "fell from his stool backwards and broke his neck, and died" 
{1 Kings 4:18]. David's guilt, incurred by taking a census of the 
people, although forgiven him by the mercy of God for which he prayed, 
was attended by a very savage pestilence. He, being penitent, and 
commanded by the prophet, Gad, to make satisfaction, erected an altar 


and made an offering of fifty shekels [2 K 24:10£f; cf 1 Chr 21:7£ff]. 


The Ninevites fasted and covered themselves with sackcloth, 
etc. [Jonah 3:5]. 


“Ahab . . . fasted, covered himself with goat's hair, slept 
in sackcloth, walked with his head bowed down and placated the 
Lord" [3 K 21:27]. 


“If that nation shall repent of their evil, I also will re-~ 


pent of the evil that I have thought to do to them" [Jer 18:8]. 


9. ON SATISFACTION WE 


"According to the measure of the sin shall the measure also 


of the stripes be" [Deut 25:2]. 


"As much as she has glorified herself and lived in delicacies, 


so much torment and sorrow give to her" [Rev 18:7]. 


"Be not without fear about sin forgiven and say not: The 
mercy of the Lord is great, he will have mercy on the multitude 


of my sins" [Ecclus 5:5f]. 


Christ said to the cured paralytic who had been in his in- 
firmity for thirty-eight years: "Behold, you have been made whole. 
Now sin no more, lest anything worse come upon you" {Jn 5:14]. In 
this Jesus manifestly hints that this infirmity lasting so many years 
was inflicted as a penalty for a sin long ago (something by no means 
incredible) wiped out through the patience of the infirm man and 


the mercy of God. See Tome 4, Hom. 49, and On Repentance, Book 3. 


Axiom 2: Works of Satisfaction, pure prayer, fasting, alms, 
{and the restitution which is] enjcined upon the 
confessant, pertain to the sacrament of penance: 
these one manifestly comes upon from the Holy 


Scriptures. 


In Leviticus [c. 4, 5, 6] the Lord commands various sacri- 
fices to be offered for the various sins of priest, leader and 


people. 


"Turn to me with your whole heart, in fasting and weeping" 
[Joel 2:12]. Daniel advised Nebuchadnezzar: '"Make recompense for 
your sins with alms, and your iniquities with merciful acts to- 


ward the poor" {Dan 4:24]. 


The Ninevites repentant at the preaching of Jonah," ... 
putting on sackcloth, fasted together with their animals, and pray- 
ing, cried out to the Lord . . . And God saw their works . .. and 


had mercy upon them" [Jonah 5:5, 10]. Our Savior Christ, praising 


68 


1532 


69 


69 


1532 


80 ECK 3 ENCHLRIDION 


them, prefers them to the unrepentant Jews, saying: ‘'The men 

of Nineveh shall rise in the judgment with this generation, (that 
is, of those obstinate ones not making satisfaction for their sins) 
and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of 


Jaya 2 5 6” [ike ISS Il. 


John the Baptist urged the people saying: "Bring forth 
fruits worthy of penance” [Lk 3:8]. Christ upbraided the cities 
in which very many miracles, were done because they had not re- 
pented;: "Woe to you, Corozaim Woe to you Bethsaida, for if in 
Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought 
in you they had long ago done penance in sackcloth and ashes" 


[Mt 11:21). 


"Unless you do penance, you shall all likewise perish," just 
as "those eighteen upon whom the tower fell in Siloe and killed 
them" [Lk 13:4£]. 'In all things let us exhibit ourselves as the 
ministers of God, in much fasting," etc. [2 Cor 6:4]. Therefore 
it is clear that satisfaction is truly necessary for the penitent. 
[This also is effectively proved by the same scriptures by which 


Luther in vain tries to disprove it. ] 
; al 
The Objections of Luther. 


1. First, John the Baptist, sent to preach repentance, 
taught only the observance of God's commandments, saying: "Do 
nothing more than that which is appointed you" [Lk 3:13], making 
no mention of satisfaction. 

2. The Lord says through Ezekiel: “If the impious be con- 
verted from his impiety, and do judgment and justice, living he 
shall live, and shall not die" [Ez 18:21]. Note: he imposes 
nothing but judgment and justice, etc. 

3. Micah says: "I will show you, 0 man, what is good, and 
what the Lord requires of you: Verily, to do judgment, and to 
love mercy, and to watk carefully with your God," etc. [Mic 6:8]. 

And he corroborates this, because the Prophet here makes fun 


of those who wish to make satisfaction through works, saying: 


9. ON SATISFACTION 


"What shall I offer to the Lord that is worthy? . . . Shall I 
offer holocausts unto him, and yearling calves? Can the Lord 
be appeased with thousands of rams, or with many thousands of 
he-goats?" etc. [Mic 6:6£]. As if he did not say this. 

4. Christ by his passion and death made satisfaction for 
our sins. Yet the passion of Christ was sufficient not only for 
removing sins, but also for wiping out punishments. "For he has 
borne our infirmities," says the prophet, "and carried our sor- 


rows'' [Is 53:4]. Therefore, etc. 
Reply of the Catholics. 


1. First of all we deny that John did not teach satisfac-— 
tion. Surely he enjoined alms which pertain to satisfaction, 
saying: “He who has two coats, let him give to him who has none; 
and he who has food, ler him do in like manner" [Lk 3:11]. In 
deed those baptized by John confess their sins that according 
to the quality of the sins penance might be determined for them. 
Hence he taught, bring forth fruits worthy of penance which 
fruits arise through works of satisfaction. Therefore Luther is 
lying when he says that John only imposed the observance of com 
mandments. 

To this I say that John did not preach mere repentance but 
a baptism of repentance, not his own, but of Christ for the 
remission of sins. Therefore he was not obligated to make more 
express mention of satisfaction to those baptized by him and 
those thereafter to be baptized by the baptism of Christ (in 
which at the same time both guilt and penalty are remitted). 

2. In the words of the prophet nothing else is promised 
than a life of grace, in order to pursue it, and if satisfac- 
tion is not exacted in the thing itself, yet it is exacted in 
vow and intention, and, it necessarily follows, in order to pre- 
serve the life of grace as pursued. 

Now if by this word of the prophet satisfaction were not 
expressed, still it follows: therefore it was not satisfaction, 


or the prophet has deceived us. Seeing that it is not expressed 


70” 


72 


82 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


in one passage of the Scriptures, it is abundantly brought forth 
elsewhere. Just as in this passage he expresses justice alone, 
saying nothing of fortitude, temperance or chastity, yet these 
are set forth and enjoined in other passages. 

3. Micah in these words does not exclude but rather includes 
works of satisfaction. That is,by judgment is understood the 
severe condemnation of oneself, through loving mercy, through ex- 
ercising works of alms and piety out of love for the poor, and 
through walking carefully with God, the observance of divine com- 
mandments. Augustine agrees, saying: "In this repentance each 
one ought to exercise greater severity in himself in order that 
having been judged by himself he may not be judged by the Lord; 
so speaks the Apostie [1 Cor 11:31f]" (De Poenitentiae Medicina, 
Se Alle 

Nor does Micah make fun of those who wish to make satisfac- 
tion to God through good works, but he means that sacrifices 
and holocausts of animals were not sufficient nor did they avail 
for the wiping out of sins. "For it is impossible with the 
blood of goats and bullocks sin should be taken away" [Heb 10:4]. 
And in themselves these were not pleasing or acceptable to God. 
{For through the prophet he says "I desire not holocausts of rams 
and of bullecks and blood of calves and lambs" [Is 1:11]. Yet 
he wished and indeed commanded these things to be offered to him 
also for sins, not because these sacrifices themselves cleansed 
from sins, but because certain ones served as witnesses to the 
faith concerning Christ who was to suffer, which cleansed from 
sins. And the law itself hints at this from the manner of speak- 
ing, for it says that in the offering of victims for sin the priest 
will pray for it and it will be forgiven him as if the sin were 
forgiven, not from the force of the sacrifices, but from the faith 
and devotion of those making the offering. ] 

4, The passion of Christ which is sufficient to remove all 
guilt of punishment not only eternal but also temporal and accord- 
ing to the mode whereby man participates in the power of Christ's 


passion and receives also absolution from the guilt of punishment. 


9. ON SATISFACTION 83 


[Moreover in baptism man participates totally in the power of 
Christ's passion (as through water and the Holy Spirit having died 
together with Christ to sin, and in him regenerated to new life).* 
And for that reason in baptism man obtains remission of all guilt 
of punishment, but] in penance man obtains the power of Christ's 
passion according to the mode of his very own acts which are the 
matter of penance. Hence the Apostle urges the penitent ones 
saying: "For as you have yielded your members to serve unclean- 
hess and iniquity, unto iniquity, so now yield your members to 
serve justice unto sanctification" [Rom 6:19]. [And the prophet 
says: "For as it was your mind to go astray from God, so when you 
return again you shall seek him ten times as much" [Bar 4:28]. And 
forthis reason, not immediately through the first act of penitence 
whereby blame is remitted, is the guilt of punishment released. 
But you complete all the parts of penance. Yet we admit how much 
contrition anyone can have in order to wipe away at one and the 
same time all blame and punishment. But this,as yet given to few, 


is not certain to whom it is given.]** 


And if anyone objects, [Pseudo-] Augustine says [On True and 
False Repentence, quoted in Decr. 3.3.42, Fr 1.1225]: "The Lord 
has never healed anyone whom he has not entirely liberated for he 
healed a whole man on the Sabbath [Mt 9], because he healed the 


' Therefore, it 


body from infirmity, and the soul from contagion.' 
seems at the same time guilt is remitted, all punishment is like- 


wise remitted. 


It is to be said that God perfectly cures the whole man. More- 
over sometimes he did this suddenly as when he restored Peter's 
mother-in-law immediately to perfect health [Lk 4:38f]. But some- 
times he did so consecutively as for example, the blind man en- 
lightened by the Lord was first restored to imperfect vision 


' then he was 


whereupon he said: "I see men walking like trees,' 
perfectly restored so that he saw all things clearly [Mk 8:24]. 


And thus also he nevertheless spiritually converts the heart of 


*cf. Rom 6:3f 


**This 1532 passage is replaced in 1541 by: See Tom 4, Homily 51. 


Cf. Eck, De satisfactione et alias poenitentiae annexis, contra 


Lutherum. Liber unus. (1533). aS 


1532 


1532 


72 


84 ECK : ENCHERIDION 


men with such great agitation, that suddenly it perfectly achieves 
spiritual health, not only with guilt forgiven, but with all the 
rest of sin removed, as is clear concerning Mary Magdalene [Lk 
7:7]. He previously forgives guilt through eco grace and 
afterwards through cooperating grace he removes in succession the 
guilt of the penalty and the other remnants of sins. It does not 
come about therefore from Christ's act that when guilt is for- 
given, at the same time all punishment is forgiven, but rather the 


contrary, etc. 


CHAPTER 10 
ON THE EUCHARIST UNDER BOTH KINDS (SPECIES) 


It is shown that one of the two kinds suffices for the laity. 


"This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that if any 
man eat of it, he may not die" [Jn 6:50]. "The true bread... 
is that which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the world" 
[Jn 6:33f}. "I am the living bread which came down from heaven" 


[Jn 6:41, 51]. “And the bread that I will give, is my flesh, for 


the life of the world" [Jn 6:52]. Note, he mentions only the peed 


When two of the disciples were going to Emmaus [Lk 24:30], 
Christ gave them the sacrament only under the species of bread, 
according to Augustine, On the Harmony of the Gospels, 3.72; and 
John Chrysostom, On Matthew. 


We pray daily: "Give us this day our supersubstantial bread" 


[Mt 6:11]. 


"They were persevering in the doctrine of the apostles, and 
in the communication of the breaking of bread and in prayers" 


[Acts 2:42]. 


“Christ our passover is sacrificed, therefore let us feast, 
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth" [1 Cor 5:7f]. 
It is clear that everywhere there is only mention made of bread, 
none of wine. Ambrose, Jerome, Eusebius, Benedict, when they were 
about to die, communicated only under the species of bread; and on 
the sixth day of holy week priests communicate only under the spe- 
cies of bread, as a figure whereof the Lord foretells concerning 
the posterity of Eli, that whoever would come to the priest and say 
to him "Put me, I beseech you, to one part of the priestly office, 


that I may eat a morsel of bread: [1 K 2:36]. 


"For we being many are one bread, and one body, all that par- 
take of the same bread" [1 Cor 10:17]. And thus established the 
sacred synod of Constance: ''Ambrose speaking of communication of 


the laity in his book On the Sacraments, mentions only bread." 


85 


73 


74 


86 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Ignatius in his Epistle to fie) epneenengene: "Obedient to 

the bishop and the presbyter, in a sense not to be transgressed, 

breaking bread, which is the medicine of immortality, the remedy 

not for dying but for living.'' Note that he does not mention the 


wine. Gregory, Dialogues, 3.3 » refers to St. Agapetus, how 


by presenting the Lord's body to a mute and lame man, healed him. 
There is no mention of the species of wine. The Council of Rheims” 
{ Deer. Zatae, Wies 5 1; 1323) prohibits the laity from carrying the 
Sacrament of the bedy to the infirm. There is no mention of the 
species of wine. 

Thus it is bidden concerning the Eucharist of bread that the 
priest always should have it ready. Concerning wine nothing is 


bidden. And this is the view of the Council of Worms. 


In the Council of Serdica, Ossius (Bishop of Cordova) forbids 
any rash persons from receiving lay communion unless they repent 
in the end, and what is lay communion but the taking of the 
Eucharist under the species of bread [Decr. Greg. IX, 1.6.2: 

Fr. 2.48f]. 


It was similarly decided at the Council of Agde’ cance mune 
the criminal priest who having been thrust into a monastery takes 


only lay communion [Decr. 1.50.7, Fr. 1.179]. 
Objections of the Heretics. 


1. Christ instituted under both species and communicated to 
the Apostles under both species, and gave the commandment to all, 
saying: "All of you, drink of this" [Mt 26:27]. 

2. In the primitive Church they communicated under both 
species, just as is proved by Cyprian, On the Lapsed [c.25], 
where the Deacon pours out the sacrament of the cup for a girl. 

3. Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink 
his blood, you will not have life in you. 

4, The whole sacrament ought to be given to laymen; other- 
wise, because the laity have now been deprived of the cup, for 


the same reason the Church could bar them from the eucharist. 


10. ON THE EUCHARIST UNDER BOTH KINDS (SPECIES) 87 


5. All admit that the priest ought to communicate, under 
penalty of sin, under both species, and why do not the laity 


omitting this, sin? 
Reply of the Catholics. 


1. We concede that Christ as consecrator instituted the 
sacrament under both kinds and gave it to the Apostles under both 
kinds, who now were priests; thus today the celebrant priest par- 
takes under both kinds, but why this to the laymen? "Drink, all 


OH sor,” 


is said to the Apostles and priests. This they do, that 

is, consecrate in remembrance of Christ, for no others but the 75 
Apostles were present, as is clear from the Gospel [Mk 14:23], 

"and they all drank of it"--it is false to apply this to laymen. 

2. We admit that this was the practice in the primitive 
Church, yet it was not the universal practice, as is clear from 
Acts 2:42, as changed by the Church. 

I. First, because when the multitude of people is considered, 
where there are old men, youths, weak persons, if they do not 
exercise due caution, injury may be caused to the sacrament through 
the spilling of the liquid. 

II. Secondly, in such a great multitude how could a vessel 
commodiously contain the sacrament of wine and function effec- 
tively without spilling? 

III. Thirdly, the sacrament cannot easily be preserved for 
the infirm, because it turns sour, it putrifies, causing nausea 
or vomiting to those who partake of it. 

IV. Fourthly, it cannot easily be carried from place to 
place for the infirm without danger of spilling. 76 

Vy. Fifthly, it might otherwise happen that the greatest 
irreverence might be dome to the most worthy sacrament. 

VI. Alexander of Hales relates a thing attested by miracles, 
that when the monks were standing up to partake under both 


species, while the priest was performing the sacrament, there 


76 


Vi 


88 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


appeared a platen full of blood; when the monks saw this, they 
were struck dumb; by this sign their prayer ceased. Now the 
primitive Church must have believed that the laity began to com- 
municate under both species, and that which comes from the tradi- 
tion cf the Apostles is a unity, because no one can point out when 
this began. 

3. Because sacramental eating demands spiritual eating, "The 
words that 1 have spoken are spirit and life" [Jn 6:64]. Hence 
the whole Christ is under each species, body and blood. ‘Therefore 
the layman, under the species of bread, drinks blood, but not under 
the proper species, but under the species of bread. Now Christ 
only acts from our incorporation into him, which the communion of 
the body sufficiently indicates. Therefore here the eye must not 
be fixed upon this sacrament. 

4. Although the Church dces not give the other species, the 
Church could de so. For it is no less under either species, as 
under two, and receives as great fruit of one species, as from the 
other, yet the Church ought not to deprive the faithful completely 
of the fruit cf the sacrament. 

5. Consecrating both species, he consecrates, because it is 
a question of the representation of the Lord's passion; for this 
reason body and blocd are at one and the same time consecrated 
under both species; and the priest in the person of the whole 
people cffers and takes under both species,*in whose person the 
whole people ought to believe that they joyously drink, by a cer- 


tain spiritual reception, the blood of Christ. 


*The priest comminicates for the whole people. 


CHAPTER I1 
CONCERNING MARRIAGE 4 


It is shown that Marriage is a sacrament. 


“Women are to be subject to their husbands, as to the Lord, 
because the husband is the head of the wife, just as Christ is the 
head of the Church; he is the savior of his own body. . ." [Eph 
5:22£]. Later: "On this account a man will leave his father and 
mother, and cleave to his wife, and the two will be one flesh: 
this is a great sacrament, that I speak in Christ and the Church” 
{Eph Beye) "Here openly he declares it a sacrament, because he 
shows the joining of man and wife to be the sign of a sacred thing, 
namely of Christ and the Church. And that you may not believe this 
only through a comparison, derivatively, he shows it to be a true i 
sacrament first declared by the prophet." So does Jerome under- 


stand the passage. 


"Marriage honorable in all, and the bed undefiied" [Heb 13:4]. 
The bed would not be without defilement if there were not the grace 


of a sacrament. 


"Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder" 
[Mt 19:6]. 

Divine joining together is not witheut grace. 

"In order to avoid fornication, let each one have his own 
wife" [1 Cor 7:2]. 

"Honor and riches are given by parents; but a prudent wife is 


properly from the Lord: [Prov 19:14]. 


"Everyone of you should know how to possess his vessel in 
sanctification and honor" [1 Thess 4:4]. Sanctification is not 


without grace. 


"Yet she shall be saved through childbearing; if she continue 
in faith, and love" [1 Tim 2:15]. To bring forth children without 


grace would be more condemnation than salvation. 


89 


78 


1572 


90 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


"If any brother has an unbelieving wife, and she consent 
to dwell with him, let him not put her away. And if any faithful 
woman has an unbelieving husband, and he consent to live with her, 
let her not dismiss him. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified 
by the believing wife . . . otherwise your children would be unclean, 
but now they are holy" [1 Cor 7:12-14], [that is,] through the 


sacrament. 


It is probable that the blessing which God gave Adam and Eve 


was not without grace [Gen 2. eee 


Augustine [On Marriage and Concupiscence, 1.17.19]: "Not only 
fruitfulness, whose fruit is in offspring, not only modesty, whose 
bond is faith, but also the sacrament of marriage is commended to 


the faithful." 
Objections of the Heretics. 


1. Where the Apostle [Eph 5:32] calls marriage a "sacrament," 
in Greek it reads "mystery." 
2. Nor does Paul say matrimony is a sacrament absolutely, but 


in Christ and the Church. 
Reply of the Christian. 


1. We admit marriage to be a mystery, but with what rashness, 
he infers: Therefore, it is not a sacrament, when all sacraments 
are mysteries, and the Greeks commonly call sacraments "mysteries." 

2. Marriage is a great sacrament in Christ and the Church, and 
through this the heretic cannot prove that thus it is any less a 
sacrament, for here the Apostle explains, how it is the sign of a 
sacred thing, not only of grace, but also of the union of Christ and 


the Church. 


CHAPTER 12 
CONCERNING EXTREME uncriont 


Extreme unction is a sacrament in the Church of God, set 79 


forth by St. James. 


"Is any man sick among you? Let him bring in the priests of the 
Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the 
name of the Lord. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick man; 
and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he be in sins, they shall 


be forgiven him" [James 5:14f]. 


"The Apostles anointed with oil many sick persons, and they 


were healed" [Mk 6:13]. 


The matter of this sacrament is the anointing of oil, namely 
olive oil, which is properly called Tae For other liquids, 
from their likeness to this take the name “oil" by form, because 
with prayer there is also the effect, namely, forgiveness of sins. 
It is therefore a sacrament, because there is a sensible sign, the 
sign of a sacred thing. For what other purpose does anointing have? 
Dionysius, On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, 7, determines this; 79 


also Hugo of Saint—-Victor. 


{[Pseudo-] Augustine, On the Visitation of the Infirm, 2 

{cf. PL 40.1148], teaches that the infirm ought to confess, to com- 
municate, and receive anointing, for he says: ‘That precept of 

the Apostle James ought not to be overlooked. ‘Anyone whe is in- 
firm among you'" etc. Therefore, you should ask yourself that it 
also be done for you just as the Apostle James has said, or rather 
the Lord through his Apostle. Namely, the very anointing with 
consecrated oil is understood as a type of the anointing of the 


Holy Spirit. 


[Pseudo-] Augustine, De Rectitudine Catholicae Conversationis, 5 


{PL 40.1173] says: Let him who is sick, trust in God's mercy alone, 


*Cf£. Thomas Aquinas, S.T., PT 29.4. 


91 


got 


92 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


and receive the Eucharist with faith and devotion, let him faith- 
fully petition oil and blessing from the Church, with which his 


bedy may be ansinted. 
Objections of the Heretics. 


1. An Apostle cannot institute a sacrament. 


2. There is deubt concerning the authority of that Epistle. 
Reply of the Catholic. 


1. It does not seem absurd that the Apostle, by Christ's 
authority, and the bidding of the Holy Spirit, instituted this 
sacrament. Yet even if Christ instituted it, stiil James set it 
forth. 

2. And if at any time there were any doubts concerning this 
Epistle, whether it were written by another than James, yet it 


obtained canonical authority, according to the witness of Jerome, 


and is placed first among the Canonical Epistles, before the Epistles 


of Peter, John, and Jude. But if you do not hear the Church ap- 
proving this Epistle, now all things will be uncertain, for a rash 
man of this sort would even deny the Epistles of Paul. See Tome 4, 


Homily 52. 


CHAPTER 13 
ON HUMAN CONSTITUTIONS 


Proving Two Axioms. 


Axiom 1: A human constitution of councils and pontiffs 


to be kept. 


"He who hears you, hears me; and he who despises you, despises 
me; and he who despises me, despises him who sent me” [Lk 10:16]. 
Note that he who despises the prelates of the Church and the 
ecclesiastical constitutions, despises Christ and the Gospel. 
[Hence the Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, says:] ‘You S28) 
know what precepts I have given to you by the Lord Jesus Christ" 
{1 Thess 4:2]. Later: "Therefore, he who despises these things, 
despises not man but God, who also has given His Holy Spirit in 


us" [1 Thess 4:8]. 


Moses said to the people murmuring against himself and Aaron: 
"I have heard your murmur against the Lord" [Ex 16:7]. Later: 
"For what are we? Your murmur is not against us, but against the 81 
Lord" [Ex 16:8]. [Therefore, on the contrary, he who conducts 1529 
himself according to the ecclesiastical rulers, also obeys God 


himself, according to that statement]. 


"He who knows God, hears us; he who is not of God, does not 
hear us. By this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of 


error [1 Jn 4:6]. 


{Ecclesiastical constitutions therefore are not only human 1529 
laws, but also divine, both because established by the fathers on 
divine authority, and because they are according to the divine 
scripture, and because they are for divine honor, the dignity and 
splendor of the Church, the readier fulfillment of divine law and 
the salvation of souls. Hence they bind in the forum of conscience 
so that they make despisers and transgressors of them subject to 


eternal damnation; in accordance with the Apostle's statement:] 


93 


94 ECK : ENCHEIRIDION 


"Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For 
there is no authority except from God, and those that exist have 
been previously constituted by God. Therefore he who resists the 
authorities, resists what God has appointed, and those who resist 
will incur judgment'' (Rom 13:l1f). [Understand the same thing con- 


cerning just civil laws or constitutions. | 


“"Admonish them to be subject to princes and authorities; tell 


them to obey, and to be prepared for every good work" (Tit 3:1). 


"Be subject: to every creature . .. whether it be to the king 
as excelling; or to governors as sent by him..." (1 Pt 2:13f). 
And later: ''Servants, be subject to your masters in all fear, not 


only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward' (1 Pt 2:18), 


since so is the will of God. 


The Apostles indicate that men can establish constitutions, 
forbidding the sacrificing to idols, of blood and of strangled ani- 
mals (Acts 15:29; 21:25; 15:20). Paul indicates how many laws he 
gave concerning the appointment of bishops (1 Tim 3:2; Tit 1:7), 
concerning widows (1 Cor 7:8; 1 Tim 5:3ff), concerning the veiling 
of virgins (1 Cor 11:4f£), that women should not preach (1 Cor 14:34), 
concerning not deserting an unbelieving spouse (1 Cor 7:12-14), 
concerning profane matters (1 Tim 6:20; 2 Tim 2:10) and secular judg- 


ments (1 Cor 6:4). And yet Paul was a man (Acts 14:14). 


"Stand fast, therefore, brothers, and hold the traditions which you 
have learned, whether by word, or by our epistle'" (2 Thess 2:14). 


{Paul commands that unwritten traditions be Kepiteel 


Indeed, it was always permitted to priests and presbyters to 
establish constitutions. Dt 12:13f: The Lord forbids the erection of 
an altar, except where the Ark of the Covenant is, yet Samuel, wien 
a temple existed at Shiloh, erected a stone in Masphat (1 K 7:12). 
And Elijah erected one on Mt. Carmel (cf. 3 K 18:42). If the judg- 


ment be ambiguous (Dt 17:8), see above ch. 1. * 


"The Scribes and Pharisees have sat upon Moses’ seat: do what 
they say" (Mt 23:2). "If he does not hear the Church, let him be to 


you as a Gentile and publican" (Mt 18:17). 


*Page 16, 


a2) 


oy 


1529 


g2F 


82 


g3r 


13. ON HUMAN CONSTITUTIONS 944 


"Let us, as many as are perfect, be thus minded; and if in 
anything you be otherwise minded, this also God will reveal to 
you" (Phil 3:15). Note that the church legislates to the honor 


of God; this she does with God revealing. 


"IT praise you, brothers, that in all things you are mindful 
of me, and keep my ordinances as I have delivered them to you" 
(1 Cor 11:2); moreover he did not deliver all things in writing, 
as above, and that precepts of this sort, both written and un- 
written, were delivered in the primitive Church, Dionysius asserts, 


On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, Is 


"You shall not do there the things we do here this day, every 


man does what seems good to himself" (Dt 12:8). 


Axiom 2: Ecclesiastical customs, rites and ceremonies are 


to be observed just as much as divine laws. 


This is clear first of all by a comparison. Custom in civil 
matters has the force of law, why not then in the practices of the 
Church? (Cf. Gratian, Decr. 1.11.4: Fr. 1.25) For the custom of 


the Church prevails over contentious persons. 


"Tf any man seem to be contentious, we have no more custom, 
nor the Church of God" (1 Cor 11:16). On this, Jerome says: "The 
Apostle, after he had bidden the woman to pray with head covered, 
anticipated the objection, whereby someone might say: where is it 


written? For this reason he alleges custom. 


"In the last days there shall come deceitful sccffers, walking 
after their own lusts" (2 Pt 3:3). This is what the heretics do, 
who do not live according to the statutes of the fathers, but ac- 
cording to their own desires. 

Heretics are those Hamites (cf. Gen 9:22), making fun of the 
nudity of Mother Church, because she gives precepts without express 


Scripture. 


13. ON HUMAN CONSTITUTIONS 95 


"Brothers, whatever things are true, whatever modest, whatever 


lovely, whatever of good report, if there be any virtue, if any 


praise of discipline, think on these things. And the things you have 


both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me..." 


{Phil 4:8f]: of this sort moreover are the constitutions of the 


Church, which are to be kept. 


St. Paul with Silas "went through Syria and Cilicia, con- 
firming the churches, commanding them to keep the precepts of the 


apostles and the elders" [Acts 15:41]. 


As Paul, Silas and Timothy" . . . passed through the cities, 
they delivered to them the decrees for them to keep what had been 
decreed by the Apostles and presbyters who were at Jerusalem" 
[Acts 16:4]. Ponder the decrees, because it was not only a decree 


abrogating the legal regulations. 


Christ not only gave the power to plant the Church through 
preaching, but also the power to rule; now that includes the 
power to make statutes for salutary governance, without which one 
does not live here, etc. "Take therefore heed to yourselves, and 
to the whole flock, wherein the Holy Spirit has placed you as 


bishops to rule the Church of God" [Acts 20:28]. 


"We charge you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that you withdraw yourselves from every brother walking 
disorderly, and not according to the tradition which they have 


received from you" [2 Thess 3:6]. 


Polycarp to the Philippians:* "Be subject to the presbyters 
and deacons, as to God and Christ." Jerome to Lueinius [Ep 28: 
Gratian Decr. 1.12.4: Fr. 1.28]: The traditions of the Church are 
to be observed, as they have been handed down by the ancestors; 
let each province abound after its own mind, and let the precepts 


of the ancestors and the laws of the Apostles be determinative." 


In the Decretals, there are many canons on this matter from 


the words of Augustine [Decr. 1.11.5, 7, 8; Fr 1.24-26]. 


*ch 5 [PG 5.1009r] 


83 


84 


85 


96 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"Obey your prelates, and be subject to them. For they are 
going to render an account for your souls" [Heb 13:17]. 


"Let all things among you be done according to order," 


{1 Cor 14:40], but order requires law. 
Objections of the Heretics. 


1. "In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines and pre- 
cepts of men" [Mk 7:7]. 

2. "You shall not add to the word that I speak to you, nor 
shall you take away from it" [Dt 4:2; 12:32; Rev 22:18f]. 


3. ‘You are bought with a price; be not made the servants of 


men'' [1 Cor 7:23) 2 


4, "If you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law" 
[Gal 5:18]. 
5. "The law is not made for the just man" [1 Tim Teo 


6. "The law works wrath" [Rom 4:15]. 
7. “Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom" 
[2 Cor ena71< 
8. "By the freedom wherewith Christ has freed us" [Gal 4:31]. 


Response of the Catholics. 


1. Christ did not simply disapprove of the traditions of men, 
but only those which they made that were contrary to the divine law, 
or gave up the divine law because it follows what is above. "For 
leaving the commandments of God, you hold the traditions of men," 
{Mk 7:8]. "And he said to them: Well do you make void the com- 
mandment of God, that you may keep your own tradition” [Mk 7:9]. 
Just as he says there, so also he says in Mt. 15:3. Paul ex- 
piains: "Not giving heed to the commandments of men, who turn 


away from the truth" [Tit 1:14]. 


Hence, the Lord threatens the woe of eternal damnation upon 
those who fashion impious traditions of this sort. "Woe," he 
says through the prophet, "to those who make wicked laws, and 
when they write, write injustice, to Oppress the poor in judgment, 


and do violence to the cause of the humble, my people, that widows 


13. ON HUMAN CONSTITUTIONS oe 


may not be their prey, and that they might not be fatherless," 
etc. [Is 10:1f]. But the constitutions of the Church increase 
divine worship, repress concupiscence of the flesh, and expedite 
the keeping of the divine commandments, and increase brotherly 
love. 

2. Nothing is to be added to Scripture that corrupts or 
denatures itor that is said to be of the integrity of Sacred 
Scripture, except when it promotes those things that are commanded 
in Scripture or advised, for the constitutions of the Church, even 
if they are not in Scripture in exact form, still flow from it, 
as the Sage testifies. 

"Every word of God is fire tried; he is a shield to them who 
hope in him" [Prov 30:5]. 

"Do not add anything to the words of Scripture, and be proved 
and found out to be a liar" [Prov 30:6]. Therefore all addition 
is not simply forbidden, but only false and lying addition. 

If any man (he says) shall add te these things, God shall 
add to him the plagues written in this book" [Rev 22:18]. To 
those who add or supplement by explaining, clarifying, or inter- 
preting the Scriptures, laws, or constitutions for divine honor, 
the glory of the Church, and by establishing the salvation of 
souls (on which account Christ also willed that some be doctors, 
others apostles, others evangelists, others pastors in the Church 
[Eph 4:11]. And to some are given kinds of tongues, to others 
interpretation of speeches" [1 Cor 12:10], here is promised the 
reward of eternal life. ‘''They who work in me" says eternal wis- 
dom, “shall not sin; and they who explain me shall have life 
everlasting" [Ecclus 24:30f]. And elsewhere: "Those who are 
learned shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and those 
who instruct many to justice, as stars for all eternity” 

{Dan 12:3]. 

A closer distinction solves the question: the things for- 

bidden there are Tikum seeeatiiee I believe that solution to be 


true. See in Porchetus and Galatinus. 


1 ce. p. 139, below. 


i.e., by deliberate scribal emendation. 


85 


86 


86 


87 


98 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


3. They ought not te become the servants of men, by com- 
mitting schism, so that one is of Cephas and another of Apollo 
{1 Cor 1:12]. 


4, Those who are perfectly directed by the Spirit, are 


. 


not under the Mosaic law, or the coercive law. Nevertheless they 
need the directive law, just as Adam had the law in paradise. 

5. Upon the just man who is wholly ruled by God's Spirit, in 
perfect love, the law has not been imposed [Gal 5:18] with regard 
to that part which is just, but because occasionally he lusts 
against the Spirit, with regard to that part he has the law to 
reform him. Or say as we have done concerning the fourth point. 

6. The Mosaic law works wrath, if we are not helped by 
grace; grace and truth through Jesus Christ. 

7. Just as Gospel liberty does not exclude the power of 
and obedience to the superior, so not its statutes but that liberty 
is opposed to the bondage of the Mosaic law, the bondage of sin. 
Therefore it is only liberty in the spirit, because it does not 
serve sins, and because that liberty promotes good, it does not 
exclude constitutions and precepts of the Church, which likewise 
promote good, as Paul attests. ‘"“You,brethren, have been called to 
liberty; only make not liberty an occasion for the flesh, but by 
charity cf the Spirit, serve one another" [Gal 5:13]. And Peter: 
"As free, and not as making liberty a cloak for malice, but as 
the servants of God" [1 Pt 2:16]. Likewise: ‘Those who" (that 
is, heretics) . . . “converse in error, promising them liberty, 
whereas they themselves are the slaves of corruption’ [2 Pt 
2:18f£]. This word of St. Peter we see fulfilled in the Priapist 
Lutherans, slaves of every uncleanness and filthiness, falsely 
passing off this ungodly and diabolical bondage as Gospel liberty. 

8. Now in Scripture there is often commended freedom from 
that burdensome Mosaic law. Paul: "You are not under the law, 
but under grace" [Rom 6:14]. "The law rules in man, so long as 
he lives" [Rom 7:11]. "Therefore, brethren, be mortified to the 
law through the body of Christ" [Rom 7:4]. "Man is not justified 


from the works of the law" [Gal 2:16]. "The law was our tutor 


13. ON HUMAN CONSTITUTIONS 99 


in Christ Jesus" [Gal 3:24]. "And everyone who is from the works 
of the law, is umder the curse" [Gal 3:10]. "Stand fast, and be 
not held again under the yoke of bondage" [Gal 5:1]. "If you are 


circumcized, Christ shall profit you nothing" [Gai 5:2]. 


Therefore new moons and sabbaths and ritual washings have 
been done away with, etc. [cf. Is 1:13]. "How do you turn again to 
the weak and needy elements, which you desire to serve again. You 
observe days and months, and times, and years" [Gal 4:9f]. "For 
he is our peace, who has made both one, and breaking down the middle 
wall of partition, the enmities in his flesh, making void the law 
of commandments contained in decrees" [Eph 2:14f]. “Let no man 
judge you in food or in drink, or in respect of a festival day, or 
of the new moon, or of the Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things 


to come" [Col 2:16f]. The same is taught in Heb 10:1 and Acts 15. 


Therefore, Christian or evangelical liberty is nothing else 
than (as it pleases Paul) redemption or absolution from the bondage 
of the law and of sin, accompiished through Jesus Christ, whereby 
summoned to God and to justice, we receive the adoption of sons. 
[Cf Rom 6-8; Gal 5] Concerning this freedom the Savior said to 
the Jews: "If therefore the son shall make you free, you shall 


be free indeed" [Jn 8:36]. See Augustine on this. 


87 


88 


Vv 


1529 


88 


89 


CHAPTER 14 
ON FEASTS AND FASTS 


On not eating meats and degrees of consanguinity. 
[Proposition 1: On the Observance of Feast Days] 


{Exodus 12:16] That one day in the week is consecrated to 


God is obvious to all. 


In the Law of Moses God established still other feasts: 
“Three times each year you will celebrate feasts to me... of 
unleavened bread . . . of the first fruits, of the grain" [Ex 
23:14, 15, 16, 19]. 

“Thrice a year every one of your males will appear before 
the Lord your God, namely at Passover, at Pentecost, and at the 


* 
feast of tabernacles" [Ex 23:17; Dt 16:16). 


In this passage you have the pilgrimage of the Jews, and 


founded from it and upon it, the pilgrimage of the Christians. 


"In the seventh month, the first day of the month, you shall . 
keep a sabbath, a memorial, with the sound of trumpets, and it 

shall be called holy" [Lev 23:24]. "On the tenth day of this the 
seventh month the day of expiations will be most celebrated and 

will be called holy" [Lev 23:27]. Later: "From the fifteenth 

day of the seventh month. . ." will be the feast of tabernacles 


for seven days: and something is to be offered each day [Lev 


23:39ff]. 


"On the calends moreover, that is, the first days of the 
months, you shall offer a holocaust to the Lord" [Num 28:11]. 
Moses dedicated the tabernacle of the Lord [Ex 40:43; Num 7:1ff}. 
The dedication of the first temple under Solomon [3 K 8]. The 
dedication of the second temple under Esdras [1 Esd 6:16ff]. The 
dedication of the restored temple and of the altar just as one reads: 


"And they kept the dedication of the altar eight days" [1 Mace 4:56]. 


* 
Martin Bucer, Ena und Ursache (1529) Butzer, Deutsche Schriften, 
1’ 


I. 267 argues ", . 


100 


14. ON FEASTS AND FASTS 101 


Note that the feast of Purification was instituted by Judas 
Maccabeus, yet observed by Christ. Let us list the feasts of 
the Jews apart from the Sabbath: seven days of unleavened bread 
at Passover, one of Pentecost, one day of trumpets, one day of 
expiation (which was at the beginning of the year), seven days 
of tabernacles or booths, seven days of purification or lights or 
dedication. They had twelve of new moons, or lunations; on leap 
years, thirteen. Taken together the days total thirty-five when 


only three sabbaths come together. 


But since we have received greater benefits from God through 
the Gospel, than the Jews under the Law, why have we not also to 
give more thanks to God, even than those who were under the old 
Law? Hence the feast of passover under the law was succeeded in 
the new law by the feast of the passion and resurrection of Christ. 
For Christ was sacrificed as our Passover [1 Cor 5:7]. The feast 
of Pentecost on which the old law was given was succeeded by Pente- 
cost on which was given the law of the spirit of life. The feast 
of new moon was succeeded by the feast of the glorious virgin Mary 
in whom first appeared the illumination of the sun, that is, Christ 
through the abundance of grace. The feast of trumpets is succeeded 
by the feast of the Apostles the sound of whose preaching went 
forth into all the earth. The feast of Atonement is succeeded by 


the feast of the Martyrs and Confessors. 


The feast of Tabernacles was succeeded by the feast of the 
consecration of the Church. The feast of assembly and congrega- 
tion was succeeded by the feast of the Saints, or also the feast 


of all Saints. 


The Sabbath is manifoldly commanded by God [Gen 2:3; Ex 20:9f; 
Num 15:32f] and neither in the Gospel nor in Paul is it set forth 
that the Sabbath was to cease. Nevertheless the Church established 
the Lord's Day through the traditions of the apostles without Scrip- 


ture. John remembers the Lord's Day, saying: "Il was in the spirit 


89” 


90 


91 


102 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


on the Lord's Day: [Rey 1:10}. His disciple, Ignatius, remembers 
the same day (To the Philippians, at the end). Concerning the 
Lord's Day of the Passover, Jerome says: "The universal grace of 
the Sabbath replaced that ancient festival of the Jews by the 


solemnity of this day." 


Moreover, the Sabbath was changed because it signifies the 
first creation on the Lord's Day on which is commemorated the new 
creation begun with the resurrection of Christ. Hence, Augustine 
responding to the questions of Januarius [Epist. 54] says, "the 
Lord's Day was déclared by the resurrection of the Lord not to the 
Jews but to the Christians and from that resurrection begins to have 
its own festival." The Council of Lyons set the feast of St. Law- 
rence, of St. Michael, $t. Martin, and All Saints [Gratian Decr. 
3.3.1: Fr. 1.1353]. And the Finding [Invention] of the Cross 
[Gratian Decr. 3.3.19: Fr. 1.1357]. 


Augustine, Against Faustus, 19.28: “When you ask why do 
Christians not observe the sabbath rest I answer: indeed Chris- 
tians do not observe that for the reason that what was professed 
as a figure has now been fulfilled by Christ." For more on this, 


see Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose and Gregory to the Romans. 


They celebrated the feast of St. Lawrence at Hippo (Augustine, 
On John, Tr. 27): And at Rome under Pope Leo as in the homily of 
that day. 


Proposition 2: On Delight in Foods. 
The Church can fully prohibit certain foods at certain times. 


"You are to abstain from things sacrificed to idols and from 


blood and from things strangled" [Acts 15:29]. 


"Let us follow after the things of peace, and keep the things 
of edification. Do not destroy the work of God for food. All 
things indeed are clean, but it is evil for that man who eats with 
offense. It is good not to eat flesh, and not to drink wine, nor 
anything by which your brother is offended or made weak or scan- 


dalized" [Rom 14:19-21]. 


14. ON FEASTS AND FASTS 103 


"If food should scandalize my brother, I will never eat flesh, 


lest I should scandalize my brother" [1 Cor 8:13]. 
"Flesh and wine have not entered into my mouth" [Dan 10:3]. 


Leo IV says, “The custom of abstaining from flesh on the fourth 
and sixth days of the week is very ancient" [Decr. 3.3.11, Fr. 1.1355]. 
And from Jerome one gathers this in his Commentary on the Epistle to 
the Galatians; and Ignatius, the disciple of St. John the Evangelist, 


attests this, To the Philippians. 
Proposition 3: On the Reason for Fasting. 


Concerning fasting, it is indeed clear that it is a holy thing, 91” 
for the softening of the body, the expulsion of a pertinacious spirit, 


the imploring of divine grace, and the imitation of Christ fasting. 


"My knees are weakened through fasting, and my flesh is changed 
for oil" [Ps 108:24]. 


"Can the children of the bridegroom mourn as long as the bride- 
groom is with them?" [Mt 9:15]. "But the days will come when the 
bridegroom shall be taken away from them; then they shall fast" 

[Lk 5:34]. The Apostles fulfilled that by work: "And as they were 
ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said to them: 


separate for me, etc." [Acts 13:2]. 


"When they had ordained to them presbyters in every church 
and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord" 
[Acts 14:22]. 


"In all things let us exhibit ourselves as the ministers of 
God in much patience . .. in labors, in watchings, in fastings" 


[2 Cor 6:4f]. 
The Ninevites undertook a fast [Jonah 3]. 92 


"But you, when you fast anoint your head and wash your face 
in order that you may not seem to men to be fasting but to your 
Father who is in secret and your Father who sees in secret will 


repay you" [Mt 6:17f]. Note that fasting is meritorious. 


104 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


Likewise concerning Lent. 
"When Jesus had fasted forty days and forty nights, after- 


wards he was hungry" [Mt 4:2]. 


. 


Moses fasted forty days and forty nights [Dt 9:25]. Similarly 
Elijah fasted as many days [3 K 19:8]. 


"Sanctify a fast’ [Joel 1:14]. "I humbled my soul in fasting" 
[Ps 34:13]. 


"If a woman vow to afflict her soul by fasting . .. it shall 
depend upon the will of her husband, whether she shall do it or not 
do it. But if the husband hearing it, keep silent, and postpone his 
decision till another day, whatever she had vowed and promised, she 


snall fulfili" [Num 30:14£]. 


Holy Scripture everywhere attests that fasting will be accept- 
able to God: in Ahab [3 K 21:27, 29] Tobit [Tob 12:8] Judith 
[Jud 4:12; 8:6] Esther [14:2; 4:16] Daniel [Dan 9:3] the Ninevites 
[Jonah 3:5] the widow Anna [Lk 2:37]. 


Ignatius To the Philippians: "Do not hold Lent to be of no 


account, for it contains an imitation of the conversation of God." 


Pope Telesphorus, a near-contemporary of the Apostles, con- 
firmed this [Decr., 1.4.4: Fr. 1.6, n. 16]. Likewise Ambrose 


[ef. Decr., 1.4.5] in IMany sermons. Likewise the Councils of Agde 


and Orleans. Origen On Leviticus, Hom 10: "We have forty days con~ 
secrated to fasting." Jerome, Against Montanus: "We fast during 


Lent according to the tradition of the Apostles." 


Jerome [Against Jovinian, 2; cf. Gratian Decr. 2 She Bho 2 INS 
Fr. 1. 1202-1206]: Jovinian turned the affliction of fasts and 


all the punishment of the body into luxury and banqueting. 


Irenaeus: The Valentinian heretics said that one ought to 


eat meat freely at all times [Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.1]. 


Chrysostom, On Matthew, Hom 56: "He remembers concerning 


the faste of the monks, and how they say thanks." 


14. ON FEASTS AND FASTS 105 


Origen On Leviticus, Hom. 10: "We have forty days conse- 
erated to fasts; we have the fourth and sixth days of the week on 
which we celebrate a fast publicly." It is certainly Christian 
freedom to fast at all times, not through superstitious observance 


but through virtue. 


"For how may uncorrupted chastity be preserved among them un- 
less it be supported by the straiter props of continence. How do 
men pursue wisdom and knowledge? Do they not do so through continence 
of the belly and the throat? How does anyone castrate himself for 
the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven [Mt 19:12] unless he rejects abun- 
dance of foods? Unless he use abstinence as minister? This there- 


fore is the reason why Christians fast." So speaks Origen. 


Bishop Maximus [of Turin, Homiliae, 1.38: PL 57.307]: ‘We have 
set forth examples from the Holy Scriptures by which we prove that 
this number "forty" was not established by men, but divinely conse- 
crated, not initiated by earthly cogitation, but enjoined by heavenly 


majesty." 


And a little later [Ibid., PL 57.308]: "These precepts 
are not so much of priests as of God. And for that reason anyone 
who rejects them does not reject the priest but Christ who speaks 

in his priests." Ambrose, Sermon on the Fast says in order that we 
may know that it is not a new fast, he established (that is for 

our first parents) there (that is, in paradise) the first law con- 
cerning fasting, etc. [Decr. 1.35.8, Fr 1.132]. Gregory, Augustine, 


and all who were Catholic doctors so understood and taught concern~ 


ing the observance of fasts. 
Proposition 4: On Grades of Consanguinity. 


The grade of consanguinity is an impediment to marriage. John 
the Baptist upbraided Herod, saying: "It is not permitted to you 


to have your brother's wife" [Mk 6:17]. 


Paul turned over to Satan the Corinthian fornicating with his 


father's wife [1 Cor 5:1, 5]. 


In the old law grades of consanguinity and affinity have been 


forbidden by God. "No man shall approach to her that is near of kin 


94 


25 


106 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


to him by blood, to umcever her nakedness" [Lev 18:6]. Gregory 
the Great, writing to the bishops of Gaul: ‘We decree that each 
one keep his descent pure even to the seventh generation, and so 
long as they recognize next of kin by affinity I deny that they 
yield to conjugal copulation. If they should do this, they are to 
be separated." [Decr. 2.35 2/3.1, Fr 1.1264] Nevertheless a 
general council reduced this to the fourth degree [Lateran IV, 


Can. 350: Decret. Gregor. IX, 4.14.8; Fr. 2.7 03f], 


Ambrose, Epistles, 8.66, teaches: "Not all lawful grades were 


expressed by the law." Before the times of St. Gregory they used 


alse to give dispensation even in the second degree, for he writes 
to Augustine, bishop of the English: A certain Roman law permits 
that the son and daughter of either a brother or sister or of two 
full brothers, may be united, but by experience we have learned 
from such a marriage progeny does not spring forth." ([Gratian, 


Decret. 2.35.2/3.20; Fr. 1.1268f]. 


Objections of the Heretics against the Second Proposition. 

1. It is not what enters the mouth, that defiles a man 
(Mt 15:11]. 

2. “Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected 
that is received with thanksgiving" [1 Tim 4:4]. And there he 
calis "a doctrine of devils" [1 Tim 4:1] and lying [v.2}, “to ab- 
stain from foods, which God has created to be received with thanks-— 
giving by the faithful" [v.3]. 

3. "All things are clean to the clean, but to those defiled 
and to unbelievers, nothing is clean" [Tit 12 It5i)} 

4. “Let no man therefore judge you in food, or in drink, or 
in respect of a festival day, or of the new moon, or of the sab- 
baths, which are a shadow of things to come" [Col 2:16f}. 

5. "If by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you 
shall live,” [Rom 8:13]; he did not say "by fasts." 

6. In the Gospel, Christ did not command the choice of foods. 


Why then do you impose this burden upon the faithful? 


14. ON FEASTS AND FASTS 107 


7. Christian freedom does not allow these burdens of bond- 


age [Actes 15:28]. 
Response of the Catholics. 


1. Here Christ says nothing concerning fasts, but is re- 
moving the error of the Jews, who believed foods touched by un- 
washed hands were unclean, and one who ate this food became unclean, 
as is clear from Matthew and Mark. This stupidity Christ rejected, 
stating that foods touched by unwashed hands do not make unclean 
those who eat them. Otherwise, at the time of the Apostles, by 
eating strangled or poisoned meat knowingly, one would not become 
unclean. The Manichees also twisted this passage against delight 


in foods. See Augustine, Against Faustus [Sh ZAERE || 


Observe therefore, that food entering the mouth, which goes 
into the stomach, and is thereafter emitted, does not make man 
unclean. But man himself, taking food against the prohibition of 
God and Church, or also against the custom of the Church, and 
against his own vow or with the scandal of his neighbor, makes him- 
self unclean. For this proceeds from an evil heart, that is, from 


the contempt of God and of the Church in its commandments. 


Hence Augustine [DCD 14.12]: "One ought not for that reason 
to deem light and small that sin committed in Paradise, because 
it was committed with respect to food, not indeed bad and harmful, 


‘ete. Thus wine although good in 


except that it was forbidden,' 
itself, would have polluted the Rechabites, if they had drunk it 
against the prohibition of their father, but because they abstained 
from it, they pleased the Lord. For this follows, "These things 
the Lord of Hosts of Israel said. Because you have obeyed the 
precept of Jonadab your father, and have kept all his command- 


ments .. . there shall not be wanting a man of the race of Jonadab, 


the son of Rechab, standing before me, forever" [Jer 35:18f]. 


And concerning John the Baptist, the Angel Gabriel foretold, 
‘ye shall drink no wine or strong drink" [Lk 1:15]. Likewise: 


‘tis food was locusts and wild honey" [Mt 3:4; Mk 1:6]. [If it 


95 


96 


1529 


96 


oF 


108 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


were not salubrious to abstain from delicacies in food and drink 
and to control the flesh with fasting and abstinence, these things 
would by no means have been written in the Gospel in commendation 


of John the Baptist. ] 


Eleazar and Maccabeus chose rather to die, than to eat pork 
against the prohibition of the divine law [2 Macc 7:1ff] . But the 
disobedient Lutherans, empty speakers and seducers, "subverting 
all houses, teaching what they should not, for the sake of filthy 
gain, as .. . the Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, slothful 
bellies" [Tit 1:11f£], keep no fasts of the Church, “sitting upon 
the fleshpots in Egypt" [Ex 16:3], loathing the heavenly manna, 
“overcharging their hearts with overeating and drunkenness" 

{Lk 21:34], having mind and conscience befouled. They boast that 

they are evangelicals but deny their deeds, since they are abomi- 

nable and unbelieving and reprobate toward all good works [cf. Tit 
SES Is 

2. The apostle did not want the Jewish observances, namely, 
that some foods be perpetually forbidden as pork* (except as 
decreed in the Council of the Apostles [Acts 15:28f], yet the 
Church believes every creature of God to be good, although for a 
time for the mortification of the old man, she commends abstention 
from some foods. 

Now the Apostle Paul is not discussing fasting or softening 
of the flesh, but because the Tatianists and other heretics were 
saying that certain things were created by the evil principle. 
Paul tears this down, because “every creature of God is good, and 
to be received with thanksgiving," [1 Tim 4:4], which the Catholic 
does, although not for all time, nor does Paul here enjoin this 
for all time. 

3. In the law some animals were unclean through significa- 
tion; so the Jews believed through nature. Paul lays aside this 
error because to the faithful all things are clean and for the 


time are to be eaten, yet because it is not permitted to abstain 


*carnem suillam: cf. Is 65:4; 66:17. 


14. ON FEASTS AND FASTS 109 


for a time, the Apostle does not forbid this. Hence St. James 
the Lesser never used flesh or wine, according to the author 
Hegesippus [Eusebius, H.E., 2.23.5]. 

4. Similarly let it be said, for the faithful did not want by 97 
the Jewish rite to be judged in food and drink, and in festivals. 

5. By the spirit deeds of the flesh are mortified and the 
spirit is helped if the flesh is crucified by fasting, just as Paul 
says, "Those who are of Christ have crucified their flesh" [Gal 5:24]. 
And again: "I chastise my body and reduce it to servitude" [1 Cor 
9:2]. 

6. Even if Christ hae not taught that one should sometime ab- 
stain from meats, this makes no difference, for he taught things 
more necessary for salvation. But he leaves to the teaching office 
of the Holy Spirit and of the Church, the matters which are expedient 
for and promote salvation, and has not by himself explained all these 
things. 

7. Refer to the above point and to the last argument, Chapter 


* 
on Human Constitutions. 


* Chapter 13, pp. 98f, above. 


1529 


98 


98 


CHAPTER 15 
1 
CONCERNING THE VENERATION OF THE SAINTS 


{[Fourfold proof that the Saints are to be honored and called 
upon: by the Scriptures, by reason, by the authority of the saints, 


and the customs of the Church. ] 
I First Proof: By the Sacred Scriptures. 


The Saints as friends of God ought to be implored to inter-~ 
cede for us, and although the Saints are not to be worshiped with 
latria, because this is owed to God alone, yet they are to be vene- 
rated with dulia. John 12:26; "If any man minister to me, him will 
my Father who is in heaven honor." If therefore God honors the saints, 
why should we not honor the saints? ''So long as you do this to one 
of the least of these my brothers, you have done it unto me" [Mt 


25:40]. Therefore honor shown to the saints is shown to God. 


“But to me thy friends, 0 God, are made exceedingly honorable; 


their principality is exceedingly strengthened" [Ps 138:17]. 


"Tf Moses and Samuel shall stand before me, my soul is towards 
this people" [Jer ee Expounding this, Gregory [Moralia, 9.12: 
Gl. Ord.] says: it is as if to say, 'not only do I hear them on 
behalf of my friends, for the merit of their great virtue; I know I 
am praying also for my enemies.’ There Jeremiah is manifestly hint- 


ing that the saints pray for the people. 


"Call now if there be any that will answer you, and turn to 
someone of the saints" [Job 5:1].* These words, indeed, although 
Eliphaz the Temanite spoke them to Job, yet Job did not rebuke 
them, but received them as the salutary advice of a friend. Thus 
also Elihu said: "If there shall be an angel speaking for him, 
one among like ones, to declare man's uprightness, he (that is, 
God) shall have mercy on him, and shall say: Deliver him, that he 
may not go down to corruption, I have found wherein I may be merci- 


ful to him" [Job 33:23£]. 


1 : 
Cf. Baden Disputation (1526), Proposition 3: "Mary and the Saints 


are to be invoked as intercessors."'** 


Cf. Obj. 8 of the heretics (Zwingli). below, p. 118. 


110 


15. CONCERNING THE VENERATION OF THE SAINTS JLaL 


"Go to my servant Job, and offer for yourselves a holo- 


caust. . .his face I shall accept, that folly may not be imputed 


to you. . ." [Job 42:8]. And later: "The Lord also was turned to- 
ward the penance of Job, when the latter prayed for his friends 
[Job 42:10]. 


Jacob said: ". .. and let my name be called upon them, and 
al 
the names of my fathers Abraham, and Isaac .. ." [Gen 48:16]. 
Moses said to him: "Let thy anger cease, and be appeased upon 


the wickedness of thy people. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and 
Israel . . . to whom thou swarest by thy own self, saying: I will 


fp 
multiply your seed as the stars of heaven" etc. {Ex 32:12f]. And 


there follows: ‘The Lord was appeased upon the wickedness of his 
people" [cf. Ex 32:14]. [Azarias in the fiery furnace prayed, say- 
ing: “Deliver us not up for ever . . . for thy name's sake, and 


abolish not thy covenant. And take not away thy mercy from us for 
the sake of Abraham thy beloved, and Isaac thy servant, and Israel 
thy holy one, to whom thou hast spoken, promising that thou wouldst 


multiply their seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that is 


3 
on the sea shore" [Dan 3:34-35].~ And he was freed with his companions 


from the fiery furnace. | 


"Q Lord Almighty, God of Israel, hear now the prayer of the 
dead of Israel and their sons who have sinned before thee" [Bar 


1 
Saale reas 


"Judas Maccabeus saw Onias extending his hands to pray for the 
people of the Jews; after this he saw another man wonderful in age 
and glory, concerning whom Onias said: he is the lover of the 
brethren and of the people of Israel, who prays much for the people 
and the whole holy city, Jeremiah, the prophet of God" [2 Macc 
15:12-14]. 


If the fathers of the Old Testament in limbo, not yet blessed 
with the clear vision of the divine countenance, were praying for 
their own, how much more are the saints in eternal blessedness con- 
templating ceaselessly God face to face, to be believed to be pray- 


ing for us. 


eI) 


WS 22) 


99 


1532 


112 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"In as much as you have done to one of the least, my 
brothers, you have done it unto me" [Mt 25:45]. Therefore if 


honor is shown to the saints, honor will be shown to God. 


"For this every saint will pray to thee in a suitable time" 
[Ps 36:6]. The Hebrews read "every merciful one": the blessed 


moreover are saints and merciful. 


Absalom, reconciled to his father yet for two years stopping 
in Jerusalem, did not see the face of his father [2 K 14:24ff]. Thus 
the sinner reconciled to God does not immediately present himself 


to God, but through mediators and intercessors. 


Solomon ordered a throne to be placed for his mother next to 
his own [3 K 2:19]. The true peacemaking Solomon, Christ, honoring 


his mother, does the same thing. 


al 
[Woe, ungodly Lutherans, thinking it to be too much that the 
godly faithful of Christ, worshipers [cultores] of the God-bearing 
Virgin, say when they salute her: 


Praise the Queen of Heaven. 
Hail Queen of mercy, 


Life, sweetness, and our hope, 
Hail, &c. 


And on this account, the Lutherans, hating (where they could) all 
worship of the Christ-bearing Virgin, reckoned as the supreme idolatry 
(whereby the greatest injury is done to Christ who is life, sweetness, 
our hope, our Advocate with the Father), have rejected that worship. 
Let these ministers, haters of the glorious Virgin, see to it that 
they derogate nothing from her dignity, because by thus saluting 

the Blessed Virgin we honor her. Nay, all honor which we direct to 
the divine Virgin redounds to Christ, Son of God and of the Virgin: 

we honor the Virgin as mother in the Son, and the Son in the Virgin 
mother. Just as one honors the Son, one honors also the Father, and 
conversely. God is the Father of mercies [2 Cor 1:3]. Why then is 
the Engendress of God not the Mother of mercies? God is King of 
heaven and earth. Why will the Mother of God not be the Queen of 
heaven? Christ is the way, the truth, and the life {Jn 14:6]. Why 


is not Christ's mother these things, who found favor with God, and 


15. CONCERNING THE VENERATION OF THE SAINTS 113 


gave forth for us our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, Author of our 
salvation? That this title can be used in reference to the Son, so 
also to the Virgin mother (although not for the same reason), is 
clear from many passages of Scripture. Of Christ it is said: "He 
was the true light illumining every human being coming into this 
world."' [Jn 1:9] To John the Baptist (than whom no greater one 
arose from those born of woman) this is denied. For so one reads 
in the same passage. "He was not that light, but that he might 
furnish witness of that light." [Jn 1:8] Note: he was denied to 
be that light, concerning which nevertheless Christ the true light 
afterwards spoke to the Jews. He was a burning and shining lamp. 
Christ says: "I am the light of the world," and yet he said to the 
Apostles: "You are the light of the world' [Mt 5:14]. The Apostle 
writing to the Philippians (2:15) says: "Among whom you shine as 
lights in the world." Hence Jerome on Obadiah Ch. 1 says: "How 
the Lord as light calls his apostles the light and says, You are 
the light of the world, and he the rock grants to Peter that he 
might be the rock. Also the good shepherd endowed them with the 
name of shepherds [pastores]. And whatever he is called, he attri- 
buted to his servants, that they may be so called." Thus the 
Savior willed his apostles to be saviors. No wonder when even the 
saints and righteous are called, through the grace and participation 
of God in the Scriptures ‘gods,’ according to that Psalm [Ps 81:6]: 
"T said, you are ail gods and sons of the Most High." And again, 
[Ps 81:1] "God stood in the congregation of the gods." Therefore 
Christ alone by essence is light and good. Not so the Baptist nor 
the Apostles, who nevertheless were good, light, and lights in the 
world through participation. So also the Virgin Engendress of God 
is called Queen of heaven, Mother of mercy, life, sweetness, and 
our hope, because she found favor with God, and conceived and gave 
birth to Christ the repairer of our life, by the working of the 
Holy Spirit. And just as we have Christ, who is at the right hand 
of the Father, and intercedes for us, as our Advocate with the 


Father, so we rejoice that we have the mother of this Advocate as 


114 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


our advocate with the Father and the Son, saying: "Lo, thou our 
advocate," &c. And not undeservedly. For if the Philippians (4:10 
were joy and crown for St. Paul, and to the Thessalonians [1 Thess 
2:19], "Hope, joy, and crown of glory," why then will not the 
glorious virgin mother be the same for us? Therefore the divine 
Virgin is not a woman as other women, having no favor or prerogative 
over them as the impious Lutherans blab. Yet we confess her to 

be by sex a woman, but an uncorrupted virgin, full of grace, En- 
gendress of God, Queen of heaven, Mistress of the world, blessed 
among women. "Such a woman has not been found upon the earth" 
{Judith 11:19] nor will one like her ever be found. These are those 
great things which the Lord God Almighty, O blessed Virgin, has done 


for you, wherefore all generations will deservedly call you blessed. 


The angels pray for us: "The angel of the Lord shall encamp 


round about them that fear him, and shall deliver them" [Ps 33:8]. 


"For he has given his angels charge over you, to guard your 


ways" [Ps 90:11]. 


The angel prays for the Jewish people: "O Lord of hosts, how 
long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the cities of 
Judah, with which thou hast been angry? . . . And the Lord answered 


the angel . . . good, comfortable words" [Zech 1:12f]. 


"The four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down 
before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials, 
full of odors, which are the prayers of the saints" [Rev 5:8]. 

". . . the angel stood before the altar, having a golden censer, 
and there was given to him much incense, that he should offer of 

HOON, the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar, which is before the 
throne of God. And the smoke of the incense from the Prayers of the 


saints ascended up before God from the hand of the angel" [Rev Boel 


"Are they not all ministering spirits, sent to minister for 
them, who shall receive the inheritances of salvation?" [Heb 1:14]. 
Therefore angels support us: why then is it not permitted to call 


upon their support [suffragia] and ministry? 


15. CONCERNING THE VENERATION OF THE SAINTS iS) 


And the same reason applies to the saints as to the angels 
whose equals they are in the kingdom of heaven [Lk 20:36; Mt 22:30; 
jae WU RSI) 


"No word overcame him (Elisha), and after death his body pro- 
phesied; in his life he did great wonders, and in death he wrought 


miracles" [Ececlus 38:14f]. 
II Secondly It is Proved by Reasons. 


1. Christ intercedes for us according to his humanity before 
God the Father. "For Christ Jesus makes intercession for us" 101 


[cf. Heb 7:25}. 


"Jesus has an everlasting priesthood, whereby he is able also 
to save forever, those who come to God by him, always living to 


make intercession for us" [Heb 7:24f]. 


"But if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the just: and he is our propitiation for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world" 


[1 Jn 2:1f]. 


If therefore Christ as head prays for us, why not also the 
saints his members, (who conform themselves to Christ) asking with 
him. 

2. The living pray for one another and often obtain their re- 


quests. 


"Pray for one another that you may be saved" [James 5:16], 


and he adds the prayer of Elijah [James 5:17; cf.3 K 17:22]. 


Moses prayed [Ex 17:4]. The Canaanite woman prayed for her 
il 
daughter [Mt 15:22f]. The centurion prayed for his servant 


[Lk 7:3]. Paul prayed for his fellow passengers {Acts 27:23f]. 101 
[Dilemma Insoluble to the Lutherans: ] 1532 


If therefore the living pray for one another, why do the 1541 
blessed dead not also do this, who are more perfect in charity 


and more powerful with God and purer in mind? Or therefore the 


102 


102 


116 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


saints do not pray for us as the living do because it is a thing 
unworthy of them and therefore will not befit Christ; or because it 
is a thing of such great excellence that it will befit Christ alone 


and not others; consequently it will not befit pilgrims. 


No, indeed. God wills to be called upon through his saints, 
"I sought among them for a man who might set up a hedge and stand 
in a gap before me in favor of the land, that I might not destroy 
it, and I found none" [Ez 22:30]. 


"I beseech you, brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
by the charity of the Holy Spirit, that you help me in your prayers 
for me to God, that I may be delivered from the unbelievers who are 


in Judea" [Rom 15:30f]. 
III Thirdly It is Proved by the Authority of the Saints. 


Cyprian, to Pope Cornelius [Epist. 1.1], asks that if any of 
them should die before, prayer for our brothers and sisters shall 
not cease. Bernard, On Canticles, Hom. 66, concerning the heretics 
of his own time: "They make fun of us because we are baptized in 
a font and call upon the prayers of the saints, and they wish to 
outlaw both the living and the dead of both sexes from Christ for 
they both defraud the dead of the prayers of the living and no less 


despoil the living of the helps of the saints who have died." 


"Vigilantius said that while we are living we can pray for 
one another, but after we have died the prayer of no one for another 
is to be heard." Jerome relates this and disproves it. For this 
Jerome fights against Vigilantius. "If the apostles and martyrs as 
yet in the body can pray for others when as yet they ought to be 
careful for themselves, how much more after victories, crowns and 
triumphs? One man, Moses, obtained forgiveness from the Lord for 
600,000 men* [Ex 38:25], and Stephen, imitator of his Lord and first 
martyr in Christ, prayed for forgiveness of his persecutors [Acts 
7:59). And afterwards when they begin to be with Christ will they 


be any less able? Paul the Apostle says that there were two 


*armatorum: males of military age. 


15. CONCERNING THE VENERATION OF THE SAINTS ney 


hundred seventy six souls on the ship [Acts 27:37]. And after he 

begins to be set free with Christ, then is he going to close his 

lips; and on behalf of those who in the entire earth believed in 

his gospel, could he not even mutter? Vigilantius, 'Will not 

Vigilantius better be a living watchdog than a dead lion?’ 

[Eccl 9:4]. You would have been right in proposing this saying 

of Ecclesiastes if he had confessed Paul dead in spirit.” So 103 


speaks Jerome [Contra Vigilantium, 6 : PL 23.344c]* 


Augustine On John, Tr. 84.12 "The blessed martyrs whose 
memory we do not emptily celebrate. Consequently, them we do not 
thus call te memory at the table itself, that is, the altar, as 
we do the others who rest in peace, so that we may pray for them, 
but rather that they may pray for us, that we may cleave to their 


footsteps." 


Augustine, Sermon on the Day of Peter and Paul: ‘Whoever 
honors a martyr, honors Christ, and whoever rejects martyrs, re- 
jects Christ" [Sermons 295-299 : PL38*]. Pope Leo, concerning 
St. Lawrence, "By whose prayer and protection we confess we are 


aided without ceasing" [Sermon 85.4, in Natal. S$. Laurent. ] 


Dionysius, Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, 7.6 {PG 3.561-562B]: 
"If anyone rejects the most holy discipline, and, seduced by un- 
happy pride, deems himself worthy of intimacy with God, and despises 
the saints," etc. Here if he lacks intense desire, he will never 


through his own effort acquire his ignorant request. 103 
IV Fourthly It is Proved by Church Custom. 


The practice of the entire Church attests, as well as the 
Holy Fathers through all the centuries of Christians, and so many 
utterly clear miracles, and the festivals instituted by the Church 
concerning the saints. Saint eeean ereceed a church, to St. 
Peter the Living; he founded also two other churches in honor of 


St. Stephen and St. John the Baptist in Gaul. 


1 ne Castro, Adv. Haeres., "Reliquiae," makes large use of Augustine, 


ped, 22.8-10. BT NPNF(1) 7,350 (of On Jn. Tr. 84.1). 


Savinianus or Sabinianus, First Bishop of Sens. 


104 


118 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Objections of the Heretics. 


Christ alone, God, is to be called on because he alone is 
sufficient. He alone is most generous and most merciful, loving 
us more than all saints do. 

1. “If you ask the Father anything in my name, he will give 
it you" [Jn 16:23]. 


2. “Ask and you shall receive; seek and you shall find" 
[Lk 11:9]. 
3. "All things whatever you shall ask in prayer, believing, 


you shall receive" [Mt 21:22]. 

4. “Let us go therefore with confidence to the throne of his 
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace in seasonable aid" 
[Heb 4:16]. 

5. Therefore we ought to approach God "himself the father of 
mercies and the God of all comfort," [2 Cor 1:3] and fountain of 
grace, rather than the saints. 

6. "There is one mediator of God and men, Christ Jesus" 

[1 Tim 2:5]. Why then do we want to make from among the saints 
more mediators? 

7. Because this doctrine was deduced from Baruch and the 
book of Maccabees, they say those books are not canonical. Jerome, 
Prologue on Proverbs [PL 28.1242£}.2 

8. The heretic Zwingli answers Jeremiah. "If Moses and Samuel 
were still among human beings and were interceding for this people, 


indignation would conquer grace" [cf. Zwingli, Auslegung, 18].* 
These Objections Solved by the Catholics. 


That the heretics are here deceived by false reasonings is 
clear from the fact that the things inferred by them as much do 
away with Christ's intercession and every time as they do away 
with the prayers both of the living and of the dead, whose inter- 
cession nevertheless, they, however impious and blasphemous they 


are, do not dare deny. 


*Cf. p-110, abover 


15. CONCERNING THE VENERATION OF THE SAINTS 119 


1. We confess that what is to be prayed for is to be prayed 
in the name of Jesus, is to be prayed for with assurance, yet 
that does not exclude the saints, because also through the saints 
as members we pray in the name of Jesus their head. Hence the 
Church concludes that the collects of the saints are through Christ 


our Lord. 


And although God is best and most merciful, yet he is also 
most orderly, disposes all things sweetly, and draws the lower things 
through the middle things to the higher things, as Dionysius says. 
And thus is clear the solution to objections 1, 2, 3, and 4. 

5. It is most pleasing to the Lord, that we approach the fount 
of grace and the Father of mercies, yet we will do this more easily 
through the saints, because "our God is a consuming fire" [Deut 4:24; 
Heb 12:29]. We deservedly fear lest we perish from his face, just 
as wax flows from the face of the fire. On this account we seek 
mediators and intercessors. 

6. There is one mediator of redemption, Jesus Christ, because 
he alone has redeemed the human race; there is no other name under 
heaven in whom we are to be saved, but there are very many mediators 
of intercession. Therefore there is one mediator through redemption, 
just as also there is one savior. For he alone is the good shepherd 
who has given his life as redemption for many. But there are many 
mediators through intercession, just as also Scripture mentions very 
many saviors. Moses says "I was the mediator and stood between the 
Lord and you" [Deut 5:5]. "Likewise he raised them up a savior 
Othoniel" [Judges 3:9]. And again: "And you have given to them 
saviors who have saved them" [2 Esd 9:27]. Pharoah the king of 
Egypt called Joseph "the savior of the world" [Gen 41:45]. 

7. All the canons of the Church concerning the canonical 
scriptures list Maccabees. Therefore let the heretics show where 
it is judged that books are canonical, and they wiil find those to 


be canonical, although in the synagogue they were not canonical, 4s 


105 


105 


120 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Augustine attests (DCD 18.36). And when the canon of books was 
published in the Council of Milevis! perchance it had not yet 


reached Jerome. 


8. This is the proper thing which the heretics should wrest 

106" of Scripture: for when they are always demanding clear texts of 
Scripture and admit no glosses, why now when a clear Scripture is 
quoted does he, (Zwingli,) adduce an extraneous gloss? "God says 

‘if they stood' (cf. Jer 15:1); he does not say if they lived and 


stood.'" 


Especially since that gloss is not founded in Scripture, 
in Councils, in Holy Fathers, but in dreams from the unlearned and 


insane brain of the heretic Zwingli. 


Augustine (Against Faustus, 20.21)3” "The Christian people 
celebrate the memories of the martyrs with religious solemnity 
and to arouse the imitation of them and also that in order that 
they may share in their merits, and be helped by their prayers, 
consequently we have established altars not to any one of the mar- 
tyrs but to the God himself of the martyrs, as much as in memory of 


the martyrs." 


See the following, that the heretic Faustus also impugned the 


memory of the martyrs. 


1532 [And the Apostle says: "We see now through a glass in an enigma, 


but then face to face," etc. (1 Cor 13:12). Therefore the saints 


see our prayers. For what would they not see, who see Him who sees 
all things? Consequently, according to the aforementioned reasons 

the invocation of the saints he would not teach by express Scriptures, 
since the Holy Spirit sufficiently taught the faithful in the Church 


through miracles and assistance that follows prayers poured out to 


Its either the Council of Hippo (AD 393), canon 36, or 


Carthage III (AD 397), canon 47, meant here? 


2 or DCD 22.10 cited by De Castro, AH, fol. eye 


Augustine, Against Faustus, 20.21, answers Faustus' charge that 
the Christians worship martyrs instead of idols, when in fact 
the Christians are really merely paying honor to the memory of 


the martyrs. ET: NPNF (1) 4.262. 


15. CONCERNING THE VENERATION OF THE SAINTS 120 


the saints, through which and through their word He confirmed 


sanctity of life and declared the glory of His blessedness, etc. 


(Therefore we honor, venerate, invoke, and adore God and His 
saints, yet in an unequal manner. Him (because He is first and 
beginning of being and conserving and governing for all, and 
alone gives grace and glory) we worship with latria, which is 
owed to Him alone in accordance with the Scripture: "You shall 
adore the Lord your God, and Him alone you shall serve" (Dt 6:13; 

Mt 4:10). And again: "To God alone be honor and glory" (1 Tim 1:17). 
And with this adoration Mordecai would not adore Haman, fearing lest 
he might transfer to a man the honor owed to God (Esther 3:2). And 
the angel forbade John from wanting to worship him (Rev 22:8 f). 

The saints as intercessors and patrons, not as conferers of grace 

and glory, but (by their merits and prayers) as obtainers of requests 
with God, and thus far beneath God, we venerate, honor, and invoke 
with dufia (which is shown to excellent creatures as a sign of rev- 
erence) but the Virgin, bearer of God, by hyperdutiat Now this in- 
vocation and veneration is sometimes called in Holy Scripture 
"adoration." Thus we read that Abraham adored the angels (Gen 18:2). 
So also the brothers of Joseph, offering him gifts, prostrated them- 
selves on the ground and adored him (Gen 43:26). Later: "And 

bowing down they adored him (Gen 43:28). And the sons of the proph- 
ets, prostrate upon the ground, adored Elisha (4 K 2:15). And Nathan 
the prophet entered into the presence of King David and prostrate 


upon the ground adored him. 


[In the litany the Church teaches the difference between the 
invocation or adoration of God and of the saints, where first of all 
the Holy Trinity is invoked under the distinction of persons and 
the unity of essence, to have mercy upon us. Then the intercession 
of the saints is implored, to pray for us. Finally, the litany re— 


turns to God that He may deign to hearken to us while the saints 


121 
ECK: ENCHIRDION 


are praying together with us, may free us from evil, grant 

us grace, and bestow eternal life. The Church cbhserves a 
similar form of prayer in the prayers /fol. G 4¥/ (which are 
called "collects") which are said on the festivals of the 
Saints, where we implore divine clemency through the merits 
and intercessions of the saints. It concludes with: "Through 


our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee lives and reigns" etc. ] 


The invocation! of the saints is not explicitly enjoined 
in the Scriptures. Not in the Old Testament: where the people 
had otherwise slipped into idolatry, and the fathers were in 106 
limbo, not yet blessed. "Abraham has not known us, and Israel 
was ignorant of us” (Is 63:16). Under the Gospel too there was 
no precept, lest the Gentiles being converted might believe them- 
selves once more led back into the cult of those born of earth, 
so they would have worshiped (according to the old custom) the 
saints not as patrons, but as gods: just as they wanted at Lycaonia 
to sacrifice to Paul and Barnabas (Acts 14:10). Now if the Apostles 
and Evangelists had taught that the saints were to be venerated, they 
would have been blamed for arrogance, as if they themselves had sought 
that glory after death. Therefore he would not teach by express 
scriptures the veneration of saints, but he taught that they were 
confirmed in faith through miracles and the assistance of the saints; 
by fervent prayers to them they were to be venerated: Although by 
an unequal worship to that of God, who is to be worshiped by fatria, 
just as Mary by hyperdulia and the saints by dufia, which by exten- 107r 


sion is also called adoration. 2 


the 1532 passage just quoted, which represented an effort on Eck's 
part to meet the Protestant rejection, on Scriptural grounds, of 
veneration of the saints, placed at the end of Chapter 15, was in 
turn suppressed infavor of the shorter passage here beginning which 
in the 1541 edition closes the chapter. 


2Thomas Aquinas, S.T., SS 84.1; 103.4; cf. Calvin, Inst., 1.12.3n8.* 


107 


CHAPTER 16 
CONCERNING THE IMAGES OF THE CRUCIFIED AND OF THE saints! 
Although the Jewish nation was somewhat inclined to idolatry, 


still God commanded them to have some images. 


You shall make also two cherubim of beaten gold on the two 
sides of the oracle. Let one cherub be on the one side and the 


other on the other" [Ex 25:18].* 


"The Lord said to Moses: Make a brazen serpent, and set it 


up for a sign" [Num 21:8]. 


"You shall not make for yourselves any idol or graven thing, 
neither shall you erect pillars, nor set up a remarkable stone in 
your land, to adore it" [Lev 26:1]. And yet Joshua when he was 
about to die, "took a great stone and set it under the oak that 
was in the sanctuary of the Lord" [Josh 24:26]. Likewise Samuel 
{1 K 16:5ff]. Thus an altar was permitted to the sons of Reuben 
and Gad [Josh 22:10ff]. 


Eusebius says: Seth the just man was the first to make images 
of God. Jerome, On the Hebraic Questions, and Peter Comestor, On 


Genesis, discuss the Jews and the reason why they made images. 


John of Damascus, [Fount of Knowledge ] 4.16, declares that we 


have the use of images from the tradition of the apostles. 


Eusebius, H.E. 1.13, and John of Damascus [4.16] relate that 
Christ sent an image of his face to Abgar, king of Edessa, preserved 


at Genoa in the Church of St. Bar eroded 


The Lord gave to Veronica the likeness of his face imprinted 
on a handkerchief, by the image of which Tiberius Caesar was healed, 
who on that account decreed divine honors for Christ. But because 
he had done it without the knowledge of the Senate, the Senate for- 
bade this [cf. Eusebius, H.E. 2.2]. The author who recounts this 


is Suetonius. 
1 


Also Baden Disputation (1526), Proposition 4: “Images of our Lord 
and of the Saints are not to be done away." ** 


2 Cf. Calvin, Relics. 


122 


16. CONCERNING THE IMAGES OF THE CRUCIFIED AND OF THE SAINTS 123 


St. Luke painted the Virgin Mary, as is of great renown 108 


throughout the Church. 


The use of images was approved at the Second Council of Nicea. 
From it comes that couplet, translated into Latin: 
“God is what the image reaches, but it is not itself God; 


Contemplate it, but with the mind worship what you discern 
therein." 


In Constantinople under Irene, in three Lateran Councils under 
Gregory 2, Gregory 3, and Stephen, and the Council of Frankfurt—am— 
Main, the Felician heresy was condemned, which false persons are 
trying to revive in the Church. The Greeks called those heretics 


"Tconoclasts,'" that is, image breakers. 


The Greek Emperors for a hundred years tyrannically combatted 
the use of images, and this was a rather powerful reason for trans- 


ferring the empire to the Germans.* 


Bede says that no Scripture forbade images being made in the 108” 


Church. 


Athanasius writes that a miracle tock place with the image of 


the crucified in Beirut; this was the cross of St. Nicodemus. 


It is clear therefore that in the time of the Apostles there 


were images in the Church. 


Eusebius, H.E. 7.18, writes concerning the images of the Apostles 
Peter and Paul, and recalls the image of Christ, doing miracles. 
Cassiodorus also relates this in his Tripartite History 6. [41: 

PL 60.1057£). 
Charlemagne wrote four books against those wishing to destroy 


images.** Hence the people of Zurich ought rather to follow this 


*Not true: The empire was in the hands of Irene, an iconophil 
at the Second Nicene Council (AD 787) when iconoclasm was repudiated. 


*&*Hardly the case, for the Carolingian Libri Carolini are directed 
against images. For Calvin's use of the arguments against images in 
this work, see Institutes, 1.11.14-16 (icc 20.114 n.28) 


124 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


founder and patron Charles, with the Catholic Church, rather than 


the heretic Zwingli. 


The usefulness of the images is that they instruct the simple, 
admonish the knowing, affect all. For it befits God to be made 
visible in human vesture, to be presented in a visible image [Decr. 
3.3.27, Fr. 1.1360]. And even Luther is wise in this respect, be- 
cause he saw to it that Carlstadt, destroying and wiping out images, 
be banished from Saxony ,* and with all his strength resisted this 
Felician heresy. Luther thus says against Carlstadt that commemora- 
tive or testimonial images (as for example, of the Crucified and the 
Saints) are to be tolerated. Such were approved even in the law. 
And not only are they to be tolerated, but so long as memory and 
testimony in them last, then they are worthy of praise and honor, as 


for example the statues of Joshua and Samuel. See our book On 


Images. 


Objections of the Heretics. 
1. "You shall not make a graven image or a likenness of any- 
109 thing which is in heaven above, on the earth below, or of those 
things which are in the waters under the earth" [Ex 20:4]. Something 
similar is said in Ex 34:17; Dt 4:23; 5:8; 27:15, and in many other 
Passages of the Old eeeaeee 
2. Hezekiah broke the brazen serpent which Moses had made 
[4 K 18:4]. 
3. Christ promised that the time is coming and now is when 
true worshipers worship God in spirit and in truth {Jn 4:23]. But 
the Spirit is not influenced by images. 
4. Furthermore, the peril of idolatry lurks under images, and 
the danger of unclean thoughts as well. 
5. Balthasar Hubmaier,* who now calls himself Friedberger, a 
new-fangled heretic, makes this horned argument: Either images 
have been commanded, and then Scripture is shown forth, or they 
110 have not been commanded, and then are not valid. Afterwards he 


became the father of the Parabaptists. 


+ 
Cf. R. Bainton, Here I Stand, pp. 262f. 
*Burned at Vienna, 1528. C£. p- 13 above; p. 205 below. 


16. CONCERNING THE IMAGES OF THE CRUCIFIED AND OF THE SAINTS 125 


Reply of the Catholics. 


1. By what preceded and what follows God explains his inten- 
tion, for just as he forbade strange gods to be worshiped, so he 
forbade images of them, yet because we do not take our saints for 
gods, we are not forbidden to make images of them. For before the 
quoted words, he says: "You shall not have strange gods before me," 
"You shall not make for yourself anything graven," etc. There fol- 
lows: “You shall not adore them, or worship them." Note: they 
ought not to be carried to that extreme. So does Luther himself 


understand this. 


But if Leo Jud of Zurich is tied to the letter in the Jewish 
manner, saying that it is absolutely forbidden to make images, the 
corollary would be that Solomon sinned, when he made twelve little 
lions in his throne; he would have sinned by carving oxen in the 
brazen sea, and lions; and oxen and cherubim in the brazen basins 
[2 Ch 9; 3K 7]. Who is so stupid as to believe that there was no 
painter, no sculptor in Judah, who then carved the cherubim? And 
whose image did Christ say was on the coin? (Mt 22:20f; Mk 12:16f] 
Augustine, Against Faustus, 20.23. 


And if the use of such things among the Gentiles seems similar 
to our own, still they are far differently used; they use them to 
another end. Thus let him speak concerning the images of Gentiles 


and of Christians. 


2. That Hezekiah destroyed the serpent was caused by this 
abuse of the idolatrous people. For in the same passage there 
follows: ‘For till that time the children of Israel burnt incense 
to it" [4 K 18:4]. Hence, if it were a question of the abuse of 
any image, that ought to be abolished; therefore he withdrew the 
serpent, not because there was an image, but because the Jews were 


worshiping it. 


3. We say that God is to be worshiped especially in spirit 
and in truth. Images admonish and remind us to do this. For that 
the spirit does not exclude sensible signs, the sacraments, which 


have been established in sensible signs, furnish us proof. 


119 


111 


126 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


4. There is no danger of incurring idolatry, for the simple- 
minded can most easily be instructed to rectify their intention, 
considering that they are to refer their veneration not to the image 
itself, but (as Basil [On the Holy Spirit, 18.45: PG 32.149C] 
teaches) to the prototype; lest occasion for, or peril of, unclean 


thoughts be given, lascivious subjects are to be forbidden to painters. 


5. It is clear from the first and second and fourth points, 

how truly horned is this argument of that Egyptian fly [cf. Ex 

111 8:24]: This is not commanded in Scripture, therefore it is not to 
be observed. Om the contrary, by this horn let us accuse him: is 
there anything commanded in Scripture, which is nevertheless not 
to be observed, as for example, on the hallowing of the Sabbath, 
on not eating blood or strangled animals, etc.? Let it be enough 
for a Catholic that the Church has established that the images of 
the saints, as useful and expedient, ought to be placed in the Church, 
and let the horns of sinners be broken. I shall say: to celebrate 
the Lord's Day to him is either a commandment and is set forth by 
Scripture, or is not a commandment, and is consequently invalid-- 


something even the heretic will not say! 


CHAPTER 17 
ON THE SACRIFICE QF THE MASS 


How from the columns cf the Church was established the cere- 
monious action of the mass (so to speak), is clear from St. Diony- 
sius, the disciple of the Apostles. Yet because the new heretics 
have found the mass not to be a sacrifice--an unheard of heresy in 


the Church of God!--the contrary is proved from the Scriptures. 


There was always an office of priests to make offering for the 
sins of the people, for ignorance, for crimes, for cleansing [Lev 


fe So fie Sea IWAN. 


"T have no pleasure in you. . . and I will not receive a 

gift from your hand: for from the rising of the sun even to the 
going down, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place 
there is sacrifice, and there is offered to my name a clean obla- 
tion" [Mal Page). The prophet foretold here the cessation of the 
sacrifices of the law, and the institution of the sacrifice of the 
new law. You cannot say that sacrifice was only on the cross, for 
he says it is sacrificed in every place and yet speaks of one offer— 
ing, and there is no other sacrifice save the body of Christ so many 


times repeated in the mass. 


When Malachi speaks of the coming of the Messiah, he adds: 
"and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and shail refine them as 
gold, and as silver, and they shall offer sacrifices to the Lerd in 
justice. And the sacrifices of Judah and of Jerusalem shall please 
the Lord, as in the days of the ancient era" [Mal 3:3f]. Note that 
the Savior has purified the priests of the Gospel, that they may 
offer sacrifices, not in blood, but in justice, as the Glossa 


Ordinaria says: that is, the eucharist. 


"Many shall be chosen, and made white, and shall be tried as 
fire; and the wicked shall deal wickedly, and none of the wicked 


shall understand, but the learned shall understand. And from the 


+f. Calvin, Inst., 4.18.4, 16; De Castro, AH 10 (1543 ed.), 
Feil, ees 


127 


112 


a2 


Vv 


113 


128 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


time when the continual sacrifice shall be taken away, and the 
abomination of desolation shall be set up, there shall be a 
thousand two hundred ninety days" [Dan 12:10£]. That that was 

to be fulfilled, Christ attests [Mt 24:15f£]: continual sacrifice 
at the advent of the abomination, that is, of Antichrist, will 
universally cease for four years, while the churches will be deso- 
late. Therefore those who in particular churches cause the con- 


tinual sacrifice to cease are precursors of Antichrist. 


“For every high priest taken from among men has been ordained 
for men in the things that appertain to God, that he may offer up 
gifts and sacrifices for sins: who can have compassion on those 
who are ignorant and err, because he himself also is encompassed 
with infirmity. And on this account he ought, as for the people, 
so also for himself, to make offering for sins" [Heb 5:1-3]. Here 
the Apostle assigns the high-priest one especial office, namely, 
to make offering for sins. And although the heretics deny one can 
make offering for another, Paul teaches that he makes offering 


both for the people's and his own ae 


That the mass was frequently celebrated by the Apostles, 
Ignatius, a disciple of the Apostles, who saw Christ, shows in his 
Letter to the Smyrneans; accordingly it is not permitted, without 
a bishop, either to offer sacrifice, or celebrate masses, and be- 
cause there is no real New Testament sacrifice (because a contrite 
heart is always a sacrifice) apart from the body of Christ, and yet 
in the Old Testament there were many sacrifices, all representing 


the sacrifice of Christ. 


Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyon, [Adv. Haer] 4.32: "Him who is 
bread from the creation, he took, and gave thanks, saying: This 
is my body. And the cup likewise, which is that creation according 
to us, he confessed as his blood, and he taught the new oblation 
of the New Testament, which the Church, receiving from the apostles, 
offers to God throughout the world." This holy man who lived 


shortly after the times of the Apostles, could not speak more clearly. 


17. ON THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS 129 


Cyprian the Martyr writes to his brother Caecilius: "You should 
moreover know we have been admonished, that in offering the cup 
the Lord's tradition ig preserved; and let nothing else be done by 
us, than what previously for us the Lord previously did, that the 
cup which is offered in commemoration of him, may be offered 
mixed with wine." St. Augustine repeats these words in On Chris— 
tian Doctrine, ips And so does John Chrysostom say that in the mass 
is a sacrifice, in: On Matthew, On the Second Epistle to Timothy, 
On the Epistles to the Hebrews. Similarly, St. Ambrose, Augustine 
(very often), Gregory, and others. See our book, On the Sacrifice 
of the Mass.” 

The order of the Mass or of the prayers by which the sacrifices 
offered to God were consecrated, was first established by St. Peter, 
the celebration of which the whole world accomplishes in one and 


the same way. 


And the Sixth Synod [recte: Quinisexta, AD 692] thue deter- 
mined: "James, brother of our Lord according to the flesh, to whom 
the Jerusalem Church was first entrusted, and Basil Bishop of 
Caesarea, whose clarity shone throughout the whole earth in the 
scriptures, added for us the celebration of the mass" [Gratian 


Decr. 3.1.47: Fr. 1.1306]. 


3 

St. Andrew wrote to the proconsul, that he daily offered an 
unblemished lamb to Almighty God. Thus do ali Latins, Greeks, 
Chaldeans, even schismatics, heretics, observe (not counting all. 
those new dogmatists). 

Objections of the Heretics. 

1. "For by one offering he has perfected for ever those who 
are sanctified" [Heb 10:14].* 

2. Christ does not have need daily, as does the priest, of 
offering sacrifices first for his own sins, then on behalf of the 
people; for this was done once for all, by his offering of him- 


self [Heb 7:27]. 


11541 ed., marg: [Fulgentius] De Fide ad Petrum, c.7 
2De sacrificio missae contra lutheranos libri tres (1526) 


3ncts of St. Andrew (apocryphal) 


114” 


115 


115 


116" 


130 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


3. "Through his own blood Christ entered once for all into 
the sanctuary, thus obtaining eternal redemption" [Heb 9:12]. "But 
now he has appeared once for all at the end of ages, for the destruc- 


tion of sin, by the sacrifice of himself" [Heb 9:26]. 


4. "In which will we are sanctified by the offering of the 
body of Jesus Christ once for all" [Heb 10:10]. 


5. The Mass is a testament, not a sacrifice; this is the 
blood of the New Testament [cf. Heb 10:20]. Matthew [26:28] and 
Mark [14:24] relate: "This cup is the New Testament in my blood." 


How therefore can a sacrifice be made from a testament? 


6. The Mass is the well-remembering of the sacrifice and 
offering. On that account Christ did not say, "Offer," but "Do 


this in remembrance of me" [Lk 22:19]. 
Reply of the Catholics. 


1. These heretics twist against the Mass the express and clear 
texts of the Apostle. The offering of Christ is indeed two-fold, 
and both are real and true, seeing that in both Christ is truly and - 


really offered and sacrificed. 


Once for all he has offered to God the Father his living body 
and blood on the altar of the cross for the salvation of the human 


race, and " 


the sins of the whole world" [1 Jn 2:2]. And concerning 
this offering the Apostle perceives, showing the excellence of this 


sacrifice, beyond the sacrifices of the Law [Heb 10:1ff]. 


Paul writing also to the Ephesians, says: "Christ loved us, 
and he gave himself to God as an offering and sacrificial victim 


for us for a sweet savor" [Eph 5:2]. 


And on this account Holy Mother Church re-presents this obla- 
tion annually, once on the Day of preparation; nor does the conse- 
cration of the Eucharist take place on this day, but the eucharist 
consecrated on the previous day is taken, lest the Church remain on 


that day without the fruit of the Lord's passion. But the other 


17. ON THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS 131 


offering is sacramental, for Christ is daily offered in the Church 
and taken by the priests in the sacrifice of the mass under the 
sacrament [(that is, under the sacramental species, pure bread and 
wine),] in remembrance of the passion, death, and prior offering 
once for all accomplished on the cross. So the priest in the person 
of the Church presents to God the Father the offering made through 
the Son on the altar of the cross, and himself offered, and that is 
the offering according to the order of Melchizedek. Therefcre this 
offering is also rightly called "remembrancing," not as if Christ 
were not really and trustworthily offered (as the heretics would 
have it) but because it is offered under the sacrament invisibly and 
remembrancingly as a memorial of the prior offering, by his bidding 
and his institution. [And this offering has been prefigured through 
the sacrifice of Melchizedek. Christ indeed is called a priest for- 
ever according to the order of Melchizedek, who offered to God bread 
and wine as a sacrifice [Gen 14:18; Ps 109:4]. Hence Melchizedek 
was a figure of Christ's priesthood and sacrifice. Yet Christ did 
not offer himself on the cross under the species of bread and wine, 
but his body and blood under their own proper species. On the 

cross therefore he did not make an oblation according to the order 
of Melchizedek, but a little before had instituted it in the Last 
Supper to be repeated by the Apostles and their successors under 

the species of bread and wine in memory of him, to the end of the 
age. There is therefore in this very celebration of the Mass the 
immolation of the body and blood of our Lord under the form of 
bread and wine, a true and proper sacrifice of the priesthood of 
Christ Himself, according to the order of Melchizedek, whereby 
through the ministers of the Church he is daily offered to God the 
Father as expiation of our sins.] This offering is signified by 

the continual sacrifice whereby a lamb was daily immolated, one in 


the morning and the other in the evening, according to Numbers 28:4. 


That second offering the priests do at Christ's bidding: 
"No this in remembrance of me" [Lk 22:19]. For "to do this" refers 


not only to the taking but also to the offering. Otherwise he 


1532 


1532 


116 


1532 


1532 


117 


177 


132 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


would not through those words have given the power to consecrate. 
Christ once for all accomplished this offering on the altar of the 
cross, and its effect is daily distributed to us, [when the priest 
in the person of the Church presents to God the Father the remem- 
brance of this offering.] Hence it comes to pass that while the 
first offering was of infinite merit, the second is limited and 
finite. The third is the merely memorial offering, which takes 


place on the day of preparation. 


Eusebius of Emesa*: ''Because Christ's body assumed [(in 
the incarnation) ] was to be withdrawn from their eyes, and taken 
to heaven, it was necessary that on the day of the supper he 
consecrate for us the sacrament of his body and blood, that what 
was once for all offered for a price, might thereafter be wor- 


shiped through a mystery" etc. [Decr. 3.2.35, Fr. 1.1325]. 


It is clear that, contrary to the heretics, the Mass not 
only re-presents the Lord's Supper, but also his passion, death, 
and offering. It is manifest also, against the same, that the 
Eucharist is not only a sacrament (something which they contend) 
but at the same time it is both sacrament and sacrifice. It is 
a sacrament indeed, inasmuch as it re-presents and is received. 
But it is a sacrifice inasmuch as it is offered and sacrificed 
to God. For this reason also the Mass in which these things are 


accomplished, is called and is a sacrifice. 


2/3. Let it similarly be said with reference to the four con- 
sequences, for they are speaking concerning the first offering. 
It is clear from Chrysostom, speaking concerning Christ as sacri- 
ficial victim: "And because that was offered once for all, it was 
offered in the holy of holies; moreover this sacrifice is the 
pattern of that one, the one we ever offer, not today one lamb 
and tomorrow another, but ever that very one; accordingly that 
sacrifice is one." Later: "For just as he who is everywhere 
offered, is one body, not many bodies, so also one sacrifice, but 


our high priest is he, who offered a victim to cleanse us; we offer 


*See Friedberg, 1.1325, n. 416, for attribution. 


17. ON THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS 133 


it, and what then was offered cannot now be consumed. But this 
which we do, is indeed done in remembrance of that which was 
done.'' Note how daily we offer one oblation, which was offered 
once for all, although the mode of offering, as a remembrance and 


re-presentation, is far different from the first actual offering. 


5. We cannot properly say the Mass is a testament, because 
both the body of Christ is commemorated there, and yet is not called 
the New Testament. Therefore concerning the blood, that he said 
it is the New Testament, is to be understood confirmatively, just 
as Moses, about to confirm the Old Testament, received the blood of 
calves and goats, etc., and he sprinkled all the people, saying: 
"This is the blood of the testament which God commanded to you" 

[Ex 24:8]. Thus Christ by his own blood confirmed the New Testa- 
ment, and entered into the holy of holies. Now there are many 
things of the New Testament which do not pertain to the Mass, such 
as baptism or the priestly key. Moreover, it does not follow that 
because the Mass is a testament, it, on that account, is not a 
sacrifice, as the King of England concludes. And a testament, 
according to the Apostle, involves the death of the testator [Heb 
9:16£], and the Mass is a testament; then it involves the death 


of the testator, and thus an offering. 


6. The Mass is the remembrance of Christ's passion, not 
merely, just as any layman simply communicates, but is a memory 
of this sort: that in it there is a re-presentative action of 
the entire passion, and Christ said 'Do this."' Not only did he say, 
"Take," but "Do," that is (joining what went before and what comes 
after), consecrate, offer, take. Accordingly, that part of the 
Mass is called "the action."! Therefore, just as there was con- 
tinually a sacrifice in the Old Testament, so Jesus, our Savior, 


will only cease to offer himself at the time when Antichrist comes. 


a 


Poland. 


" Achtung 


2 Introduction, p. 7*, note, above; also, p. 129, note. 


118 


118 


119 


119 


CHAPTER 18 
1 
CONCERNING VOWS 


Two axioms proved. 


Axiom 1: That Vows are to be paid, Scripture teaches, 


nature dictates, and honesty demands. 


Jacob made a vow to the Lord at Bethel [Gen 28:19f]. "When 
you make a vow to the Lord your God, you shall not delay to pay it: 
because the Lord your God will require it. And if you delay, it 
shall be imputed to you for a sin. If you refrain from making a 
vow, you shall be without sin. But that which is once gone out of 
your lips, you shall observe, and shall do as you have promised to 
the Lord your God, and have spoken with your own will and with your 
own mouth" [Dt 23:21-23]. 


"But a beast that may be sacrificed to the Lord, if any one 
shall vow, shall be holy, and cannot be changed, . .. neither a 
better for a worse, nor a worse for a better" [Lev 27:9f]. "Every 
thing that is consecrated to the Lord, whether it be man, or beast, °* 
or field, shall not be sold, neither may it be redeemed. Whatever 


is once consecrated shall be holy of holies to the Lord" [Lev 27:28]. 


"This is the law of the Nazarite, when he has vowed his offer- 
ing to the Lord in the time of his consecration” [Num 6:21]. And 
from the beginning of the chapter: "When a man or woman shall 
make a vow to be sanctified, and will consecrate themselves to the 


Lord, they shall abstain from wine and from everything that can 


inebriate . . . Further on, "They shall not eat grapes either fresh 
or dried" [Num 6:2f]; ". . . no razor shall pass over his head" 
(Num 6:5]. 


How a woman's vow binds her, the Lord has decreed in Num 30:4. 


“Yow and pray to the Lord your God; all you that are round about 


him bring presents" [Ps 75:12]. 


"I will pay my vows . . . before all the people" [Ps 115:14]. 


134 


18, CONCERNING Vows 135 


“I will pay thee my vows, which my lips have uttered" 


eS OSH). 


The wise man says: "The vows of the just are acceptable" 


[Prov 15:8]. 


“If you have vowed anything to God, do not delay paying it; for 
an unfaithful and foolish promise displeases him; but whatever you 
have vowed, pay it. And it is much better not to vow, than after 


a vow not to perform the things promised" [Eccl 5:3f]. 


Isaiah says: "In that day (of the most holy Gospel), they 
(the Egyptians) shall worship him with sacrifices and offerings; 
and they shail make vows to the Lord, and discharge them. . . and 


he shall be pacified towards them, and heal them" [is 19:21f£]. 


"Cursed is the deceitful man who has in his flock a male, and 
making a vow offers in sacrifice that which is feeble to the Lord. 120° 


For I am a great King, says the Lord..." [Mal 1:14]. 


"Avoid the younger widows. For when they have grown wanton, 
in Christ, they want to marry, having condemnation, because they 
have made void their first faith" [1 Tim 5:11f]. If ycunger widows 
have condemnation, because they have made void their first faith, 
what then of our Lutheran monks, friars, and nuns, sacrilegious, 


fornicators, and adulterers. 


St. Mark built in Alexandria the Semmon, that is, a monastery, 


as Eusebius attests, and Philo. 


The Rechabites said: “We will not drink wine, because Jonadab 
the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying: You shall 
drink no wine, neither you, nor your children, for ever. Nor shall 
you build houses, or sow seed, or plant vineyards, or have any. But 
you shall dwell in tents all your days" etc. [Jer 35:6f], and they 120 


are there commended to the Lord. 
Axiom 2: Perpetual Vows are better, for the sake of per- 


severance. 


*falso: Philemon. The reference is to Philo Judaeus' discussion of 
the 'Therapeutae,' cited by Eusebius, HE, 2.1/7. 


121 


136 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"T am confident of this very thing, that he, who has begun a 
good work in you, will perfect it unto the day of Jesus Christ" 


[Phil 1:6]. Where is Luther's faith that can do all things? 
"I can do all things in him who strengthens me" [Phil 4:13]. 


"Thus says the Lord to the eunuchs. They who shall keep my 
sabbaths, and shall choose the things that please me, and hold fast 
my covenant, I will give to them in my house, and within my walls, 
a place, and a name better than sons and daughters; I will give 
them an everlasting name which shall never perish" [Is 56:4f]. 


Note that we obtain more from a vow. 


"There are eunuchs who have castrated themselves for the sake 
of the kingdom of heaven. He who can take, let him take" [Mt 
19:12]. 


"But I say to the unmarried, and to the widows: It is good 
for them if they so continue, even as I. But if they do not contain 
themselves, let them marry" [1 Cor 7:8f]. Later: "Concerning vir- 
gins, I have no commandment of the Lord; but I give counsel, as ‘ 
having obtained mercy of the Lord, to be faithful" [1 Cor 7:25]. 
It is consistent with divine law that it is lawful to vow, and to 
keep the commandment to remain continent, and not to drink wine, 


etc. 


"God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted beyond 
that which you are able, but will make also with temptation issue 


that you may be able to bear it" [1 Cor 10:13]. 


24: James, p. 277]. 
Clement consecrated [Flavia] Domiet We at Rome [cf. Jerome. Evist. 
86]. 


Matthew consecrated Iphigenia with many virgins [Apostolic His- 
tory of Abdias, 7.8, 13: James, p. 467%); and Fausene contesaee [cf. 
Eusebius, H.E., 7.11]; the daughters of Philip have kept virginity 
(Acts 21:9) [cf. Eusebius, Blea 5 Jo sulle 


alee 
Niece of the Emperor Domitian 


2 F 2 P r : 
A deacon associated with Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria; he died at 
a great age, a martyr in the persecution. 


18. CONCERNING vows 137 


Dionysius [of Alexandria], in his Letter to Caius [Epist. 1: 
PG 3.1065A], remembers the cloistered ones, arid calls them, wor- 
shipers male and female, therapeutae. Similarly Ignatius in his 


Letter to the Tarsians** confirms this. 


Tertullian during the time of the martyrs wrete On the Veiling 
of Virgins. 

Objections of the Heretics. 

1. Christ gave us freedom; vows drive us back into bondage. 


2. Christ wished counsels to be free; votaries turn them into 


commandments. 


3. They are human inventions, and they add to Scripture. 
Dt 12:32; cf. 4:2: "Do not add to the word I have spoken or take 
away." "If any man shall add to these things, God shall add to him 


the plagues written in this book" [Rev 22:18]. 


4. Vows do not renew the inner man, but only outward works, 
which make hypocrites rather than saints. Accordingly, Paul said: 
"Exercise yourself to godliness, for bodily exercise is useful for 


little, but godliness is profitable to all things" [1 Tim 4:7£]. 


5. Now, these outward works extinguish faith, sap hope, when 


they are trusted in, more than the mercy of God. 


6. Votaries are guided more by their own tradition than by 
God's commandments: "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, who tithe 
mint and rue and every herb, and pass over judgment and the charity 


of God" [Lk 11:42]. 


7. By baptism the faithful person is bound to the Gospei rule. 


It is presumptuous for him to wish to bind himself to a stricter 


rule, since with all his effort he cannot achieve any more. 


8. Besides, great insolence indeed it is, that those who 
cherish monasticism cause so many sects: when one boasts Benedict 


is the author of his sect, another Francis, another Bernard, 


**A pseudonymous epistle. See PG 5.895f (c. 9) 


122 


138 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


contending among themselves over the worth of their orders. What 
122 is this? Was it not enough that they were Christians? Is a 


Franciscan better than a Christian? 
Reply of the Christian Votary. 


1. Vows will lead us back into bondage to Christ, yet this 
bondage is the highest freedom. Hence the Apostle: "Being then 
freed from sin, you have been made servants of justice and of God" 


{Rom 6:18, 22]. Indeed, to serve God is to reign with him. 


Hence obligation to repaying a vow in no wise gainsays Chris- 
tian freedom; accordingly, just as obligation to fulfill the com- 
mandments, so also transgression of the commandments, so also the 
non-observance of vows, cast one down into the bondage of sin. 
Hence the Lutherans, transgressors of their own vows, are the most 


filthy slaves of corruption. 


2. Counsels are free in common, but when the promise accedes, 
they become obligating. Concerning men the judicial magistrate 
says: I will keep the covenant (Codex: On Covenants). Why should 
we not keep covenants with God? Consequently, God does not command 


vows to be made, but vows to be kept. 


For just as marriage, before it is contracted, is free, but 
after it has been contracted it is firm and indissoluble, and 
accordingly necessary, so that apart from a great penalty (out- 
side the case of a servant), divorce is unthinkable [Mt 19:3ff]. 

So also it is with vows; hence Pope Innocent III [Decret. Greg, IX, 
3.34.6: Fr. 2.590f]: Although there is free choice to all in making 
vows, yet thereafter the repayment is necessary after the vow, so 
that without the expense of one's salvation, it is not permitted to 
anyone to retreat from a vow. Hence the Savior says: ''No one put- 
ting his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom 
of God" [Lk 9:62]. And "remember Lot's wife" [Lk 17:32], who, look- 
ing back was turned into a pillar of salt [Gen 19:26]. "But he who 


shall persevere until the end, shall be saved" [Mt 10:22; 24:13]. 


18. CONCERNING vows 139 


And the Apostle: "Only let him who now holds, hold until he be 123 


taken out of the way" 


[2 Thess 2:7], that is, even to death. For 
it is ruin for a man to devote himself to the saints, and after- 
wards withdraw his vows. "Render therefore," 0 votaries, "the 
things that are God's (that is, your vows) to God," in order that 


you may deserve to be saved. 


3. And if the rules of the monks and friars were established 
by all, nevertheless they flow from and are founded upon the Scrip- 
tures, for in them is nothing else contained, than the most salu- 
brious admonishments of the Gospel, and summaries of that way. How 
nothing ought to be added to the Scriptures was dealt with at Objec- 


tion 2, Chapter 13,* 


4. Outward works prescribed by the rule do not renew the inner 
man, yet they aid the spirit in order that the body may not too much 
weigh down the soul. If these things be done only that they may be 
seen by men, they are hypocritical; but if to the glory of God, praise- ipa" 
worthy. The Apostle does not wish there to be no bodily exercise, 


but sufficient if it conduces to piety. 


5. Outward works apart from God do not extinguish faith, for 
it especially to be nourished by them, "for faith without works is 
dead" [James 2:17]. Yet if anyone presumed upon works, he would 
deservedly be answerable for this. ‘If you do all things which are 


commanded you, say: We are unprofitable servants" [Lk 17:10]. 


6. Those who neglect the commandments of God do iil, whe- 
ther they are religious or laity. 

7. In order that the religious may more appropriately carry 
out the precepts of the Gospel and because they have promised them 
in baptism, therefore they vow the rules as promoting them, in 


order that they may speedily serve the Lord. 


*C£. p. 97, above. 


124 


1529 


140 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


8. The fact that religious are distinguished by divers 
titles is no affectation of sanctity. Just as there were in the 
Old Testament those who were called Nazarites, Rechabites, and 
Levites, etc. You would by no means Suen ly speak of orders of 


" inasmuch as they are in no wise separated 


this sort as "sects, 
from the Catholic Church, but above the rest are bound by vows 

to keep God's precepts and the healthful counsels of the Church. 

Why doesn't Luther rebuke his followers and partners, for whom it 
is not enough to be called "Christians,'' but as schismatics call 

themselves by the new name "Evangelists" and thus cause division 


and schism from the Catholic Church? 


Schatzgeier has written at length on vows; See Dietenbergius 
and our One Hundred and Sixty Conclusions Concerning Vows and 
Chrysostom, On Matthew, Hom. 56, who also wrote three books in 
defense of monasticism. That variety of rites, of ceremonies ,of 
abstinences, of exercises, of habits, and other things of this kind, 
in divers orders of religion are established in preparation for 
departure or provide no obstacle thereto, these things clearly 
come from Christ their Savior through John the Baptist and the dis-— 
ciples of both. For he had a garment of camel's hair, and his food 
was locusts and wild honey, and he did not drink wine or strong 
drink [Mt 3:4]. But he used the common clothing, food and drink; 
hence it is said: "John came neither eating nor drinking, and 
they say, he has a devil" [Lk 7:33]. ''The Son of man came eating 
and drinking, and they say: Behold a man that is a glutton and a 
wine drinker, a friend of publicans and sinners" [Mt 11:18f£]. Yet 
as the envious Jews judged concerning both of them rashly and 
perversely, so also do the impious heretics do concerning the 
religious. Let them restrain and correct their evil-speaking 
tongue babbling that their vows are diabolical figments, unless 
perchance, blinder than the blind Jews, they prefer to say that 
Christ, not as they, was a glutton, a wine-bibber and had a devil, 
when rather the very devil and his gospel assert not a divine but 


* 
Against the Adversaries of the Monastic Life (PG 47.319-386) 


18. CONCERNING VOWS 141 


a diabolical doctrine. How obviously this follows from this heresy 
of theirs is clear from reasoning thus: the vows of the religious 
are diabolical figments. Yet Christ has counseled these in the 
Gospel; therefore Christ is the devil and his Gospel diabolical. 
The major premise is of the heretics; the minor of Christ and Paul, 
as is clear from the aforesaid. The conclusion follows syllogisti- 
cally from the premises. Note into what great blasphemy these 
blasphemous heretics fall. But let this goal in their resisting 

be subsumed under the immediately inferred conclusion when this 
covenant is prosyllogized.* To say that Christ is a devil and his 
Gospel diabolical, is impious, heretical and blasphemous, in fact 
there is nothing more impious, heretical and blasphemous. Accord- 
ingly, those who say that monastic vows are diabolical, are most 
impious heretics and most diabolical blasphemers. But religious 
votaries paying their vows to the Lord, highest Catholics and true 
evangelical Christians doing the same: their vows are pious, 
evangelical and truly Christian. Far be it from anyone to say 


they are impious and diabolical figments. ] 


*To prosyllogize: to arrive at a conclusion that leads to 
another further conclusion. 


125 


125 


CHAPTER 19 
CONCERNING THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY* 


Although Christ in the above chapter praised those who be- 
came eunuchs for the sake of the Kingdom of God [Mt 19:12], Paul 
accedes to virgins rejecting celibacy, something that Christ and 
Paul both despise. "A priest shall not take to wife a harlot and 
vile prostitute nor one who has been put away by her husband, be- 
cause he is consecrated to his God and offers the loaves of the 
show-bread. Let him therefore be holy because I also am holy, the 
Lord who sanctifies you" [Lev 21:7f]. And today to those offering 
the living bread "which descends from heaven" {Jn 6:33, 59], Luther 


permits concubines and harlots to be taken in marriage. 


Concerning the high priest: "He shall take a virgin as his 
wife, but a widow or one that is divorced, and defiled, and a har- 


lot, he shall not take . . ." {Lev 21:13f]. 


"They shall not take as wife, a widow or one divorced, but 
virgins of the seed of the house of Israel. But they may take a 


widow also, that is, the widow of a priest" [Ez 44:22]. 


God had not commanded Moses in preparing for the reception of 
the law, that they not approach their wives, and yet Moses forbade 
them, saying: "Be ready for the third day and do not come near 


your wives" [Ex 19:15]. 


Abimilech said to David: "I have no common bread at hand, 
but only holy bread; if the young men be clean, especially from 


women,'' let them eat {1 K 21:4]. 


"But I would have you to be without solicitude. He that is 
without a wife is solicitous for the things that belong to the 
Lord, how he may please God. But he that is with a wife is soli- 
citous for the things of the world, how he may please his wife 
and he is divided. And the unmarried woman and the virgin think 


*On clerical celibacy, see Gratian Decr. ey ie 


142 


19. CONCERNING THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY* 143 


on the things of the Lord that they may be holy both in body and 
in spirit" [1 Cor 7:32-34]. 


Paul warns the married that for a time they abstain from the 
marriage bed that they may be more open to prayer [1 Cor 7:5]. 
But priests ought perpetually to stand by their altars, and there- 


fore perpetually to abstain from marriage. 


"If anyone, after baptism, should be joined in a second marriage, 
or have a concubine, he can be neither a bishop, nor a presbyter, or 
deacon, or even anyone of the number of those who serve in the sacred 


ministry" [Apostolic Canons, 17, in Gratian Decr. 1.33.1: Fr. 1.122]. 


It is fitting that bishops, presbyters and deacons, or those 
guardians of modesty who handle the sacraments, keep themselves from 
their wives. In Title III (the Council of Carthage V) it is said 
that we also are to guard that which the apostles taught and anti- 


quity preserved [cf. Decr. 1.84.4: Fr. 1.296]. 


A presbyter who takes a wife, we decree that he ought to be 
deposed from his order, but if he should be a fornicator or should 
commit adultery let him be cast out of the church and do penance. 
Let a presbyter if he take a wife be deposed from the order (Council 


of Neo-Caesarea c. 1). [Decr. 1.28.9: Fr. 1.103] 


Jerome, Against Vigilantius, inveighs against bishops who did 
not ordain deacons, unless they had previously taken wives, attri- 
buting chastity to no celibate person. On the contrary they should 
see those who have been evilly suspected of all things, showing 
how holily they live, and unless rejecting wives, etc., they do 
not dispense the sacraments of Christ. What will the churches of 
the East do, what will the churches of Egypt and of the Apostolic 
See do? For these churches accept either virgin or continent men 
as clerics, or, if they have wives, when these men cease to be hus- 


bands. 


More than 1300 years ago Pope Calixtus decreed, and we to this 


day utterly forbid to presbyters, deacons, sub-deacons and monks 


126 


126 


Cr 


144 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


the having of concubines or the contracting of marriage. [Gratian 


Decr. 1.27.8: Fr. 1.100] 


1 
Augustine [In Qu. V. & N.T., Q. 127]: But perchance it may 
be said, if it is permitted, and is good to marry why is it not 
permitted to priests to have wives? Chrysostom, Hom. 21, pt. 4 to 


Theodore, the monk, disapproves of the marriage of notaries. Poly- 


carp [Epist., 5]: "Virgins, walk in chaste conscience.'' Therefore 
Yr F ° F aes c 
127 there were then those persevering in virginity, just as Matthew 


2 
consecrated Iphigenia. Origen, Hom. 23 On Num.: "It seems to me 
that only to him is it given to offer sacrifice incessantly, who 


incessantly also has devoted himself to perpetual chastity." 
Objections of the Heretics. 
1. The priests of the old law had wives. 
2. The Greeks to this day and the Calabrians have wives. 
3. ‘Increase and multiply” [Gen 1:22; 8:70; 9:7]. 


4. Paul foretold that some shall come giving heed to the 


spirits of error, who will forbid marriage [1 Tim 4:1, 3]. 


5. Paul bids Titus that he choose a man of one wife as bishop 
[Tit 1:6]. 


6. Chastity is free; traditions make it compulsory. 
7. “It is better to marry than to burn" [1 Cor 7:9]. 


8. A vow of virginity is foolish because impossible, and the 
pope wishes to mortify the flesh by human traditions when he ought 


to have had recourse to the grace of God. 
9. If you took a wife you have not sinned [1 Cor 7:36]. 


3 
In these is the root of those things which that impure Jonas 


blabbed against our Faber.“ 


1, pseudonymous work (PL 35). 


2See above, p. 136 


posene Jonas (1493-1555), Lutheran Reformer, humanist and translator. 


4 Johann Faber: see p. 30, above. 


19. CONCERNING THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY* 145 


Reply of the Christian. 


1. The first point Ambrose disposes of in his Commentary on 
the Epistles to Timothy. It was conceded to the old Levites and 
priests to take wives, because there was much leisure from ministry 
and priesthood. For there was a multitude of priests and each one 
used to serve at a definite time according to the practice laid 
down by David who established 24 classes of priests [1 Chr 24]. 
Later: "But now all ought to abstain from intercourse with women 
because it is necessary for them to be daily present in the church, 
without any leisure. And because only those of the tribe of Levi 
were accustomed to minister, on that account in order that they 
might be preserved through propagation they could not keep per- 
petual chastity; otherwise the ministers of the temple would become 
extinct. Accordingly on certain days those about to sacrifice 
under the old covenant were accustomed to abstain. And it came to 
pass that, as the days of their office were accomplished, they went 
back to their own houses and the priests of the Old Testament 
handled the show-bread, the flesh of goats, oxen, lambs, ete. Our 


Ww 


priests handle the body and blood of Christ. 


2. The Greeks have wives, yet no priest among the Greeks took 
a wife but he who has taken a virgin as wife is duly ordained as 
priest. But if his wife dies he remains a widower. Therefore, a 
married man is made priest, but a priest is never made a married 
man. Hence from the time of the Savior's death it has not been 
heard that a priest took a wife except that now the little hold 


Lutherans rashly try this. 


3. God commanded this when the earth .as well as heaven was 
to be filled: At that time there were few producing offspring; 
now there are innumerable ones. Hence that law is not concerning 
permanent things, whereby one reasons from the general to the 
particular. Otherwise John the Baptist would have sinned who 
remained a virgin; Mary would have sinned who espoused virginity; 
Paul would have sinned who ccunseled virginity; and Christ would 


not have praised eunuchs [Mt 19:12]. 


128 


129 


129 


146 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Hence that precept also was confirmed by the Savior [Mt 
19:10]; "What God has joined together let no man put asunder" was 
given to the whole multitude of men not to any one of the multi- 
tude, just as also the commandment to till the fields. For it 
is not fitting that some men, yet it is necessary that others, be 
farmers. Thus also it is not fitting that every individual man 
give up begetting, yet it is necessary that some men attend to 
propagation. So it is concerning many other things, needful in- 
deed for the entire community. Yet it is not fitting that they be 


done by one and all, but it is enough that they be done by some. 


4. The Church does not prohibit marriage but when some are 
bound by a vow, she prohibits the vow from being violated for be- 
fore the vow one was free to marry, just as a married man is pro- 
hibited from contracting marriage; thus the Church does not wish 
one making a vow to transfer the power over his body to another, 
because it has been turned over to Christ. Such were the heretics 
whom Paul foretold, namely Marcion, Mani, and Tatian who condemned 


marriage. 


5. Paul does not command the bishop to be married, otherwise 
neither he nor Titus would have been bishops, but he did not want 
a bishop to be a bigamist. So Jerome and others. Hence the Church 
does not admit bigamy, on this point having been instructed by Paul. 
And thus Paul has described the measure within which the bishop 
should contain himself, that is, that he should not take a second 


wife. 


Hence, although he who had many concubines, may be ordained as 
priest or bishop, still he who had many lawful wives, may not. 
The reason for this is that this institution is not on account of 
the representation of the sacrament. For the Bridegroom of the 
Church (whom the priest represents) is Christ, and the Church is 
one. "One is my dove’ [Cant 6:9]. And on this account the Church 


does not permit bigamy. So speaks Augustine in his book On the Good 


of Marriage. 


19. CONCERNING THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY* 147 


6. Chastity is free but enjoined upon the one who takes a 
vow, yet it does not oppose freedom of the spirit, but promotes 


it, for even God freely produces his Holy Spirit and of necessity. 1307 


7. "It is better to marry than to burn" [1 Cor 7:9], but "it 
is good for a man not to touch a woman" [1 Cor 7:1 ]. The Apostle 
does not want him to burn who is tempted by the flesh, but he 
burns who is overcome by the flames of concupiscence; for him it 
would be better to marry than to wallow perpetually in filth. Say 
the contrary and you will make Paul into a one who married because 
he suffered from a thorn in the flesh [2 Cor 12:7]. I confess that 
it is difficult to remain continent, yet the kingdom cf Heaven 
suffers violence, and the violent bear it away" [Mt 11:12]. We 
are all tempted by the flesh, "yet God is faithful, who will not 
suffer us to be tempted beyond what we are able, but makes with 
the temptation also a way of escape that we may be able to bear 


it" [1 Cor 10:13]. 


8. You say that that vow is impossible. If you look to nature, 
many other things are impossible for us; if you look to God's assist- 
ing grace, nothing is impossible, because those to whom it is given 130” 
can receive. Therefore the wise man says: "I know that I cannot 
otherwise be continent, unless God grant it; and this itself was 
wisdom: to know of whom the gift comes" [Wisd 8:21]. The heretic 
brings us a new sort of conquering the temptations of the flesh: 
so that we thus obey the desires of the flesh, contrary to all 


scriptures. 


9. *Jerome answers: Paul is not speaking of a virgin who 
once for all dedicated herself to the service of God, but of her 


who is free [Against Jovinian, 1). 


*This does not seem to correspond to Obj. 9 of the heretics. 


131 


131 


CHAPTER 20 
CONCERNING CARDINALS AND LEGATES OF THE APOSTOLIC SEE 


Christ associated with himself twelve Apostles [Mt 10:1ff], 


seventy-two disciples [Lk 10:1]; he sent them where there was need. 


"And he made that twelve should be with him, and that he might 
send them to preach” [Mk 3:14]. 


“After these things the Lord appointed also seventy-two others, 
and sent them two by two before his face into every city..." 
[Lk 10:1]. Thus the Pope provides himself with Cardinals to assist 
himself, and perchance in this regard there were Cardinal disciples 
before apostles. Bernard, writing to Eugenius: "These also con- 
tinually assist you, elders of the people, judges of the earth, 


collaterals, coadjutors." 


Isidore testifies that St. Peter in the city of Rome delegated 
for himself assisting priests and deacons. To assist him he took 
Linus, Cletus, and Clement. As the Church increased Linus consecrated — 
10 presbyters and 11 bishops. So also did Cletus, so Clement and so 
Anacletus. Evaristus first apportioned the titular churches, that 
is, the churches with the people in the city of Rome, among the 
presbyters, instituted 7 deacons to serve the Roman pontiff. Mar- 
cellus by increasing the number established 25 titular churches in 
the city, in order that they might suitably look after baptism and 
burial. In the primitive church only presbyters and deacons of the 
city of Rome were spoken of, yet afterwards the name of cardinals was 
conferred upon them as some histories wish to date under Pope 
Pontianus, others under Marcellus, others under Sylvester; others 
consider it to be a still more recent name. Hence they are accus- 
tomed to call St. Jerome a presbyter of the city of Rome, not a 
cardinal, although the Donation of constentine Tae that the 
name of cardinals was more ancient, yet it cannot be rejected that 
Pope Stephen used that name when he decreed that no pontiff be 
elected except by cardinals [Decr. 1.79.3: Fr. 1.277]. I find, 


*A forgery, independently disproved by Nicholas of Cusa, Reginald 
Pecock (Repressor), and Laurentius Valla. Cé£. p. 239, below. 
148 


20. CONCERNING CARDINALS AND LEGATES OF THE APOSTOLIC SEE 149 


moreover, that in the time of Pope Symachus and of Gregory II there 
were 64 titular churches in the city of Rome, that is, those of 

St. Laurence, St. Cecilia, Sixtus, Marcellus, Susanna, Anastasia, 
Mary across the Tiber, John and Paul, ete. To the Council of Nicea, 
Sylvester sent Hosius, bishop of Cordoba, Victor and Vincent, pres- 
byters of the city of Rome; to the African council in which Augustine 
took part, Pope Zozimus sent Bishop Faustinus Potentianus, Phillip, 
and Asellus, presbyters of the city of Rome. In case of appellation 
concerning the deposition of a bishop, the Nicean Ccuncil decreed 
that the pope commit the case to two neighboring bishops or send 
from his side a presybter. Note that legates a latere date from 

the time of the Council of Nicea 1200 years ago. Sylvester sent 

to the Council of Arles the presbyters Claudius and Habitus and the 


deacons Eugenius and Quinatus of the church cf Rome. 


During the time of the martyrs they were accustomed to call 
legates apocrisarii, as for example, St. Fabianus Pope and St. 
Zephyrinus sent their apocrisarii to the East. Pope Lec sent to 
the Council of Chalcedon bishops Paschasius and Lucens and Boniface 
presbyter of the Roman church. Under Pope Agatho there were legates 
at the sixth council [Constantinople III], the presbyters Theodore 
and Gregory and John the deacon. At the seventh council [Nicea II] 
the legates were Peter the Presbyter and Peter the abbot of the 
monastery of St. Sabina. To the eighth council [Constantinople IV] 
were sent Donatus, Bishop of Ostia, Stephen, Bishop of Ephesus, 
Marinus Deacon of the Church of Rome, and Anastasius the very famous 
librarian. To the second Council of Ephesus Leo sent Bishop Julius, 
Hilary the Deacon, and Dulcitius the Prothcnotary, although they did 


not want to go to the Synod, knowing the treachery of Dioscorus. 


To the Council of Serdica was sent Hosius of Cordova (the same 
one who was at the Council of Nicea) with Fortunianus of Aquileia 
and Vincent of Capua. At the Council of Frankfort-am-Main, the 
presiding legates of the Apostolic See were Bishops Theophylactus 
and Stephen, when the Felician heresy was condemned, which forbade 
the use of images in the Church. You will find these matters more 


deeply dealt with in our book, On the Primacy of Peter, 3.19. 


132 


133 


CHAPTER 21 
il 
CONCERNING EXCOMMUNICATIONS 
Christ instituted the power of excommunication, speaking of 
brotherly correction; after other things he says: "Tell the 
Church. If then he does not hear the Church, let him be to you 


133” as a Gentile and a publican" [Mt 18:17]. 
[T* 
Here it is very clear ‘that excommunication is done by the 


authority of Christ, especially by those words which he adds, say- 
ing, "Amen, I say to you. Whatever you shall bind on earth (the 
Gloss has it: by the bond of anathema) shall be bound also in 
heaven" [Mt 18:18]. On this Chrysostom says, "See how he bound 

by two-fold necessities, and the penalty which is given here, 
namely casting out of the church. Let him be to you as a gentile 
and publican and by a future punishment which is to be bound in 


heaven, 


Augustine, On John 27.2 [Decr. 2.11.3.33, Fr. 1.653]: "A 
Christian ought to fear nothing else than to be separated from the 
body of Christ. For if he is separated from the body of Christ, 
he is not a member thereof; if he is not a member thereof, he will 
not be quickened by the spirit thereof. But whoever, says the 
Apostle, does not have the spirit of God, he is not of him [Rom 


Se O]].™ 


134 Jerome: "Whose sins you forgive [cf. Mt 18:18], etc., will 
be retained, that is, those to whom you interdict the Church, unless 
they be reconciled by satisfaction, to him also will be closed the 


T] gates of the kingdom of heaven." 


"I indeed absent in body, but present in spirit, have already 
judged, as though I were present, him who has so done, in the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together and ny 
spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus; to deliver such a one to 
Satan for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be saved 


in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ" [1 Cor 5:3-5]. 


*T = Tilmann 
150 


21. CONCERNING EXCOMMUNICATLIONS 151 


Know that in the primitive church, when it was fitting 
through signs to invite men to faith, just as a gift of the Holy 
Spirit was manifested by a visible sign, so also excommunication 


became known by bodily vexation by the Devil. 


[Decr. 2.11.3.32, Fr. 1.653]: “Every Christian, most beloved, who 
is excommunicated by the priests, is turned over to Satan. How? 
Because obviously the devil is outside the Church, just as Christ 
is in the Church, and through this as he is turned over to the 
devil who is removed from churchly communion. Hence those whom 
the Apostle then proclaims to have been turned over to Satan, he 


demonstrates to have been excommunicated by himself." 


See how bad excommunication is, because on the day of prepara- 
tion the Church prays for the Jews and pagans, but not for the 


excommunicated. 


"Some have made shipwreck concerning the faith, of whom is 
Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have delivered up to Satan, that 


they may learn not to blaspheme"” [1 Tim 1:19f]. 


Paul recalls this power: "Shall I come to you with a rod or 


in charity, and in the spirit of meekness?" [1 Cor 4:21]. 


"Therefore I write these things, being absent, that being pre- 
sent, I may not deal more severelyaccording to the power which the 
Lord has given me for edification, and not for destruction" 


[eRGorelsrslOle 


"Tf any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be 
anathema, maranatha (that is, in the advent of the Lord)" [1 Cor 


(2 22). 


"But if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that 
man and do not keep company with him, that he may be ashamed" 
[2 Thess 3:14]. Peter not only excommunicated Ananias and Saphira 


for cheating on the price of a field, but also condemned them with 


152 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


a sentence of death [Acts 5:lff] . From this it is clear that 


it is permitted to the church to excommunicate for temporal losses. 


Augustine, Questions on the Old Testament, Q. 39, On Deuter— 
onomy: "Now in the church of God excommunication does that which 


in the Old Testament one reads that killing did.” 


Origen, On Judges, Hom 2 [Gratian Decr. 2.11.3.21: Fr. 1.648f ]: 
"Not only through the Apostles did God hand over transgressors into 
the hand of their enemies, but also through those who preside over 
135” the church, and have the power not only of loosing, but also of 
binding, do they hand over sinners to death of the flesh, when for 
their transgressions they are separated from the body of Christ; it 
follows afterward, how men are doubly handed over into the power of 


the Devil." 


Ambrose, On the Psalms, Ps. 118, Sermon 8 (cf. Gratian Decr. 
2.23.4.33: Fr. 1.915] speaking of excommunication adds: "Rightly 
therefore ought the priest like a good physician to excise the 
wound, lest it spread more widely through the whole body of the 


church, and bring to light the virus of the crime which lurks within.” 


"If any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, do not 
receive him into the house or say to him, Hail. For he who says to 
him, Hail, communicates with his wicked works" 2 Jn v. 10. I have 
written to you, not to keep company with fornicators, greedy persons, 
grasping ones or servants of idols" [1 Cor 5:ll]. Later: "With 


such a one, do not so much as eat"[ Ibid]. Note: excommunication. 


136° "Avoid a man who is a heretic after the first or second admoni- 
tion" [rit 3:10). Here you have it that heretics will be excommun- 


icated. 


Objections of the Heretic. 


1. Excommunication is not a penalty, but a declaration, 
because anyone excommunicates himself through sin, and afterwards 
the judge declares him to be excommunicated. 

2. Excommunication is remedial [ Sext. Decretal. 5.9.1: 


x 
Fr. 2.1093f] . Accordingly, it is not to be feared but welcomed. 


*Innocent IV, Council of Lyons. 


21. CONCERNING EXCOMMUNICATIONS 153 


Response of the Catholic. 
[Foreward of Tilmann. ] 


1. [For the understanding of the solution of this argument, 
know that excommunication is the separation from the communion of 
the church with respect to fruit and general suffrages. In the 
first the import is the separation from the sacraments. But in 
the second it is separation from the communion of the faithful 
with respect to spiritual things. For it is said that excommuni- 
cation is the separation from any lawful communion of the faithful. 
But the communion of the faithful is three-fold. The first is 
extrinsic in at one and the same time praying in the church, in 
masses, and in divine offices, and in the deprivation of this com- 
munication, excommunication does not only consist. The second is 
intrinsic through the charity uniting the members of Christ through 
formed faith to Christ as head and to the rest of his members, con- 
cerning which the Psalm says, "I am a partaker with all those who 
fear thee" [Ps 118:63]. And sin, not excommunication, takes this 
away. The third is at one and the same time extrinsic and intrinsic 
communion according to the common suffrages, which have been carried 
on in the church since its establishment, as in masses and other 
prayers, denominated in the creed as "the communion of saints.'' And 
excommunication removes this and substitutes the removed communion 
of the saints through charity.] And excommunication is the penalty 
inflicted either by law or by man, and not only a declaration of 
penalty, for clearly Paul indicates that the Corinthian man was not 
turned over to the devil, but was to be turned over to the devil 
{1 Cor 5:5]. Now his statement that any man actually excomauni- 
cates himself through sin, is true by lesser excommunication, but, 


although it deprives man of divine grace, he still remains, as 


sinner, united to the Church and joined with the mystical body 
of the Church as a dried-up member; yet in greater excommunication 


he is excised from the body. Not that he is by means of the Church, 


1572 
1529 


and 
1532 


136 


137 


137 


154 ECK . ENCHIRIDION 


because so long as he holds the true faith he is in the church, 
but because he is deprived of participation in the suffrages of 
the Church--something appropriate for a man either from the force 
of charity, or from the intention of the Church (with the general 


will that her merits accord with all her members not cut off). 


And Origen, in his second Homily on Judges, recalls this 
double excommunication. Moreover, if through sin anyone should 
turn himself over to the devil, yet through the sentence laid down 
by man or by law, the devil still receives the greater power over 
him. This is clear concerning Judas, whom the devil first invaded 
after he had thought about betraying Christ. "But Satan entered 
into Judas (says Luke) . . . and he went, and spoke with the chief 
priests," etc. [Lk 22:3f]. And John says: "When .. . the devil 
had put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to 


"etc. [Jn 13:2]. Yet afterward once more "he entered 


betray hin,' 
into him" [Jn 13:27], and the devil possessed him, as the same 
John says. "And when he had dipped the bread, he gave it to Judas 
Iscariot, the son of Simon, and after the morsel, Satan entered 


into him" [Jn 13:26f]. 


2. Excommunication is remedial, but only if it is not 
despised, for it is called "remedial" from its end, because it is 
ordained to the end that a man repent and amend himself, and 
satisfy the Church. No one moreover will prefer excommunication, 
except an obstinate person who would rather be turned over to Satan, 
than to serve Christ, and wishes to be considered as a pagan and a 
publican by the Church. Hence Gregory says [Homin Ev. 26, quoted 
in Decr. 2.11.3.1: Fr. 1.642]: "The judgment of a pastor, whether 
just or unjust, is to be feared. Far be it from any judgment to 


be loved!" 


CHAPTER 22 
CONCERNING THE WAR AGAINST THE TURKS* 


Under an existing reasonable cause, Christians can wage war 


against Turks and heretics. 


"And soldiers also asked him, saying, And we, what must we do? 
And he said to them, Strike no man, commit no calumny, and be content 
with your wages" [Lk 3:14]. It is clear that he did not forbid war, 


but set a limit on those who fight. 


"Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is 
no power but from God" [Rom 13:1]. Later: "But if you do evil, 
fear; for he bears not the sword in vain. For he is God's minister, 
an avenger to execute wrath upon him who does evil" [Rom 13:4]. Hence 
the sons of Israel not without fighting obtained the promised land 
given to them by God, as is clear in the books of Joshua, Judges, and 
Kings. On the contrary, the Lord God willed them to wage continuous 
war against the infidel. Hence it is said in the book of Judges: 
"These are the nations which the Lord left, to instruct Israel in 
them, and all who did not know the wars of the Canaanites; after- 
wards that their children might know how to fight against the foe, 


and have practice in battle" [Jdg 3:1f]. 
"Cursed be he who keeps back his sword from blood" [Jer 48:10]. 


The whole Old Testament is full of how, by the commandment and 
help of God, the Jews not only resisted the infidei, but also 
Abraham, Moses and Joshua invaded them. "Thus says the Lord of 
hosts" (Samuel is speaking to Saul). "I have reckoned up all that 
Amalek has done to Israel, how he opposed them in the way when they 
came up out of Egypt. Now therefore go, and smite Amalek, and 
utterly destroy all that he has. Spare him not, and do not covet 
anything that is his, but slay both man and woman, child and suckling, 
ox and camel and ass"{1 K 15:2£]. Who now was the counselor of the 


Lord or who knew his mind, seeing that now is the time that he wills 


*CF. Luther, Argument in Defense of the Articles of Martin 
Luther (1520), 34. 


155 


138 


138 


139 


1529 


139 


156 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


to punish the Turks by Christians, just as he punished the 


Amalekites by the Jews. 


The Maccabees urged one another, saying: "If we all do as 
our brethren have done, and fight not against the Gentiles for our 
souls and our justifications, they will the more quickly destroy 
us from the earth. And they took counsel on that day, saying, 
Every man who shall come to us on the Sabbath day, let us fight 
against him, and we will not all die as our brothers died. And 
they gathered the army and they struck the sinners in their wrath 
and the evil men with their indignation" [1 Macc 2:40-43]. Thus 
also we Christians unless we fight against the Turk, the most 
savage enemy of the cross of Christ, he will the more speedily 
destroy us, and wipe out the name of Christ from the earth--some- 
thing these brawlers seem to desire, with their lies to the effect 
that fighting against the Turk is fighting against the Gospel of 


Christ. 


"Judas Maccabeus rose up, and all his brethren helped him and 
all those who had joined themselves to his father, and they fought 
with cheerfulness the battle of Israel, and he got his people great 
honor" [1 Mace 3:1-3]. [From this it is clear that it is lawful 


to fight for the defense of the state. ] 


"We will fight for our lives and our laws and the Lord Himself 
will overthrow them" (that is, the Gentiles) "before our face" 


[1 Mace 3:21f]. 


"Simon went into Galilee and fought many battles with the 
Gentiles" [1 Macc 5:21]. Simon said: "You know what great battles 
I and my brothers, and the house of my father, have fought for the 
laws, and the sanctuary . . ."" [1 Mace 13:3]. Therefore it is most 
holy and most just to fight against the infidel Turks and against 
those heretics more ungodly than the infidel Turks themselves, on 
behalf of the Church's faith, the preservation of divine worship, 
on behalf of the welfare of the poor and the defense of the op- 


pressed. Gird yourselves, therefore, 0 Christian princes, and be 


22, CONCERNING THE WAR AGAINST THE TURKS* 157? 


powerful sons, and be prepared to fight against these ungodly 
nations which have gathered together to destroy us and our sanc- 
tuaries, since it is better that we die in war, than see the 


misfortunes of our people and of the saints. 


Augustine, Epistle 194 to Count Boniface: "I shall give you 
and yours some useful advice, take up arms, let the prayer of your 140 
author strike your ears." And again to the same man: "Do not 
think that no one can please God who ministers with warlike arms, 
for in these was David holy, on whom the Lord bestowed great testi- 


mony." 


And Against Faustus (22. ): "The natural order of mortals 
accommodated to peace demands this, that the authority and the coun- 
sel to undertake war be in the hands of the princes; it is said to 
the princes: "Rescue the poor; and deliver out of the hand of the 
sinner" [Ps 81:4]." Why then should they not liberate from the hand 
of the Turk, paying especial attention to the fact that he forcibly 
magnifies and extols the worship of his Mohammed to the injury of 
our Creator, and that he carries off a third offspring, pleasing 
to him, to rear in the Mohammedan rite in everlasting bondage? 

Hence the Most Glorious Charles, Geoffrey, Alphonse, Ferdinand, 
and other destroyers of the infidel are praised with celebrated 
renown throughout the Christian world. See Tome 1, Third Sunday 140” 


after Epiphany, Homily 5. 
Objections of the Heretic. 


1. To fight against the Turks is to oppose the will of the 


Spirit, visiting our iniquities through them. 
2. The Christian fights by prayer, not by the sword. 


3. In Matthew 5:39ff defending oneself is forbidden: "Let 
us not oppose those who use force against us" [cf. Mt 5:41]. 
Response of the Catholic. 


Now very many heretics, as for example Oecolampadius, deny 


completely that Christians are permitted to fight. This was the 


141 


141 


158 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Manichaeans' heresy, as Augustine, Against Faustus, [22.75f] 
teaches, and also on the Sermon on the Mount, [cf. Ch. 20] but let 


us reply. : 


1. Even if God should visit our iniquities upon us through 
the Turk, still through this he does not hinder us from our own 
defense; otherwise when he visits us with famine, plague, fire, 
wars, and diseases, any provision for us against famine, any 
remedy against diseases, any refuge against plague would be out of 
keeping with such visitations. For God so visits his own people 
as not to forsake them. "I will visit their iniquities with a rod, 
and their sins with stripes. But my mercy I will not take away 


from him, nor will do harm to my truth" [Ps 88:33f]. 


2. I admit that a righteous warrior strikes God with prayers 
yet let him take arms in hand with Judas Maccabeus, "For when Moses 
was praying on the mountain, Amalek was conquered by the sword of 
Joshua" [Ex 17:10£]. Let those who remain at home pray; let others 


bear arms against the Turks. 


3. Out of the counsels and works of the perfect the Lutherans 
make commandments and since the Lutherans are so bitter that they 
cannot bear the Catholics’ words, even pious ones, these servants 
of iniquity desire that we should suffer the lashes of the Turks, 
desolation of temples, the violation of virgins, etc. "For the 
things that he teaches there he enjoins for the preparation of the 
heart, not for the showing of works," says Augustine. It ought 
rather to be hoped after so many tribulations and calamities of 
Christianity with the loss of two empires and thirty-six kingdoms 
that God at last should take pity on us and that we should sing 


joyfully. 


"QO daughter of the Turk, miserable; blessed he who repays 
thee by payment, which thou hast paid us" [Ps 136:8, alt]. See 
Hom 5, Tome 3, On the War against the Turks. 


CHAPTER 23 
CONCERNING THE IMMUNITY AND WEALTH OF THE CHURCH 


Ecclesiastical immunity and freedom are shown. Pharaoh, the 142 
Gentile King of Egypt, preserved immunity for the priests. "For 
Joseph bought all the land of Egypt, and subjected it to Pharaoh, 
and all its peoples, except the land of the priests which had been 
transferred to them by the king, to whom was also furnished a stated 
supply of food from the public storehouses. And for that reason 
they are not compelled to sell their possessions" [Gen 47:2-24]. 
And later: "From that time unto the present day, in the whole 
land of Egypt the fifth part is paid to the king and it has become 
as a law, except the land of the priests, which was free from this 


agreement" [Gen 47:26]. 


Artaxerxes, the king of the Persians, granting to the children 
of Israel the right freely to return with Esdras to Jerusalem on 
behalf of the liberty of the priests and of the ministers and temple 
set forth a decree in these words: "I Artaxerxes have determined 
and decreed to all guardians of the public chest, who are beyond 
the river, that whatever Esdras the priest, the scribe of the law 142 
of the God of heaven, shall require of you, you give it without 
delay" etc. [1 Esdr 7:21]. And later: "We give you also to under- 
stand concerning all the priests and the Levites and the singers 
and the porters and the Nathinites and the ministers of the house 
of this God, that you have no authority to impose toli or tribute 
or custom upon them" [1 Esdr 7:24]. On this, the Glossa Ordinaria, 
which is by Bede, states [PL 113.708c]: "By this privilege it is 
shown that the rest of the people of the children of Israel upon 
reaching the fatherland, were to pay tribute to the king, which the 
king is known to have done by a separate provision so that those 
who were continually occupied with divine service would be free 
from serving him, and those who possess nothing of their own in 
the land but live from the tithes of the people, from them no one 


might exact tribute." Note that here are two kings,both of them 


159 


143 


143 


160 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


Gentiles. One was zealous for the liberty of the priests of 
idols, but the other for the liberty of the Jewish priests and 
the lawful ministers. And now some Christian princes and rulers 
of cities levy, exact and strip priests of Christ and poor minis- 
ters of the word of God and endeavor to cast them into extreme 


bondage. 


Joshua allotted cities to the priests and Levites just as the 


Lord had commanded by Moses [Joshua 21:8; Num 35:2]. 


Likewise, priests and Levites had tithes, first-born, first- 
fruits, portions from victims, from oblations and from sacrifices, 
by God's ordaining and bidding, for the ministry with which they 


daily served in the tabernacle of the testimony [Lev 27; Num 18]. 


"Joaz said to the priests: All the money of the sanctified 
things, which was brought into the temple of the Lord by those who 
pass, which is offered for the price of a soul, and which of their 
own accord, and of their own free heart, they bring into the temple 
of the Lord, let the priests take it according to their order..." 
[4 K 12:4f]. Hezekiah ". . . commanded the people dwelling in 
Jerusalem, to give to the priests and Levites their portion, that 
they might attend to the law of the Lord" [2 Ch 31:4]. Because 
also the people did so abundantly, the king "commanded storehouses 
to be prepared in the house of the Lord," [2 Ch 31:11], where 
fruits might be received, etc. 


Christ had Judas as steward, who “had the purse" [Jn 13:29], 


and “carried the things that were put therein" [Jn 12:6]. 


"Joanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and 


many others, who ministered to him of their substance" [Lk 8:3]. 


Christ taught the immunity of the priests. "What is your 
opinion, Simon?" said Christ. "The kings of the earth, of whom do 
they receive tribute. . . of their own children, or of strangers? 
Peter said to him, Of strangers. Christ said to him, Then the 
children are free?" [Mt 17:24f]. 


23. CONCERNING THE IMMUNITY AND WEALTH OF THE CHURCH 161 


“Who serves as soldier for any time at his own pay? Who 
plants a vineyard and does not eat of the fruit thereof?" {1 Cor 
9:7]. Later: "It is written in the law of Moses: You shall not 
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn" {1 Cor 9:9]. 
Later: "If we have sown for you spiritual things, is it a great 
matter if we reap your carnal things." [1 Cor 9:11]. Later: "Do 
you not know that they who work in the holy place, eat the things 
that are of the holy place? And they who serve the altar, partake 
with the altar? So also the Lord erdained that those who preached 
the Gospel should live by the Gospel" [1 Cor 9:13£]. 


"It behooves a bishop to be blameless, the husband of one wife, 
sober, equipped, prudent, modest, hospitable" etc. [1 Tim 3:2]. How 
could he be hospitable if he had nothing? 


"For as many as were owners of lands or houses, sold them and 
brought the price of the things they sold, and laid it down before 
the feet of the Apostles" [Acts 4:34f]. Hence in the primitive 
church it was customary to make a collection for the support of the 


clergy. When they were in need they were relieved by benefices. 


"Princes, be subject to Caesar, soldiers to the princes, dea- 
cons to the presbyters: as to ministers of sacred things. But let 
presbyters and deacons, and ail the clergy together with all the 
people, be subject to the soldiers and the princes; but also let 
the Caesars be obedient to the bishop, the bishop to Christ, even 
as Christ is to the Father. So is unity preserved threugh all 
things" [Ignatius, To the Philadelphians]. Likewise: "The priest- 
hood is the highest of all goods which abide among men, but if 
anyone should dishonor it, he dishonors God, and the First-Rorn of 
all creation" [Ignatius, To the Smyrnaeans}. 

"Do not touch my anointed, and do not evil to my prophets" 

{Ps 104:15]. 

"Who shall put forth his hand against the Lord's anointed?" 

[1 K 26:9]. This he says also concerning the anointing of the 


king; what then of the anointing of the priests? 


144 


162 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople: ''Whoever is 
in a place of governance sometimes has need also of pondering 
earthly matters, and taking care of external matters so that the 
flock committed to him may be strong, and of continuing in those 
things which he is to fulfill. From pastors the law has increased 
in royal majesty, from fishermen the Gospel has increased in 


imperial majesty." 


And in Gregory's letters at various points are found letters 
concerning the administration of temporal matters. Hence also at 
that time he had regional prefects in Sicily and the province, so 
that it is manifest also that at the time of Gregory there was the 


patrimony of St. Peter. 


In the Epistle of Clement [Decr. 2.11.1.32: Fr. 1.635]* MIE 
any of the fathers have business among themselves, let them not be 
judged among the defenders of this world, but among the presbyters 

145 of the Church; whatever there is, let it be separated, and let them 


by all means obey their statutes." 


The Council of Carthage [AD 419, c. 31: Decr. 1.74.4: Fr. 1.262]: 
"It was decided that each clergyman seek cognizance of public matters 


from the Emperor, lest he be deprived of his own honor." 


Pope Gaius the Martyr (283-296) [Gratian Decr. 2.11.1.1: 
Fr. 1.626f] decreed: "let not laymen bring before the secular judge 


those initiated in sacred things." 


Dionysius to Demophilus ? On the Correction of the Bishop: "Yet 
if anyone by lot should deviate among them from the right path, let 
him be corrected by his peers and the holy men of his rank, so that 
it will not happen that one rank merges with another and mixes up 


everything, but each one remains in his own office." 


Origen who lived during the time of the martyrs, when there 
were still pagan emperors, in his Commentary on Luke explains the 
subjection of the presbyter to the bishop, just as Jesus was sub- 


ject to his parents [Homilies on Luke, 20]. 


Pseudo-Isidore 


“Dionysius of Alexandria, Epist. (PG 10.1269-72) 


23. CONCERNING THE IMMUNITY AND WEALTH OF THE CHURCH 163 


Julian the Apostate, adversary against Christ, withdrew from 
the clergy all privileges and honors, which the most godly Catholic 
emperors, Constantine, Theodosius, Marcian, Valentinian, and other 


religious-minded princes decreed. Because these matters are obvious 


to all (Chapters "On Most Holy Churches," and "On Clergy and Bishops"), 


we shall put off referring to them until later. 


The Emperor Constantine in the Council of Nicea would not re- 
ceive written accusations against the bishops; he said: "You are 
gods appointed by the true God; go, and settle your dispute among 
yourselves, for it is not worthy that we judge gods" [Gratian Decr. 


2.23.8.22, 24; Fr 1.961f]. 


Peter the prince of the Apostles did not oppose the charges. 


Ambrose on the first Letter cf Paul to the Corinthians, c. 9. 


The Constitution of the Emperor Frederick, chapter concerning 
bishops and clergy [Sext. Decr. 5.11.3: Fr. 2.1094]. "We have deter- 
mined that no one may presume to hale an ecclesiastical person in a 
criminal or civil suit before the secular tribunal, against imperial 
constitutions and canonical sanctions, but if a plaintiff should do 
so, let him be deprived of his legal right, let judgment not be 
held, and the judge is then and there to be deprived of his office 
of judging. Guard against those who wrongly drive the clergy to the 


secular tribunal." 


It is clear therefore from the aforesaid that the most just 
excommunications are brought against offenders against ecclesiasti- 
cal freedom, by their own unjust decisions oppressing and making 
demands on the clergy; as against those who sin both against the law 
of nature, against the divine law of both Testaments, and against 


human law, civil and canon. 
Objection of the Heretic. 


Christ allowed himself to be judged by the lay judge Pilate, 
and furnished evidence to him, because he had power over him from 
above. Therefore Christian priests ought not to flee from lay 


judges. 


146 


164 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


The Reply of the Catholic. 


You are attempting something remarkable in asserting that all 
Christian judges are Pilates and Herods. Christ clearly cast the 
sin before Pilate, because he who had betrayed him had a greater 
sin. But his statement that Pilate has the power from above, if it 
be referred to God, is to be understood permissively: God has per- 
mitted this to Pilate, for "He was offered because he so willed" 


{Is 53:7], if the heretic did not intend to apply it to Caesar. 


CHAPTER 24 
ON INDULGENCEs * 


, 1 
Because indulgences are merely penalties of satis— 
faction owed for sins, let us show that merit and satis- 


faction are two different things. 147 


On the merit of Christ it is said: "On this account God exalted 
him, and gave him a name which is above all names" [Phil 2:9]. Note 
what he merited for himself. On his satisfaction, it is said: 

"This is the cup of the New Testament in my blood" [Lk 22:20], 
which is given for you for forgiveness of sins" [Mt 26:28]. Note 
what he merited for us. 

On the person offering the victims for sins it is said: 

" , . . and the priest praying for them, the Lord will be merciful 
unto them" [Ley 4:20]. How can one be freed not from guilt but 


from punishment save through intercession? 


(Thesis of Tilmann 1529 
and 
Know here that the treasury of indulgences is made from the 1532 


superabundance of merits (insofar as they were capable of making 
satisfaction) of Christ and the saints. Concerning the super- 
abundance of Christ's sufferings for us, it is said: "He is the 
propitiation for our sins, not for ours only however, but for those 
of the whole world” [1 Jn 2:2]. From this authority it is clear 
that the passion of Christ sufficiently satisfies for the whole 
world, and through this since it satisfies exsecutively only for 
a few, the infinite treasury of Christ's satisfaction abounds in 
the sacraments, by which the same passion of Christ satisfies. 
Concerning the superabundance of sufferings and merits of the 
saints, for the office of satisfying for us, Job's statement is 
clear; "O that my sins were weighed, for which I deserved wrath, 
and the calamity which I suffer in the balances appeared heavier 


than the sand of the sea" [Job 6:2f]. From these words of Job 


*At the Leipzig Debate (1519), one of the topics of the third week, 
between Eck and Luther. Also, Baden Disputation (1526), Proposition 5: 
"After this life there is a purgatory." 


165 


148" 


148 


166 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


it is clear that he suffered more than he ought to have suffered 
for his sins. In superabundance of sufferings consists super- 
abundance of satisfactions. The same thing is very clear concern- 
ing many saints. But concerning the intention of the saints, what 
indeed they wished to suffer or what they willingly suffered, not 
only for themselves, but also for us, the Apostle attests:] "Now 

I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up those things that 
are wanting in the sufferings of Christ, in my flesh, for his body, 


which is the Church" [Col 1:24]. 


Ponder, O Catholic, that the miseries of the saints are to be 
added to the sufferings of Christ for the common usefulness of 
the Church. And it is this treasury of merits of which the Church 
speaks: the prayers and merits of the saints. For what Paul 
filled up, who will deny of other saints, bearing Christ's cross, 
and following him? That the pope dispenses this treasure is clear 
from the Apostle's statement: ''Let a man so account of us as of 
the ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of His ministries" 
{1 Cor 4:1]. Likewise, "A dispensation is committed to me" 
{1 Cor 9:17]. Likewise: ''To whom you have pardoned anything, I 
also" [2 Cor 2:10]. He did not pardon guilt but punishment. 
“For what I have pardoned, if I have pardoned anything, for your 


sakes have I done it in the person of Christ" [2Cor 2:10]. 


It is certain that Gregory the Great gave indulgences nine 
hundred years ago and this observance was maintained afterwards 
throughout the whole church. The heretics wonder, that the Pope 
remits a third or half part of punishments, or gives a plenary 
indulgence. Since these heretics are not ashamed to assert that 
any priest absolves from guilt and punishment, they remit the 


whole punishment, and do not wish the Pope to remit a part thereof. 


The Jubilees in the Old Testament were the figure of indul- 


gences of the Gospel [Lev c. 25]. 


Concerning these we are content, because we have a solid 


foundation in St. Paul, lest we be thought more diligent in a 


24, ON INDULGENCES 167 


profitable case. Now that the Church has received, believed, and 
held all things, how could there be anything erroneous in her 
faith? The whole Church, spread over the whole earth, received 
indulgences from the time of Gregory the Great (except for what in 
a few crannies of heretics they began elsewhere to reject). And 
general councils approved them, as for example that most celebrated 
holy Lateran Council (IV) under Innocent III, in which that most 
salutary constitution Omnis utriusque [Decr. Greg. IX, 5.38.12: 

Fr. 2.887£] was promulgated; that council limited the authority of 


minor prelates in granting of indulgences. And the holy Council of 


Vienne approved the indulgences of Urban IV [Const. Clem. V, 3.16.1: 


Fr. 2.1174f], for the veneration of the venerable Eucharist. And 
every church of the Germans, French, Spanish, Italians, English, 
Hungarians, Poles, Transylvanians, Scots, and others, reverently 
accepted the Jubilees in Rome, celebrated by the Pontiffs, with 


plenary indulgences. 


[Appendix of Tilmann. 


Indulgences are beneficial for souls in purgatory, because 
there is no reason why the Church can transfer the common merits 
of Christ and the saints, upon whom rest indulgences to the living, 
and not to the dead as well, who dying in love, since obstacles 
hindering their access to the Kingdom of Heaven have not yet been 
removed, are detained in purgatory. But the pope applies indul- 
gences to them not with the authority to absolve, but by way of 
suffrage.* And therefore he cannot at pleasure free souls from 


purgatory, or empty purgatory. 


The adversaries among other arguments raise this Achillic 
objection (thinking it invincible): if the merits of Christ are 
infinite, nevertheless the merits of the saints which are most 
fully paid out are in no wise so. On the contrary they are ultra 
condignum since "the sufferings of this time are not worthy to be 


compared with the glory to come that shall be revealed in us" 


*per modum suffragii: "An act done by way of suffrage depends 
for its efficacy on God's response to the prayer that accompanies 
it..." (Attwater, A Catholic Dictionary, p. 507) 


149 


1529 
and 
1532 


168 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


[Rom 3:18]. Therefore the merits of the saints cannot be applied 


to us through the treasury of indulgences. 


It must be said that, just as the works,of Christ were at one 
and the same time meritorious and capable of making satisfaction, 
he merited indeed for himself and for us: for himself, because 
through the humiliation of his passion he merited the glory of the 
resurrection, in accordance with the passage: "He humbled himself, 
becoming obedient unto death on the cross, for which cause God has 
exalted him" etc. [Phil 2:8f]; he merited for us since, "If by the 
offense of one many died, much more the grace of God, and the gift, 
by the grace of one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many" 

[Rom 5:15]. And later: ''Therefore just as by one man's offense, 
unto all men condemnation, so also by the justice of one, unto all 
men to justification of life" etc. [Rom 5:18]. He has made satis-— 
faction not for his own sins, because he has not committed sin, nor 
has deceit been found in his mouth, but for our sins, as is clear 
from many scriptural passages. "For he was wounded for our iniqui- 
ties, he was bruised for our sins" [Is 53:5]. And a little later: 
"All we like sheep have gone astray . . . And the Lord has laid on 
him the iniquity of us all" [Is 53:6]. "Christ has delivered him- 
self for us, a sacrifice and oblation to God, for an odor of 
sweetness" [Eph 5:2]. "He bore our sins in his body upon the tree" 
[1 Pt 2:24]. "He is the propitiation for our sins" ete. [1 Jn BL?) 
So also are we to understand concerning the works and sufferings of 
the saints. These insofar as they were meritorious, we admit with 
the Apostles were paid out ultra condignum, but insofar as they 
were capable of making satisfaction or were penal, it is well known 
that innumerable saints made far more satisfaction, or suffered far 
More, than they ought to have done for their sins, as is clear con- 
cerning Job [Job 5] and the Apostle [Col 1]; and not only for them- 
selves, but for the body of Christ which is the Church, this re- 
mainder of satisfaction and of suffering is applied to us through 


the treasury of indulgences which yields to the greatest glory of 


24. ON INDULGENCES 169 


the saints. Hence when it happens, (for example) that the excess 
satisfaction of Laurence pays for the penitent John the penalty 
owed, Laurence will have in heaven a certain accidental joy over 
the fact that his satisfaction has paid for John. Thus the works 
of the saints, insofar as they are capable of making satisfaction 
and are penal, pay to the saints themselves also twice by their 


having been applied through indulgences. ] 


CHAPTER 25 
ON PURGATORY * 


The existence of Purgatory is sufficiently established from 


Scripture, the Church, and the fathers. 


149 "If any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, pre- 
cious stones, wood, hay, rubble, every man's work shall be mani- 
fest, for the day of the Lord shall declare it, because it shall 
be revealed in fire; and the fire shall try every man's work, of 
what sort it is .. . If any man's work shall burn, he shall 
suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire" 

{1 Cor 3:12-15)2 This evidently applies to a person who does 
combustible works, too little as it were in the day of judgment 
of each particular one, yet he is saved by fire, not the fire of 
hell, because in hell there is no redemption. So did St. Ambrose, 


St. Jerome, St. Augustine, St. Gregory and Alcuin understand this 


passage of Paul. 


"Make agreement with your accuser while you are on the way 
with him, lest perchance your accuser deliver you to the judge, 
150 and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast into 
prison" [Mt 5:25; Lk 2e5e1e "Amen I say to you, you shall not 
go out from there until you repay the last farthing" [Mt 5:26; 
Lk 12:59]. St. Ambrose understands this prison to be purgatory. 


“He who shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not 
be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to 
come'' [Mt 12:32]. 


St. Gregory [Dial., 4.9] weighs these words and says: 

"This fire is to be understood as applying to certain sins to 

be purged before judgment, for the reason that the Truth Says: 

"He who shall speak against the Holy Spirit,’ etc., in which 
sentence one is given to understand, whatsoever guilt is loosed 

in this world, the same will be loosed in the world to come" 

[Decr. 1.25.4 Fr. 1.94; cf. Aug., bCeD, 21.24]. 
*Cf£. Leipzig Disputation (1519), one of the topics of the third week, 


between Eck and Luther. Also, Baden Disputation (1526), Proposition 
5: "After this life there is a purgatory." 


170 


25. ON PURGATORY* 171 


So also did Bernard, On the Canticles, Sermon 66.11* 
[PL 183.1100, citing Mt 12:32] understand it: ‘In ancient times 
the living were aroused by musical instruments to lamentation 
and compassion toward the deceased, that they might eagerly pray 


for them. Otherwise to mourn would be sheer insanity." 


“Lay out your bread and your wine upon the burial of a just 150 
man,'' {Tobit 4:18] so that the poor, fed therefrom, may pray to 


the Lord for the salvation of the deceased. 


“And making a gathering, Judas Maccabeus sent twelve thousand 
drachmas of silver to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for 
the sins of the dead, thinking well and religiously concerning the 
resurrection, (for if he had not hoped that they who had fallen 
should rise again it would have been superfluous to pray for the 
dead)" etc. {2 Macc 12:43£]. Holy therefore and salubrious is the 
thought, to pray on behalf of the dead in order that they may be 
released from sin [2 Macc 12:46]. This book is in the canon of 
the Church as the prologue prefixed to it testifies, as well as 
St. Augustine DCD 18, and the canon of the Council of Carthage, 
although it was not among the canonical books held among the Jews 
as St. Jerome attests in his Galeatus Prologus It follows that 
one who denies that the books of the Maccabees are canonical is 
not a son of the Church but a bastard of the synagogue. And in USL 
the Leipzig disputation Luther admitted to me that he knew there 
is a purgatory. Likewise, Article 37, Assertionum: 4 "I," he says. 
“bothbelieve purgatory exists, and advise and persuade others that 
it should be believed in." How then is it that the Holy Spirit 
has not revealed in the Scriptures a thing of such great impor- 


tance as purgatory? 


The Greeks knew this heresy and abjured it at the Council 


of Florence. 


"In the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of those who 


are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth" [Philip 2:10]. ** 


jeroue's preface in which he defends himself. 


ET: PE 3.111: "I have never yet denied that there is a purgatory, 
and I still hold that there is, as I have many times written and 
confessed, though I have no way of proving it incontrovertibly, 
either by Scripture or by reason." 


151 


152 


172 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


It is obvious, then (how much this pertains to us!) that those 
"under the earth" are in hell, because they do not bow their 
knee to the name of Jesus, but rather straightway blaspheme 
against him; since the pride of those who hate God ever rises up, 


therefore those who bow their knee are in purgatory. 


"And every creature, which is in heaven and on earth, and 
under the earth, and the sea, and what are in them, I heard all 
saying: To him who sits in the throne, and to the Lamb, blessing, 
and honor, and glory, and power, for ever and ever" [Rev 5:13]. 
Here he sets forth a threefold order of those who praise God, 
namely, of the blessed in heaven, of the righteous on earth, and 
of those to be purged under the earth, because the condemned do 


not praise God, nor do they bless Him seated on His throne. 


for the dead, on the authority of the Church. He speaks as fol- 
lows: "In the Second Book of the Maccabees we read that a sacri- 
fice was offered for the dead. But if nowhere at all in the old 
scriptures one read of this, it is no slight authority of the 
Church universal (which is clear on this custom), where in the 
prayers of the priests who are poured out to the Lord God on his 
altar, commendation of souls also has its place." Such suffrages 
Monica, the mother of Augustine, petitioned from the sacrifice 


of the altar [Conf. 9.13]. 


the Church of God the first, seventh and thirtieth day of the 


deceased is observed [Gratian Decr. 2.13.2.24: Fr. 1.729}. 


John of Damascus affirms that the custom of praying for the 


dead has come down from the traditions of the Apostles. 


Augustine, On the Questions of Dulcitius, Q. 1, testifies 
to purgatory. Chrysostom in one of his own sermons makes suf- 
frages to benefit the dead. Dionysius, Ecclesiastical Hier- 
archies 74 [PG 3.559f] says: "The most holy tradition of Scrip- 


ture teaches us that the prayers of the righteous, even while 


25. ON PURGATORY* 173 


they are living (and not to speak of after death), benefit 
those alone who are worthy." "Approaching then (that is, when 
the corpse is hidden within the temple) the venerable bishop 
gives his prayer over the dead after which prayer the presiding 
officer also greets him and thereafter, each in his order, all 
those who are present. That prayer is to implore divine mercy 
so that all sins admitted through human infirmity may be for- 
given the deceased, and may establish him in the light and in 
the region of the living, in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob, and the place whence sorrow, sadness and groaning flee 
away." These are the words of Dionysius the disciple of the 
Apostle Paul.! So taught and held Holy Mother Church and all the 


orthodox. 


Purgatory is also proved from the appearances of souls which 
even if Luther mocks them, yet we read in 2 Macc 15:14 that Onias 
and Jeremiah appeared to Judas Maccabeus; in Christ's trans- 
figuration, Moses and Elijah appeared [Mt 17:3]; and after Christ's 
resurrection, the disciples thought they saw a spirit [Lk 24:37], 
which they would mistakenly have supposed, if they had not known 


that the spirits of the deceased sometimes appear. See Eck, On 


Purgatory, Book y 4 
Objections of Pighardus. > 


1. Christ forbids widows: "Do not weep" [Lk 7:13], but if 


there were a purgatory, the deceased should be wept for. 


2. Jeremiah says: ‘Do not weep for the dead; nor sorrow 
over him with weeping" [Jer 22:10]. 

3. Paul says: "We do not wish you to be ignorant, brothers, 
of those who are asleep, that you be not sorrowful, even as . aa 


ete. [1 Thess 4:12]. [cf. Gratian Decr. 2.13.2.26: Fr. 1.730] 


4. Cyprian [De Mortalitate, c. 18, 20] sedulously warns the 
brethren not to weep for those who have departed from this life 
(Gratian Decr. 2.13.2.25: Fr. 1.729]. 

' Beel. Hier., 7.4,25 (PG 3.559f) 


. Possibly a reference to the Hussite Bohemian Brethren or Pighards 


[Pighardus = Begards 


152 


153 


153 


174 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


5, Chrysostom [Hom. Heb. 26, on Ch. 11]: "To lament over 
those who have left this life arises out of weakmindedness" [Gratian 


Deere 22 26 beeen 2 ile 
Response of the Christian. 


1. Christ was shortly going to revive the dead man. Therefore 
he forbade the mother to weep: nor do Christians revive anyone 


from the dead. 


2, Jeremiah did not wish king Josiah captive in Egypt to be 
mourned, but other kings following, under whom the Jews would suffer 


more tribulations. 


3. Paul is disjointedly quoted, who says, “just as others who 
do not have hope." Therefore it is an evil thing to mourn for the 
dead out of despair of the future resurrection, something the 


Church does not do [Decr. 2.13.2.26: Fr. 1.729].* 


4/5. According to the aforesaid are Cyprian and Chrysostom to 
be understood, when anyone weeps for the dead out of unfaith, as 
if he were forever lost. See Tom. 2, Hom. for the 17th Sunday 


after Pentecost. 


*Quoting John Chrysostom, Hom. Heb., 26 on Ch. 11, with 
Gratian's comment. 


CHAPTER 26 
CONCERNING ANNATES 


In the Roman curia, men call "annates" what the ordinaries 
of the places designate, mediate or first fruits, and, for the 
confirmation of the bishop, are wont to call the redemption of the 
pallium, when yet only the Bishop of Bamberg in Germany and the 


archbishops properly have the pallium. 


"I have given to the sons of Levi all the tithes of Israel 
for a possession for the ministry wherewith they serve me in the 
tabernacle of the covenant"’ [Num 18:21]. And later: "Command 
the Levites, and declare unto them: when you shall receive from 
the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you, offer 
the first-fruits of them to the Lord, that is, the tenth part of 
the tenth, that it may be reckoned to you as an oblation of first- 
fruits, as well of the barn floors as of the wine presses, and 
that all the things of which you receive tithes offer the first- 
fruits to the Lord and give them to Aaron the priest" [Num 18:26- 
28]. In the Old Testament therefore the Levites and the priests 
received the tithes, and Aaron the high-priest received the tenth 
of these tithes. Therefore annates descend from divine law be- 


cause they have taken the place of the tithe of tithes. 


"And the Levites shall offer the tithe of their tithes in 
the house of our God, to the storeroom of the Lord our God'' 


[2 Esd 10:38]. 


2 
Johannes Andreae mentions Annates in his chapter (among 
others) "On the Duty of the Ordinary," following Hostiensis, 
whom he cites in an opinion of this sort. Here Hostiensis says 


that "necessity excuses the Roman Church in the exacting of 
1 ce, p- 39. above. 


2 Lay Canonist (c. 127-1348), Professor of Canon Law at 
Bologna and Padua and author of the Novella Commentaria on the 
Decretals of Greg. IX and On the Liber Sextus (See NCE 7.994f). 


Hostiensis - Henry of Segusio, who served in the Curia and 
became cardinal and archbishop of Ostia (thus called Hostiensis) 
LWAE 31. 149 n. 34. 


175 


154 


154 


IES) 


155 


176 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


annates, where otherwise the Church would have no right, because 
she cannot provide for all from her own substance." And later: 


"Now that derives from very ancient custom." Afterwards he re- 


lates how very often the Church proclaimed, to the extent that 
there was even a sermon on this topic at the Council of Vienne 


over which Clement V presided. 


It follows that Platyna! and Aree and certain patchers- 
together of the cenplatares of Germany, have erred, for they attri- 
bute the origin of annates either to John XXII and Boniface IX, or 
to the Council of Constance, because the Germans make out that 
Clement V preceded John XXII and Boniface IX. Yet he did not 
originate annates, but approved their establishment on the basis of 
ancient custom. Surely these two witnesses, Hostiensis and Johannes 


Andreae, shatter the lies of these haters of churchly status. 


Annates were not established at the Council of Constance as 
the patchworks of the Lutherans dream up, but because some churches 
had decreed in temporalities it was established that those churches 
might so be led back from poverty to a just tax, according to the 
current value of the church. Therefore the Council rather con- 
firmed annates. Hence no one as yet has published truly when 
annates were instituted; therefore the aforesaid authorities speak 


well that annates are a very ancient thing. 


John Gerson, On Simony, 36.K: "Just as according to the ancient 
law tithes of tithes were owed to the high-priest by the Levites 
{Num 18; Dt 26], thus no less in the new law ought this tithing to 
be made to the Pope himself by the lower clergy. Moreover this 
recompense seems rational: that the fruits of the first year are 
paid for any benefice, since in this the Pope is serving the Church, 


and thus, in order to sustain his own decent condition, he can 


2 

Flavius Blondus [Flavio Biondo] Italian archaeologist and 
historian (1388-1463), author of four fundamental works on Roman 
archaeology and antiquities. 


3 ; 
Possibly a reference to the Centum Gravimina. (Kidd, DCR, no. 61) 


26. CONCERNING ANNATES 177 


burden persons and benefices."" And he arrives at that reason by 


adequate reference and conclusion. 


It follows, if priests and bishops should wish to deny 
annates to the supreme pontiff, then with the same ease laymen 
would deny tithes to priests, and priests would refuse to give in- 
termediate fruits to bishops. Hence we would make a Babylon of the 
Church. This is something the heretics and their adherents strenu- 


ously strive to do, mixing all things, divine and human. 


CHAPTER 27 


1 
156" CONCERNING THE BURNING OF HERETICS 
1529 [This proves two axioms. ] 
Axiom 1: The first penalty of the heretics in the New 
Testament was excommunication. 

"If anyone will not hear the Church, let him be to you as a 
heathen and publican" [Mt 18:17], that is, let him be separated 
from the Church by excommunication. Yet incorrigible heretics do 
not hear the Church. 

After a first and second rebuke, avoid a heretical person, 
knowing that he who is of this sort has been subverted, and errs, 
since he has been condemned by his own judgment: "The perverse 
are hard to be corrected" [Eccl 1:15]. Accordingly, incorrigible 
heretics are not convinced, nor persuaded by reasons. 

"We charge you, brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 

156” that you withdraw yourselves from every brother walking disorderly 


and not acoording to the tradition which they have received from 


us" (2 Thess 3:6]. 


"'Tf any man come to you, and bring not his doctrine, do not 
receive him into the house or say to him, Hail’ [2 Jn 10]. For he 
who says Hail to him, comes in contact with his evil works. Hence 
also the same John the Evangelist, after he had come upon the 
heretic Cerinthus in a bath house, immediately went out to the dis- 
ciples saying, Let us flee from this place, lest even the baths 
themselves corrupt us in which Cerinthus is bathing, that enemy of 


truth" [Decr. 2.24,1.24, Fr. 1.975]. 


Thus Moses also said to the children of Israel in the rebellion 
of Korah, Dathan and Abiron: "Depart from the tents of these wicked 


men, and touch nothing belonging to them, lest you be involved in 


om Luther, Argument in Defense of the Arguments of Martin 


Luther (1521), 33. (PE 3.103-105). aes ms = 


ere Ad tit. 3 


178 


27. CONCERNING THE BURNING OF HERETICS 179 


their sins" [Num 16:26]. And the Apostle: "I beseech you, 
brethren, to mark those who make dissensions and offenses con- 
trary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. 

For they who are such, serve not Christ our Lord, but their own 
belly, and by pleasing speeches and good words, seduce the hearts 


of the innocent" [Rom 16:17f}. 


Axiom 2: Obstinate or relapsed heretics are justly re- 


moved from the midst through death. 


"If there rise in the midst of you a prophet or one that says 
he has seen a dream, and he foretell a sign and portent, and what 
he spoke come to pass, and he say to you, let us go and follow 
strange gods whom we do not know, and let us serve them, you shall 
not hear the words of that prophet or dreamer, for the Lord your 
God is tempting you, that it may appear whether you love him with 
all your heart and with all your soul, or not" [Dt 13:1-3}. "And 
that prophet or forger of dreams shall be slain, because he spoke 


to draw you away from the Lord your God" [Dt 13:5}. 


"But he that will be proud and refuse to obey the commandment 
of the priest who ministers at that time to the Lord your God, from 
the decree of the judge, let that man die and you will take away 
the evil from Israel" [Dt 17:12]. The provision of this law still 


demands that we remove an evil man from the midst of the church. 


"But the prophet, who being corrupted with pride, wills to 
speak in my name things that I did not command him to say, or in 


the name of strange Gods, shall be slain" [Dt 18:20}. 


"Bring forth the blasphemer outside the camp .. . and let all 


the people stone him" [Lev 24:14}. Why not also the heretics? 
"Elijah the prophet of the Lord slew the prophets of Baal" 

[3 K 18:40}. 
The wolf should be effectively protected against: but if the 


wolf cannot otherwise be taken care of for the safety of the flock, 


the wolf must even be slain. Now the heretics are wolves, as Christ 


157 


Si 


158 


180 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


says: "Beware of false prophets, who come to you in the clothing 


of sheep, but inwardly are ravening wolves" [Mt 7:15]. 


And Paul: "I know that, after my departure, ravening wolves 
will enter in among you, not sparing the flock" [Acts 20:29]. Justly 


therefore are they removed from the midst through death. 


"Jesus, when he had made, as it were, a scourge of little cords, 
he drove them all out of the temple, the sheep also and the oxen, 
and the money of the changers he poured out, and the tables he over- 
threw" {Jn 2:15]. If he did this to the moneychangers, what then 


would he have done to the heretics? 


The teaching of the heretics is harmful to their neighbors, 


because "their speech spreads like a canker" {2 Tim ee lW7alle 


Saphira and Ananias, from the very beginning of the Church, on 
account of a paltry sum of money were punished by Peter with death; 
how much more should heretics defrauding souls be punished with 


death by Peter's successor? 


158 Augustine, on the penalty of heretics: experience of many 
diseases forcesmany remedies to come to light. Sometimes the 

books of mathematicians and of heretics were burned, as Augustine, 
On John [PL 38.1455], says was done in his time. Pope Gelasius in 
the year 496 burned some. And at the time of the Apostles, books 
of curious arts were burned; how much more ought heretics to be 
burned. So says Luke [Acts 19:19]: "And many of those who had 
followed curious arts, brought together their books, and burnt them 
before all; and counting the price of them, they found the money to 
be fifty thousand pieces of silver". Sometimes when 
the Christians had no power of punishment over the bodies of here- 
tics, the penalty was excommunication, as above quoted from Paul. 
159 And Cyprian warns that Christians are not to speak with heretics. 
Augustine, in his Letter to Boniface, relates that individual here- 
tics were fined ten pounds of gold. Pope Gelasius condemned here- 


tics to exile. 


27. CONCERNING THE BURNING OF HERETICS 181 


Jerome {In Epist. ad Gal., 5 : Decr. 2.24.3.16: Fr. 1.995] 
teaches that putrid flesh is to be cut away, saying as follows: 
"Putrid flesh is to be cut away, and a mangy sheep is to be ex- 
cluded from the sheepfold, lest the whole house, mass, both body 
and flock, burn, be corrupted, putrify, perish." And later: 


“What is this mercy, to spare one, and lead all into danger?" 


“Arius in Alexandria was one spark, but since he was not im- 


mediately suppressed, his flame ravaged the whole earth" [Ibid.]. 


And St. Ambrose: "Heresy like a hydra of the fables increased 
by its own wounds, and while it often is cut down, it spawns by 


the fire to which it is destined, and will perish by burning." 


Augustine, Against the Epistle of Gaudentius, 2.12.13, says 
concerning heretics: "This human race ought to be corrected 
through imperial intervention." And, On John: he teaches at 
length that Catholic emperors and princes do well to use the sword 
against heretics, for heretics ought to be afflicted and cast out 
by princes, just as Hagar was afflicted by Sarah, when Ishmael 
played with Isaac [Gen 21:9f; Gal 4:22ff]. "And having in readi- 
ness to revenge all disobedience. . ."' [2 Cor 10:6]. "I would they 


were even cut off, who trouble you" [Gal 5:12]. 


Note how fervently he desires them to be cut off: if princes 
had at that time been Christians, doubtless they would have obeyed 


Paul's wish. 


Augustine, On John, says: "None of us like any heretic to 
perish; but otherwise the house of David would not have deserved to 
have peace, unless Absalom his son had perished in war; thus the 
Church, if by the perdition of some she gathers the rest, heals the 


sorrow of the maternal heart by the liberation of so many people." 


The Emperor Constantine [C. de haer., L. Manich.] condemned 


Arius with his adherents to exile, because he refused to adhere to 


the Council of Nicea. 


159 


160 


160 


161 


182 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


The Emperor Theodosius [L. Arr.] punished the Manichean 
heretics, and deprived them of the possession of all goods, and 
of all inheritance; moreover, he allowed investigation to take 
place after death. The same emperor decreed with Valentinian 
[L. quicunque, par. ult.], that Manichees not have the right to 
assemble or tarry in any Roman place, and also decreed that they 


were to be turned over to the ultimate punishment (i.e., death). 


The same decreed that the books of the heretics be examined 
with diligent study and publicly burned. Valentinian and Marcian 
condemned all heretics, and condemned with perpetual deportation 
those possessing books contrary to the Council of Chalcedon itself. 
They remanded to the ultimate punishment those who taught unlawful 


things, and once again remanded their books to be burned. 


"Bring forth the blasphemer outside the camp . . . and let 


all the people stone him" [Lev 24:14]. Why not also the heretic? 


"A land bringing forth briars and thistles is reprobate, and 
very near to a curse, whose end is to be burnt" [Heb 6:8]. The 
heretic is a land of this sort, because heretics are briars. 


Mark 7 [:6-8]: be wary of false prophets. 


"Transgressors shall all be plucked up as thorns, which are 
not taken away with hands, and if anyone will touch them, he will 
be armed with iron and with the staff of a lance; and they shall 
be set on fire and burnt to nothing" [2 K 23:6£]. But who trans-— 


gresses more than heretics? 


Forgers of money or other malefactors are justly sentenced to 
death by secular princes. Why not heretics, forgers of holy 


Scripture? 
Objections of the Heretics. 


1. The Apostles never sought from the princes of the earth, 
* 


that they should use force on heretics. 


2. The Gospel and Paul teach nothing of this sort. 


*Augustine used Lk 14:23 ("Compel them to come in") as proof text 
for the use of force by the civil arm against the Donatists. 


27. CONCERNING THE BURNING OF HERETICS 183 


3. One ought to dispute with heretics, and conquer them 


with the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. 


4. The Lord commanded his servants that they allow tares to 
grow even to the harvest, which is the end of the world [Mt 13:38]. 


By "tares" are signified the heretics. 


5. "For there must also be heresies, that they who are ap- 
proved, may be made manifest among you. Therefore . . ." [1 Cor 
11:19£] sone 


Catholic Solution of Objections. 


1. The Donatists put forth this objection against the Catholics, 

as Augustine attests, On John and in very many other passages. He 161” 
answers: "Who had then believed in Christ? It was not the emperor, 
because heretics were not deserving, but because the sword of the 

Gentile princes and of the emperors was not yet serving the Gospel, 

yet the Catholics appealed against the heretics to Constantine as 

soon as he had been baptized, for if the emperors punished theft, 

murder, robbery, adultery, perjury, why should they not punish 


heresies and sacrilege?" 


2. It was fitting that the faith in the Gospel, just as in 
its coming to birth it did not depend upon human wisdom, so neither 
does it depend on human power, even when the crowns of kings bow 
before the Savior; yet Paul desired that those who disturbed the 


faithful should be cut off. 


"pre- 


3. We are taught by the authority of St. Peter to be 
pared to satisfy everyone who asks concerning that faith which is 
in us" [1 Pt 3:15]. Yet Paul sufficiently indicates that "after 
the second admonition, the heretic is to be avoided," [Titus 162 
3:10f], and one is not to dispute with him; and Paul gives a clear 
reason for this, because he "is subverted" [Titus 3:11]. Ter- 
tullian shows himself remarkably skilled in this matter: "We are 
not to dispute with heretics, because we should rather stand on 
the faith of the ancients, than dispute over the Scriptures." And 


ae 5 added after 1529. 


1529 


1529 


after 
1541 


184 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


he pleads this case with very many, in every respect depicting 


how Luther treats sacred Scriptures. 


[Appendix of Tilmann. ] i 


4. The eradication of heretics by death is not contrary to 
the Lord's commandment, which is to be understood in that case, 
when they cannot uproot the tares without uprooting the wheat. 
Hence he added: ‘Lest perchance, in gathering the tares, you up- 
root the wheat at the same time with them" (Mt 13:29]. When this 
fear, therefore, is not involved, [that is when that crime is so 
known to each and appears execrable to all, so that they have 
either no defenders at all or no such defenders through whom the 
schism can be dealt with,] the severity of discipline should not 
sleep." These are Augustine's words, Against the Epistle of 


Parmenian,. 


5. It is necessary that heresies exist, just as it is neces- 
sary for scandals to occur. Therefore, just as "Woe to the man 
through whom scandals occur," [Mt 18:7], so also woe to him through 
whom heresies are spread. Therefore it is necessary that both exist, 
not indeed by absolute, but only by conditional necessity, [which 
must needs take place, out off or predestined by God, if they are 
jointly received.] Or secondly, it is necessary, that heresies 
exist by the necessity of the end, seeing that they are useful for 
this, "that they who are approved may be made manifest among you" 

[1 Cor 11:19], as the Apostle adds, that is, in order that the con- 
stancy of the faithful in the faith of the Church be proved, and 

the teachers may cast out laziness, more carefully conning the divine 
Scriptures, as Augustine says. This moreover is per accidens beyond, 
nay, contrary to the intention of the heretics, who endeavor to 
corrupt the faith, pervert the Scriptures, seduce the hearts of the 


innocent, with all the force of their minds. [We ought accordingly 


din 1529 edition, chapter ends here with the added sentence: 


"We shall deal more fully [with this in the chapter] 'Disputations 
with Heretics are not to be Held.'" The refutation of Obj. 5 is 
taken from 1541, with subsequent additions (see, e.g., 1572 ed.) 
marked here with brackets. 


27. CONCERNING THE BURNING OF HERETICS 185 


to have regard for that which is per se of their intention, in 
order that they may be excluded, rather than for that which is 
beyond and contrary to their intention, in order that they may 

be put up with.] Or thirdly, it is necessary that those things 
occur according to the condition of men (who do not take precau- 
tions against sins and heresies). For example, if some physician 
seeing certain persons using an unsuitable diet, Says: such per- 
sons must needs be i111; this statement is to be understood under 163" 
this condition: provided they do not change their diet. Similarly, 
also it is necessary that scandals occur, and it is necessary that 
heresies exist when men do not change their evil conversation, or 
when they do not turn away from the perverse teachings of depraved 
heretics, when princes and rectors of communities still leave those 
heretics free, nay, provide them with an annual stipend in order 
that they may spread their heresies among the people, while silence 
is imposed on Catholic preachers, so is it not even permitted them 
to mumble against the heretics. Who then would wonder that these 
heresies have to exist, where they find themselves in such a situa- 


tion? 


163” 


164 


CHAPTER 28 
DISPUTATIONS WITH HERETICS ARE NOT TO BE HELD 
Although concerning Luther and the Lutherans there is no 
doubt that they are condemned heretics, and are to be considered 
as such, because they recall the oft-condemned heresies of Arius, 
Mani, Jovinian, Nee 2 Vigilantius, Eytyches, Felix, the Albi- 
genses, the Waldensians , John Wyclif, John Hus, and other heretics, 


therefore we are not to dispute against them. 


For Pope Gelasius says: ''Our ancestors, discerning by divine 
inspiration, necessarily took precaution, that a synod once con- 
vened, should, for the sake of the faith, communion, and Catholic 
and Apostolic truth, pronounce against some heresy, and not allow 
afterward to be mutilated by new retractations (lest occasion be 
furnished to depraved persons) those things which had been remedially 
established and those which are followed." [Decr. 2.24.1.2, Fr. 1. 
966] 


The Emperor Marcian [L. nemo, C. de summa trinitate et fide 
Catholica] willed the same: "If anyone, once a case has been ad- 
judicated and rightly disposed of, should strive to reverse it and 
publicly debate it, he is doing injury to the judgment of the most 


reverend synod." 


Hence in the sevenrar session of the Council of Chalcedon, 
Marcian said, among other things [cf. Decr. 1.96.2, Fr. 1.338]: 
"We willed to concern ourselves with confirming the faith, not with 
sharing power, after the example of the most godly prince and most 
August Roman Emperor Constantine, in the council, so that when 
truth is found, the multitude may not, drawn by evil doctrines, be 


further disrupted." 


Daretins . a fourth c. presbyter of Sebaste (Pontus) who denied 
that in the Mass an oblation is made for the living and the dead 
(Aug.) Lutheran Book of Concord, p. 267 n. 6. According to Epiphanius, 


Panarion 3.1, Haer. 75, this Arian taught: "The prayers for those who 


have passed away do not have any merit; they are meaningless and they 
also must be abolished." 


recte: sixth. 
186 


28. DISPULTATIONS WITH HERETICS ARE NOT TO BE HELD 187 


Moreover, heretics do not seek disputation, unless one in- 
volved in much ill-will: for very many of them are so stubborn, 
that they freely promise that they are going to defend their 
articles even to death. Hence it is clear they are incorrigible, 164” 
obstinate and stubborm, and ones who are not teachable by God, but 
depend upon their own prudence, and put an obstruction in the Holy 


Spirit's way. 


Again, it is clear of the Lutheran heretics, that they 
fraudulently allege disputation, for they seek to dispute not in 
the presence of learned and educated men, practiced in theology, but 
in the presence of unlearned, vulgar laymen, whose capacity in no 


wise equips them to judge such mysteries of the faith. 


For how could the heretics come to a disputation in the pre- 
sence of the learned, when they know that theologians of the 
faculties (studia generalia) of France, Spain and England have 
decided against them, and the faculties of Germany, which were 
famed in theology, before the rising of this heresy, likewise 


condemned Luther. 


Besides these facts, in disputing they have in mind a perverse 
objective, namely, to draw to themselves laymen otherwise very hos- 165 
tile to the clergy, that they may lead them into even fuller hatred 


toward the clergy. 


Moreover, the Lutheran articles are of the sort that if they 
are set forth to be debated in the presence of the laity, the 
mysteries of our faith, and the authority of the Church and coun- 
cils are exposed to derision. For scandal arises not only among 
the simple faithful, but among Jews and infidels, if they should 
hear these things in our faith called in doubt, which were deter- 
mined and decreed by holy fathers and councils more than 1000 or 
1200 or 1300 years ago, or were observed from the time of the Aposties. 
Who then, who has even a grain of faith or prudence, could adjudge 
that these matters are to be disputed, in the presence of hostile 
and evilly disposed laymen? And because their change of opinion and 


stubbornness are well known (for they will not admit any other judge 


165 


166 


188 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


but Scripture, which they will to interpret according to their own 
heads), Paul the Apostle clearly has forbidden disputation with them. 
He says: ‘''Contend not in words, for it is to no profit, but to the 
subverting of the hearers" [2 Tim 2:14]. "avoid foolish and un- 
learned questions, knowing that they beget strife" [2 Tim 22 3ilh 

"But avoid foolish questions, . . . and contentions, and strivings 


about the law. For they are unprofitable and vain" [Tit 3:9]. 


"As the partridge has hatched eggs which she did not lay, so is 
he who has gathered riches, and not by right" [Jer 17:11]. Augustine, 
Against Faustus, 13.12, beautifully applies this: "The partridge is 
an excessively contentious animal. So also are the heretics conten- 
tious. For they do not love to dispute, but rather, by any means 
whatever to triumph with their most shameless obstinacy, so they may 
gather what they have not produced. For those Christians whom they 
especially seduce by the name of Christ, they now find have been 
born through His Gospei; these they gather (and lead) to madness." 
Thus does Augustine apply to heretics the proverb, "The partridge 
gathers what she has not brought forth." It follows that if a suit- 
able judge is not provided, there will never be any end to disputa- 
tion, but a heretic does not accept a suitable judge, because it is 
the very nature of heretics, as Augustine says, Against Faustus, 
Book 22, "to flee disputation." For rash, stubborn and savage per— 
sons are always found who accept no satisfactory solution. “Just 
as Jannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so do the heretics resist the 
truth--corrupt men, reprobate of mind toward the faith,” [2 Tim 
3:8], but they will not profit further. Pope Gelasius [Epist. to 
the Bishops of Dardania: Decr. 2.24.3.36: Fr. 1.1000] “With whom 
was the synod to be undertaken? The Catholic bishops were now 
routed on all sides, only the colleagues of the perfidious remained, 
with whom it was not permitted to hold council, as the Psalm 
[24:4] says: ‘I have not sat with the council of vanity, and I will 
not enter with the doers of iniquity.’ It is not churchly custom 
to mingle counsel with those who hold polluted communion with the 


wicked." etc. 


28. DISPUTATIONS WITH HERETICS ARE NOT TO BE HELD 189 


Chrysostom, Hom. on the Lord's Day, 18: "Hear, O faithful man, 
who willingly contend against the heretic. If the Pharisees have 
been appeased, can you likewise by contending against a heretic ap- 
pease him, if you have conquered him? But if the Pharisees have 
indeed been conquered, but have not been appeased, how could you 
appease them after you have conquered? Are you stronger than Christ? 


Do you appease those whom he has not appeased?" 


Origen, On Matth, Hom 22: It is characteristic of the Sad- 
ducees and of all who are teachers of falsehood, to be mute, but 
not to keep silent, for if they are mute with respect to something, 


still they are not silent. 


Therefore the Catholics ought to avoid disputation with per- 
sons of this sort because as the wise man says, "It is an honor for 
aman to separate himself from quarrels" [Prov 20:3]; except when 
suitable judges are provided, for then, in order that the glory of 
God might be manifested, and Catholic truth protected, and the 
perfidious heretics confounded, there must by all means be disputa- 
tion, even as Stephen disputed [Acts 5], Paul disputed [Acts 17 and 
20]; and where heretics desire to undergo and suffer the judgment 
of disputation, there are as yet so many Catholic men, each one of 167 
whom has a sword girded on his thigh, who will rise up against the 
heretics, just as David did toward Goliath, in the name of the Lord 
of hosts of the armies of the God of Israel [1 K 17:45]. ‘''And 


under a just judge truth will conquer" [3 Esd 3:12]. 


167 


190 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


PREFACE TO THE appitron? 


Since new diseases give occasion for the search after new 
remedies, on that account, after we had put forward other common-— 
places against the Lutherans, truly indeed we ascertained the way 
and the door opened by Luther for all to hear anything whatsoever. 

For Luther annulled (as forcefully as he could) the authority of 

holy councils, the judgment of Roman pontiffs, the replies of holy 
fathers beloved of God, and the condemnations of academic faculties 
(studia generalia). Accordingly, now to every frenzied or melancholy , 
Saturnine, doubly stupid brain, a way is opened to mix all the in- 


sane fantasies of his head with the sacred mysteries. 


0 God! O times! We are compelled therefore by their impiety, 


although utterly against our will, to add these commonplaces. 


This is a preface intended to introduce the chapters added 
in 1529, i.e., Chs. 29-33. See above, p. 9%. 


CHAPTER 29 
THAT UNDER THE EUCHARIST IS THE TRUE BODY OF curtst* 


“And while they were at supper, Jesus took bread, and blessed, 
and broke it, and gave it to his disciples, and said: ‘Take and 
eat, this is my body.’ And taking the cup, he gave thanks, and 
gave it to them, saying: ‘Drink of this, all of you. For this is 
my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for many for 
remission of sins'" [Mt 26:26-28]. Most significantly Christ said: 
"This is my body" [Mt 26:26] and "This is my blood" [Mt 26:28]. 

Why therefore does anyone reject these very clear words and Christ 


himself? 


"While they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessing, broke, 


and gave to them, and said, Take; this is my body. And having 
taken the cup, giving thanks, he gave it to them. And they all 
drank of it. And he said to them: This is my blood of the new 
testament, which shall be shed for many" [Mk 14:22-24]. 


"And taking bread, he gave thanks, and broke it; and gave it 
to them, saying: This is my body, which is given for you; do this 
in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after he had 
supped, saying: This is the cup, the new testament in my blood, 
which shall be shed for you" [Lk 22:19f]. Note with what great 
harmony the Evangelists indicate the body and blood of Christ was 
delivered over to the disciples. 

"The bread that I will give, is my flesh, for the life of the 
world" [Jn 6:52]. Christ says: "The bread I shall give is flesh"; 
the heretics deny this. 

"T have received of the Lord that which also I delivered to 


you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, 


took bread, and giving thanks, broke, and said: ‘Take and eat, this 


is my body, which shall be delivered for you; this do in remembrance 


of me.' In like manner also the cup, after he had supped, saying: 
1 


Christ and His blood are present in the sacrament of the altar"; 
Proposition 2: "The true body and blood of Christ are also truly 
offered in the mass for the quick and the dead" (Eck). 


191 


Cf. Baden Disputation (1526), Proposition 1: The true body of 


168 


168 


169 


169 


192 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


‘This cup is the new testament in my blood'" [1 Cor 11:23-25]. 
Note how Paul expressly says that the body and blood of Christ 


was | offered to the disciples. 


"The cup of benediction, which we bless, is it not the com- 
munion of the blood of Christ? And the bread, which we break, is 
it not the partaking of the body of the Lord? For we, being many, 
are one bread, one body, all who partake of one bread and one cup" 
{1 Cor 10:16f]. Here Paul’ clearly shows that in every particle of 
consecrated bread, the body of Christ is partaken; stony is he who 


twists these words to something else than the body of Christ. 


"But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that bread, 
and drink of that cup. For he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats 
and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body of the 
Lord" {1 Cor 11:28f]. It is very clear that on account of the pre- 
sence of Christ's body, the sin from the one unworthily partaking 
pertains to the body of Christ, for no one but a madman denies one 
eating unworthily to be answerable for what he eats. Paul teaches 
in this passage in First Corinthians: let them not believe there 
is simple food on the altar, but the body of Christ, for which he 
who eats unworthily is answerable; accordingly very significantly 
he added: "Not discerning the body of the Lord," that is, not dis- 
tinguishing it from other foods. This all the holy fathers of all 
periods held to in the churches; hence to act foolishly against so 
many utterly clear texts of Holy Scripture is an act of extreme 
rashness, and exceeds the insanity of other heretics. At one time 
Beregarius, deacon of St. Maurice of Angers Church, had taught this, 
but at Rome, before Pope Nicolas and thirteen Archbishops, and one 


hundred bishops, he abjured it [Decr. 3.2.42, Fr. 1.1328f]. 


Objections of the Capernaite Heretics. 2 


1. Christ says: "The poor you will always have with you, but 
you will not always have me with you" [Mt 26:11): but if He were 


in the Eucharist, we would always have Him. 


lgingular verb, treating body and blood as one. 


2 
See p. 3, n. 1 (p. 6) above. 


29. THAT UNDER THE EUCHARIST 1S THE TRUE BODY OF CHRIST 193 


2. "It is the Spirit that quickens; the flesh profits 
nothing" [Jn 6:64]. If therefore it does not profit, why is there 


so much contention over what is under the Eucharist? 


3. Augustine, On Psalm 4: "Until the end of the age, the Lord 


is above." 


4. Otherwise, three articles of faith would be falsified: "He 
ascended into heaven," "He sits at the right hand of the Father," 
"Thence He shall come." For if He is in heaven, how will He be on 
the altar? For it is impossible for the same body to be in two 


places. 


Andreas Bodenstein Carlstadt, the first reviver of this buried 


heresy, addresses these words on behalf of his own error. 


i. If the body and blood of Christ were in the sacrament, 


it would follow that bread would be crucified for us. 
ii. Christ did not say: "Take my body," but "Take this bread." 


iii. Bread is not made better by this mumbling and panting of 


priests. For who gave this power to priests? 


iv. Otherwise since Christ had a mortal body in the Supper, 
and now has an immortal one, it could now not be true to say of it 


that it is given for you. 


v. Christ says: “If anyone says to you, Here is Christ, or 
there is Christ, do not believe him" [Mt 24:23]. Therefore, let 
us not believe it, if they say, in this host is Christ, or in that 


host. 


vi. He chides the Catholics because they call the Eucharist a 
sacrament: for the Apostles did not so name it. God, not man, 
gives his own creatures their names. Moreover Paul calls the Lord's 
Supper, the Lord's bread, cup, etc. 

vii. The Lord's Supper was sufficiently instituted by these 


words: "Jesus took bread, gave thanks, and broke, and gave it to 


his disciples, and said: Take and eat, this do in remembrance of 


170 


170 


194 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


me" [1 Cor 11:23]. And these words, "This is my body," are inap- 


plicable, as if interjected through parenthesis. 


viii. The words of Paul [1 Cor 10:16£], they try to avoid, be- 
171 cause there the Apostle Paul speaks not of communion, that is, of 
taking the sacrament, but of the communion of the passion of Christ, 


which is done in commemoration of hin. 


ix. He so understands the words of 1 Cor 11:28f to refer to those 
unworthily commemorating the Lord's death. foinetis and Oecolam- 
pone two contentious vessels of error, have embraced Carlstadt's 
opinion: Zwingli lays his foundation in the passage of John Ch. 6: 
‘tthe flesh does not profit anything" [Jn 6:64]. Then, to make fun 
of the clear texts of the Gospel, they say: That means it is taken 
in an act signified, not exercised, as the sophists say in their 
categories. For, seeing how utterly absurd this shift of Carlstadt 
is, they thus endeavor to evade it. That is: this signifies my 


body; or, this is body, that is, the figure of my body. 
Refutation of These Points by the Catholics. 


171 1. That Christ is going to be with us forever, the Truth con- 
fesses in the last chapter of Matthew: "TJ shall be with you.. .- 
even to the consummation of the world" {Mt 28:20]. Therefore, when 
he says: "Me you will not always have with you." it is to be under- 
stood according to the bodily presence of human intercourse, for now 


he is not anointed, washed, cleansed, etc. 


2. Surely if flesh will not benefit Catholics, neither will 
bread benefit the heretics. Furthermore, neither will the heretic 
say that the flesh of Christ was not on the cross. Besides, it does 
not follow: "it does not profit"; therefore it is not in the sacra- 
ment; unless you admit this inference therefore is not in heaven. 
Yet if we examine the matter more sharply, the heretics do not fol- 


low Christ's meaning. Christ is not speaking of his own flesh; for 


Note the inconsistency of the heretics: Zwingli in his Canon 
bf the Mass] said the body of Christ is in the Eucharist, by 
similitude. 


Oecolampadius, in two sermons, is impious when he comes into 
the depth. (Eck's notes) Reference is probably to Sermo de sacramento 
eucharistiae (1521). Latin text in Walch; German tr. a, 
in Walch, Dr. Martin Luthers SAmmtliche Schriften, 20.2361-2381. 


29. THAT UNDER THE EUCHARIST IS THE TRUE BODY OF CHRIST U5) 


he does not say, My flesh profits nothing; the Jews held this 
opinion, who went back thinking the flesh of Christ broken by the 


teeth is visibly torn to pieces under the species of bread. 


3. We admit the Lord is above in heaven, sitting at the right 
hand of the Father, in visible and quantitative form, who neverthe- 
less, invisible, is sacramentally concealed under the species of 


bread. 


4. The truth of the eucharist does not conflict with the 
articles of faith. For because with God no word is impossible, he 
can make one body be in many places, since by nature he could make 
one essence of the soul in many members, in the hands, and feet. 
Augustine. Likewise: Christ is in heaven and yet appeared to Paul 
[Acts 9:4f; 22:6-8; 26:14f; 1 Cor 15:8]. 


i. The things Carlstadt, banished from Saxony by Luther's 
hatred, has poured forth are also so impious and obtuse that they 


deserve no reply. Nevertheless, let us speak. 


Perchance Luther would have conceded that the bread was cru- 
cified by communication of properties, yet because we Catholics are 
far away from that heresy, that the bread remains in the Eucharist, 


for that reason Carlstadt's inference is not admitted. 


[And Ambrose, Augustine, and Gregory of Nyssa asserted bread 
ig transubstantiated in the sacrament; to them add John Chrysoston, 


Hom. 60, where he says God sanctifies and transmutes the bread. ] 


4i. What Carlstadt assumes is not true, for Christ does not 
say: Take bread; but, extending the bread, he says: Take and 
eat, this is my body. What a difference there is between saying, 
Take my body; and extending his hand and saying, Take, this is my 


body. 


iii. No one says that through breathing, or panting, or mumbling, 
bread becomes better, but when the priest, according to Christ's 
institution, says the consecrating words, by which God with his 


divine omnipotent power is present, and turns the substance of 


172 


172” 


1529 


173 


173 


174 


196 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


bread into his own body, and wine into blood. This power, more- 
over, the Apostles received from Christ, when he said: "This do 


t 


in remembrance of me." Therefore Paul says: "I have received 
: 


from the Lord what I also deliver to you" etc. {1 Cor 11:23]. 


iv. Even if the body of Christ were already impassible, then 
the priest who knows that Christ does not die later, does not say 
that it must be given, but recounts that Christ said such things in 
the Supper, which is true,‘for then (not now) the body of Christ was 


to be given, and blood was to be shed [Rom c. 6]. 


v. What Christ said concerning his kingdom of faith, the 
heretic understands concerning the body of Christ. The Savior 
foresaw it would come to pass that the Hussites would say that 
Christ stands for them. The Lutherans, opposing these, assert 
Christ is for them; the Zwinglians excluding the Carlstadtites boast 
of Christ himself. The Rebaptizers claim Christ for themselves 


alone. The Lord has warned us away from these heretics. 


vi. Vain is Carlstadt's boast, for since this matter is well 
established, he contends in vain over the name; for not God, but 
Adam, gave names to the creatures, nor is the sacrament a false 
sign, as that Judaizing rascal ridicules the Church, that it is a 
"Sekerment," for it is clear that the appellation "sacraments" 
came down from the Apostles even to us, from the testimony of 
Dionysius, who in his book On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy [3.1] 
calls the Eucharist "synaxis," and according to his celebrated 
nrecep tema he says that it is the consummation of the sacraments; 
he states the most holy and most venerable mysteries of it, and 


says the sacraments are divine gifts, and are in common. 


vii. We deny what he says: for "This is my body" is most inti- 
mately connected in the middle with other words; and it is childish 
to accept the end words, but to exclude on one's own authority the 
middle words. He proves this disjunction from scripture: for it 


does not satisfy this stupid man that he says that the punctuation 


oe the Apostle Paul. 


29. THAT UNDER THE EUCHARIST IS THE TRUE BODY OF CHRIST 197 


is prefixed to the clause and after the principal capital letter. 
This to him, this is the way a theologian excels: to contend over 
capital letters and punctuation. Let the sophists be driven out of 
theology and let the sophists be taken up with those great capital 
letters. Childish are the things he gabbles so confidently: the 
natural consequence of the words only allows that Christ has pointed 
out the bread extended in the hand, and this phrase has been added 
to make the meaning clearer. And weigh what Luther here says 
against Carlstadt: they are attacking Luther in their twisting of 
these words, "You are Peter, and on this rock I shall build my 


church" [Mt 16:18]. 


viii. Carlstadt mangles and lacerates Paul, for when he leans 
toward allegories alone, he admits letter and spirit together, it 
is certain that Paul is speaking of communion and participation in 
the Eucharist, not in the passion. Now communication in the passion 
is confined to the good alone; participation in the Eucharist is 


common to the worthy and unworthy, good and bad. 


ix. He similarly mangles Paul, for Paul speaks of persons eat~ 
ing unworthily. This man twists this to commemorating unworthily 
even though these are different, although each sins, that is, com- 


municating unworthily and commemorating unworthily. 


Do twingli and Oecolampadius, sharing this error, saw Carl- 
stadt's exposition of these words, "this is my body," to be violent, 
hard, and bold, and utterly aberrant from the true one, yet his 
impiety pleased them; hence they fashioned a most trifling and more 
than sophistical exposition of their own. "Is" is understood to 
mean "signifies."" Thus they teach the new Evangelicals to follow 
the pure letter of Scripture, that is, to tear it to shreds. Hence 
also they are laughed at by Luther and Bugenhagen. And thus you can 


destroy their impiety from its very foundation. 


ton the Fifth principal objection. 


ia 


ae) 


176 


198 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


i. First, Hausschein (Oecolampadius) is raving when he says, 
"This is my body, that is, the form of my body," because he con- 
tradicts both himself and the Catholics, for, the opinion of all 
is that there is the form of bread, even if among Catholics it is 
believed to be the body of Christ, yet under the form of visible 
bread. See Augustine, Sentences of Prosper [cf. c. 341, quoted in 
Decr., 3.2.65: Fr. 1.1338]. 


ji. Secondly, the ignorance of Zwingli and Oecolampadius is 
detected, when they think in a metaphorical expression that "is" is 


' Hence they have come to this impiety 


equivalent to "signifies.’ 
also out of ignorance of dialectic; hence, afterward they err in 
symbolic theology. And in order to make sure that their doctrine 
does not progress they examine that trite expression, "the wolf is 

in the fable," as to whether those dolts here expound “is" as "“signi- 
fies." Likewise, in those symbols of John Ch. 10 let them introduce 


their "signifies." 


“The hireling . . . whose own the sheep are not, 
sees the wolf coming'' [Jn 10:12]. "I am the good shepherd,'' that 
is, "I signify the good shepherd, and I know my sheep’ [Jn 10:14]. 


QO stupid, dull, and ignorant heretics! 


iii. Thirdly, the false conclusion of Oecolampadius, twisting the 
opinions of the Fathers, especially that of Augustine, we shall 


easily avoid, if we note that the eucharist is called a sign. 
Firstly, by reason of the sensible species of bread and wine. 


Secondly, because also the true body of Christ is the sign of 


the mystical body of Christ. 


Thirdly, because the eucharist when taken is the sign of grace 


conferred upon the taker. 


And fourthly, since the body of Christ is there not only circum- 
scriptively, but its own mode of existing inheres spiritually, it 
also is designated by the name of "sign" or "form," although nonethe— 


less it is as yet truly there the body of Christ. 


29. THAT UNDER THE EUCHARIST IS THE TRUE BODY OF CHRIST 199 


iv. Fourthly, because three evangelists and Paul indicate no 
metaphor, but identically announce, "This is my body." And it is 
repeated very many times, and nowhere else in Scripture will they 
teach here is a metaphor, nor are we taught by faith that here is 
a metaphor; therefore it is to be understood in its proper sense: 


"This is my body." For Zwingli raves: elsewhere in Holy Scripture 


tt tw 


is'' is to be understood as "signifies." But he exceeds all madness. 
If "is" were anywhere understood to mean "signifies," it is here 
understood, but he was deceived by his ignorance of logic. For 


when Christ says He is the vine, "is" is not put there for "signi- 


fies,'' as his obtuseness would understand it, by putting in the text, 


"T am the true vine," " 


that is, 'I signify the true vine.'" This 
is Zwingli's opinion, although Christ does not signify the vine, but 


is signified by the vine. 


Now to the fifth very clear Gospel text, the agreement of the 
whole Catholic Church accedes, and those most powerful miracles 
divinely manifested in this most venerable sacrament as well. Then 
let heretics’ fleeting sophisms, raving impieties, most ignorant 
distortions, and forced expositions of Holy Scripture, perish. Since 
Luke for one shuts out all their dreams, when he relates that Christ 
said: "This cup is the new testament in my blood" [Lk 22:20]. For 


the heretics love the Greek words, in which "is" is not read, and 


" surely not 


yet identically, it is said, "the cup the new testament,' 
in wine, but in my blood, for there is no testament without blood. 


See Paul, Heb 9:16. 


Note how the heretics were moved like a drunken man, and all 
their wisdom was eaten up. Oecolampadius in July 5245 was angry 
that the blood of Christ was denied to the faithful in the communion: 
and before the year ended, he with his heretical accomplices denied 
to the faithful, both the body and blood of Christ. Likewise 


Zwingli. Carlstadt after he breathed such fire over the sacrament, 


now sang another song: he did not propose these things to be believed, 


1see Disputation at Baden, 18 May - 8 June 1526, especially 
Eck's Propositions 1 and 2. 


176 


177 


200 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


nor were they going to be asserted from the Spirit, or from 
Sacred Scripture, but were to be investigated as things pro- 
posed by him under their proper head. See how that stupid man 


changes like the moon [Ecclus 27:12]. 


CHAPTER 30 
CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF CHILDREN : 


"This is my covenant which you shall observe, between me and 
you," etc. [Gen 17:10]. "An infant of eight days shall be circum- 177 
cized among you" etc. [Gen 17:12]. "The male, whose flesh of his 
foreskin shall not be circumcized, that soul shall be destroyed out 
of his people, because he has broken my covenant" [Gen 17:14]. Now 
baptism seems to be in the Church what circumcision was in the 
synagogue. For just as through circumcision the children of the Jews 
are included within the divine covenant, so also the children of 
Christians are not to be excluded from the covenant of God; therefore: 
children are to be baptized, against the Rebaptizers. And a child 
not baptized is condemned by the common law, against Zwingli, who 
while he wished to destroy one heresy of the Rebaptizers, taught ten 


others that were worse, against the express statements of Scripture. 


“Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them 
not; for of such is the kingdom of God," etc. [Mk 10:14]. “And em- 
bracing them and laying his hands upon them, he blessed them" 178" 
[Mk 10:16]. Therefore the Rebaptizers do badly in forbidding chil- 


dren to come to Christ through baptism. 
"Baptize all nations" [Mt 28:19]. Therefore also, children. 


Since "our fathers were all under the cloud and all were baptized 
in the sea and in the cloud" [1 Cor 10:1f], indeed it is certain 
that even children were under the cloud and thus baptized as in a 


figure. 


Baptism is not repeatable without sacrilege. Hence Paul says 
"Tt is impossible for those who were once illuminated, have tasted 
also the heavenly gift'' [Heb 6:4], ''and are fallen away to be re- 
newed again to penance'' [Heb 6:6]. Paul does not deny the reit- 
eration of penance as does Novatian, but of renewal, that is, of 
baptism. 
*On baptism see Gratian, Decry. 3.4.1-146; Peter Lombard, Sent. 4.6; 


Thomas Aquinas, S.T., PT 66-71, especially PT 68.9: Whether children 
should be baptized. 1 


201 


178 


179 


202 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


The use and authority of the whole church came down from the 
very time of the Apostles, which all devout children ought 


deservedly to obey. 


1. Dionysius, Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, c. 7 [11: PG 
3.567£}], after he had said that children who while they cannot as 
yet understand divine things, are still made participants in bap- 
tism, adds: "When this had come to the attention of our most godly 
leaders (thus is he wont to call the Apostles), it seemed good to 
them to admit infants in this way, so that the natural parents of 
an infant offered (for baptism) may turn over the child to one of 
the faithful, a distinguished teacher of divine matters; the presi- 
dent requires of this child responding according to a holy, edu- 
cated life, that he profess self-denial, and confess faith." Note 
that children baptized by the Apostles were under the sponsorship 


of god-parents. 


Cyprian and the entire African Council to Fidus who was of the 
opinion that children designated between the third and fourth day 
ought not to be baptized. Cyprian answered: "In our council it 
seemed far otherwise to all, for in this which you thought ought to 
be done no one agreed, but all of us adjudged that the mercy and 


grace of God ought to be denied to no one born of men." 


Origen, On the Letter to the Romans. 


Augustine, On Genesis, 10.23. The custom of Mother Church in 
baptizing children is by no means to be rejected, nor in any way 
to be considered superfluous, nor at all to be believed, unless the 
tradition were apostolic. He puts forth this case in the two books 


to Marcellinus, under the title On Merits and Forgiveness of Sins. 


{cf. Gratian Decr. 3.4.139: Fr 1.1407] Jerome saw these books and 


praised 2 them. 


Jerome, Against the Pelagians, 3, declares that children are 


baptized in order that in baptism sins may be forgiven them. 


ae work is quoted by Gratian, Decr, 3.4.139 (Fr. 1.1407); also 
by Thomas Aquinas, S.T., PT 69.9. 


21529: laudavit; 1541: habuit 


30. CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 203 


The first Parabaptist was Agrippinus of Carthage [Vincent of 


Lerins, De antiquitate ecclesiae]. 
Three Heretics are Anathematized. 


The Council of Milevis, Against the Pelagian Heretics, Canon 2 
[Gratian, Decr. 3.4.153: Fr. 1.1412]: "Likewise it was decreed that 
whoever denies infants recently born from the womb of mothers are 
to be baptized or says they are baptized for remission of sins but 
derive nothing of original sin from Adam which will be expiated by 
the laver of regeneration, hence it follows that in them the form 
of baptism for remission of sins is not true but is understood to 
be false and to be anoithemar ieee” Here by a sacred council Bal- 
thasar Hubmaier is struck with anathema with his rebaptizers who deny 


the baptism of infants. 


Zo pein himself denies original sin in children. Accord- 
ingly it would not be wiped out in baptism; hence wishing to destroy 
the heresy concerning the non-baptism of infants, he asserts ten 
other heresies, of which one is, that children of Catholics, etc. 
unbaptized, are saved. Further, Augustine, On Merit and Forgiveness 


of Sins, c. 33. Likewise Jerome. 


3. A certain newfangled heretic, Eberhard lededet an apostate 
canon regular of Halberstadt, who indeed admits original sin, yet 
says it is uncertain whether a baptized child, dying, is saved, be- 


cause we do not know whether he has received faith, and thus, if he 


does not receive faith he remains a child of wrath and of condemnation. 


Note in how many chapters the heretics are split, contrary to the 
Apostle. Not all say the same thing. Reason founded upon faith over- 
comes it, for they take it that original sin has been contracted by 
the transgression of another. Why then had not the Father of mercies, 


the Lord, provided them with a remedy in order that they might be 


Ieee Hubmaier, Von der christlichen Taufe (1525), Schriften, 
pp. 118-163. 


ooee Zwingli, Fidei Ratio, 4 (teaching on original sin); on 
baptism: Ratio 7. Also cf. Dispute at Baden (1526), Proposition 6: 
"Children of Christians are born in original sin."* 


3Not identified 


179 


204 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


healed with the will of another cooperating? But the fact that 
children contract sin is clear from Augustine and Jerome in their 


180” 


treatises against the heresy of the Pelagians mentioned above and 
it is proved, "Ror behold I was conceived in iniquities; and in 
sins did my mother conceive me" [Ps 50:7]. "We were by nature 
children of wrath even as the rest" [Eph 2:3]. "For all have 
sinned and do need the glory of God" [Rom 3:23]. "As through one 
man sin entered this world, and through sin death, and thus death 
passed into all men, in whom all have sinned" [Rom 5:12]. Here the 


Apostle says “in whom all have sinned,” and Pelagians and Zwingli 


dare to say that infants have not sinned. 


In the fifth synod of Constantinople were condemned the Para- 


baptists, Zoara, Syrus Monachus, Severus of Antioch, Peter of Antioch, 


Anthimus of Trebizond, Peter of Apamara. ! 


And later: "If by one man's offense death reigned through one; 

much more they who receive abundance of grace and of the gift and 
181 of justice, shall reign in life (even infants regenerated in Christ) 
through one, Jesus Christ" [Rom 5:17]. And later: "Aas by the dis- 


obedience of one man many were made sinners" etc. [Rom 5:19]. 


"T give thanks to my Lord, that I baptized none of you but 
Crispus and Caius; lest any should say that you were baptized in 
my name. Moreover I baptized also the household of Stephanus” 

{1 Cor 1:14-16]. If he baptized the whole house therefore he also 


baptized the children of that house. 


“as in Adam all die (even children) so also in Christ all shall 
be made alive" [1 Cor 15:22], even children. But this is only 


through baptism through which they are incorporated in Christ. 


Against the Renee cera cece lempad ce argues for the 
baptism of children: 


1. The Rebaptizersshow disrespect to the practice of the 


181” Christian community. 


2. That is an inductive opinion of the sects, schisms, and 
seditions. 
lprobably this has reference to the Synod at Constantinople under 
Patriarch Menas in AD 536, not the Fifth Synod of Constantinople 
of AD 553. Cf. Corpus Juris Civilis, Novella 42. 


2chiefly in controversy with Hubmaier. 


30. CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 205 


3. Who has thus taught up until now, or who has observed this 


custom? 


4. Yet when did baptism of children begin in the Church, if 


they were not at some time customarily baptized? 


5. If children are not to be baptized, let this prohibition be 


proved from the Scriptures. 


6. From the Apostles' time baptism was not forbidden to 


children. 


7. You do not want to receive so many hundreds of thousands of 


baptized infants as Christian brothers? 


8. Zwingli inveighs against those that they will not obtain the 
victory, because, striving for this a thousand years before, they 


surrendered. 


9. He is angry about their innovation. - If the matter had 
advanced to the point, he says, that in some place or other a hos- 
tile head (as soon as anything new and rare struck his fancy) would 
immediately raise up a sect adhering to him, and there would come 
to be so many sects and schisms, that Christ would be divided into 
many pieces. And later: some melancholy, saturnine and peculiar 


head or other strives to raise up his own sect. 


10. Although baptism of children is not clear from the Holy 
Scriptures, just as many other things, yet because they are not 
contrary to God but with God, for that reason they ought to be 


received. 
Antithesis. 


We have recounted these things in order that Catholics may 
understand how heretics are umable to defend themselves against 
heretics, unless they use the arms of the Church. Let us put be- 
fore their eyes the fact that they quote Cyprian, Augustine, and 


the Council of Milevis, when the Catholics would do that, and would 


Leia Mh Of Baptism [LCC 24.158]. 


182 


182 


183 


206 ECK :; ENCHIRIDION 


shout, fathers, fathers. Let us place this matter before their 


eyes. 


1. Both Luther and Oecolampadius reject the Church's practice 


in baptism, and the mass, and all things. 


2. And the heresy of Luther has already put forth many sects, 
and very polluting seditions, such as Germany never experienced be- 


fore. Hence more than a hundred thousand men have perished. 


3. Who has so taught that you are to be baptized in the German 
ieepeneer: That the priest Zwingli should marry? And the apostate 


Oecolampadius should reject his vow and priestly orders? 


4. If at some time there was not Lent in the Church, when then 
did it begin? Or if once there was no churchly confession (which 


they call "auricular"), when did it begin? 


5. The heretics prove that children are not to be exorcized, 
not to have god-parents, that marriage is not a sacrament, that 
confession is not to be made to a priest, and a thousand things of 
this sort, which they forbid; let them prove--I say--that these are 


forbidden in Scripture. 


6. From the time of the Apostles celibacy was not forbidden, 


nor the blessing of candles, etc. 


7. You wish not to receive as Catholics so many hundred 
thousand of those who confess, who make offering in the mass, who 
adore the eucharist, who keep religious vows, then the way to 


Christ will be very narrow. 


8. Nor will you obtain victory against the images of the 
saints, against their relics, against original sin, for the Feli- 
cians, Helvidians, and the Pelagians more than a thousand years 


ago attempting this failed. 


9. All the Catholics are angry over the novelty of so many 
heresies that anyone according to his own brain changes and con- 
fuses the mass, baptism, communion and all the offices of the 


Church. 


1 
Luther, Babylonian Captivity, insists that baptism is the first and 
only plank (the ship) and is not to be replaced after post-baptismal sins 


by penance (the second plank); nor is it to be divided with confirmation. 


2See Chapter 37, pp. 264-269, below. 


30. CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 207 


Catholics weep that so many novelties of sects are permitted 
to the heretics: there are Lutherans, Carlstadtites, Zwinglians, 183 


Oecolampadians, Rebaptizers, eaperrauees 


Why then, 0 Luther, Pellikan, Carlstadt did you not admit any- 
thing as yours unless it was proved by clear texts of Holy Scrip- 
ture, thinking that to be a valid argument in theology? Yet it is 
not read, therefore it does not exist. Why now do you betake your- 
selves to the traditions of men which the dizziness of your brains 
have spewed forth? Where is the horned argument of Zwingli, of your 


brother, Balthasar (Hubmaier) Friedberger? See above, Chapter ane 
Objections of the Heretics. 


1, "Go and teach all nations, and preach the gospel to every 
creature. He who believes and is baptized, shall be saved" [Mk 


16:15f]. Therefore only believers are to be baptized. 


2. "Going therefore, teach all nations, baptizing them in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, teach- 
ing them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you" 184 


(Mt 28:19f]. 


3. The Gospel was proclaimed to the eunuch before he was 


baptized [Acts 8:32ff£]; likewise to Cornelius [Acts 10:34ff]. 


4. Why in ancient times did baptism take place only three 
times a year if children were to be baptized as soon as they were 


born? 


5. Pope Nicolas began to baptize children, but Scripture 


knows no baptism of children. 
Response of the Catholics. 


1/2. Christ is speaking of adults, both in Mark and in Matthew. 


Let the Lutherans nevertheless note that from the words of Christ 


T3ee p- 3, 192f, above 


2 P. 124, above. 


184 


185 


208 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


it is not sufficient to believe and be baptized, but it is neces~ 


sary to keep everything Christ has commanded. 


Also in the Church of the Savior infants are taught and be- 
lieve through others, just as from others they have removed the 
sins remitted in baptism. Likewise, “Mother Church provides 
motherly lips, that they may be imbued with the sacred mysteries 
because they cannot yet believe with their own heart unto righteous-— 
ness, nor with their own lips confess unto salvation [Rom 10:10]. 
If moreover they are on this account rightly called faithful, since 
they as it were profess faith through the words of those who carry 
them, let them be shown to have renounced the devil and this world" 
[Decr. 3.4.139, Fr. 1.1407, quoting Augustine, On Merit and Remis~ 
sion of Sins, Chs. 25, 19]. So speaks Augustine. The reason for 
this is attached: that spiritual regeneration is so to speak like 
physical birth with respect to the fact that children formed in their 
mother's womb do not receive nourishment through themselves, but are 
sustained from the nourishment of the mother; so also children not 
yet having the use of reason, as if formed in the womb of Mother 
Church, receive salvation not through themselves, but through the 
act of the Church. And thus the faith of another, namely, of parents 
and god-parents offering the infant to the Church for baptism, suf- 
fice to them for salvation, just as the faith of those who presented 
the paralytic (Jesus saw their faith and said to him:) "Confess, 
son, your sins will be forgiven you" [Mt 9:2], so the faith of the 
centurion obtained salvation (= healing) for his child [Mt 8:5ff]). 
And the faith of the Canaanite woman obtained for her daughter 


liberation from demon-possession, etc. [Mt 15:22]. 
The eunuch was an adult, and likewise Cornelius. 


That was on behalf of adults, not on behalf of children and 
only twice did public adult baptism take place: at Easter and at 
Pentecost. Not thrice, as Oecolampadius imagines, as is clear from 
Siricus, Leo, Gelasius, and the Council of Girone [cf. Gratian, 
Decr. 3.4.15: Fr. 1.1366]. 


30. CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF CHILDREN 209 


It was not begun by Pope Nicolas, as is clear from Jerome, 
Augustine and Cyprian, who preceded Nicolas by 400 or 600 years. 
I have seen no writings of Rebaptizers; I hear there were very 185 
many unlearned, rash men, unversed in the Latin language, with the 
exception of Balthasar Hubmaier of Friedberg, who is reported to 
be the author of this depraved sect, a man who while he was still 
in communion with the Apostolic See, performed the office of teacher. 


May God grant him to be able to discern the true echt oe 


The was burnt at Vienna, 1528. See p. 12, above. 


CHAPTER 31 
CONCERNING FREE WILL 


Madness of the Heretics. 


Here the heretics have revived the once extinct heresy of 

Mani who first indeed denied free will functions actively on good 
works, because such are wholly and totally done by God; thereupon 
Luther, having become insane, denied free will completely, because 
all things happen out of absolute necessity--something once said 

186 by the stupid Stoics, Empedocles, Critolaus, Diodorus and other 
mistaken ones. Against these see also, Seneca, Natural Questions , 
2s 


The Lord said to Cain: “If you do well, shall you not receive? 
but if ill, shall not sin forthwith be present at the door? but the 
lust thereof shall be under you, and you shall have dominion over it" 
[Gen 4:7]. Here God makes free will master. Luther, to the ignominy 


of the Creator, makes it slave. 


This commandment, that I command you this day is not above you, 
nor far off from you... - Consider that I have set before you 
this day life and good, and on the other hand death and evil . 

I call heaven and earth to witness this day, that I have set before 
you life and death, blessing and cursing. Choose therefore life, 
that both you and your seed may live" [Deut 30:11, 15, oi Elec- 


tion pertains to free will; the wise man is in agreement. 


186 "cod made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of 
his own counsel. He added his commandments and precepts. If you 
will keep the commandments, -. - the commandments shall preserve 
you. He has set water and fire before you, stretch forth your hand 
to whichever you will. Before man is life and death, good and evil, 
that which he shall choose shall be given him" [Ecclus 15:14-18)." 


Nothing more expressly could be said with respect to free will. 


*At the Leipzig Debate (1519), Eck in the first week argued with 


Carlstadt the Becess tty of the concurrence of grace and will for all 
meritorious action. 


210 


31. CONCERNING FREE WILL 211 


"Al1 those who shall remain of this wicked kindred, shall 


choose death rather than life” [Jer 8:3]. 


"The innocent shall be saved, and he shall be saved by the 


cleanness of his hands" [Job 22:30]. 


A choice was given to the Jews whether or not they willed to 
follow God [Josh 24]. 


A choice was given to David of selecting one plague out of 


three [2 K 24:12]. 


A choice was given to the husband on the vow of his wife 


(Num 30:11ff]. Now that choice is not without free will. 


"He who could have transgressed, and has not transgressed; and 
could do evil things and has not done them" [Ecclus 31:10]. "You 
have done evil things, since you were able” [Jer 3:5]. "T will 


voluntarily sacrifice unto thee" [Ps 53:8]. 


"Thy sustenance showed thy sweetness which thou hast toward 
thy children, and serving every man's will, it was turned to what 


every man liked" [Wis 16:21]. 


"The servant says, Lord, you have given me five talents, see, 
I have earned five talents more” [Mt 25:20]. He could not actively 
earn, unless he had free will; otherwise he would have said that he 


had received ten talents. Paul agrees. 


"T planted; Apollos watered; but God gave the increase" 


i 
[1 Cor 3:6]. Later: ‘We are God's helpers" [1 Cor 3:9]. 


"T have labored more abundantly than all they: yet not I, 
2 
but the grace of God with me" [1 Cor 15:10]. Therefore, free will 
and grace are working at the same time, as Jerome says and Bernard 


says that the Apostle was the companion of working. 


Let the prophets be heard: "My soul is continually in my 
hands" [Ps 118:109]. "My heart is ready, 0 God, my heart is 
ready" [Ps 56:8]. “If you be willing, and will hearken to me, you 


shall eat the good things of the land. But if you will not, and will 


provoke me to wrath, the sword shall devour you" [Is 1:19f]. 


187 


187 


188 


188 


Zaz ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"Return, O transgressors, to the heart" [Is 46:8]. 


"Behold you have spoken, and have done evil things and have 


been able" [Jer 3:5]. 


“Cast away from you all your transgressions, in which you 
have transgressed, and make for yourselves a new heart and a new 
spirit; and why will you die, 0 house of Israel? For I desire 
not the death of him who dies, says the Lord God. Return and live" 
[Ez 18:31f£]. And previously he had said, "Tf the wicked do penance 
for all his sins," etc., "in his justice which he has done, he 
shall live" [Ez 18:21]. Therefore he not only receives justice, but 


does it. 


"Turn to me, and I will turn to you, says the Lord of hosts" 


{Zech 1:3]. 


"Jerusalem . . . how often would I have gathered together your 
children, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and you 
would not?" [Mt 23:37]. While God wills, man through free will 


does not will. 


"If you will to enter into life, keep the commandments" 


[Mt 19:70]. With many similar expressions. 


“The spirit of the prophets is subject to the prophets" 
{1 Cor 14:32]. 


"He who has determined being steadfast in his heart, having 
no necessity, but having power of his own will. . oY [Ul Cow 78376 
The madman Luther imposes necessity. Paul denies it. Whom shall 


we believe? 


"Everyone as he has determined in his heart, not out of sad- 


ness or of necessity" [2 Cor 9:7]. 


"Everyone who has this hope in him (God), sanctifies himself, 
as he also is holy" [1 Jn 3:3]. Note free will and its activities. 


Augustine, In I John {4:7]*: See there how he does not remove free 


will. Later: Because you do something by your will, therefore 


*LCC 8.291 


31. CONCERNING FREE WILL 213 


something is attributed to you that you may speak just as the 
Psalmist, "Be my helper; do not forsake me" {Ps 26:9} . If you 
say, Thou art my helper, you do something; for if you do nothing, 


how can he help you? 


Peter speaks similarly: "Purifying your souls in the obedience 
of charity, in brotherly love, from a sincere heart love one another" 
{1 Pt 1:22) . If therefore we ought to sanctify and purify our souls, 
that will not come to pass without free will, or without the action of 


free will. 


"And in his sight we shall persuade our hearts" {1 Jn 3:19]. But 
how would one persuade without free will, or what would be the usefulness 


of persuasion, if all things happened by necessity, as Luther raves. 


"Without your counsel I would have done nothing, that your good deed 
might not be as it were of necessity but voluntary" [Philemon v.14.) To 189" 


stupid Luther all things happen of necessity. 


"For the poor you have always with you and whenever you will, you 


may do them good" [Mk 14:7]. 


Now if we lack free will, and all things take place by absolute 
necessity, nothing is left to prayers, counsels, public government, delib- 
erations; no rewards are owed to virtues; no penalties are owed to vices; 
laws, rights, statutes, precepts perish. Admonitions, persuasions, entice- 
ments, etc. cease. For all these things require liberty, but are made void 
by necessity. To sum up: this would be to refer all misdeeds and crimes, 
all impieties and blasphemies to God. For who will impute treachery to 


Judas, which he has committed out of inevitable necessity. 


The Lord objects. 
189% 


"Your own wickedness shall reprove you, and your apostasy shall 


rebuke you" [Jer 2:19] . 


"Destruction is your own, O Israel; your help is in me alone"{ Hos 13:9]. 


214 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"all scripture, divinely inspired, is profitable for teach- 
ing, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in justice that 
the man of God may be perfect, equipped for every good work" 

[2 Tim 3:16f]. If all things happen by necessity, what value is 
it to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct? If free will 
does nothing, what does it benefit man to be equipped for good 
works? Hence Luther wishes to make of men trunks and logs. “They 


who do all things with counsel are ruled by prudence" [Prov 13:10].4 


Jerome affirms that this was his intent to assert God's omni- 
potence and free will together. There is a similar statement in 


(pseudo) Ambrose On the Calling of the Gentiles, 1.3. 


Augustine in very many places, but especially in Hypognosticon,* 

190 3, where among other things he says: "With sure faith we believe 
that free will adheres in men and this we preach without hesitation.” 

Thus Origen, Chrysostom, Basil, Theophylact (than whom on this ac- 


count Oecolampadius is more wicked)--all have asserted free will. 


Gregory of Nyssa demolishes the inevitable fate of the Stoics, 


and very clearly demonstrates an active free will. 


Cyprian to Cornelius [Epist 1.3]: “Christ said to the Apostles: 
‘Will you also go away?' [Jn 6:68] keeping, namely, the law, whereby 
man, left to his own freedom, and established in his own choice, 


seeks for himself either death or salvation." 


Bernard is wholly of this opinion, in his own book, On Grace 


and Free Will. 
Objections of the Heretics. 


190 1. "John the Baptist said: No one can receive anything, un- 


less it be given him from heaven" [Jn B22 


2, “Every best gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, 


coming down from the Father of lights" [James 1:17]. 


3. "All our sufficiency is from God" [2 Cor 3:5]. 


lon the Roman Catholic biblical proofs of free will: "Most of these 
passages and arguments had been used by opponents of Luther, including 
Schatzgeyer, Erasmus, Cochlaeus, De Castro, and Faber." (See 0S Calvini, 
3.308). 


24 pseudonymous work. 


Shc CONCERNING FREE WILL 215 


4. “What do you have that you have not received? If moreover 
you have received, why do you glory, as if you had not received it?" 


{1 cor 4:7]. 


5. "I will have merey on whom I will have mercy; and I will show 
mercy to whom I will show mercy. So then it is not of him who wills, 
nor of him who runs, but of God who shows mercy" [Rom 9:15f£]. "Therefore 


he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens" [ Rom 9:18]. 


6. "Why hast thou made us to err, 0 Lord, from thy ways? Why 


hast thou hardened our heart, that we should not fear thee?" [Is 63:17]. 


7. "Shall the clay say to its potter, What are you making, and 
your work is without hands?" [Is 45:9]. "The way of a man is not his: 


neither is it in a man to walk, and direct his steps"[Jer 10:23]. 


8. If a remnant according to election has been saved by the grace 
of GodlRom 9:27]; ‘if moreover by grace now not by works: otherwise 


grace is no more grace" [Rom 11:5]. 


9. "But when they shall deliver you up take no thought how or 
what to speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what to speak" 
Mt 10:19]. 

10. “Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And not one of 


them shall fall on the ground without your Father" [Mt 10:29}..+ 

11. “No man comes to me unless the Father who has sent me draw 
him" Lun 6:44]. 

12. The Church prays: God of whom is all that is best. 


13. Augustine to Felicianus: "When God recompenses our debts, he 


crowns his own gift." 
14. Bernard: ‘Free will is only the capacity for salvation." 


15. Now to extol free will in this way, as if we can do anything 
of our own strength, is the Pelagian heresy: for free will before grace 
can do nothing but sin; therefore the scholastics, positing congruous 


eZ: ’ 
merit, are new Pelagians. 


Ivelanchthon, LC 1521 [LCC 19.24]. 
2meritum congrui: cf. Melanchthon LC 1521 [LCC 19.43 n. 48]. 


191 


191” 


216 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Reply of the Catholics. 


We admit that, before all things God is the prime cause of 
all things, and nothing can be done without ‘him. Hence on every 
natural effect he has a general influence, but on good works of 
the rational creature he also concurs by a special influence. 
Therefore God is the first cause, moving also natural and voluntary 
causes. And just as he does not remove those causes by moving 
them by natural causes without the acts of them being natural, so 
by moving voluntary causes he does not remove without actions of 
them being voluntary, but rather he does this in them, for he acts 
in each one according to its property, smoothly disposing all things. 
Accordingly we confess that free will of itself alone cannot lead 
192 to good, and is nothing, but the grace of God so acts that some— 
thing can happen; for this reason of himself no man thinks anything 
good, but it is of God's special grace that he does this. Thirdly, 
they say this is not only to be understood of grace, which is charity 
and makes one pleasing to God, but also of freely given motion go- 
ing before, by which God inspires, arouses and calls man to good. 
Therefore one must pay close attention as to what is of God alone 
and what is of God and free will together. This most significantly 
Augus tine [Gennadius?], or some other learned author has expressed 
in the book on Ecclesiastical Dogmas [c. 21: PL 42.1217] as follows: 
When God takes pity on us, we have the beginning of our salvation 
(note the first step is of God alone). For us to assent to his 
saving inspiration is in our power (note the second step, which is 
of free will, and congruent with merit). For us to obtain what, 
192 by assenting to inspiration, we desire, is of divine gift (note 
the third step of gratifying grace). For us not to fall back in 
the gift of salvation once obtained, is of our own power and of 
divine assistance equally. This fourth step of perseverance de- 


pends upon God's grace and free will together. 


31. CONCERNING FREE WILL 217 


1. We admit that good is received only when God is its giver, 
but he gives some things with free will acting, other things with- 


out its action. 


2. Thus we confess our merits to be gifts of God and given by 
God, prevenient, cooperating and subsequent. But by this it is not 


denied that free will concurs actively for merits. 


3-5. Concerning the third, fourth and fifth points, one must 
speak similarly: for God out of his mercy anticipates free will 
by moving, and mercifully cooperates by assisting; by inspiring 


our wills, the Church prays to be anticipated (by him). 


6. A sinning people does not make God the author of sin and 193 
error. The expression "thou hast made" is to be understood "thou 
hast permitted"; "thou hast hardened" is to be understood as "thou 
hast permitted to be hardened.'' According to the common theory: 
but through this the activity of free will is not cancelled, but 


rather confirmed. 


7. We admit that no man ought to rebel, or vaunt himself 
against the Creator, just as a tool does not do so against the 
workman, for all creation is the tool of divine power, but through 
this free will is not taken away. [As to the other text of Jere- 1529 
miah, it must be said that in the work of man is to be found two 
things, namely, election* of works and this lies always in man's 
power, and execution of works, and this is not always in man's 
power, but with divine providence governing, set before the power 
of man sometimes is led to the end and sometimes is not. Therefore 
it is said:] "The way of a man is not his, neither is it in a man 
to walk, and direct his steps" [Jer 10:23], with reference to the 
execution of choices in which he can be hindered in many ways 
whether he will or not. But choices themselves are in us, yet 
subject to divine help. And therefore it is not said to be free 
of its own actions but free of its own action, which is the judg- 
ment of things to be acted and this very name "free will" demon- 193 


strates this. For free judgment speaks of acting or not acting. 


*electio = choice 


194 


218 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


8. The good are saved by grace, not works. This you should 
understand with grace expected because all works are nothing with- 
out grace. "For the sufferings of this time,are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory to come that shall be revealed in us" [Rom 


8:18], says Paul. 


9, Remove anxious solicitude of considering beforehand and 
it is one thing concerning the knowledge of the Apostles because 
that was infused, and free will functioned passively; another thing 
concerning the works of free will, which it does together along 


with grace. 


10. Melanchthon is blinded, for against free will he mangles 
this statement: since every man sees that Christ wills that all 


things be subject to God's providence. 


11. We assert the pull of the father through prevenient and 
cooperating grace, but to assent to that pull, and not to harden 


our hearts, if we have heard his voice--this is of free will. 


12. We admit that everything is from God, not only in the best, 
but also in all creatures, but just as through this natural causes 
are not excluded, so also is free will not excluded in morals. 
Elsewhere I have roundly said: merit is wholly from God, but not 


totally; the good natural philosophy clearly understands aie a 


13. Our merits are gifts of God, nay, all temporal goods which 
we have received are gifts of God, just as Job says. But through 
this the activity of free will is not excluded, just as the beget- 
ting of cattle or even the fructifying of the field is not ex- 


cluded, etc. 


14, Free will is only the capacity for salvation, that is, 
of grace. For there it functions merely passively. What is said 
concerning grace, the heretic Carlstadt twists to meritorious 


works. 


Wena Against Carlstadt. 


31. CONCERNING FREE WILL ALS) 


15. The church fathers and schoolmen are not Pelagians, for 
they do not deny original sin, they do not say that man is saved 
by means of his natural endowments alone, but they consistently 
affirm necessary grace. On the contrary it is necessary that grace 
anticipate the working of free will. And he rightly asserts con- 
gruent merit as is clear concerning Cornelius the Centurion [Acts 
10:2], whose alms God had regard for, and conferred the grace of 
the Holy Spirit. We are not therefore new Pelagians, but the here- 
tic Luther, with Carlstadt, Urbanus,* and Pelican is that ancient 


stupid Stoic, and posthumous Mani. 


{Appendix of Tilmann. 


Know from the presence of God that it cannot be concluded that 
all things happen by necessity (something some ignorant folk think) 
and thus that our acts are necessary, by absolute necessity, which 
is called the necessity of consequents, but by well conditioned 
necessity, which is called necessity of consequence, when thereby 
freedom of choice stands in human affairs, just as also the contin- 
gency of things stands in things contingent. See what we have 
written against Carlstadt and in the special work, On Free Will. 


See Cochlaeus, and Alfonsus a Villa Sancta. 


*Urbanus Rhegius (= Urban Rieger): See p. 32, above. 


194 


1529 


195 


195 


196° 


CHAPTER 32 


CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS 


Because Luther has taught that all things happen by absolute 
necessity, and he has denied free will, very many of his followers 
against express statements of Scripture deny that one ought to pray, 


because Christ sufficiently prayed for us. 
Axiom 1: The necessity of prayer, from the Scripture.* 


The disciples said to Christ: "Lord, teach us to pray” [Lk 11:1). 


vt 


And he said to them: "When you pray, say, ‘Our Father . etc. 


(Mt 6:9]. 


And having dismissed the multitude, Jesus went up into a mountain 
alone to pray” [Mt 14:23]. "He went into a desert place... and 
prayed "( Mk 1:35]. "And it came to pass while he was praying, the 
appearance of his countenance was altered" [Lk 9:28 f]. "Kneeling 
down, he prayed, saying: Father, if thou wilt, remove this cup from me” 
[ik 22:41£; Mt 26:39]. "And being in agony, he prayed the longer” 

(ix 22:43 J]. "But pray that your flight be not in the winter, or on the 
sabbath" [Mt 24:20] . "See, watch, and pray, for you do not know when 

the time is coming" [Mt 24:42 ]. "Pray for those who persecute and speak 
ill of you" [mt 5:44] . "We ought always to pray, and not to faint” 

[Lk 18:1 ]. "And will not God revenge his elect who cry to him day and 
night"LLk 18:7]. "Pray that you enter not into temptation" [mt 26:41]. 
"And when they had prayed, the place was moved wherein they were assembled" 
[Acts 4:31]. "And praying, they said: Thou, Lord ,who knowest the hearts 
of all men” etc. [Acts 1:24]. 


"A11 these were persevering with one mind in prayer with the women, 


and with Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brethren” [Acts 1:14]. 


"Then they, fasting and praying, and laying their hands upon them, 


sent them away" [Acts 13:3]. 


"And when they had ordained to them priests in every church and 


had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord" [ Acts 14:22). 


*Inferred by translator . 


220 


32. CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS 221 


The very thing therefore that the Apostles sought to know, 
Christ taught and commanded and fulfilled by deed; this the dis- 
ciples also and the Christians of the primitive Church zealously 


did. It is in no wise to be neglected by the Christian. 


"But this kind of demons is only cast out by prayer and fast- 


ing" [Mt 17:20]. 


"Whatever you ask in prayer, believing, you shall receive" 
{Mt 21:22]. "Your prayers and your alms have ascended as a memo- 
rial in God's sight" [Acts 10:4]. "Peter therefore was kept in 
prison. But prayer was made without ceasing by the Church unto 
God for him" [Acts 12:5]. 


"TI beseech you therefore, brethren, through our Lord Jesus 196 
Christ, and by the charity of the Holy Spirit, that you help in 
your prayers for me to God" [Rom 15:30]. 


“Since also he will yet deliver us from dangers, you helping 


in prayer for us" [2 Cor 1:10f]. 


“Have no anxiety about anything; but in everything, by prayer 
and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made 
known to God" [Phil 4:6]. "We give thanks to God always for you 
all, making a remembrance of you in our prayers without ceasing" 


{1 Thess 1:2]. 


"Be instant in prayer, watching in it with thanksgiving, pray- 
ing withal for us also, that God may open unto us a door of speech 
to speak the mystery of Christ" [Col 4:2f]. Hence Mary is called 


upon in the beginning of the sermon. 


“But we will be instant in prayer and the ministry of Christ" 


[Acts 6:4]. Note: he puts prayer before preaching. 197 


Isaiah said to Hezekiah: "Give charge concerning your house, 
for you shall die and not live." He prayed, saying: ‘''I beseech 
thee, 0 Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and 
with a perfect heart, and have done what is pleasing before thee" 
[4 K 20:1-3]. Later: "Thus says the Lord the God of David your 
father: I have heard your prayer" [4 K 20:5]. 


197 


198 


22 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"Tet nothing hinder you from praying always" [Ecclus 18:22]. 


Jehosophat says, "As we know not what to do, this alone we 


have left to us that we turn our eyes to thee" [2 Ch 2012 
"We pray God, that you may do no evil" [2 Cor ISR cs 


"Pray for us, that the word of God may run, and may be glori- 


fied"' [2 Thess 3:1]. 


"ty desire first of all that supplications, intercessions and 
thanksgivings be made for all men; for kings and for all that are in 
high station, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all 
piety" [1 Tim 2:1f]. This custom has been preserved in the Church 
from the time of St. Paul even to our day, that at the end of the 
sermon there is prayer on behalf of the ecclesiastical and secular 


order, for peace for the living and the dead, etc. 


''y will that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands, 
without anger and contention" [1 Tim 2:8]. It is therefore clear 
from the Old and New Testaments, how useful and necessary it is to 


pray, for all good against all evil. 


We have chosen these few passages from a thousand; see the 


Psalms. 


The Wycliffites and Lutherans, who oppose prayer, are like the 
giants fighting against God. ‘The ancient giants did not obtain 
pardon for their sins, who were destroyed trusting to their own 


strength" [Ecclus 16:8]. 


Axiom 2: It is shown that the canonical hours are to be 


observed by ecclesiastics. 


"Seven times a day I have spoken praise to thee, upon the 


judgments of thy justice" [Ps 118:164]. 


"Daniel went in to his house, and opening the windows in his 
upper chamber toward Jerusalem, he knelt down three times a day and 


worshiped" [Dan 6:10]. Note the stated times of prayer. 


32. CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS 223 


"Peter and John went up into the temple at the ninth hour of 


prayer" [Acts 3:1]. 


"Peter went up to the higher parts of the house to pray at 
about the sixth hour" [Acts 10:9]. Note that the Apostles ob- 
served the customary hours of prayer among the Jews and the Church 


follows these. 


"From ancient times, Moses has had in every city, persons who 
preach him in the synagogues, where he is read every sabbath" 
{Acts 15:21]. So says St. James and today the Jews do this: It 
would be shameful for the Church to keep silent while the synagogue 198 
is singing. Three chapters are read by the Jews each day: Exc. 13 
in three parts; Dt 9; Rabbi Moses. Let the Christian who does not 


praise God blush with shame. 


"All things have their season, and in their intervals, all 
things under the sun pass away" [Ecclus 3:1]. And since the Apostle 
bids that all things ought to be done among us "decently and in 


order" [1 Cor 14:40], why do divine prayers not have their own time? 


In the figure of this Jericho fell down when the priests with 
seven trumpets went around the walls sounding them seven times 
[Josh 6:4]. Thus do the devices of the Devil fall down by the 


trumpets of the canonical hours. 


Note that the songs of the Church have been taken from the 
Bible not only according to the translation of Jerome which we now 
use, but from the Septuagint as is clear in the introit 'Laetare 
Jerusalem," [cf. Is 66:10]: there we read "Laetamini Jerusalem" 
("Rejoice with Jerusalem"). Therefore it follows that these 


r 
canticles were in the Mass before Jerome. 199 


In his exposition of the Lord's Prayer, Cyprian attests to 
the canonical hours, observed even in the Old Testament from the 
time of Daniel. But for us Christians beyond the hours of 
prayer anciently observed both the extent of prayers and sacraments 


have now increased. Under the law there were the third, sixth and 


199 


200 


224 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


ninth hour. The Church has added matins, prime, vespers and com- 
pline, that thus our just acts might more abound than those of the 
scribes and Pharisees (Mt 5]. For the mysteries of the hours, see 


the same. 


For these hours were established to praise God for his benefits 
to us, among which the greatest are the benefit of the creation 
accomplished in seven days, Genesis c. 1; and the benefit of re- 


demption accomplished as it were in seven hours. 


The Emperor Julian the Apostate transferred the rite of psalm- 
singing and the canonical hours to the pagans, in order that the 
integrity of the Church might not be a matter for the admiration of 
the pagans, as Cassiodorus attests in his Tripartite History, 6.29 
[PL 69.1048]. 


Jerome, On the Preservation of Virginity to Demetrias: "Be- 
yond the order of psalms and prayer which you are always to carry 
out at the third hour, the sixth and the ninth hour, vespers, at 
midnight and in the morning, determine how many hours you ought to 


study Holy Scripture." 


He says the same thing in the epitaph of Paula on the order 


of the monastery. 


Matins, third, sixth, ninth hours, vespers, midnight it was 


their custom to sing the psalter in order. 


Basil, On the Institution of the Life of the Religious, 
Ch. 2 [Decr. 1.91.2, Fr. 1.316]: “The hours set apart by holy men 
for prayers to God are to be followed, for the great David says: 
‘In the middle of the night I arose to confess thy name, upon the 
judgments of thy justice'" [Ps 118:162]. Again, he says: “At 


night, in the morning, and at noon" [Ps 54:18]. 


Chrysostom, Hom 59: ‘They carried out morning prayers." 
Later: "They celebrated terce, sext, none, and evening prayers." 


And many other passages. 


32. CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS 225 


The Council of Agde [Decr. 1.91.2: Fr. 1.316]: In the morning 
when the morning office (matins) is finished, the presbyter should 
fulfill the duty of his service, namely, prime ,terce, sext, none, 


vespers. 


Augustine, in answer to the questions of Januarius: "Without 
doubt, that is especially to be done which can be defended from 
the Scriptures, as we have the examples of our Lord and of the 
Apostles concerning the singing of hymns and psalms." But this is 


not done except during the canonical hours. 


Concerning Morning Hours. 


"In the middle of the night, I rose up to confess thee" 
{Ps 118:62]. 


"TI remember thy name at night, O Lord" [Ps 118:55]. 200 
"In the nights lift up your hands to the holy places, and 
bless the Lord" [Ps 133:2]. 
"Every night I will wash my bed" [Ps 6:7]. 
"It is good to confess the Lord, and to sing to thy name, 0 
most High, to show forth thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth 
in the night" [Ps 91:2f]. 
"and it came to pass at midnight, the Lord slew every first- 
born in the land of Egypt" [Ex 12:29]. 
"At midnight there was a cry made: Behold the bridegroom 
comes" [Mt 25:6]. Note that at midnight God is to be praised, for 
these are the night-watches of Christians and monks, says Jerome. 
For thus we will not be mixed up with the downfall of the Egyptians, 
but will await with joy the coming of the bridegroom. 
"T anticipated the dawn and cried" [Ps 118:147]. 
Christ while he is praying at midnight on the Mount of Olives, 
is betrayed by Judas, and is seized by the Jews [Mt 26:30ff; 201 


Jn 18:2ff]. 


*kEpist. 54 


1529 


201 


202 


226 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


“and at midnight, Paul and Silas worshiping praised God" 
[Acts 16:25]. Later: "Suddenly there was a great earthquake" 
[Acts 16:26]. Tf therefore David, the prophets, Christ and the 
Apostles prayed at midnight to the Lord why do the lazy Lutherans 
and sneezing heretics make fun of the religious arising at matins, 
because it would be vain to rise before dawn, as if the Lord pro- 


mised a crown for deep sleepers. 


["Christ passed the whole night in the prayer of God" [Lk 
6:12]. ] 


Peter was freed from the prison of Herod at midnight [Acts 
12:6£]. 


John Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, against the 
treachery of Arius, increased the prayers in the nightly hymns. 


See Cassiodorus, Tripartite History, 10.8 [PL 69.1171]. 


The tribes of Levi were especially commanded to keep the 
night-watches of the children of Israel, before the tabernacle 
of testimony [Num 3:6]. Therefore the religious are especially 
now to watch in the morning hours, for the salvation of the 


Christian people. 


Away with Vigilantius and the sluggish heretics, together 


with the Lutherans, with their slandering of vigils and matins. 


Concerning Night Hours and Lauds. 


The public institution of the Divine Office is said to have 
begun in Alexandria with St. Mark; afterwards it passed to other 
churches as Philo Judaeus “attests. Eusebius relates that he com- 
posed new hymns (Ecclesiastical History, 2.72) of the night 
offices and the reading of Psalms. Cassiodorus is also a witness 
of this. Jerome: If therefore Mark ordained this in Alexandria 


he had it directly from St. Peter, as also his Gospel. 


Cassian attests that twelve psalms were appointed and as many 


readings from the New and Old Testaments. 


*Cf. Eusebius, HE, 2.17 


32. CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS 227 


The Council of Laodicaea! determined that psalms were not to 


be read continuously, but readings were to be interspersed. 


St. Jerome most aptly divided the Psalter, at Damasus' behest, 
so that the great variety of praying might cease. The three night 
hours and lauds are sung in one vigil in place of four vigils, 
since weak flesh would not suffice to bear the continuous observance 


of watching. 
Lauds. 


Lauds were discharged to God because although every creature 
is released from praising God, man would be culpable as a rational 
being when he neglected to do it. Prophecies were assumed, on the 
use of the Psalms that all prophesies had Christ as their end, and 
Christ appeared in the synagogue and read Isaiah [Lk 4:16f]. On 
certain days and festivals there were also certain gospels, accom- 
modated from the time of the Apostles and kept as annual observances. 
Augustine On First John, Prologue: there was interposed the solem- 
nity of holy days on which it was necessary to recite certain read- 
ings from the Gospel in church, which thus were annual so that others 
could not be. That order which we had received was gradually inter- 


mitted of necessity. 


Augustine posits that it was necessary to read certain Gospels 
on festivals. The heretics confuse all the Gospels, reading then 


every day as they please. 


Ambrose added the books of Jonah and Job to be read at a 


certain time [Epist 5:33]. 


The Council of Africa, Canon 13, decreed: "Let it be permitted 
that the passions of the martyrs be read, when their anniversary 


days are celebrated." 


exe Concilia, 2.573. 


202” 


203 


203 


228 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Concerning Hymns, Antiphons, and the Use of Psalm Singing. 


"After a hymn was sung, they went out to the Mount of Olives" 
[Mt 26:30]. i 


"Let the word of Christ dwell in you abundantly, in all wis- 
dom, teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, hymns and 
spiritual canticles, singing in grace in your hearts to the Lord" 


[Col 3:16]. 


"Go into his gates in confession, into his courts in hymns 
confess him" [Ps 99:4]. ‘A hymn becometh thee, O God, in Zion" 


[Ps 64:2]. 


"My lips shall utter a hymn, when thou shalt teach me thy 
justifications" [Ps 118:171]. 


"And when this was done they blessed the Lord with hymns and 
confessions, who had done great things in Israel" [2 Mac 10:38]. 
"I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also with the mind; I 
will sing with the spirit, I will sing also with the mind" [1 Cor 
14:15]. “Sing to the Lord who dwells in Zion" [Ps 9:12]. "I 
will sing to thy name, O Most High" [Ps 9:3], in psalms through all. 


"Sing praises to our God, sing" [Ps 46:7]. 


"Be filled with the Holy Spirit, speaking to yourselves in 
psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody 


in your hearts," 


etc. [Eph 5:18f]. The Psalm expresses beseech- 
ing; the Antiphon, petition; the Collect, prayer; the Hymn, 


thanksgiving. Paul mentions these four [1 Tim 2:1]. 


At Alexandria arose the alternate mode of psalm-singing, as 


above, restored by Chrysostom, received throughout the whole Church. 


The Council of Toledo [IV, A.D. 633, Canon ef sends "Con- 
cerning the singing of hymns: we have the example of Jesus the 


Savior and of the Apostles" [Decr. 3.1.54, Fr. 1.1308]. 


The same Council, with Isidore presiding: "Let our diversity 


seem to show error to save persons among carnal or ignorant 


Tease Toledo III (AD 589) in Gratian. 


32. CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS BES) 


schismatics, and the variety of the churches show itself a scandal 
for many. Therefore one order of praying and singing will be kept 


by us throughout Spain and Galicia." 


Augustine, On the Questions of Januarius* "If anything is varied 
through the places of the churches and of the districts, let each 
one do what he finds in the church into which he comes, for nothing 
of them is contrary to the faith, or contrary to morals." See how 


beautiful this is. 


The variety of the churches in divine offices does not hinder 
but it adorns because “the queen stood on thy right hand... sur- 
rounded with variety" [Ps 44:10], provided there not be such great 


variety that it seem to induce the error of schism. 


Isidore: The Greeks sang antiphons with alternate choirs, like 
two seraphim and the testaments crying in turn to one another. St. 
Ambrose, imitating the Greeks, established antiphons among the Latins. 


See the Tripartite History. 


Ignatius, taught through a vision of the angels, was the first 


to establish at Antioch the antiphons. 


"And the four animals had no rest day and night, saying: Holy, 
Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty" [Rev 4:8]. The Church exhorts herself 
to singing in order to imitate the angels, saying in the preface: 

"The virtues of the heaven of heavens and the blessed accompanying 
seraphim concelebrate with exultation with whom we pray that you may 
order our voices to be admitted saying with suppliant confession, Holy, 


Holy." 


Luther notably trifles over this matter, for when here and there 
he rejects human constitutions lest he seem to be wholly lazy, he 
does not reject canonical hours completely but permits for his apos- 
tate and perjured followers, that they take at least three psalms 


for the morning office and three for the evening office. 


Paul taught the Corinthians [1 Cor 14:26], Ephesians {Eph 5:19], 


and Colossians [Col 3:16] voiced singing in hymns and psalms. 


*Epist. 54 


204 


204” 


205 


ig 


205 


230 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Objections of the Heretics. 


1. "Not all who say to me, Lord, Lord, will enter into the 


kingdom of heaven" [Mt 7:21]. 


2. If prayers had value, then they would bind God to necessity. 


3. If prayers were useful, then other good works would be 


superfluous. 


4. "Your Father knows what you need before you ask him [Mt 


6:8]. Therefore they pray in vain. 


5. "I am God, and am not changed" [Mal 3:6]. Therefore he is 


not influenced by prayer. 


6. "And when you are praying, speak not much as the heathen do. 
For they think that in their much speaking they may be heard" 


[Mt 6:7]. Therefore prayer should not be wordy. 


7. Could priests do something else more useful than mumble so 
many psalms and something better and more pleasing to God? So go 


sometimes the arguments of the lukewarm hearers of theology. 


8. In the Bible canonical hours are not enjoined upon the 


clergy. 


9. Nothing is to be read in the church but the word of God; 
however in prayers many other things are contained, even fictitious 


matters concerning the saints. 
Response of the Catholics. 


1. Here Christ does not forbid prayer, but excludes from the 
kingdom of heaven the hypocrite who prays God with words, not with 


deeds. Such are the heretics who by their deeds assail God. 


2. God, supreme Judge of all things, is laid under necessity 
by no one, yet urged by the godly prayers of the faithful, he con- 
ducts himself through the mode of necessity, as he says to Moses 
praying; "Let me alone, that my wrath may be kindled" [Ex 32:10], 


as though hindered, he asks to be left alone. 


32. CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS 231 


3. It behooves one to do (pray) and not neglect other things: 206 
fasting and alms are not so superfluous that by them prayer is not 


lifted, as by wings, to heaven. Jerome. 


4. He admits that God foreknows. And we do not tell our story 
to God as one who is ignorant, but we make our request for help to 
him as one who is powerful. Therefore by prayer we seek that which 
God has disposed that we are going to receive through the means of 
prayer, for God wills to be prayed to lest the thing given become 


worthless. 


5. God is not changed by prayer with respect to his essence, 
but the effect is changed. Hence our prayer is not ordered to the 
unchangeableness of the divine disposition, but in order that what 
God disposed to be given before the ages may be obtained by our 
prayers, as Gregory says in his book of Dialogues, 1.8 [Decr. 2.23. 
4.21, Fr. 1.906]. 


6. Much speaking in prayer is not simply forbidden but rather 
the way the pagans do this. Augustine says to Proba: Much speaking 206” 
is forbidden, not copiousness or duration. For much speaking is to 
do a thing with superfluous words. Hence the prayers of the Fathers 
in Egypt were short but frequent. Christ prayed copiously [Lk 22:40£]; 
Hannah prayed copiously and multiplied prayers [1 K 1] and Christ 
"passed the whole night in prayer" [Lk 6:12]. 


And Rabanus Maurus, On ee "Just as it is the mark of 
hypocrites to see to it that they are to be seen at prayer, whose 
fruit is to please men, so is it the mark of the Gentiles, that is, 
the pagans, to think they are answered in their much speaking [cf. 
Mt 6:7]. And actually all much speaking comes from the Gentiles, 
who pay attention to exercising their tongues rather than cleansing 
their heart. This kind of trifling or begging pursuit they try even 
to turn into swaying God by prayer thinking that just as a human 
judge, so also God is forced into judgment. Therefore do not be 207 


like them, says the one true Master." So speaks Rabanus. 


232 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


7. They are like Naaman who adjudged the rivers of Damascus 
better than all the waters of Israel to cleanse himself in them, 
but the prophet orders him to bathe in the Jordan if he wishes to 
be healed [4 K 5:10-12]. Thus if the reading of both Testaments 
is better, let it be so, yet one must wash in water when the masters 
of the Church bid one in the seven canonical hours. Thus the blind 
man ordered to enter the pool, did not say, it is better that I pray. 
Our duty is to obey the precepts, not to choose what is preferable 
according to our decision. "Cursed be he who does the Lord's work 


negligently" [Jer 48:10]. 


8. In the Bible, canonical hours are not commanded, but are 
hinted at, and the Church has received this from the holy teachers, 
that is, the Apostles. It behooves us, however, to obey the things 
set forth. You contend that hours ought to be free, but these hours 
are free by the Christian liberty with which one is to serve God, 

207 but not by the Mohammedan liberty, with which each one does or omits 


according to the depraved desires of his heart. 


9. The contrary was demonstrated: that even saints’ legends 
are to be recited in the divine offices; likewise, the homilies of 
the Fathers are read, and the Collects of prayers, which are not 
expressly contained in Holy Scripture. But we do not, in Lutheran 
fashion, reject the struggles of the unconquered martyrs, provided 
they have been faithfully written down, for even in the Biblical 
writings some are contained, as for example, those of Stephen, James, 
Paul, etc. [Acts 7:52]. Others have been written down at various 


times by great men. 
The End. 


The Lutherans and other heretics, rejecting the churchly rite 
of singing, reading and praying, and fashioning, according to their 
insane heads, new formulas of singing, massing, and praying, do 

208 like the heretic Paul of Samosata, who caused psalms addressed to 
Christ to cease, as newly devised. But he caused psalms composed 


out of himself to be sung on Easter day in the midst of the Church 


32. CONCERNING PRAYER AND THE CANONICAL HOURS 233 


by women, especially those whom he had previously inseructedes 
Thus do the stupid heretics with their ditties, and their new 


porcine and canine yowlings. 


Iualchion, Epist. 2, as quoted in Eusébius, HE, 7.30. 


208 


209 


CHAPTER 33 
CONCERNING PLURALITY OF PRIESTS AND CONCERNING TITHES 
The heretics falsely accuse the multitude of the 


servants of God, priests and monks. 


“Sanctify to me every firstborn that opens the womb among the 


children of Israel, as well of men as of beasts: for they are all 


mine" {Ex 13:2]. "You shall give to me the firstborn of your sons" 
[Ex 22:29]. "The firstborn, which belong to God, no man may sanctify 
and vow" {Lev 27:26]. "I have taken the Levites from the children 


of Israel, instead of every firstborn who opens the womb among the 
children of Israel and they shall be my Levites" {Num 3:12, 41}. 
"Every firstborn is mine, since I struck the firstborn in the land 
of Egypt; I have sanctified to myself whatever is firstborn in 


Israel . . ."' [Num 3:13}. 


"You shall take the Levites to me instead of all the firstborn 
of the children of Israel" {Num 3:41]. Note that in the law of 
nature, all firstborn enjoyed the privilege of priesthood, and in 
the written law, the whole tribe of Levi succeeded in place of the 
firstborn. Now there are not as many priests and monks as there 


are firstborn. 


“Jacob said to Esau: Sell me your first birthright" [Gen 
25:31]. Later: "Esau swore to him, and sold his first birthright" 
{Gen 25:33]. In the law of nature, primogeniture was great, be- 
cause the firstborn received the blessing from the father (and this 
was in place of consecration), he had the power of blessing, like- 
wise special clothing in which he made offering, he had a double 
portion in inheritance and spoils. All these things ceased with 
the first priesthood of Aaron, then with our priesthood, except 
for the fact that priests do not take a double portion of inheri- 
tance, because a single portion is paid to them unwillingly by lay- 


men, or utterly denied. 


234 


33. CONCERNING PLURALITY OF PRIESTS AND CONCERNING TITHES 235 


“All the Levites numbered by Moses . . . every male from one 
month and upward, were twenty-two thousand" [Num 3:39]. And later: 
“Moses reckoned up . . . the firstborn of the children of Israel, 
and the males . . . from one month and upward, were twenty-two 
thousand two hundred and seventy-three" [Num 3:43]. The Lord spoke: 
"I am the Lord. But for the price of the two hundred and seventy- 209” 
three, of the firstborn of the children of Israel, that exceed the 
number of the Levites, you shall take five shekels for every head. . 
and you shall give the money to Aaron and his sons, the price of them 
that are over and above" [Num 3:45-48]. Ponder the firstborn redeemed 
with money: let no one wonder at this, if today in the Church similar 
redemptions occur. Think that you feed on milk in fasting, thus con- 
tributing to this fabric, for it is the change of one good into an- 
other. Therefore, rude argument yields: if it is permitted or just 
to do so with money, then also without money. Today such money is 
commonly given to the poor or to the Churches; how the laity would 
cry out, if it were given to the clergy, as God has here commanded 


through Moses to be done. 


"The Levites were numbered from twenty years old and upward" 
{1 Ch 23:27], “and there were found of them thirty-eight thousand 
men" [1 Ch 23:3]. The same were distributed into singers [v. 5], 210 
porters [v. 5], overseers [v. 4], judges [v. 4], and into very many 
sorts and classes. But when Judah was so small that the length was 
a three days' journey, of the width (says Jerome in his Letter to 
Dardanus) he was ashamed to speak. Let the unfaithful Christian be 
ashamed, who complains against the multitude of religious, when 
there was a much greater number of those serving God in the Mosaic 
law. For when the people of Israel were “eleven hundred thousand 
men that drew the sword" [1 Ch 21:5; cf. 2 K 24:9] (so did Joab num- 
ber Israel) it follows that the number of those serving God was the 
28th part thereof. Hence those who wish the clergy to be reduced are 


the Pharaohs, who wanted to reduce the Hebrew people serving God. 


210” 


1529 


211 


236 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


On Tithes and Other Assessments. 


"you shall not delay to pay your tithes and your first fruits" 


(Ex 22:29]. 


"you shall carry the first fruits of the grain of your ground 


to the house of the Lord your God" [Ex 23:19]. 


"This shall be the priest's due from the people, and from those 
who offer victims. . . they shall give to the priest the shoulder 
and the breast, the first fruits of grain, of wine, and of oil, and 


a part of the wool from the shearing of the sheep" [Dt 18:3f]. 


"All the first fruits also, which the children of Israel offer, 
belong to the priest, and whatever is offered into the sanctuary 
by everyone, and is delivered into the hands of the priest, it shall 


be his" [Num 5:9f]. 


"Joshua gave to the Levites forty-eight cities and their sub- 
urbs" [Josh 21:39f]. ["'More than sixty cities with their suburbs 
were given to the Levites [1 Ch 6].] ‘Moses and Aaron among his 
priests" [Ps 98:6], yet these were the supreme leaders of the people 


out of Egypt. 


Samuel was a priest, according to Bede, or at least a Levite, 
as Jerome states, Against Jovinian, 1, for he was of the tribe of 
Levi. The same author attests in Comm 1 K, c. 15 that he was never- 


theless the supreme judge of the Jews. 


The royal tribe of Judah and the priestly tribe contracted 
marriages [Lk 1:5]: hence Elizabeth the mother of St. John, the 


wife of Zechariah the priest was a cousin of Mary [Lk 1:36]. 


Zadok, the priest, anointed Solomon the King [3 K 1:39]; Samuel 
anointed Saul [1 K 10:1] and David [1 K 16:13]. It is no wonder 
that today the emperor is anointed by the pope, kings by archbishops: 
for so ought it to be done, not by bishops. Jehoiada, the high- 
priest, caused to reign, and anointed Joash king [4 K 11:12]: the 
wife of Jehoiada was Jehoshabeath, the sister of King Ahaziah 


[2 Ch 22:11]. 


33. CONCERNING PLURALITY OF PRIESTS AND CONCERNING TITHES 237 


Azariah resisted Uzziah, the king, invading the sacerdotal 


office, who was struck with leprosy [2 Ch 26:16-19]. 


Hezekiah commanded the people in Jerusalem to give portions 
to the priests and Levites, that they might give themselves to the 
law of the Lord [2 Ch 31:4]. 


Jeshua, the priest, restored the temple after the Babylonian 


captivity [1 Esd 3:5]. 


Ezra, the Levite, obtained gold and silver from King Arta- 
xerxes for the temples and obtained permission for the Jews to 
leave [1 Esd 7:12-16]. 


"I (Nehemiah) perceived that the portions of the Levites had 
not been given them, and that every man had fled away to his own 
region. And I pleaded the case against the magistrates, and said, 
Why have we forsaken the house of God? And I gathered them together, 
and I made them to stand in their places. And all Judah brought the 
tithe of the grain, and the wine, and the oil into the storehouses" 
{2 Esd 13:10-12]. This people on account of the famine that had 
arisen refused to give tithes to the Levites; therefore they were 
compelled to withdraw from the temple. So are the wicked laymen 
doing today, saying, why shall I give to the priest? I have need for 


myself and my children. 


The Maccabees were very brave priests and leaders in war 
{1 Mace 2]. 
God reserved to himself tithes owed as a sign of universal 


dominion [Gen 4:3ff; Ex 22:29; Lev 27:30ff; Dt 12:6; 26:12; Tob 1:7]. 


"You shall set aside the tithes of all your fruits, etc. 
. . . that you may learn to fear the Lord your God at all times" 
[Dt 14:22£]. Therefore those who do not give due tithes are impious 


and not God-fearers. 


"All tithes of the land whether of grain or of the fruits of 


trees are the Lord's" [Lev 27:30]. "Of all the tithes, oxen and 


211 


ale 


238 ECK ; ENCHIRIDION 


sheep and goats that pass under the shepherd's rod every tenth 
that comes shall be sanctified to the Lord. It shall not be 
chosen, neither good nor bad" [Lev 27:32£], Note the precise 


tithes, but according to the reckoning of the very last one.* 


‘all the things that you shall offer of the tithes, and shall 
separate for the gifts of the Lord, shall be the best and choicest 
things" [Num 18:29]. "And you shall not sin on this point, by re- 
serving the choicest and fat things to yourselves, lest you profane 
the oblations of the children of Israel, and die" [Num 18:32]. Note 
that the penalty of death remains for those who consistently give 


the worse things as tithes. 


212 "Tf a man afflicts God, for you afflict me. And you have said: 
Wherein do we afflict thee? in tithes and in first fruits" [Mal 3:8]. 
Note that a person not giving tithes is like those who crucified 
Christ, and he does injury not only to the priest but to God himself. 


So speaks Jerome. 


“and in poverty you have been cursed" [Mal 3:9]. Note the 
penalty of those who do not give tithes or have given them unfaith- 
fully: hence comes scarcity of all things; attend to our own times 


when all things are dear." 


Augustine: "Since by giving tithes you can merit heavenly and 
earthly things, for your avarice you are defrauded of a double 
benediction. This is the custom of the most righteous Lord, that 
if you do not give the tithe to him, you are called back to the 
tithe. You will give to the impious soldier what you do not wish to 


give to the priest" [Decr. 2.16.166: Fr. 1.784). 


Augustine: "Tithes are required from what is due, and those 


223 who have been unwilling to give them invade the property of others." 


"The laborer is worthy of his hire" [Lk 10:7]. ‘Who serves as 
a soldier at any time on his own pay?" [1 Cor 9:7}. "You shall not 
bind the ox treading out the grain" [Dt 25:4; 1 Cor 9:9]. 


* 
: Tr. note: It is the last tenth of the total on which the 
tithe is being reckoned, whether it is good or bad. 


33. CONCERNING PLURALITY OF PRIESTS AND CONCERNING TITHES 239 


"If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great 
matter if we reap your carnal things?" [1 Cor 9:11]. "And they 


who serve the altar, partake with the altar" [1 Cor 9:13]. 


["'For as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them and 1529 
brought the price of the things sold, and laid it down before the 
feet of the Apostles and distribution was made to everyone accord- 


ing as he had need" [Acts 4:34f].] 


"Now concerning collections that are made for the saints, as 
I have given order to the church of Galatia, so also are you to do 
on the first day of the week" [1 Cor 16:1f]. These collections 
were made for the use of the poor of Jerusalem and for the preachers; 
and today Christians in Greece under the Turk support the patriarch 
and the clergy from collections. Hence from collecting, the prayer 


in the Mass is called a "collect," although there are also other 


mystical reasons. 


After kings and princes submitted their necks to the faith, 213” 
and bowed their heads to the sign of the cross, donations and gifts 


of benefices succeeded in place of collections. 


Pope Sylvester [Decr, 2.12.1.15: Fr. 1.682]: "The Apostles 
foresaw the future church among the Gentiles. For that reason they 
did not at all acquire estates in Judaea but only monies for the 
support of the needy. Afterwards he recalls the donation of Con- 
stantine [See Decr. 1.96.14, Fr. tee and how religious men 
began to possess estates. The canon is ascribed to Pope Melchiades; 


in ancient times it was of Pope Sylvester. 


For some thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus had 
said to him: "Buy those things which we have need of for the festi- 
val day" etc. [Jn 13:29]. Augustine, [On John, Tr. 62: Decr. 
2.12.1.17: Fr 1.681]: ''Therefore the Lord also had a purse, and 
keeping the things offered by the faithful, he contributed for the 
needs of his own people and for other indigent persons; then first 214 


the form of ecclesiastical money was instituted, after we understood 


ocr, Chapter 20, p. 148, note, above. 


215 


240 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


that when the Lord commanded us not to think of the morrow, this 
was not commanded to the end that no money be saved by the saints, 


but to insure that it be useful to God." 


Augustine, On the Lord's Sermon on the Mount: Christ by his 


example taught that no one was offended, if his servants obtained 


what was needful for themselves. 


St. Urban I, Martyr, established before Sylvester, that the Church 


receive booty and funds offered by the faithful. 


The following martyrs increased this: Pontianus, Antherus, Fabian, 


Cornelius, etc., even to Sylvester. 


Cassiodorus, Tripartite History, 1.9: The Emperor Constantine, 
disposing the affairs of the clergy, provided for each city that the 


clergy receive sufficient pay, and confirmed this by law. 


"Bring all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be food 
in my house, and try me in this, says the Lord. If I open not unto 
you the floodgates of heaven, and pour you out a blessing even to abun- 
dance. And I will rebuke for your sakes the devourer, and he shall not 
spoil the fruit of your land, neither shall the vine in the field be 
barren" [Mal 3:10£) . Stupid laymen fear lest they have less, if they 


provide tithes and offerings. 


Augustine: "The ancient fathers accordingly abounded in plenty, 
because they gave tithes. Therefore it is to be feared that these 
persons do not prosper for they even envy the religious their begging, 
and prescribe a set number for the brethren, being ignorant of the 
generosity of the synagogue which sustained so many thousand Levites 


each day" (Ps-Aug. Hom. 86.10, in Gratian Decr., 2.16.7.8: Fr. 1.802]. 


Augustine [Serm. de Tempore, 277.2: Decr. 2.16.1.66: Fr. 1.784]: 
"Tf you give the tithe, not only will you receive abundance of fruits, 
but you will also attain health of body and of soul, for God demands 


not recompense, but honor." 


33. CONCERNING PLURALITY OF PRIESTS AND CONCERNING TITHES 241 


Hence the princes and nobles of Germany were richest when they 
gave abundantly to the churches and monasteries. Now a scarcity 
of all things exists among people and princes. Greater was the 
splendor of the abbots of Reichenau, that is, of France and Munich, 
than now is that of three bishops. Charlemagne in the year 813 
turned over the royal villa of Ulm with all its rights and appur- 
tenances and adjacent places to the monastery of Reichenau. Charles 
became "the Great" because in giving Churches he followed Constantine 
the Great, who was said by Augustine [Against Petilian, 2.93] and by 
happy on account of his support of the Church. Let princes beware, 
lest by plundering the clergy, they prefer to imitate the impious 
Emperor Julian the Apostate, rather than the Most Christian Princes, 


Constantine, Theodosius, Charlemagne, and St. Henry. 


Cassiodorus, Tripartite History, 6: ''The Emperor Julian with- 
drew all privileges, honors, and customs from the clergy, and 
annulled the laws previously put forth on their behalf." Again 
[6:4]: “He ordered all the possessions and moneys of the Church of 
Caesarea to be turned over, exacting this with lashes, to the com- 
munity. And directly, he deposited by this means in the public 
treasury three hundred pounds of gold. And afterwards in the mean- 
time many sacred vessels of the churches were ordered to be turned 
over to the fisc, and the doors of the larger Church having been 
removed, the sanctuary became accessible to all." Concerning Julian 
it is well known that he died at age thirty-two, and he ruled only 


one year and seven months. 


Cassiodorus describes at length the pumishments of Julian's 


underlings, Felix and Helvidius. 


Heliodorus, when he wished the very splendid temple of Jeru- 
salem, was stricken miraculously by many plagues and scourges, yet, 


when the priest Onias prayed for him, he was restored [2 Mac Sule 


215 


216 


216 


217 


242 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"Antiochus went up to Jerusalem with a great multitude, and 
he proudly entered into the sanctuary, and took away the golden 
altar, and the candlestick of light, and atl the vessels thereof, 
and the table of show-bread, and the pouring vessels, and the 
vials, and the little mortars of gold, and the veil, and the crowns, 
and the golden ornament that was before the temple; and he broke 
them all in pieces. And he took the silver and gold, and the pre- 
cious vessels; and he took the hidden treasures which he found: 
and when he had taken all away he departed into his own country. 
And he made a great slaughter of men, and spoke very proudly. And 
there was great mourning in Israel, and in every place where they 
were; and the princes, and the elders mourned, and the young men 
and virgins were made feeble, and the beauty of the women was changed. 
Every bridegroom took up lamentation; and the bride that sat in the 
Marriage bed mourned. And the land was moved for the inhabitants 
thereof and all the house of Jacob was covered with confusion” 
[1 Mac 1:22-29]. Concerning his departure it is written: ‘It hap- 
pened as he was going . . . that he fell from the chariot" [2 Mac 2 
9:7] “and by the heavy shock to his body his members were vexed . 
so that worms swarmed out of his body, and while he lived in sor- 
row... his flesh fell off, and the filthiness of his smell was 
noisome to the army" [v. 9] ". . . since no man could endure to 
carry, for the intolerable stench" [v. 10] ". . . Among the moun- 


tains he died a miserable death" [v. 28]. 


Alcimus, wishing to destroy the temple, “was stricken with 
paralysis,so that he could no more speak a word . . . and died at 


that time in great torment" [1 Mac 9:55f]. 


Nicanor with thirty-five thousand was killed [2 Mac 15:27]; his 
head with his execrable hand, which he had stretched out against the 
holy house of Almighty God, was cut off [v. 30, 32]; they were hanged 
up over against the temple, and his tongue cut into pieces was given 


to birds [v. 32-33]. 


33. CONCERNING PLURALITY OF PRIESTS AND CONCERNING TITHES 243 


Balthazar, drinking out of the vessels of the temple, was 
killed the same night [Dan 5:3, 30], “and Darius the Mede succeeded 
to the kingdom" [v. 31]. 


Thomas, Bishop of Canterbury, was killed for the rights and 
property of his Church; when the brethren were celebrating Mass for 
the dead, angels stood near and entoned joyfully the Laetabitur 
justus, etc. Therefore let princes beware of counsellors who, for 
the advantage of the kingdom and the preservation of dominion, advise 


(on account of extreme necessity) that Churches be despoiled. 


"The Shechemites gave seventy weight of silver out of the temple 
of Baalberith to Abimelech, wherewith he hired for himself men that 
were needy and vagabonds" [Judg 9:4]. This he did to obtain the 
rulership. "But a woman, casting a piece of millstone, hit the head 


of Abimelech, and broke his skull" [Judg 9:53]. 


"King Ahaz gathered together the silver and gold that could be 
found in the house of the Lord, and in the king's treasures, and 
he sent it to the king of the Assyrians" [4 K 16:8], in order that 
he might save him "out of the hand of the king of Syria, and of the 
king of Israel" [4 K 16:7]. The impious, idolatrous king did this, 


not content with the protection of God promised him by Isaiah [Is 4]. 


Therefore it will be the duty of a good prince to love and 
defend the clergy, to keep intact the privileges granted them, and 
to leave his goods to churches and ecclesiastics; but to drive as 
far away from his borders as possible heresies and heretics; in this 
he will prepare for himself and for his subjects peace and tran- 
quillity and will merit eternal life with the ancient most Christian 


princes. 


217 


218 


218” 


219 


CHAPTER 34 
CONCERNING THE BUILDING OF CHURCHES AND THEIR DECORATION! 

The heretics despise the Church of God and her adornment they 
remove: ~ the Anabaptists would have none at all. They revive the 
heresy of the Massilians, whom Augustine mentions in his Sermon 
against the Arians; the Sagarellans and the Wycliffites have fol- 


lowed this error, against the express statements of Scripture. 


Jacob said: 'Indeed the Lord is in this place, and I knew it 
not... . . How terrible is this place! This is no other but the 
house of God, and the gate of heaven" [Gen 28:16f]. "And he called 
the name of the name of the place Bethel," [v. 19] that is, the 
house of God. "You may not offer the passover sacrifice (phase) in 
any of your cities, but in the place which the Lord your God has 


chosen, that his name may dwell there" [Dt 16:5£]. 


David confesses: ‘The word of the Lord came to me, saying: 
You have shed much blood, and fought many battles, so you cannot 6 
build a house to my name, after shedding so much blood before me. 
The son who shall be born to you, shall be a most quiet man... . 
He shall build a house to my name" [1 Ch 22:8-10]. See with how 
much care God provided for the building of the temple, which he did 


not will to be done by a warrior, but by the peaceable Solomon. 


God said: "I have walked in a tabernacle, and in a tent, in 
all the places that I have gone through with the children of Israel" 


{2 K 7:6f£]. Note that He who is everywhere walked in a tabernacle. 


Solomon built the temple. He sent ten thousand men each month 
to Lebanon, to fell trees, seventy thousand to carry burdens, and 
eighty thousand stone cutters, three thousand three hundred over- 


seers of the work [3 K 5:14-16]. 


"The house before the oracle he overlaid with most pure gold, 


and fastened on the plates with nails of gold. And there was nothing 


ichapter added after 1529. 


zon the Reformed critique of opulence in ceremony, see H.O. Old, 
The Patristic Roots of Reformed Worship (1975). pp. 37f. 


244 


34. CONCERNING THE BUILDING OF CHURCHES AND THEIR 245 
DECORATION 


in the temple that was not covered with gold; but the whole altar 
of the oracle he covered also with gold" [3 K 6:21f]. Later: "he 
covered the Cherubim with gold" [3 K 6:23]. Later: "The floor of 
the house he also overlaid with gold inside and out" [v. 30]. 
"Solomon made all the vessels in the house of the Lord: the altar 
of gold, and the table of gold, upon which the show-bread should 


be set [7:48]; and the golden candlesticks, five on the right hand 


and five on the left .. . of pure gold .. . and the lamps of gold, 


the golden snuffers, [v. 49] and pots, and fleshhooks, and bowls, 


and mortars, and censers of purest gold; the hinges of the doors were 


of gold" [v. 50]. 


"The Lord said that he would dwell in a cloud. Building, I 
have built a house for thy dwelling," said Solomon [3 K 8:12f]. 


"Solomon said: The Lord promised that he would dwell in dark- 
ness, but I have built a house to his name, that he might dwell 
there for ever" [2 Ch 6:1f]. 


God more propitiously and swiftly answers prayers in a sacred 


place than outside it. 


The Gibeonites, at the command of Joshua, became cutters of 


wood for the use of the temple. 


“When King David came and sat before the Lord," [1 Ch 17:16] 
that is, the ark. You see that He was more present in one place 


than in another, because in the ark there was a more sacred place. 


When Daniel could not pray in the temple, because he was in 
the Babylonian captivity, he still prayed thrice a day, with his 


face toward the temple in Jerusalem [Dan 6:10). 


King Cyrus, who played the part of Christ, gave permission 
for the rebuilding of the temple of the Jews [1 Esd 1:1f]. Darius 
confirmed the concession made by Cyrus, and the Jews built it, and 
prospered, according to the prophecy of Haggai and Zechariah 


(1 Esd 6:1ff]. 


219 


220 


220 


221 


246 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


"My house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples, 
says the Lord God" [Is 56:7]. Christ confirmed this statement 
concerning the material temple from which he cast out the sellers. 
"You, he said, have made it a den of robbers" [Mt 21:12f£]. Thus 


many governors make dens of heretics out of churches. 


"A man... planted a vineyard . .. and built a tower, and 
let it out to husbandmen" [Mt 21:33]. The vineyard was the synagogue 
of the Jews; the tower, the temple; but because they killed the son, 
the vineyard was let to other husbandmen, Christians. And just as 
the priesthood was to be transferred, so also the temple into the 


churches of Christians [Heb 7:12]. 


The Jews said to Christ about the centurion: "He loves our 
nation, and he has built us a synagogue" [Lk 7:5]. The building of 
a synagogue pleased Christ. Why would not the building of a church 
please him? ‘Peter and John went up to the temple at the ninth hour" 
{Acts 3:1]. See how the Apostles prayed in the old temple, when as 


yet the Christians did not have churches. Augustine, On Christian 


Doctrine, 3. 


St. Paul rebuked the Christians who were confusing churches 
with suppers and banquets [cf. 1 Cor 11:20f]. Hence we can say to 
the heretics what Paul said to those rash folk: "Or do you despise 
the Church of God?" [1 Cor 11:22]. 


In the time of the Apostles churches began to be built. Thus, 
Paul and Barnabas established presbyters in each church [Acts 14:22], 


in which Paul bade women keep silence. 


"An infidel or unlearned person entering a church, falling down 
on his face, will worship God, affirming that God is among you in- 
deed" [1 Cor 14:24£]. 


St. John, about to die, ordered that he be carried into the 


church. Jerome, On the Epist. to the Galatians. 


St. Paul saw the house of Cornelius which had been made a 


church [Acts 10:22], and likewise the small houses of Philip 


34. CONCERNING THE BUILDING OF CHURCHES AND THEIR 247 
DECORATION 


[Acts 21:8], and the bedchamber of the four virgins. Jerome men- 


tions these in his Life of St. Paula. 


In many passages Augustine attests that building churches was 
an act of adoration (latria), which the grateful faith of the be- 
lievers owe to God; therefore temples are not built or consecrated 
to the saints, but to God, in memory and veneration of the saints 
(Against Faustus, 20; Dep, 22; Against Maximus, and in many other 


passages). 


The bishop is to see to it, in consecrating altars and temples, 
which in the titles of the inscription always set God first, attach- 
ing the honor of the saints thereunder. For the act of adoration 
(latria) is a service owed to God alone, not to the saints, although 
in churches and altars we also venerate the saints, and celebrate 
their birthdays in remembrance. Those who know the Christian litera- 
ture of both testaments, do not blame on the sacrilegious rites of 
the pagans the fact that they constructed temples and established 
priesthoods, and performed sacrifices, but because they exhibit these 


to idols and demons. Augustine, To Deogratias, Q. 2. 


Through the fabric of the churches and any necessary uses, the 
demons are expelled by those whom they previously possessed as their 


own (Augustine, On the Harmony of the Gospels). 
The temple of the synagogue was brightly ornamented. 


"Of every man who offers of his own accord, you shall take them" 


(Ex 25:2]. Later: "Gold, and silver, and brass, violet and purple, 
and scarlet twice dyed," ete. [Ex 25:3f] " . . . ofl for lights, 
spices . . . of good odor, onyx stones, and precious stones" [Ex 


25:6f]. Later: The ark was gilded "within and without, with the 
purest gold" [Ex 25:11]. "Bars . . . overlaid with gold'' [v. 13] in 


"four golden rings" [v. 12]; "a mercy-seal of the purest gold" [v. 17], 


golden Cherubim [v. 18], "a table overlaid . . . with gold," with a 
golden ledge [v. 24)! "four golden rings" [v. 26], "dishes, and bowls, 


censers, and cups. . . of the purest gold" [v. 29], " a candlestick 


221 


222 


222 


248 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


of the purest gold” [v. 31], and snuffers {(v. 38], “the curtains 
of the tabernacle of . . . linen, violet and purple, and scarlet 
twice dyed" [Ex 26:1], with fifty loops {v. 5] and rings of gold 
[v. 6]. "The boards themselves you shall overlay with gold, and 
shall cast rings of gold to be set upon them" etc. [v. 29). See 


other details in text. 


"They shall make an ephod of gold and violet and purple, and 
linen embroidered with divers colors" [Ex 28:6]. ‘And you shall 
take two onyx stones," [v. 9], “set in gold, with the engraving of 
a jeweler, you shall engrave them" [v. 11]. ‘You shall make also 
hooks of gold" [v. 13], “and two little chains of purest gold," 
etc. [v. 14]. In the rational [v. 15] you shall set four rows of 
stones: of carnelian (sardius), topaz, emeralds [v. 17]; car- 
buncle, sapphire and diamond [v. 18] jacinth, agate, and amethyst 
[v. 19]; chrysolite, onyx, beryl [v. 20]. You shall make on the 
rational, two golden chains [v. 22] and two rings of gold [v. 23]; 
likewise a golden bell on the robe [v. 34]; a golden plate [v. 36] 
in the violet fillet [v. 37]. 


"Every one of the children of Israel shall give a price for 
their souls . . . namely, half a shekel . . . in the sanctuary” 
[Ex 30:12£]. For the perfecting of all the above things and many 
more, God "filled Bezalel with the spirit of God, with wisdom and 
understanding and knowledge in all manner of work, to devise what- 
ever may be made by an artificer in gold and silver and marble and 
precious stone, and he gave him as his companion Oholiab" [Ex 
31:2-6]. 


The people carried out all the above precepts, "and offered 
with a devout and most ready mind first fruits to the Lord," 
etc. [Ex 35:20£]. Every golden vessel was set apart to be given 
to the Lord, so that the artisans said to Moses: ‘The people are 
offering more than is necessary" [Ex 36:5]; hence the people were 


forbidden to offer any more. 


Solomon caused equally precious things to be made [3 K 6]. 


34. CONCERNING THE BUILDING OF CHURCHES AND THEIR 249 
DECORATION 


The princes of Israel offered in the dedication of the 
tabernacle twelve dishes of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve 
little mortars of gold. They weighed together 2,400 shekels of 
silver [v. 85], and 120 shekels of gold [v. 86], twelve oxen, 
twelve rams, twelve lambs [v. 87], twenty-four oxen, sixty rams, 
sixty buck goats, sixty lambs [v. 88]. Offerings daily [Num 28:18], 
on the Sabbath [v. 9f], on the first day of the month [v. 10-15], 
the Passover [v. 16-25], Pentecost [v. 26-31], trumpets [29:1-6], 
atonement [v. 7-11], tabernacles [v. 12-38], are accurately listed 


by Moses. 


King Cyrus restored the golden vessels removed by Nebuchad- 


nezzar [1 Esd 5:14f]. 


King Darius provided for the costs of the offerings [1 Esd 
6:8]. 


King Artaxerxes likewise also permitted that Ezra collect from 
all the province of Babylon, and that the people give, which was 
decided to carry to Jerusalem [1 Esd 7:11ff]. Therefore, not per- 
sonally visiting St. emcee they can send gifts; the same is true 


of other holy places. 


Ezra weighed into the priests’ hands, gold and silver, and 
vessels, which the king and his counsellors, and his princes, and 
the whole of Israel, had offered, that is, of those that had been 
found [1 Esd 8:25]. And he weighed 100 talents of gold, [v. 26], 
and 20 cups of gold [v. 27], and 650 talents of silver [v. 26]. 


"We shall make ordinances for ourselves, to give a third of a 
shekel every year for the work of the house of our God, for the 


loaves of show-bread, and for the continual sacrifice" [2 Esd 10:32f]. 


The rich temple is not condemned for receiving the increase of 


its adornment even from a poor widow [Lk 21:2f£]. 


Ioe, James of Compostella, in Spain, a popular pilgrimage 
shrine in the Middle Ages. 


223” 


250 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


The most Christian princes made immense gifts to most holy 
churches ,*as well as most ample largesse, and the emperor deter- 
mined that sacred vessels, except for the redemption of captives, 
should in no wise be withdrawn or given in pledge. Constantine 


1 
the Great constructed the Lateran Church. 


And he determined that the patrimony of the Church should 


remain unharmed. 


The heretics do not rejoice in a physical church, because they 


are the enemies of the spiritual church. 


The heretics do just as the Jews, for whom it was difficult to 
give earrings for the adornment of God, yet too readily gave them 
for the golden calf [Ex 32:4]. Thus the reigning heretics complain 
of the expenses of thetemple, and of the Catholic priests, but they 
are prompt in giving ample pay to the perverse calves of the here- 


tics and seducers. 


224 The heretics condemn churches, but love crypts and caves, as 
Jerome has eloquently reasoned in Comm. Hab., and Ambrose has said 5 
many things [On Epist. Eph., 5; On Luke 5]. We have experienced 


this in the Catabaptists. 


In the heretics is verified that saying of Christ: “Behold, 
your house shall be left to you, desolate" [Mt 23:38]. For the 


Church being desolate, these men seek caves. 


"If therefore they shall say to you: ‘Christ is in the desert,' 
do not go out. ‘Behold, he is in the closets,' believe it not" 
{Mt 24:26]. Thus the Anabaptists now often have assembled in groves, 


and in private conventicles, seeking Christ where He is not. 


The heretic Faustus denied temples, altars, incense, like- 
nesses, and sacrifices--things capable of being grasped by the 
senses-~these he placed in heaven alone [Augustine, Against Faustus, 


20]. The unhappy heirs of this man are the heretics of our time. 


1 the Basilica of the Redeemer, now St. John Lateran, the 


diocesan church of the Bishop of Rome: omnium ecclesiarum Urbis 
et Orbis mater et caput. 


34. CONCERNING THE BUILDING OF CHURCHES AND THEIR 251 
DECORATION 


The Donatists also burned the churches of Christians (Augus- 225 
tine, Letter to Count Boniface). See what leaders the heretics 
follow--Donatists, Manicheans, Sagarellans, Massilians, Wycliffites, 


Hussites, Picards, and if there is anything worse than these. 


Objections of the Inflammatory and Sacrilegious Heretics. 


1. Stephen says: "The Most High does not dwell in houses 
made with hands" {Acts 7:48]. 


2. Paul says to the Athenians: "He, being Lord of heaven 
and earth, does not dwell in temples made with hands, nor is he 


worshiped with human hands" [Acts 17:24f]. 


3. God is in every place, and no place is shown, in which God 
is particularly present, but everywhere he hearkens to sinners. 


Therefore Churches confer nothing. 


4. Paul says: "I wish men to pray in every place, raising 
of 


clean hands" {1 Tim 2:8]. 


5. Christ said of the temple: "Amen, I say to you, here not 225 
a stone will be left upon a stone, which shall not be destroyed" 


[Mt 24:2]. 


6. "The true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit 


and in truth" {Jn 4:23]. 


7. Jeremiah says: ‘Trust not in lying words, saying: The 
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, it is the temple of 
the Lord" [Jer 7:4]. Jerome interprets this: "Do not have faith 


in the splendor of buildings, and in gilded ceilings." 


8. Jerome, Epist. to Nepotianus: "Now the poor Master has 
dedicated the poverty of his house, in contrast to the wealth of 


Solomon's temple.” 


9. Persius [Sat. 2.70] says: "0 you pontiffs, tell us what 
gold is doing in a holy place. Namely, dolls given to Venus by 


a virgin." 


226 


226 


252 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Response of the Faithful Ministers of the Church. 


1. God is not in temples, as the pagans think, for God does 
not dwell in the temple, there circumscribed according to his 
essence, but there dwelling through more abundant grace. Solomon 
teaches this solution: "Therefore it is not credibie that God 
should dwell with men upon earth. If heaven and the heaven of 
heavens do not contain thee, how much less this house, which I 
have built? But to this end only is it made, that thou mayest 


regard the prayer of thy servant," etc. [2 Ch 6:18f]. 


2. Likewise, unless the heretic is quoting Paul's words in 
a mutilated form, God is not worshiped by human hands, needing 
something. Therefore God is not worshiped by us, that he should 


need our help. 


3. This was the reason of the ungodly seducer and idolatrous 
King Jeroboam, as Josephus [8.12] attests: God is everywhere, but 
he wills to be prayed to and honored in one place more than in 
another. Hence Jeroboam falsely persuaded them not to pray when 
fatigued by a long journey [3 K 12:27]. This also our heretics 
say against pilgrimages to the dwelling places of the saints. 
Therefore, our heretics are Jeroboamites, just as he did not wish 


the Jews to go up to Jerusalem. 


4. In every place, namely a suitable one, one is to pray. 
Ambrose said this, because otherwise they falsely thought that one 


was not to pray outside the Church. 


5. The temple of the Jews was rightly to be destroyed, but 
just as the Gospel priesthood succeeded their priesthood, so also 


our churches, sacrifices, etc., succeeded their temple. 


6. The true worshipers in the churches worship the Father in 
spirit and in truth, for why should one oppose the church while not 


opposing a grove or the filthy grottoes of the heretics. 


7. Jeremiah there expressly attests to the place chosen by 


God. For he says: ‘And I shall dwell with you in this place" 


34. CONCERNING THE BUILDING OF CHURCHES AND THEIR 253 
DECORATION 


[Jer 7:4}. And he means that the sanctity of the temple is not 
benefited, when they do not follow good paths. The addition of 
Jerome, who also declares his position on the splendor of per- 227 


verse doctrines. 


8. Jerome rightly censures the decoration of churches, to 
the neglect of the poor; for he regards the decorating of churches 
themselves to be praiseworthy, and on this account praises Nepo~ 
tianus. He was concerned whether the altar glistened, the pavements 
were cleansed, the vessels shining, and godly care disposed upon 
all ceremonies. He thereupon compares Nepotianus witi Bezalael and 


Hiram. 


9. Persius is learnedly quoted. After the heretics demand 
clear scripture texts from us, they also press upon us the pagan 
poets, as Luther, the patriarch of the heretics did; when he wished 
to prove that everything happens from absolute necessity, he quoted 
the poet: "By law all things stand sure." With such valid de- 
fenses the heretics fortify their own! Let us not accept Persius, 
since he does not know God. And let him, with all the heretics 


struck with anathema, not know God. 227, 


228° 


CHAPTER 35 
1 
CONCERNING THE (INDELIBLE) STAMP (CHARACTER) 


The Church believes also that the faithful are in three 
sacraments impressed with a certain seal of the soul, which is 


1 


called "stamp," namely, in baptism, confirmation, and orders. 


"Grieve not the Holy Spirit .. . in whom you have been 


sealed unto the day of your redemption" [Eph 4:30]. 


"In whom you also, after you had heard the word of truth, 
(the gospel of your salvation) in whom also believing, you were 
sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, who is the pledge of our 


inheritance," etc. [Eph 1:13f]. 


It is clear that in the regeneration of baptism the faithful 
are sealed by the Holy Spirit, so that the sheep of Christ are set 


apart from others. 


Jerome explains the words of Paul: The seal of God is, as 
the first man was created to the image and likeness of God, so, in 
the second rebirth, whoever follows the Holy Spirit, is sealed by 


him, and receives the figure of the Creator." 


The same author: ‘We are sealed by the Holy Spirit of God, 
in order that also our spirit and soul may be imprinted with God's 


seal,'' and later. 


This seal of the Holy Spirit is sealed, with God imprinting 
it, according to the declaration of the Savior. ''For him has 


God, the Father, sealed' [Jn 6:27],"' and later. 


"He who for this reason is sealed, that he may preserve the 
seal, and show it on the day of redemption, pure and sincere, and 
in no part mutilated, and on this account it deserves to be num- 


bered with those things which have been redeemed." 


Note that the stamp remains even to the day of judgment. 


lchapter added after 1532. 


254 


35. CONCERNING THE (INDELIBLE) STAMP (CHARACTER) 255 


Athanasius, On Ephesians, 1: ‘The Jews of the circumcision, 
after the custom of beasts, having received the seal of the flesh, 
were branded with marks, but upon you as children of God, beyond 
what the condition of flesh permits, the sign of the spirit has 


been imprinted." 


The same author, On Ephesians, 4: "The Spirit has sealed us, 
and has made us to be of the royal flock, and in no wise allows us 
to consort with criminals and condemned persons, but has imprinted 
the seal, and has distinguished that we may be redeemed and free 
from anger of that sort." 


“And I shall set a seal among them, and send from among those 


' etc. 


who shall be saved, to the nations by the sea, in Africa,' 
{Is 66:19]. The prophet foresaw that the apostles and disciples 
would be sent to the nations, namely, those who have the seal, the 


stamp of God. 


The Stamp, according to Jerome's view, was prefigured in the 
blood of the lamb, which was marked on the lintel and both door 


posts, that the avenging angel might pass over. 


For this stamp was also figured by Tau. ‘Mark Tau on the 
foreheads of men, weeping and sorrowing over all the abominations, 
which occur in our midst" [Ez 9:4]. Later: "Accordingly, do not 
slay anyone on whom you see the Tau" [Ez 9:6]. Thus Christ in 
baptism seals the door posts of the soul with the merit of his 


blood, that souls may be freed from the devil. 


Dionysius, Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 2.3 [PG 3.397-400]: ‘''The 
divine majesty admits the one acceeding to baptism into His inner 
fellowship, and thereupon gives to him His light and a sign making 


him holy and participant in the order of the saints." Note that 


he calls stamp "light." 


"Now through baptism we receive the first fruits of the Holy 
Spirit, and the beginning of another life takes place in us, that 


is, the first fruits of regeneration, and seal and guardianship, 


228 


229 


229 


230 


256 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


and illumination, and sanctification."' Note that the stamp is 


a seal [Ch. 10]. 


Augustine, On Baptism Against the Donatists, 6.1: “He has 
sufficiently shone upon the pastors of the Church, that the sheep 
who was wandering outside, and had outside received the Lord's 
stamp from deceiving pillagers, coming to the safety of Christian 
unity, is corrected from error, yet the Lord's stamp in her is 
recognized rather than rejected, inasmuch as many wolves imprint 
this very stamp upon wolves, he speaks of those baptized by here- 


tics, returning once more to the Church." 


Augustine, Epist. to the Donatists [Epist 204]: "And you are 
the sheep of Christ; you bear the Lord's stamp, in the sacrament 


which you have received." 


Augustine, On John, Tr. 5: "If a baptized person does not 
have charity, he indeed has a stamp imposed, but as a deserter he 


wanders." 


The stamp is imprinted in three sacraments, namely, baptism, 


confirmation and poderees 


Gregory, [Epist. 2.10.46 (22): PL 77.583ff]: "Your statement, 
that he who is ordained, should be ordained again, is utterly ridi- 
culous, for as he was once for all baptized, he ought not to be 
baptized again; so he who has been once consecrated, does not have 


to be consecrated again in the same order." 


Augustine [Against the Epistle of Parmenian, 2.13.28: PL 43.70]: 
"Both (baptism and order) are sacraments, and by a certain consecra- 
tion both are given to man, one when he is baptized, and another 
when he is ordained. Therefore it is not permitted in the Catholic 


Church to repeat either one." 


"Now he who confirms us with you in Christ, and who has 
anointed us, is God, who also has sealed us, and given the pledge 


of the Spirit in our hearts" [1 Cor 1:21f]. 


mee. Eugenius IV, Exultate Deo (Mansi, 31.1054; Denziger, Ench. 
No. 695: ET p. 221). On the indelible character, especially as 
applied to Orders, see Peter Lombard, Sent., 4.24.13; also Thomas 
Aquinas, ST, PT 63.6; PTS 35.2. 


35. CONCERNING THE (INDELIBLE) STAMP (CHARACTER) 257 


Objections of Luther. 


dhe ae ene is a fictitious thing, which Scripture is 


ignorant of. 
2. How can water impress such a sign on the soul? 
Reply of the Catholic. 


1. The Stamp is not something invented by the fathers, but 
with the Holy Spirit as teacher, men of God understood it, as has 


been shown from Paul [cf. Eph 4:30; 1:13£]. 


2. Water does not imprint such a sign in the soul, but God 
imprints it, at the presence of the water of baptism, with his own 
omnipotence assisting. And in this Christians exceed the Jews: 


for we have the seal of the Spirit; they had the seal of the flesh. 


230 


CHAPTER 36 
CONCERNING TRANSUBSTANTLIATION 


‘ 


1 


Before the Council of Nicea the Church did not use the term 
consubstantiality, (homoousios); but was compelled on account of the 
heretics to adopt it; likewise, person. 


In the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the substance of the bread is 
converted into the substance of the body of Christ. Thus the sub- 
stance of the bread does not remain. "Taking the bread, he gave 
thanks, and broke it, and gave it to them saying: ‘This is my body.'" 
Matthew, Mark and Paul agree. Note that he took bread, but after 
the blessing was finished, he called it his body, which would not 
happen without its being changed. No Evangelist says “with this" or 
"in this," but "this is my body.'' Ponder what this proves. Alphon- 


sus, Against Heresies [6.4; 10.10]. 


"The bread which I shall give, is my flesh for the life of the 
world" [jn 6:52]. This would not happen unless there was a conver- 


sion. 


Cyprian: "This common bread, changed into flesh and blood, ob- 
tains life." And later: "This bread which the Lord was extending to 
his disciples, not changed in appearance but in nature, has by the 


omnipotence of the Word become flesh." 


John of Damascus, 4.14: ‘It cannot be readily explained how by 
nature bread and wine and water undergo a natural conversion through 
drinking into body and blood for the one who eats and drinks, but 
there is no other body than what existed before: thus also how super- 
naturally the shown bread and wine and water through the invocation 
and coming of the Holy Spirit are transmuted into Christ's body and 


blood, but they are not two, but one and the same. 


Ambrose, On the Sacraments 4.4: "The word of Christ will avail 


to change the species of the elements." 2 ambrose: This bread is 


Schacter added after 1532. 


2Decr. 3.2.69 (Fr. 1.1340), quoting Ambrose, De Mysteriis, c.9. 


258 


36. CONCERNING TRANSUBSTANTIATION 259 


bread before the words of the Sacraments; but when consecration 
occurs, from bread it becomes the flesh of Cree Again: "It 

was not the body of Christ before consecration, but after consecra- 
tion, I say to you, that now it is the body of Christ; He said it, 
and it was Bene Again: "Therefore, you have learned, that from 
the bread the body of Christ is made, and that the wine and water are 
mixed in the cup, but it becomes blood by the consecration of the 
heavenly applet Again [c. 3]: "Before it is consecrated, it is 
bread; but when the words of Christ have been added, it is the body 
of Christ." Later: "See, therefore, into how many kinds the Word 


of Christ is capable of converting all nines aa 


John Chrysostom, Hom. 60: "The works set forth are not of human 
power: He who then did these things in that supper, now also does 
them. We hold the place of ministers, but he who sanctifies these 


things and changes them, is Christ Himself." 


Augustine, The Sentences of Prosper:> "We honor in the species 
of bread and wine, which we see, things invisible, that is, flesh 
and blood." [Later] ‘We confess before the consecration that is 
bread and wine which nature formed; but after consecration the flesh 


and blood of Christ, which the blessing has consecrated." 


Gregory: "Christ the good shepherd gave his life for his 
sheep, that in our sacrament, he might change his body and blood 
and he might satisfy the sheep which he had redeemed by the food of 
his flesh." 


Gregory of Nyssa: "The invisible priest converts, by the word 


the secret power, visible creatures into the substance of his body 


ye 3.2.55: Fr. 1.1334, quoting Pseudo-Ambrose, De Sacra- 


mentis, 4.4. 


“Wns, 3.2.55: Fr. 1.1335, quoting Pseudo-Ambrose, De Sacra- 


mentis, 4.4. 
Teas. 3.2.55: Fr. 1.1335, quoting Ibid. 
“Wee 3.2.55: Fr. 1.1335, quoting Ibid. 


Sere. 3.2.41: Fr. 1.1328. Fr. n. 530 attributes this to 
Lanfranc, Contra Berengarium, c. 13. 


232 


260 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


and blood, saying: ‘Take, this is my body.' Gratian attributes 


this to Eusebius of Emesa [Decr. 3.2.35: Fr. i 3258ui), 


Gregory: Appearance and likeness of those things were words 


which previously were "bread" and "wine." 


Theophylact: "After he had blessed, he broke bread, which we 
also do, with the addition of prayers, This is my body; This, I say, 
which you take. For the bread is not only a figure of the Lord's 


body, but into it the body of Christ is changed." 


Theophylact on John 6: Transformed indeed by secret words 
through the mystical blessing upon the flesh. And later: Therefore 
the bread in the flesh of the Lord is now changed, that is, by the 
living nournishment of the bread it will be changed into the flesh, 
and was made like his holy flesh. Therefore: Now the bread is 

233 changed into the flesh of the Lord. Theophylact: The bread is trans- 
mitted into Christ's body and it will change in truth into bread and 


beneath the bread also wine, flesh and blood. 


Transubstantiation is possible: "Therefore the Lord God formed 
man from the dust of the earth" [Gen 2:7]. Note that God changed 


dust into flesh. 


"The Lord God formed the rib, which he had taken from Adam 


into woman" [Gen 2:22]. 
Note that the bone of the rib is changed into woman. 


Lot's wife, looking back, was turned into a pillar of salt 
[Gen 19:20]. 


Moses cast down a rod, and it was turned into a serpent [Ex 4:3]. 


"T will strike with the rod... the water of the river, and 


it shall be turned into blood" [Ex 7:17]. 


1 
Friedberg n. 416. Not by Eusebius, but some attribute it to 
Eucherius of Lyons, others to Hilary or Caesarius of Arles, some 
finally to Rabanus or Bede. Ivo Decr. 2.4; Peter Lomb. 4.8. 


36. CONCERNING TRANSUBSTANTIATION 261 


And there are other texts adduced by Ambrose, On the Mysteries. > 


Exodus 16:31 "The manna was like coriander seed," and yet it 


is called bread. Psalm 77:24; 104:40. 


The devil recognized this power to change in Christ: "If you 233 
are the Son of God, he says, tell these stones to become bread" 
{Mt 4:3]. 


Christ from five loaves fed five thousand people; this he did 
by multiplying bread. He now sacramentally feeds the whole Church 
of the faithful with the one loaf of his body. 


Objections of Luther. 


1. The substance of bread remains in the Eucharist, for 


Scripture calls it "bread." 


"Moreover the apostles were persevering in teaching and in the 


communicating of the breaking of bread" [Acts 2:42]. 


"The bread which we break, is it not the partaking of the Lord's 
body?" [1 Cor 10:16]. 


"But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that bread, 


and drink of the cup" [1 Cor 11:28]. 
2. The evangelists also call it bread. 


3. The eucharist is like red hot iron, in which remains both 
the nature of fire and the nature of iron; thus in the eucharist 234 


remains both the nature of bread, and the nature of Christ's body. 


Response of the Catholic. 


No creature, especially an irrational one, is worthy to be 
mingled with the blessed body of Christ, otherwise the Word would 
72 
assume breadness in the unity of the prime substance. Luther 


however has not yet shown to us in the Scriptures, that the Word 


lvost of the OT texts just quoted, or suggested, are from Decr. 
3.2.69 (Fr. 1.1339£), quoting Ambrose On the Mysteries, c. 9, but 
Ambrose's close reasoning is imperfectly ‘transmitted in Eck's mere 
enumeration of proofs. Eck also has used the On the Sacraments 
long attributed to Ambrose but now thought to be @ apocryphal. 


2 uppositum 


262 ECK :; ENCHIRIDION 


has become bread. Therefore, one must stand by the decision of 
the council [Decret. Greg. IX, lela ie Fr. 2.5f£; 3.41.6, Fr. 2. 
636-639]. "Cyril: Lest we should be stricken with fear at flesh 
and blood set upon the Sacred altar, he pours out the wine of life 


upon the elements offered, changing them into his own true flesh." 


Ambrose [Paschasius, De Corpore et Sanguine Christi, c. l, 
quoted in Decr. 3.2.74: Fr. 1.1344] Although the figure of bread and 
wine is seen in the altar, we are to believe them to be nothing but 
the flesh and blood of Christ." 

1. What Luke and Paul call "bread,'' is not to be understood 


according to nature, but in a fourfold manner: 


Proverbs 23:6: ‘The bread of falsehood" was not bread by 
nature. 


i. Because before conversion it was bread, in like manner the 


serpent is called "rod," because it was a rod. "But the rod of Aaron 


devoured their rods" [Ex 7:12]. 


ii. According to the species of bread and accidents, just as 
an image is called from an image; just as Solomon made oxen, and 


little lions, because they made images of them [3 K 10:18]. 


iii. The eucharist also is called "bread," because in it is 


“the living bread that came down from heaven" [Jn 6:51]. 


iv. By reason of the body of Christ which is called "bread" 
in Jeremiah [11:19]: ‘Let us put wood in his bread," they put the 


wood of the cross in the body of Christ. 


2. The evangelists call it "bread" before consecration, but 


when this has been accomplished, they call it “the body of Christ." 


Irenaeus: After the invocation it is not common bread, but is 


removed from earthly matter, and becomes heavenly [AH 4.17£]. 


rere is cited the famous confession of faith of Innocent III 
which constitutes Canon I of the Fourth Lateran Council, A.D. 1215. 


36. CONCERNING TRANSUBSTANTIATION 263 


3. Iron is not changed into fire; hence iron is not fire, 
but glowing hot. For it so strongly takes heat into its density, 
that also splendor shines in it. Therefore let Luther be ashamed 
of comparing the most venerable sacrament with red hot iron, when 
the substance of iron remains, but not bread in the eucharist. 
Ambrose says [Decr. 3.2.74: Fr. 1.1344]: "It is clear that the 
figure of bread and wine is seen; yet, after consecration, one is to 
believe nothing else than the flesh and blood of Christ."' Here he 
openly denies the substance of bread, when he affirms that nothing 


else is here, than the flesh and blood of Christ. 


CHAPTER 37 
THAT MASSES ARE TO BE SAID IN LATIN, NOT IN GERMAN? 

235 That the more important languages of the time of Christ were 
three: namely, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, is indicated by the 
title affixed to the cross of Christ {Mt 27:37; Jn 19:19f], in 
which languages God is not undeservedly praised, and especially in 


these languages are the divine offices carried out. 


Yet we do not deny that it is permitted to the East Indians, 
that they do the divine office in their own language, which their 
clergy today observe, as we ourselves have seen and heard, although 
mysteries of the Mass, since it cannot be translated into Italian, 


we cannot have it from them. 


The same thing with regard to old Church Slavonic is very 
widely attested by others, as [had been] accomplished by Jerome 
[for Latin], as Melchionensis, in the Chronicles of the Poles 
testifies: In memory of the men of Cracow in the Chapel of the 
Holy Cross (if I rightly remember the name, for I do not have the . 
book at hand), masses were celebrated in Slavonic; yet the nations 
of this language long ago gave up this privilege, and now conform 


to the Latin of the anna” 


236 And because the triumphal title of Christ was written in the 
three principal languages, as it is seen at Rome on the Holy Cross 
(in jevusaven). alehouen with some of the letters having quite 
fallen away. Thus it is no wonder that the Latin Church uses in 
the sacred mysteries words of the sacred language (= Hebrew) and 


of Greek. 
The Hebrew word alleluia means, “praise God"; hosanna means, 


“pray, save (us)." 


chapter added in 1532 (fol. M9Y - M12"): It is argued from the 
Scriptures that the Mass, as well as the Canonical Hours are to 
be said in Latin and not in German. 


2 
Note that Eck passes over the wide use of Slavonic, after Cyril 
and Methodius, in the Eastern Orthodox Church. See p. 269, below. 


34 reference to the Basilica-Hierusalem Sessoriana (c. 300) a church 


at Rome which housed fragments of the true cross, later replaced by 
the baroque church Santa Croce in Gerusalemme. 


264 


37. THAT MASSES ARE TO BE SAID IN LATIN, NOT IN GERMAN 265 


Amen means "let it be done," or "so it is in Truth,” 


"Faithfully." 


Sabaoth means, "hosts, merieen 


Kyrie eleison means, “Lord, have mercy." Christe eleison means 


"Christ, have mercy.” 


Church has kept some Hebrew, is explained by Origen and Augustine. 


I have described the Greek Mass from the book of the Archbishop 

of Rhodes, and Joannicius Corcyrensis Basilianus has written another 236" 
to me, and has shown all the actions and rites through the order for 

very many days also, yet no one remembers this, although it is attri- 


buted to Remigius. 


And if the Italians and the Greeks have their own common speech: 
yet for neither is the Mass celebrated in the vernacular, but in the 
erudite and learned speech, so that it is not necessary to follow the 


various idioms of the language. 


The reasonable custom of the Church, of the Latin Mass in the 


Latin Church. 


1. Because the Mass has been celebrated for more than a thou- 
sand years, when Germany accepted Christianity where a more urgent 
reason appears to have been at hand for reading Masses in German for 
the new plantation, and yet the most holy men famous for miracles 


have observed the use of the Latin Church.* 


2. It would engender great confusion, that when Italians, 
Spaniards, French, English, Hungarians, Bohemians, etc. come to 
us, they would not understand the action of our Mass, and all 237 
would seem to be barbarians to one another, and the Mass would be 


held in contempt. 


3. And not only would confusion occur between divers nations, 


but also scandal would be caused in the same nation. For in Germany 


Tone of the orders of angels. 


237 


238 


266 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


itself, some use one word, others another, and what in one district 
means something honorable, in another something filthy. And diver- 
sity in pronunciation in Germany would lead to such great dissonance, 


that it would be more confused than Babylon. 


4. A greater irreverence would be done to the mystery, if it 
were carried out in the common speech so that it would be made fun 
of at the crossroads and in the barbershops, and at convivial ban- 
quets, as now happens in Lutheran places, and once upon a time 


pastors were punished by divine judgment, by fire fallen from heaven. 


Therefore Dionysius often mentions how the masters of the faith, 
that is, the Apostles, most diligently saw to it that the Holy of 
Holies not be brought forth in the presence of profane persons, and 
for that reason they handed down those supreme and supersubstantial 
things to us, partly in written and partly in unwritten institutions. 
Therefore it is quite enough in the Catholic Church for the Mass to 
be read in the Latin and Greek languages, for the generality of 
peoples who have entered the Church, in these two languages have dis- 
tinguished themselves in wisdom and power. Therefore, the ancient 
custom of the people of God, as Augustine, To Januarius, says, is to 
be considered as having the force of law. The Church determined that 
the words of consecration together with certain other words are said 
secretly in the Mass; since also the high priest alone and once a 
year entered into the holy of holies: are not the mysteries of our 


faith more sacred? 


The Jews were barred from the more sacred place, and there was 
a veil before them (Heb 9); no wonder then that the Church has for- 


bidden laymen from being close to the celebrant, in order that he may 


Clerics, c. 1). Hence they are accustomed to veil the altar with 


curtains and tables, in order that the priest may remember to give 


assent to the handling of the secret mysteries. 


37. THAT MASSES ARE TO BE SAID IN LATIN, NOT IN GERMAN 267 


Luther in his preface harshly treats those, who wish the canon 
of the mass to be read in a high voice, that it may be understood: 
Why, then, that the Mass may be understood, does he only want it 


to be read in German and in the loudest voice? 


Christ prayed in silence and secretly, and withdrawing from 


his disciples [Mt 19:36; Lk 22:41]. 
Objection of the Heretics. 


Paul forbids the Corinthians to speak in church in a language 
that is not understood, for he says: "Who shall hold the place of 
the unlearned? How shall he say, Amen, to your blessing, because 


he does not know what you are saying?" [1 Cor 14:16]. 


Now if the Mass is read in Latin, the laymen do not understand 
it. 
And thus the hearing of it bears no fruit, as if the sermon 


were delivered to a wall. 
Response of the Catholics. 


1. On the words of Paul, in our homilies we showed that prayer 


not understood is meritorious [Rogations, Hom. 3]. 


What the heretics twist to the Mass, we reply that Paul is 
speaking concerning the prophet, that is, the interpreter and 
teacher of the Scriptures, for so is "prophet" here used, as 
Jerome and Augustine attest. Therefore anyone would in vain preach 
to Germans in an unknown language, but of the Mass Paul makes no 
mention here: this is clear from Paul's words: "But in the church 
I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that I may 
instruct others also..." [1 Cor 14:19]. Ponder "I may instruct," 
which is done by preaching, not by celebration of the Mass. See the 


above-mentioned homily. 


2. And if the laity do not understand the words, yet they 


understand all mysteries, which they imbibed from their childhood 


238 


239 


239 


240 


268 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


or the teaching of their parents, or the preaching of the parish 
priests. Therefore, now with kneeling, now with rising, now with 
inclining, now with breast-beating, and making the sign of the 
cross, they accommodate themselves to the celebration of the Mass. 
Hence this outward action shows they understand more of the mystery 
of the Mass than if Cicero, Livy and Varro, most learned in the 
Latin language, but not instructed concerning the mystery, heard 


the words. 


3. The hearing of the Mass is not unprofitable, even when the 


words are not understood, for the following reasons: 


i. Since in the Mass, Holy Scripture is received into use, but 
through it the Holy Spirit speaks, in whatever language used, it 


instills it upon hearts. 


ii. The priest in the Mass is the common minister of the whole 
Church [1 Cor 4}; therefore all hearers of the Mass ought to repose 
their trust in the faith of the Catholic Church, for she, as His 
most beloved bride, pleases God more than the faith of a private * 


individual. 


iii. The goal of the Mass is withdrawn from no hearer of the 
Mass, whether he understands or not: for he knows the end of the 
Mass and the special intention of the Church, namely, that that 
sacrifice is offered for the living and the dead, in memory of the 
passion and death of Christ, to the praise of God, for the upbuild- 
ing of the Church, to the honor of St. Mary, and of all the saints. 
What if that understanding of the layman is so sharpened by devotion, 
that he surpasses the prudence of many who understand the words of 
the dry Mass? For it is a fact that the devotion of one who prays 


can sometimes be hindered by too much attention to the words. 


iv. Also the mysteries of the most holy Mass are not unfolded 
in the vernacular: it is sufficient that in homilies and exhorta- 
tions to the people these things be explained according to the 


custom of the Church, where the people are instructed in faith and 


37. THAT MASSES ARE TO BE SAID IN LATIN, NOT IN GERMAN 269 


morals, so that to no one at all, at least to a godly and frequent 
hearer of God's word, is the understanding of the mysteries of the 
Mass hidden, not even to a mute or deaf person. Thus does the 


merciful God will that all men be saved. 


Let us therefore conclude; the Latin Mass is enough for 
Germans, since they are of the Latin Church, since there are three 
principal languages, Hebrew, Greek and Latin: and not without 
mystery, Pilate, not knowing these, wrote down Christ's title 259 
{Jn 19:19-22]; and we ought reverently to recognize the mysteries 
of the Savior under these, and the greatness of the mystery, as 


Augustine, Alcuin, Isidore, Bede, and others attest. 


Addition to Note 2, Page 264 


Thanks to the kindness of the Director of the Jagiellonian Library 

at the University of Krakow, Poland, Prof. dr hab. Wladyslaw Serczyk 

and his staff, this has been identified as a reference to Maciej from 
Miechow, Chronica Polonorum (Krakow, H. Wietor, 1519), pp. CCXCI-CCXCII: 
"In the year of our Lord 1390, the fifth day after the Feast of St. James 
the Apostle, King Wladislaus with his consort Queen Hedwig, founded a 
monastery of the Order of St. Benedict, of Slavs from Prague, entitled 

"Of the Holy Cross," outside the walls of Krakow, in the town of Kleparz, 
and choir of the church with the sanctuary to be completed, as is noted. 
They laid only the foundations of the church, which lay hidden under the 
earth. And they assigned a wooden house with a garden for the monks, 

and a dowry of 20 marks of Krakow thalers [2] , in order that the monks 
might celebrate and carry out with deep voice both the canonical hours 

and masses in the Slavonic language. When Queen Hedwig died, the prior 
provision and the building were suspended. But in my childhood a Slavic 
priest continued masses in the Slavonic language. Finally, when Slavonic 
was abandoned, it was replaced by the Latin language, first under Nicolaus 
Lithwas Archdeacon of Lublin, then under Albert the Royal Steward who took 
over this very church with the kings' concession." 


[My translation.] 


240 


241 


CHAPTER 38 
CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES* 


‘Moreover they were continuing steadfast in the Apostles' 
doctrine and in the communication of the breaking of bread, and 
in prayers" [Acts 2:42]; and later: "Also they continuing daily 

with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from 

house to house, ate their food with gladness" [Acts 2:46]. Al- 
though this could be understood as relating to the common food, 
the Gloss understands it of the sacrament, “in the breaking is 
understood as communion." "And the bread we break, is it not the 
participation of the Lord's body?" [Cor 10:16] But they were not 
in the house, when at the ascension the faithful numbered one hun- 
dred twenty [Acts 1:15]. On the day of Pentecost they numbered 


three thousand [Acts 2:41], and soon five thousand [Acts 4:40]. 


Alexander I, Pope and Martyr, allowed a priest, if it were 
necessary, to celebrate two masses, “one for the dead, the other 
for the daily service" [Gratian 3.1.53: Fr. 1.1308]. He permitted 
to the priest two masses in the same church, of which the one for 


the dead was private. 


Honorius III writes as follows to all the prelates of the 
churches: that each day there be carried out "the rites of 
masses of the anniversaries of the dead, and for the time or 


festival" [Decr. Greg. IX, De Celebr. Miss., 3.41.11: Fr. 2.642f]. 


If two masses are necessary, he by no means excluded other 


free masses- 


Therefore the Council of Agde [recte, Council of Tribur] 
did not prohibit special masses "of Holy Trinity, of St. Michael" 
but only that the mass of the day be not omitted on account of the 


special mass [Decr. Greg. IX 3.41.2: Fr. 2.636]. 


38. CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES 271 


Telesphorus, Pope and Martyr, established that the rite be 
celebrated thrice on the Nativity of the Lord [Gratian, 3.1.48: 
Fr. 1.1306f£]. And Innocent III [Decr. Greg. IX, 3.41.3: Fr 2.636]. 


Soter, Pope and Martyr, established "that no priest should 
hold the rites of masses unless there were two present responding 
to him, with himself the third" [Gratian, 3.1.61: Fr. 1.1311]. He 
did not forbid a private mass, but only prescribed the manner in 


which it was to be performed. 


The Council of Laodicea (c. 58) forbids offerings to be made 
in houses. Therefore it does not forbid private masses in churches; 


other councils also caution against this. 


The Council of Agde [Gratian, 3.1.35: Fr. 1.1302]: "If 
anyone wishes to have an oratory in a field, outside the parishes 
in which a gathering is lawful and ordinary, apart from festivals, 
in order that he may hold masses there on account of the weariness 
of the family, we permit it juxta ordinem. But on Easter, Christ~ 
mas, Epiphany, Ascension Day, Pentecost, and John the Baptist's 
Birthday, and any highly esteemed days of the festivals, they are 
heard only in the cities or the parishes. But if any clergy wish, 
without the command or permission of the bishop, to carry out or 
hold worship during the festivals above-mentioned in oratories, 


let them be banished from communion." 


The Sixth Synod [Council of Agde, c. 21]: "Let clergy who 
minister in oratories which are inside houses do this with the 
consent of the bishop" [Gratian, 3.1.34: Fr. 1.1302]. The Council 
of Orleans: "When it is fitting to celebrate masses in God's 
name." [Gratian, Decr. 3.1.65: Fr. 1.1302] Note; masses 


in the plural number. 


In the Tripartite History [Book 9, c.9 ]:* "When the people 


were gathered there {at the Basilica of Anastasia] for masses, a 
woman falling from the upper porch, when common prayer was made 


over her, revived, thanks to the masses."' Observe the plural: 


masses. 


*cf. Sozomen, 7.5. 


241 


242° 


272 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Leo writing to Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, orders sacri- 
fice to be repeated on account of the multitude of people assembled 
together, lest "a part of the people be deprived of their devotion" 


{Ep. 9, AD 445, Gratian, 3.1.51: Fr. 1.1307]. 


For the same reason, when it is not convenient for all people 
to gather at one time, through occupations and divisions of acti- 


vities let it be provided that more masses be celebrated. 


In the Tripartite History [Book 9, c. 8],*when Gregory 
Nazianzus was made Bishop of Constantinople, he performed rites 


within the city in a small oratory. 


Thus St. Conrad celebrated private masses in a chapel on 
242" Lake Constance. St. Ulrich at Augsburg in a private chapel. 
Thus St. Wolfgang, having built a chapel above a lake, celebrated 
private masses there. Hence so many chapels belonged to cathedral 
churches that canons celebrating privately might not draw the 
people away from the rites of masses in the great festivals. Hence 
the priests of kings and princes, privately celebrating for them, 


were called "capellani." 


The Council of Tribur: "When a church burns, it is permitted 
to celebrate the masses with a consecrated table" [Gratian, 3.1.30: 
Fr. 1.1301£]. 


Jerome: John the Almsgiver, Patriarch of Alexandria, accost- 
ing people out of doors intent on stories at the time of worship 
said to them: "Where there are sheep, there ought also to be a 
shepherd: either enter the church and I shall be with you; or 
if you stay here, I also shall remain with you; on your account I 
243° have gone down to the church; I could say masses for myself 


in the episcopal residence." 


NOTE: Private masses in the episcopal residence. 


Gregory, Letter to Castorius [Epist. 2.41 : PL 77.578]: "We utterly 
forbid public masses to be held there [in the monastery] by the 
bishop: lest by the departure of the servants of God, occasion for 


popular tumults may ensue." 


*cf. Sozomen, 7,5. 


38. CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES 273 


He prefers in monasteries the private masses of the monks 
to the public one of the bishop. If only one public mass is to 
be celebrated in one church, then in vain was it established at 
the Council of Auxerre that “at the altar in which the bishop 
had sung mass, on the same day it was not permitted to a priest 


to celebrate mass" (Gratian, 3.2.97: Fr. 1.1352]. 


Gregory in the Life of St. Benedict, 2.23: "Nuns excommunicated 
by Benedict were buried in the church. When the rites of the mass 
were celebrated in the church with the deacon shouting, ‘if 
anyone does not communicate, let him give place': they were seen 
by their nurse to come out cf their graves, and to go forth." 

He speaks of masses that were wont to be celebrated on the thirtieth 
or fortieth day after death, when it was customary to perform obla- 
tions for each. Just as this nurse daily made oblations for dead 


nuns. 


Pope Gelasius to the bishops established throughout Calabria 
and Basilicata, etc., commends that in churches erected without 
consent of the Apostolic See, they suspend masses. Note the plural 


masses. [Gratian 3.1.6: Fr. 1.1295] 


Pope John gave permission to the illustrious woman Megacia that 
in their oratory the divine offices be celebrated in the name of 
the dead only. Now these rites were nothing but private masses 


(Gratian 3.1.7: Fr. 1.1296]. 


Augustine [City of God, 22.8]. Hesperius, of a tribunitian 
family, who is among us, has a farm called Zubedi in the Fussalian 
district, where, after he had learned that his house was, with 
the affliction of his animals and servants, suffering from the 
noxious force of unclean spirits, he requested our presbyters, in 
my absence, that one of them cleanse it. They acceded to his 
prayers; one hastened there, offered the sacrifice of the body of 
Christ, praying as much as he could that that vexation might cease; 


and God being merciful, it straightway ceased. 


243 


244 


274 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Augustine [Confessions, 9.11] Monica said to her bones 
I beg only this of you, that you remember me at the Lord's altar, 
wherever you may be."' Later: "When the body was taken away .- - 
During the prayers which we poured out to thee when the sacrifice 
of our redemption was offered for her--while the body, as the cus- 
tom there is, lay by the grave before it was buried--during those 


prayers we did not weep"[Ibid, 9.12]. 


Observe: 

1. Sacrifice ef the mass approved. 

2. That is beneficial for the dead--contrary to these 
denying purgatory. 

3. Sacrifice of the mass to be privately applied-—as 
here to Mother Monica. 

4. Here a private mass is held. 

5. Formerly, mass was celebrated for the dead before 
burial [ob Erd besingen]. 

6. That Augustine did not begin this, but it was cus- 


tomarily done there in the Year of Our Lord 387. 


Thus St. Ambrose read a mass for Theodosius, which was no- 


thing but a private one. 


Augustine [among the chapters of Theodulf of Orleans, d. 821, 
Mansi, 13.1005, c. 45, 46: note from Fr. 1.1307n594]: ‘And this 
is to be attended to: that special masses, which are performed on 
solemn days by priests are not so to be done in public, that on 
their account one is to be drawn away from the public rites of 
masses, which are done canonically at the third hour. But the 
priests who are in the environs of the city or in the city itself 
and the people are to gather together for the public celebration 
of masses." [Gratian, 3.1.52: Fr. 1.1308]. Note: special 
Masses; note: the public celebration of masses. Therefore there 


was not one only. 


The Council of Africa [Cone. Carth. V, AD 401, c. 48] decreed: 


"That altars which are set up here and there in fields and on roads, 


+Suos, i.e., Augustine and his brother. 


38. CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES BUS) 


in which no body or relics of martyrs are proved to have been incor- 


porated are to be destroyed by bishops." [Gratian 3.1.26; Fr. 1.1300]. 


Therefore the ones in which there are such relics ought not to be 


pulled down. 


Ambrose attests that he celebrated daily: who believes on this 
account that the other priests at Milan were all silent? Thus St. 
Bernard, celebrating at Rome, Naples, Milan, Pettau, Rheims, Speyer, 
etc. Who could persuade a fool that all priests abstained from 
oblation, as if at the coming of such a great man, there would be 


no joy, but the prohibition of ecclesiastical offices? 


Gregory has irrefutable evidence, in a passage, against this 
new error: we recount some of it: Letter 3.63 [PL 77.660£]. He 
orders to be dedicated a monastery of nuns at Naples in the village 
of Lampadi. As often as it was necessary, venerable sacrifices of 
masses should be celebrated by the presbyters of the church in the 
above-mentioned place. These were private masses. Timothea, a 
famous woman, requested that an oratory be consecrated in honor of 
the Holy Cross. Gregory agreed, provided she would not have a 


baptistry, nor a cardinal priest [Ep. 2.12: PL 77.548]. 


Palladius, Bishop of Seckingen, constructed a church in honor 
of St. Peter and Paul, Apostles, as well as of leaumenee mand Pan- 
chratius, Martyrs. There he placed thirteen altars, of which four 
remained not yet consecrated, on account of the lack of relics. He 
orders it to be provided that suffrages for food not be lacking to 


those serving. 


There is no doubt that in the larger churches there was 


more than one altar. 


William the Abbot, Life of St. Bernard, 1.12.58: PL 185.258D]: 
When Bernard was ill, prayers were offered by the brethren at the 
three altars in the same basilica. First, in honor of the Blessed 
Mother of God; two at side altars in honor of Blessed Laurence the 


Martyr and Blessed Benedict the Abbot. 


245” 


246 


276 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


When there was a schism at Pettau and St. Bernard nad gone 
there to remove the schism, he celebrated mass. But when he de- 
parted, the deacon broke the altar at which the holy man celebrated. 
Who then would believe that the sole altar in the cathedral church 


was broken! 


Gregory [Epist 12.43] ordered the Bishop of Syracuse to permit 
in the house of Valentinus the Patrician the rites of masses to be 
carried out, and if he were at any time called, he would nimself 


celebrate. 


The same Gregory [Epist 1.15] commanded that in the church of 
Rig Populonium three priests be installed, where otherwise one 


would suffice for public mass. 


The same Gregory ordered a bishop of the old city not to for- 


bid masses to be celebrated in St. George's monastery. [1.12] 


Thus he ordered Felix Bishop of Sipontum to install two parish 


priests in the Canossa church [1.53]. 


Even in the Old Testament there were two altars. One was out- 
side the tabernacle for whole burnt offerings [Ex. 30:1f£f]. The 
other was the golden altar of incense inside the tabernacle: and 
on both each day were made oblations, and in one often even on the 


same day, as is clear from Leviticus and Exodus. 


BY WAY OF APPLICATION: It was not difficult for a Catholic 
to understand that a priest could apply the utility of the mass to 


one or another, just as it was in the Old Testament. 


“and if the whole multitude of the children of Israel sin 
through ignorance . . . then they shall offer a young bullock for 
247 the sin" [Lev 4:13f]. Later: “And when the priest is inter- 


ceding for them, the Lord will be propitious to them" [Lev 4:22f]. 


"If a ruler has sinned. . . he shall offer his offering before 
the Lord, a kid of goats" [Lev 4:22f]; and the following: "And the 
priest shall intercede for him and it shall be forgiven him,” 


[Lev 4:26]. He speaks similarly at the end of the chapter [Lev 4:35]. 


38. CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES 277 


"The soul that swears," 


etc. [Lev 5:4]. “Let him offer from 
the flock a lamb or ewe; the priest shall pray for the soul, and 
for its sins" [Lev 5:6]. 

Later: “He should offer for his sin a like tenth part of 
an ephah and turn it over to the priest, who will burn it upon 
the altar in remembrance of him who offered it, interceding on his 


behalf and making expiation." [Lev 5:11f] 
Twice he lays out like matters in the same chapter. 


"Go to my servant Job, and offer a whole burnt offering for 


yourselves: [Job 42:8]. 


Job sanctified his sons and he offered a whole burnt offering 


individually for each [Job 1:5]. 


"T exhort, therefore, that first of all, supplications, 
prayers, intercessions and thanksgivings be made for all 
men, for kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may 
lead a quiet and peaceable life... . For this is good and 


w 


acceptable in the sight of God our Savior... . {1 Tim 2:1f]. 


Ambrose: This church rule was handed down by the Master of 
the Nations, which our priests use, to pray for all. Praying 


for the kings of this world. 


Tertullian, Apology [c. 39]: We pray also for emperors, and 
their ministers, and powers, for the condition of the world, for 
the quiet of things, for the delay of the end." And chapter 30: 
With hands extended and heads uncovered, and finally without an 
admonitor, we Christians are all praying at all times for all 
emperors, that they may have long life and secure rule, a safe 
house, strong armies, a faithful senate, upright people, a quiet 


world, and whatsoever of man and Caesar have been promised. 


Epiphanius to John, Bishop of Jerusalem: When we offer sacri- 
fices to God, and fulfill prayer according to the rite of the 


mysteries, we speak both for all and for you also. Keep him who 


preaches the truth. Or surely thus. Grant O Lord and keep him that 


247 


247 


278 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


he may preach the word of truth, just as the occasion of the 


sermon leads him, and may his prayer be fulfilled. 


First Reason 


Now no one doubts that anyone can apply his own prayers to 
whom he will, just as Abraham says: "O that Ishmael might live 
before thee!" [Gen 17:18]. Thus God commanded the Jews to pray 
for the tyrant Nebuchadnezzar, who was holding them captive. “Pray 
for the life of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and for the life of 
Belshazzar his son, that their days may be as the days of heaven 

248 upon earth" [Baruch 1:11]. And everywhere Scripture teaches 
us to pray for one another. Just as Paul testifies he did, and 
sought to be done for himself [2 Thess 1:11; 3:1]. Since the mass 
is both an exhortation and supplication, why cannot the priest 
receive the gathered supplications for parents, for the emperor, 
for benefactors, for a sick friend, since David prayed, and wept 
for the sick child [2 K 12:22]? Elisha also prayed for the dead 
{4 K 4:33]; therefore the mass can be conveniently applied, both 


by way of sacrifice and by way of prayer. 
Second Reason 


We all confess the mass to be the remembrance of the death, 

and of the victim offered on the altar of the cross. Since it is 

good to remember the death of Christ and its very great benefit 

just as Christ enjoined, "This do in remembrance of me" [1 Cor 11:26] 
249 hence the Eucharist is called a good gift, thanksgiving as 
Chrysostom, Irenaeus [AH 4.34], etc., state. What then forbids re- 
membering the Lord's death more often in the same church? Or what 
then should a priest wish on behalf of his own person even privately 
to repeat the remembering of such a great benefit, according to the 


prescription of the Church? 
Third Reason 


Ad hominem: ‘Since that sacrifice is to be continually offered 
daily and in each city, more could be faithful, who desire to remember 


this sacrifice, even if they do not partake: ought they to lack 


38. CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES 279 


devotion, and be neglected by a lax priest, for the reason that 

they are not present to partake, since it would be a damnable 
novelty, already dreamed up by cold and impious priests, that 
celebrating the mass and consecrating it against the precept of 

the church, they do not communicate. Council of Toledo [XII], 

Canon 5 [Gratian Decr. 3.2.11: Fr. 1.1318]. Any priest, who is 
about to take his turn of sacrificing at the divine altar approaches 
it, and suspends himself from communion, from that grace of communion 
from which he has unseemly deprived himself, let him know himself 
debarred for one year. For of what sort will that sacrifice be, of 
which he himself not sacrificing is recognized not to be a parti- 
cipant? Therefore in every respect it is to be held that just as 
often as he, sacrificing, immolates the body and blood of Jesus 
Christ on the altar, so often should he make himself participant 


in receiving of the body and blood of Christ." 


Therefore this contrary novelty has arisen at the instigation 
of the devil, because he wished to remove the frequent remembering 


of Christ's passion from men. 


Fourth Reason 


Since Augustine says [Against the Epistle Called Fundamental 
of Mani, 5.6; cf. Calvin, Inst., 1.7.3]: "I would not have believed 


the Gospel if the authority of the Church had not moved me to it," 
and the practice of the Church is the best interpreter of Scripture 
and of the canons, who would dare, against the custom of the Catholic 
Church, to disapprove of private masses, in so many kingdoms and 
provinces, in so many cathedral churches, metropolitan and 
parochial, in monasteries of all orders - in which according to 
ancient institution everywhere more masses are celebrated on the 

same day as among the Praemonstratensians, Cistercians, etc. I do 
not mention collegiate and parish churches, and so many simp le 
benefices, among which some are very ancient. In like manner, chapels 
everywhere are visited. Where there were two hundred, three hundred 
monks in a monastery, who believes there were so many priests who 
only celebrated one mass? How would they have conferred any most 


ancient benefits, if they had not performed private masses? 


*C£. p. 13, above. 


250 


250 


251 


251 


280 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Fifth Reason 


How great an inconvenience would it be‘ for bishops, princes, 
and other nobles, and pious persons, who deeply desire daily to 
hear and see this sacrifice of praise, but frequently around that 
hour of public mass are on weekdays occupied with business. 
Therefore it was best provided for by catholic princes that coun- 
sellors have a private mass before undertaking counsel. Similarly, 
it happens at Rome before the Rota, the Chancellery and the Peniten- 
tiary. Besides, counts, nobles, and noble ladies in castles on ac-— 
count of distance of place, storms, and heat, on account of sickness 
of body, old age, and other causes, cannot conveniently come to public 


mass. 
Sixth Reason 


And all these things are proved by the Ambrosian Missal [as the 
oldest authority], where on certain feast days as on the day 
of the Lord's Resurrection, one office takes place in the lesser 
church for the baptized, and another in the greater church. Like- 
wise, on the Feast of Pentecost. From this it is clear that those 


were private masses for the baptized. 


Objections of the Heretics 


1. We do not care how a plurality of masses has arisen: it 
is enough for us that the church of our fathers does not remember 
them: for example, "massings'' of earlier times are proved with 
difficulty from Gregory. 

2, St, Francis wished only one mass to be celebrated by the 
brethren each day, according to the form of Holy Roman Church. 

3. Pope Honorius wished only two masses per day to be read 
in collegiate churches. 

4. One reads of only one altar, not of more. 

5. A single altar is proved from the decrees of Pope Hyginius; 
and the Council of Meaux says: superfluous altars are to be de- 


stroyed. 


38. CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES 281 


6. Jerome, Commentary on Amos, says that a church has one 
altar. Also, On Isaiah: One altar, just as one faith, one church. 

7. Augustine, Chrysostom, Ignatius, Cyprian, and the Apostolic 
Canons speak of altar in the singular number. 

8. Ambrose calls priests "ministers of the altar” not " of 
altars"; and we speak of "the sacrament of the altar," not " of al- 
tars"; and in the Lord's Supper there was only one table from which 
they drank and ate. 

9. Basil, On Psalm 115, would not allow a private sacrifice, 
but a public one, and a common sacrifice with which all the people 
had communion of the divine ministry, etc.; these are strong words 
against the present abuses: in order that the hand of God may up- 


root them without a hand. Amen. 


Reply of the Catholics 

1. He assumes it to be false that because we showed 252 
there were formerly more masses, there were also many altars. 
Gregory does not disapprove of Palladius with twelve altars: but 
only charges him with providing the ministers with food. 

2. We deny this was St. Francis' intention, when the churches 
of the Minorites, erected during the lifetime of the Holy Father, 
spread, with more altars; nor do the Minorites recognize the letter 
cited. Or if he speaks of one mass only, Francis is not understood 
by those arguing against us: he is speaking in the Lord's Supper: 
for even on that day also, they had one mass only, which was also 
observed at Rome. And formerly it was observed in Germany, as one 
reads in the ancient missals of our diocese of Eistet, under a 
rubric of this sort: When the oblation has been broken, the priests 
first communicate, then the deacons, and the rest of their order. 
And the deacon, taking the cup, does not immediately consume the 
blood, but puts it on the left side of the altar until after the 
Magnificat, then the deacon consumes the blood and all the 252 
rest afterward. 

3. He misinterprets Honorius, for Honorius does not speak 


exclusively, but is saying that you should permit no sluggishness 


282 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


of negligence to creep in without celebrating masses both for the 
anniversaries of the dead and on festivals or holidays; he calls 
it sluggishness and negligence, if only one mass is said. 

4. On the contrary, one reads of more than one altar, as we 
have demonstrated. Elisha complained: ‘They have destroyed thine 
altars" [3 K 19:10, 14]. And David: "Thine altars, O Lord of 
Hosts" [Ps 83:4]. Near Rottenburg there is a mountain named from 
worms [Wurmlingenberg] above Tiibingen where the most noble Count 
Albrecht 4 Calvo established the anniversary day of his death to 
be celebrated with all parish priests, and on this day is celebrated 
there, since there have been named in that place 22 Parishes in this 

253 deanery, if I rightly remember. For I have been away for so 
many years from the territory of Wirtemberg and Hohburg (about forty 
years). Therefore individuals celebrate masses even if they do not 
have so many altars in one chapel, yet even today one priest after 
another reads mass. So it is done to this very day. Who then will 
be so insane as to think this most godly count established this, if 


there were not previously a solemn rite and custom among catholics? 


5. We recognize no decree of Hyginius, in opposition to our 
view; let him set forth anything he has: if he should answer harshly 
against the Church - allthe harder he'll be treated by us. It is 
wonderful that he dared adduce the Council of Meaux to the effect 
that superfluous altars be destroyed. To this I would rejoin, as 
an old theologian of logic; I admit that superfluous altars are 
destroyed; therefore, conversely, let those not superfluous remain. 

6. On this point it is shameful to speak, since they display 

253 such open ignorance, yet attempt to say anything of sub- 
stance. Jerome, Augustine, Ambrose, and before them Tertullian, 
Origen, Cyprian, confess one altar, that is, one manner of sacrifice, 
not a schismatic one, in the entire Church. And in this sense the 
Holy Fathers speak; a madman is he who, in the many churches of the 
whole of Christendom, would establish one material altar. Cyprian 
the martyr teaches this, writing to the whole people: "God is one, 
and Christ is one, and the Church is one, and there is one seat 


founded upon the rock by the Lord's voice.'' No other altar can be 


38. CONCERNING PRIVATE MASSES 283 


established, no new priesthood made, on account of the one altar 
and one priestnood. 

O READER, WEIGH how much the grammatical theologians wander 
from the truth. 

7. (It is childish to suppose that the leaders of the Church 
advocate the remembering of the altar, as if they wanted only one, 
yet the grammarian teaches according to his intellectual discipline 

one indefinite to equal a universal, and a singular a plural. 254" 

Is David speaking of one man, when he says: "What is man, that thou 


art mindful of him" 


{Ps 8:4], "Man will approach the depth of the 
heart; it is man's task to prepare the mind" [Ps 63:6]? or: "Man 
is born to trouble," [Job 5:7]? There are a thousand sayings like 
these in the prophets, Gospels and apostles. 

8. This objection is empty and ignorant, since one cannot deny 
that the eucharist is truly consecrated and offered on more than one 
altar, albeit distant ones. They deceive themselves when they cite 
the deed of Christ as relating to one table, since in the Lord's 
Supper one only Christ was consecrating, for only the apostles were 
partaking. Now there are many celebrating. 

9. Basil adverts to the killing letter; since that great man 
most clearly explains himself that he disapproves of a private sac- 
rifice of the heretics and schismatics. For he says: "Not Ds 
fleeing secretly the quarrels of the ungodly, I shall extol your 
honor: but I shall make public sacrifice; I shall take your people 


" See what ungodly private sacrifices he 


as partners in worship.’ 
disapproves, for there follows: “Hear ye who leave the Church; and, 
gathering in public homes, cause miserable splittings of the precious 
body.'' And all consequent schisms are detested. Hence these words 
do not overthrow the best use of the Church concerning private 
masses, a use which the hand of God will by no means uproot, but 

the hands of the ungodly and of evildoers. I on the contrary beg 

the author of the opposite opinion that God may give him a spirit 


healthy, chaste, and truthful. Amen. 


284 ECK : ENCHIRIDION 


Let us conclude with this statement of Jerome, Comm. on 


Zechariah: 


"In the time of the persecution, let the priests of the Church 
boldly repromise the believing captives that the churches are to be 
built again, and the tranquillity of peace is to return.'' Therefore 
at sometime through God's mercy, the heresy of Luther, Zwingli, 
Oecolampadius, Blarer, Osiander, Schnepsius and the like, will cease, 
and the firm truth of the faith will flourish once more. Do this, 


good Jesus, and quickly. 


The Usefulness of the Enchiridion, from Augustine, Tractate on 


the Epist. of John. 

All things which are read in the Holy Scriptures we are to 
listen to intently for our instruction and salvation: yet ought 
they be committed to memory, which are of more value against the 


heretics, whose stratagems do not cease to circumvent the weaker 


and more careless brethren. 


Genesis 


erie 
#1322 . 
2:3 

DOT 
2:17 
2:22 
2223-25 


3:16. 
38 ang) 


(he By GME 


4:4-5 
4:7 


#8:70 . 
#9:7 
O22 
14:18 
Seis 
SRG 6 
# : 
17:10 
17:12 
17:14 
17:18 
18:2 
19:20 
19:26 
21:9f 
15:31 
ESA BiS} 


28:16f . 


28:19 


2 Sten Ota. 


260 


. 262 


260 


SCRIPTURAL INDEX 


285 


286 


27:9£ 134 #5:8 
27:26 234 6:13 
27:28 134 9: 
DR BHO) oc 2237) 9:25 
BY ROB 238 12:6 
ALB ts) 
Numbers WES Syae 
#12:32 
3:6 226 # 
3:12 234 13:1-3 
Srl 234 13:5 
3:39 235 14:22f 
3:41 234 16:5f 
3:43 235 16:16 
3:45-48 235 17:8 
Eso NS) 67 
BAe 236 17:8-13 
6:2f 134 17:9 
6:5 134 17: 10f£ 
6:21 134 73 A 
ese letarts 106 18:3£ 
12:10-15 78 18:20 
15:32f 101 23:21-23 
16:2 18 25) 32 
16:26 179 2S gas 
16:30 68 26 
16:33 68 26312. 
16:35 68 #27:15 
18 160 30:11 
176 30:15 
163} 3 2 es 175 30:19 
18:26-28 175 Be OT 
18:29 238 
18:32 238 Jesnua 
ZO 24 78 
21:8 122 1:18 
25) 2 67 bach 
28:4 131 21:8 
28:9-31 249 21:39f 
Boe! mele 22:10£f 
29:1-38 249 22:11-14 
30:4 134 24 
30:11f££f Pale 24:26 
30:14£ 104 
35:2 160 Judges 
Deuteronomy 3:1f . 
#432 96 aie d 
# Tet 9:53 . 
#4:23 ° . 5 WA 17:6 . 
Li) rere E'S) Beil . 
Seon we eee LAO) 18:31 
21:24 


124 
120a 
223, 
104 
237 
94a 
94 
96 
137 
179 
179 
ASH 
244 
100 
48 
94 
16 
30 
30 
179 
230 
179 
134 
79 
238 
176 
237 
124 
210 
210 
210 
22 


5 Bll 
BOS 
160 
236 
122 

38 
211 
122 


155 
119 
243 
243 

31 

31 
o all 
a Sil 


51 


19:10,14 . 
22 


I Chronicles 


45 
9:20 
17:16 


25:16 


2 Chronicles 


eR Won ar 


Proverbs 


11:18 
13:10 
15:8 
19:14 
Be 3 
22:28 
23:6 
ARGUS 5 
30:5,6 


Ecclesiastes 


288 


9:4. 


Canticles 


117 


19 


Jonah 


5:5,10 


Micah 


#6:6£ 
#6:8 . 


Zechariah 


ss 
EwWwWWOWNNRK 
w 
Fh 


H 
iss} 
a 
au 
ial 
yy 
on 


DOAN TWADAHAY We 
ie) 


2 Esdras 


SE 2s 
10:32 
10:38 
13:10-12 


3 Esdras 
3212 


245 


249 
245 
249 
100 


- 249 


237 
159 


249 


119 
249 
175 


5 2ST 


189 


Judith | 


4:12 
8:6 
11:19 
Wisdom 


SeiS 
5:16 
8:21 
10:17 . 
16:21 . 


Ecclesiasticus 


2:8 
Sei % 
3385)3} 


| Maccabees 


S2BSBY 6 


740-43 
3 
:21f 
256 


FwwWwnNnne 


See. 
9:55f 
Thee; 


2 Maccabees 


3 6 & 
Hs Wsese 


9:7,9,10,28 


10:38 
12:43£ 
RIN ey Ss 
15:12-14 
IS8UA 6 « 
15:27,30-33 


1 0 0 OO 
oe ee oe 


#9:22 . 
#9:28 . 


3:14 148 10:7 
6:13 91 10: 16 
6:17 105 10:35 
7:6-8 182 11:1 
RUB? 6 96 #11:9 
7:8,9 96 11:32 
8:13 88 #11:42 
8:24 83 12.41 
10:14 201 12:58,59 
10:16 64 13:4f 
ae 201 17:10 
#10:37£ . 36 17:12 
#10:39f . 36 17:14 
12: 16£ AS) 17:32 
12:25 115 iss be 7 
WAS? « « 5 28 18:10ff 
14:22-24 . 191 18:19 
14:23 87 20:27££f 
#14:24 130 20:36 
16 See eS) 20:37£ 
#16:15£ . . . 207 Bi Bait 
21:34 
Luke (61) 223 t 
#22:19 
easy fp a oe Zed 
Wel @ = a o LOY : 
RAS Go a 9 Zoho 22:19f 
WRAY eo 0 A 22:20 
2:37... . 104 
35805 = . -aeoO #22:24£ . 
Beil 6 o a o ll Pepe SME 5 
313) 5) 0) =O 22:40f . 
Sous Se 6 ¢ 5 S55 22:41 
OUME 9 59 9 Bi 22:41f£F 
(ROSE 95 G a 13} 22:43 
Goh A ea 5 «40 24:30 
Ses oo a co o Sie MEO Sy 
Bosh 5 5 5 o OS 24:49 
6:12 5 22S 
x Bs John (58) 
6:14 30 
Goeeeeees « Sul 1:8f . 
733) oe o WS 2ocullSiae. 
UBS a - 246 3:1ff 
#7313 173 HOOT 
7ES3 o 4 140 #4:23 
#7:37££ . 75 # 
PRET 9 6 84 4723 Ga, 
8:3 160 BRA 5 
8:16 16 #5:24 . 
9:28f 220 5:29 
#9:46 . 36 6:27 . 
9:62 138 6:28f 
10:1 65 6:33 
148 6:33f 


# 
# 


= 


. 


# 


PP Pw 
os eo an 


ss 


=e 

MPP PWWNnh hee 

os 00 ce we 48 ce oe ce ce ce ce 
lee} 


DADAM 
oo ee ce te oe 
oO 


291 


734. 98 
7311 98 
#7219 61 
#7223 61 
62 

8:1f 62 
8:9 . - 150 
#8213 106 
8:18 218 
#9:15£f 215 
#9318 215 
#9:27 215 
10:10 208 
#1135 215 
11:6 53 
#1221 69 
12:5 8 
. 16 
12:12 16 
12:16 2 
11 

13:1 - 155 
13:1ff 94 
13:2 39 
ISReS 155 
14:19-21 102 
15:5f ll 
15:30 221 
15:30f 116 
16:17 . 10 
16:17£ 179 
16:18 . 10 


I Corinthians 


SW eS 5 6 LO) 

PA ee a hs) 

1:14-16 . 204 

Ie 21 256 

336. 211 

3:8 52 

3:9 F 211 

FSG as 31 
3:12-15 170 

SoH 5 6 70 

4. 268 

4:1 166 

#437 215 
4:21 151 

Sigil 105 

5:3-5 - 150 

5:5 105 

153 

Shy . 101 


SNM NNN DU 
© oe 08 2s oe ce ce ce oe 


= 


9:9,11,13f 


Signy 


10:1f 
#1034 . 
10:13 


#1016. 


10:16f . 
# : 
10:17 


1 as 
11:4ff . 
11:16 
Wigwe 
#11:19£ . 
11:20f . 
122s 
#11:23 


11:23-25 
#11:28 

11:28f . 
5 6 6 
keene 5 
11:34 
12:10 
12:12 


. 


. 


16 

#12313 69 
12:27 16 
12:31 58 
382 5 58 
BES 5 55 
13:8 . 58 
13:10,13 58 
i333 2 120 
14:15 228 
#14:16 267 
14:19 267 
14:24f 246 
14:26 229 
14:32 212 
14:33 10 
14:34 94 
14:40 96 
223 

15:6 . 47 
15:8 . 195 
15:10 211 
15:22 204 
15:34 57 
ISB 5k} 5 52 
16:1f . . 239 
W842 5 5 ISL 


2 Corinthians 


iS 2h 17 
1:3 110 
# : 118 
1:10f 221 
ARNO! 166 
ee) s 12 
#3:5 214 
#3:17 96 
4:3 48 
4:17 52 
5:10 52 
6:4 80 
6:4f 103 
SS as 212 
10:6 . 181 
WAST 5 147 
ISSH 222 
13:10 151 
Galatians 
MBE Ss ah 3 (28 
2 32 


> 
Winuw eee rPwhy 
ee ee ee . 


Ephesians 


1 


BEE ENNe eR 


212 
gS) 
Bliss 6 


8 RUE 
2:24 
BG 
:10 


cals fe 


222£ 
223 
Reh 
:14f 
31-6 
Toners 
solver. 
730. 


PRE EWNN 


1 
1 


is 


2: 


# 


3: 


3 
4: 


Ris eo ge «© ails} 
So og a oe TO 
CI 56 5 6 0 BHA 
Sone 22a 
See a o a 5 ESD 
SIMO) Ge 5 a ILA 
ils! emer ces. 1L3is 


Colossians 

a € 6 6 o IS 
210 SG 8 DS 
SG Go DML 
243 « ae JG 
+ 3 egal 66 

We 5 ae 8 
Paces 6 OS 
ieee og 
5 eg 
BBE on og oO 
Pate oe 6 Aol 

Thessalonians 


B2ow oc og Bel 


SiG) Gey 5 Ich 
BD wag 5 es) 
Bh eg | 
Omens <0 eee OS. 
cMWieyee e 6 bes 
S12. . 3 « 66 
Thessalonians 
sills 6 5 o Ae 
SUA ep | MS 
94 
i LS ermrereec 72727 
se EO 
BS 6 eo 6 YS 
pares 6 LZ} 
Spl, cp eee elo! 
Timothy 
5 59 
9 96 
Ie 6 120a 
19f 151 
1 - 228 
1£ 222 
é 277 
5 ae LES 


3:8-10 


#1: 


= 
WWWWWW eRe ee ee 
se 00 ce 20 ce oe oo 
— 


:10~—=« 
2H0f . 
8 ili 


Philemon 


AOS 
14 


= 


F = 
WOwowowonnntwHsananannuuun fre 
eo +e ee 00 2 06 ce ce 08 ce ce ce co o0 
wr 
°o 


= 


Jl aregie 


e222) 
#2:9 


. 


ZB 5 57 
60 
Aish 5 . 94a 
2:13£ 94 
BMG 6 94 
98 
Bee 5 94 
2:24 + = 62 
168 
3:15 183 
3:20f 8 
522 ,4 66 
5:8 5 
2 Peter 
1:10£ 57 
2:18£ 98 
333 . 94a 
ie es) . 47 
1 John 
1:9 74 
Zeal = aH 
228 ie 115 
2. 130 
165 
168 
yan /27) 9 
3:3 212 
ey 53 
3:9 57 
3:19 213 
4:6 93 
4:7 212 
#5:10 59 
2 John 
8 53 
10 152 
Pose els 
2 ae 46 
3 John 
she. | See 47 
Revelation 
WISE Gee 69 


1:10 - - 102 


4:8 229 
Bee 6 114 
#5:10 69 
Belle) 172 
8:3£ . 114 
S87) 5 79 
20:6 - 70 
Que. 8 
21:14 Bz 
22 Ome - 120a 
22a Sees 79 
i eels 7 
#22:18f - 96 
KEY 


# Scripture quoted by 
Eck’ s opponents 
(‘heretics’) 


295 


INDEX OF AUTHORS AND PROPER NAMES 


Aérius siebevateneusteperchere 
AGathon POPES 6 10. 0 ss 6 
INGTAY OOO oa gaanggnsoe 
Albigenses .. ll, 
AlG UNM cotetersucuscsussersreienees | ee Ocr 
Alexander I, Pope ........0.6. 
Alexander of Hales .......... 
Alfonsus a Villa Sancta ...... 


Ambrose ...... 20, 26, 28, 29, 30, 

34, 41, 44, 75, 85, 102,105, 106, 
170, 
Zale 
263, 


106, 129, 145, 152, 163, 
IA, Weil, WS, 2275 Bes) 
DE, BN, Bi, Biol, Isp 
274, 275, 277, 281, 282 

Pseudo-Ambrose .. 214, 259, 
280 


Anabaptists (also call Catabaptists, 
Parabaptists, Rebaptizers) .. 10, 
207, 


124, 196, 201, 203, 204, 
209, 244, 250 
Anacletus, Pope ..... 


186 
149 
203 
186 
269 
270 

43 
219 


261, 


con cod oo las 


Johannes Andreae ........175, 176 
Andrew, Acts of St. ......... 129 
MUS Sooo ope eonacuoDesode ou 
Antherus, Pope (235-236) .... 240 
Anthimus of Trebizond ....... 204 
MOUS coooooopenucocooea ail 
Apostolic Canons ........143, 281 
Arcadius, Emperor ......++2+. 42 
Arius .......-. 22, 49, 181, 186 
Athanasius ...30, 35, 41, 42, 44, 
123, 25S 
Augustine .... 13, 17, 20, 21, 23, 
25, 28, 29, 31, 41, 44, 46, 48, 
49, 54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 
70, 78, 82, 85, 90, 91f, 95, 99, 
102, 105, 107, 177 120, 125, 
129, 146, 150, 151, 152, SZ, 
158, 170, 171, 180, 181, 183, 
184, 188, 193, 195, 198, 202, 
203, 204, 205, 208, 209, 212, 
215, BOS, Be, 229, Bly Bey, 
239, 240, 241, 244, 246, 247, 
250, 256, 265, 266, 267, 269, 
273, 274, 276, 281, 282, 284 


Pseudo-Augustine .... 
216, 240, 259 
Augustine of Canterbury ........... 
AUZEMIEMS verses </etetercre's sss chenerensieroronemene 2 O 
Basil ....... 74,126, 214, 224, 281, 283 
Basil, Emperor... 25, 26f, 40 


1S emus i Pa OS 


106 


Bede .. 29, 67, 123, 159, 236, 269 
BEMOCIOE sancoounceanG0 85, 273 
BEREM GALLUS = eve svelereic) sie sl eoreicrcretscterome a 2 


Bernard .. 29, 30, 35, 48, 76, 116, 148, 
Wl, Bil, AulZy, Yl, 4S, 276 
BAG Reeeaerare ss lev avevereveve sce cnetes CD 2 e me OA 


Boniface I, Pope (418-422) ......... 44 
BUCO! SamounpcooeneeooeoeoonooGedD Bo 
BUGeMNAGeME capeereue sc siele ie se eletetenshe stemeoy 
Burchard of Worms ....ccceccessses 44 
Calixtus, Pope Anoeona ota ais 
Capernaites ...... 3, 6n, 192,,207 
Carlstadt and Carlstadtites .. 10, 12, 24, 
124, 193, 194, 195-197, 199, 207, 218, 
219 
(CEISGIEIA 6anuunscuneooonds coosno0oe 2a 
Cassiodorus ... 24, 75, 123, 224, 226, 
229, 240, 241, 271, 272 
Charlemagne [Libri Carolini] ....... 123 
Chrysostom, John ...15, 28, 29, 30, 41, 


42, 69, 85, 104, 129, 132, 140, 144f, 

150, 172, 174, 189, 195, 214, 224, 226, 

228, 259, 278, 281 
(CUBES cooccanocaanocungncss Bie 
Clement of Rome ... 20, 136, 162, 148 
Clement V, Constitutions ......... 167 
Guenus, HONE gouosgdanonsoposno commas) 
Cochlaeus, Johann ........... 17, 219 
Cemasier, PSE concaacosunonccc0, LAZ 
Connell, Ses caw coco ooG ne 
Constantine I, Emperor ... 40, 163, 181, 

186, 250 

Donation Of ......-ceeeeees 148, 239 
Constantine IV, Emperor ........ 36, 40 


Constantine V, Emperor (Copronymus). 24 
(Gerais , SNS so gocanKgGon06 44,116 


296 


COUNCILS 
(Listed Chronologically) 


Apostolic .... 14f, 18, 19, 39, 43, 
108 

African (under Cyprian) . 22, 23, 
202 

African (other) .... 
149, 102, 171, 227 

ATIGSH(S14) irerccacisce neste « s ose ao 

Neo-Caesarea (314-325) ....... 143 


4l, 


25, 37, 43, 143, 


Nicea I (325) ... 21-25, 37, 41, 42, 
43, 149, 163, 181, 258 

/Nouevorels (GV) Gooocagonuducudon ae 

Serdica(343) ....... 86, 149 


Laodicea (343-81) ........ 227, 271 
Milan (S'55): Merctenetetnte:sorelevacorese etme 
Seleucia (Isauria) (359) ......... 24 
ovouliol, (GS) sooascncocce Ap Bn 24 
Constantinople I (381) ...... 21, 25 
Antioche(392—3?)mepsrseiecielererert cntemet 
Hippon(398) sayeee ses cscs os seerbed 
Carthage III (397) ........e00822120 
Carthage V (401) ..........222. 274 
Milevis II (416) .. 41, 120, 203, 205 
Ephelsuis le(431)) ercyan wee sielecverepareneeeyl 
Ephesus II (449) ....... 22, 23, 149 
Chalcedon (451) ... 21, 24, 26, 149, 
186 
Ste. Agde (506) .. 86, 104, 225, 271 
(Ghiterrs Gil7) soosacaccacccgues FUE 
Constantinople (536) ........ 204 
Auxerre \(Si7:8) tae. eieeice + 61s" < SieiegoMIES 
Welles IN/ (SSE) casganguaccocne 2A 


Noerine (EO) peeeocccnue@oaounn fe 
Constantinople (680-1) ........ 149 
Wellecke YAN (BEND) Gaoasooncacs0n 279) 
Quinisexta (692) .............. 129 


Constantinople (Hieria) (754). 22, 24 
Lateran Synods under: 
Gregory II (715-731) ........ 
Gregory III (731-741) ....... 
Stephan III (768-772) ........ 123 
Nicea II (787) ....... 24, 123, 149 
Frankfort-am-Main (794) ... 123, 149 
Meaux (845) ....eeeeeeee 280, 282 
Worms (868) ....eescecescesese 86 
Constantinople IV (869) ..25, 26f, 29, 
41, 149 


123 
123 


stale (INS) Gosqncaccnscdea GUO, 2VZ 
Lateran IV (1215) ........+-eeee4- 167 
Viennes(l3 U2) s.cc acc sreers steve se eteneteneliiO 
Constance (1415) ....... 23, 85, 176 
Cyprian... 22, 28, 29, 41, 44, 69, 86, 
102, 116, 129, 173, 174, 180, 202, 
205, 209, 214, 223, 258, 281, 282 
Cyril of Alexandria .........2. 29, 75 
Damasus, Pope... 35, 44, 227 


De Castro, Alphonsus ......-e+e++- 258 
ID US MNOS sooconcongeeoonda set 
DietenbergeriusS ....ceceeereceee LAD 


Pseudo-Dtonysius the Areopagite ... 30, 
63, 68, 91, 94a, 117, 127, 172, 173, 
196, 202, 255, 266 

Dionysius of Alexandria ..74, 137, 162 

Dionysius of Corinth ..........-. 33 

Dioscorus of Alexandria .. 22, 23, 149, 
272 

IDYeyKNGKES Gooaghooaancan Uy 25,5 BSL 

Eck, John ... 29, 39, 43, 64, 66, 75, 
76, 79, 83, 92, 124, 129, 133, 149, 
157, 158, 173, 174, 219 . 
Homilies ... 56, 64, 66, 79, 92,157, 

158, 174, 267 

Gran ORM: 6 ccserece ers o: orsre stove eretereme eel) 

lHepoVosVUNISS SH ooooecccensncona Wy BUT 

Eucheru's: ..<..<< 1c: cccrel hetenenctoleret nee 

Eudoxial, Empress. .t- 1 ele sicleeneeeal 

Eugenius IV ........2+.2. 30, 148, 256 


Eusebius ... 24, 30, 33, 40, 85, 109, 
122, 123, 135, 136 
Eusebius of Emesa ........e..-. 132 


EUIty.GMEIS Verstere.cieieroisteetsisteretereee CIC emmlEG 
lanveiolis wey, IS Gonooonccoundcaa JAG 
Faber, Johann ..... 30, 33, 35, 144 
Fabian, Pope ...cseeeseeees 149, 240 
EQUStUSE 6.000 s:aenere suctere ete eee ea) 
Faustus, Deacon of Alexandria ... 136 
Felix onirgieliy.. <2. eee ee sG 
Felixdlig, Popely ....c.cimeie c oeeereO 
Felicians ...... 124, 149, 206 


Fisher; John’ wyy..<:s os sicrerenee eieners < oemnl 
Francis of Assisi .......... 280, 287 
Frederick, Emperor .....eesese2+- 163 
Fulgentiusinrr. « stete esuteiroire leo 
Galuses sires c ucies eeleores sae eS 
Gaiusi, POPCMis eacs cote eee LO. 


SaMatIMUiSI rete eyelet sre love’ scale ademeueneuspel giz. 
CEUCOIS 544aq5qcon0sKseoue on 


Gelasius, Pope. 186, 188, 208, 
273 

Gemnaclitismerats -tieeietiietes se cho 

COrsCial, JON) caonabongogaccan AVS 

Glossa Ordinaria ..... 127, 159 


Gratian, Emperor ...........e. 40 
Gratian (Canonist) 
(See Separate Index) 

Gregory I, Pope ... 9, 21, 28, 29, 
0 PC 1: ae’ Wc Ss a no] oO A 
105, 106, 110, 129, 154,162, 166, 
170, 231, 256, 259, 273, 275, 276 

Gregory VAT. s sccteccreres slorsiotene «OD 

Gregory IX, Decr. ... 25, 44, 86, 
106, 138, 167, 262, 270, 271 

Gregory Nazianzus ...... 30, 272 

Gregory of Nyssa ..195, 214, 259f 

HadnianeVl ;SRBOpeN. . ..leeieieneceie a 

OCESYNIUS so asonanoe coon o Gen IS) 

Helvidius, Helvidians .. 45, 206, 
241 

HIGGZIMAN: «sere ste sielsicis ee sverstensiees 24 

Sh SaonaneenecoUeooDs asin as 

Honorius III, Pope 270, 280, 281 

Hostiensis (Henry of Segusio). 175f 

Hubmaier (Friedberger, Pacimontan- 


us) .. 12, 14, 124, 203, 204 
207, 209 
Hugo of Saint-Victor .......... 91 
Hus, John and Hussites .. 11, 186, 
196, 251 
Hyginius, Pope ........ 280, 282 
Ignatius of Antioch .. 33, 68, 86, 


102, 103, 104, 128,161, 229, 281 
Pseudo-Ignatius ........ 68, 137 
Innocent 1 .....essceeee5 41, 44 
Innocent III ........ 138, 167,171 
Trenaeus ...... 33, 40, 104, 128, 

262, 278 
Trene, EmpreSsS ..eccsececeeee 123 
Isidore of Seville ... 228, 229, 269 
Pseudo-Isidore .......... 64, 148 
44,260 


I cooopoacooobogdCOdON 


297 


Jerome ... 3, 12, 28, 29, 30, 32, 34, 
35, 39, 42, 43, 44, 45, 48, 49, 61, 
62, 64, 69, 70, 74f, 89, 94a, 95, 
102, 103, 104, 113, 116, 118, 122, 
143, 146, 147, 150, 170, 171, 181, 
202, 203, 204, 209, 211, 214, 223, 
224, 225, 226, 227, 231, 235, 236, 
238, 246, 250, 251, 253, 254, 255, 
264, 267, 272, 281, 282, 284 

John of Alexandria ..........22. 272 

John of Damascus ..... 47, 122, 172 

John of Jerusalem ......... 42, 277 


WUC Omreapens torejerersiel ceo oecersrorerremelico 
JOras, JORIS ssscanncoccousce Mi 
JORIS sasoncanencoooeedooa Asx 
jomabotisiel paccagancdascaacnonecs MBS 


Julian the Apostate ... 163, 224, 241 
jraubing: , BOE ssoococccccnncn A, A 
Justinian, Emperor ..........22. 30 
WA CEATILLUS (aspera oretelonerelerereterskerereretome co 
Leo I, Pope... 20, 28, 29, 35, 39, 
117, 149, 208, 272 
MES OEXS, RODE er eusvenecc: es sverelercieren COUln aL 
itbererattisy, Helis) GGanuonaconsuuccco Gh) 
ILO » HCI sooonasoonocas OH, 148) 
Lombard, Peter ........ 66, 73, 260 
Luther and Lutherans ... 10,11, 13, 15, 
Wy Ally Bay Billy ey OO, Sl, Aol 4s), 
46, 47, 49, 55, 56, 59, 61, 62, 63, 
67, 69, 71, 75, 80f, 96, 98, 106, 
108, 112, 114, 115, 124, 125, 135, 
136, 138, 142, 155, 158, 171, 187, 
190, 196, 197, 206, 207, 210, 212, 
219, 222, 226, 229, 232, 253, 257, 
261, 263, 266, 267, 284 
MAINO ooooconccnonao90nces BOAR 
Mani ...21, 182, 186, 210, 219, 251 
Marcellus I, Pope ..... 32, 35, 148 
Marcian, Emperor ... 26, 30, 40, 163, 
182, 186 
Marcus, Pope ....e.ee 30, 44, 205 
Massilians ..cccecceeecees 244, 251 
IMIERUOENY oaaencsononnooadecona LSG 
Maurice, Emperor .....e-eeceeee 
Maximus of Turin ......ceeee00- 105 


to 
os 


298 


Melanchthon .......++-2-2+ 215, 218 


Melchiades, Pope ......... 64, 239 
Melehion siteeisiciiterirecrern mec Oe 
iMisiteEL, Sika oocaoneaccccon WHS, GUE 


Nectarius of Constantinople ..... 79 
Nicholas I, Pope ..... 41, 207, 209 
Nowalteid P8agocsccenccconnoc00. GU 
Oecolampadius (Hausschein) and 
Oecolampadans... 48, 61, 157, 194, 
197, 198, 199, 204, 216, 207, 208, 
214, 284 
Origen ... 28, 29, 35, 74, 104, 105, 
144, 152, 154, 162, 189, 202, 214, 
265, 282 
Osiander ....... 10, 22, 284 
Ossius (Hosius) of Cordova..42, 149 
Pacimontanus ... see Hubmaier 
Palladius of Seckingen .... 275, 281 
PADIS 0 svo.:oce scoiekes nate elere secrete creme 
Paschasius Radbertus .......... 262 


PAEWASLUS! cv erelererevcreis cis sienereer sree 
Paul of Samosata ....ccescceeee 200 
aul USMeqetarets) sueials) st <ioletetenel « ahetemenems.O) 


PAINS (ORIN Saggoncdecccunee Ske 
Relagiuis RODE sis:ercrcielsiesess:« eroncresion eS 
Pelagius, Pelagians ....... 204, 206 
IESE son oaconnbocnKKlOm a0, Aly) 
PEPE sooocounnaeoueadpe Goln God 
Peter of Antioch... 204 
Peter of ApPamea@ ..eseeeseseee 204 
Philo Judaeus ....04e+e++02135, 226 
NCR, INNO? Gaoonosooodao0 alll 
Pighardus, Picards (Bohemian Bre- 
thre) ssueevee wee fe sonine sks OE 
Platyna sHmecceee ced LVS 
POWy.Garpiens <i cusyoysrsievee eve ersrercs OOnmCa 4 
Pontianus, Pope .......... 148, 240 


eeeeoceeoon 


RORGHEGUSH era cc ctetenctetstshels.« « tenes eMC? 
Praemonstratesians ...esessoee 279 
Rabanus Maurus .......ee00004 201 
Ruiercreie,, Wideeil Ganaadaapaoe San ZI) 
Roman Law ... 151, 182, 186 
Sagarellans ........ce-0+. 244, 251 
SSMACE, canaunouoonosboaangope Cul 
Severus of Antioch ............ 204 


Sextus, Decretals of .......152, 163 
SiiGkewls , HIS anaaascaqsacaccns CU 
SChatZqelenr sie:<ciscisisiesecieiels seer LAO 


SGHNEpISLWS) s)o.c1e a c\s16 sictele RECO 
SOMME soaccoooanobodCS 12 
SOL HEOD Cie s ciclo aelele ctoletanetenemeremcial 
SOZOMEM srecers oreveieveie cle lelelerererenccema 


eeoee 


Sylvester, Pope ... 148, 149, 239 
240 

Syrus Monachus ......e++e+00 204 

Telesphorus, Pope .....ecee-e. 271 

Tertullian ... 33, 49, 69, 102, 137, 


183, 277, 282 
Theodosius, Emperor 

274 
Theodulf of OrleansS......0.4+. 274 
Theophilus of Alexandria ....... 41 
Theophylact ........... 214, 260 
Thomas Aquinas .......48, 91, 121 
Thomas of Canterbury ......... 243 
Tilmann .. 153, 165, 167, 184, 219 
Torquemada, Juan .....ee+e2-. 17 
MOUTHICH GE Sts, ssiecovsia ie stare sishecetstceneremeci ee 
Urban. I, Poperascicmcterieceecieree 240 


... 40, 163, 182, 


Urban Ih, PODG sca sicters siecheksienerse oO 

Valentinian, Emperor ... 26, 30, ~40, 
163, 182 

Welesoiains Gaqgaganooconndondene We 

Vigilantius ... 116, 117, 143, 186, 
226 

Vincent of Lerins .......eeee0e- 203 

Waldensians 2)... sss nemrerreicO 

Wiedens, Eberhard ........... 203 

William), Abbotiw.....:sserreceeae renee sO 


Wolfgang, St. .......0.8 
Wyclif, Wycliffites .. 
244, 251 


nooocce GUE 
5 I WES, BAep 


Zephyrinus, Pope ......... 33, 149 
ZOOLA aie, o:.00.:0:5:o el eienetee tetere eter OS 
Zozimus, Pope ........ 41, 42, 149 


Zwingli, Zwinglians ... 10, 12, 22, 44, 
48, 110, 118, 120, 124, 194, 196, 
197, 198, 199, 201, 203, 205, 206, 
207, 284 


*Also: 9ha, 138, 181, 280 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 


Chapter 1 


Page 7 
al 


See J. Courvoisier, De la Réforme au Protestantisme: Essai d'Bc- 
clesiologie Réfornée (1977), especially Chapter 2, "Le Catholi- 
cisme Romaine," pp. 35-50, referring to Eck's Enchiridion (Lyon 
Ed. of 1572). 


Ao ccin Harm. Ev., Mt 5:19 [CTS 1.279]: “The Kingdom of Heaven means 
the renewal of the Church, or the prosperous condition of the Church, 


such as was then beginning to appear by the preaching of the Gospel." 
368, Calvin, Institutes, 4.1.2. 
% Calvin, Inst. 1536, EBT 266.4, n. (p. 420) [ef. 1559 Ed., 4.8.12]. 


Page 8 


ton Iuther's conception of the Church as a spiritual unity, see "An 


Ansrer to the Celebrated Romanist of Leipzig" [Augustin Alveld], ET 
Philadelphia Edition [hereafter, PE], 1.3#49ff. See also p. 10, be- 


low. 


7on the charge of the Romanists that Luther taught that Christ forsook 
His bride the Church for 500 or a 1000 years, see P. Fraenkel, Testi- 
monia Patrum: The Function of the Patristic Argument in the Theology 
of Philip Melanchthon (1961). On the Lutheran theory of the progress- 
ive corruption of faith, especially note pp. 105f, and n. 273. Also 
ef. Calvin, Inst. 1536, PA 3 [ET, p. 6, line 17, note (p. 319). 


gee p. 7, n. 1, above. 


Page 9 
“365 p. 8, n. 2, above; also Calvin, Inst. 1536, PA 7 [BT, p. 15, lines 
23rf]. 


*calvin rejects the Roman Catholic claim of doctrinal_infallibility 
apart from the Word [Inst., 4.8.10-16]; see also Inst. 1536, ET p. 
264, line 19, n. (p. 419); Inst. 4.8.11: Individual Christians and 
the whole Church must keep within limits of God's Word. 


eatvin, Indie) 0.0%, 17. 


-299- 


300 ADDITIONAL NOTES 


Page 10 
Tease, Inst. 1536, ET, p. 261, line 4, n. (p. 418) (cf. 1559 Ed., 


4.8.10]; p. 264, line 23, n. (p. 420 [cf..1559 Ed. 4.8.11ni2] 


2tpid., PA 3 CET, p. 6, line 16, n. (p. 319)]. 


Page 11 
Days Calvin's use of Jer 2:13, see Inst. 1536, ET, p. 4 and p. 26 


(First Commandment). 


26. Chapter 4, pp. 45ff, below. 
Page 12 
lor, Calvin, Inst. (1559), 1.7.2: "The Church Itself Grounded upon 
Scripture" [Eph 2:20]. 
oon the name 'Pacimontanus' see Corpus Reformatorum, Opera Zwinglii 
(hereafter, CR Zwingli] , 8.254, n.1. 
Page 13 
"Saab, Inst. (1559), PA4, n. 36 (LCC 20.22]; ef. Zwingli, Commentary 


True and False Religion, 14 [ET 3.373]; also Disputation of Ilanz (1526 ) 
and Disputation of Bern (1528), para. 1 (Kidd, Documents of the Con- 


tinental Reformation, #217]; cf. para. 2. 


Note that both Eck and Luther argue in the same way, but from differ- 


ent premises: 


Luther: Church Tradition and Councils disagree ———> .:. Word of God 
Eck: Seripture and Church Practice disagree —»- .:. Church over 

(Scripture 
3 


Cf. Calvin, Inst., 1.72:"the acceptance of Scripture had to precede 
the founding of the Church"; cf. Bucer, in D. Wright, Commonplaces of 
Martin Bucer, p. 217. 


Noe, Zwingli, Exposition of the 67 Articles, Art. 1; also, Calvin, Inst. 
1.7.3; Luther, Babylonian Captivity, PE 2.274. Augustine's statement 
is repeated at Ch. 38, p. 279, below. 


cee pp. 45ff, below. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 301 
Page 14 


1 

These arguments are rejected by Bucer, Lectures on Ephesians (1550-1) 
{see D. Wright, Commonplaces, 8, The Church, pp. 216f] as “a misre- 
presentation and fallacious reasoning.” 


“Note Eck’s exploitation of differing baptismal formulae between 
Mt 28:19f and Acts 2:38; cf. Calvin, Comm. Acts [CTS 1.120]. 


Sor, luther, On Councils (1539), PE 1.150. 
icateine Comm, Acts 15:28 [cTS 2.78f]. 


Sor, schema of Calvin in Inst. 4.8ff. 
Page 16 


Ageia Inst. 1536, ET, p. 261, line 19, n. (p. 419); Inst. (1559), 
4.10.17. 


Page 17 


Use tine Homilies on I John, 1:12 [ET, Lcc 8.268]. 


yori ions of Cochlaeus, De Authoritate Ecclesiae, translated in Calvin, 
Inst. 1536: 1.3 (ET p. 261, line 19 (p. 419); (BT p. 264, line 23 (p. 
419)]; [BT p. 267, line 1 (p. 420]; 1.4 (BT p. 261, line 13 (p. 418)]; 
1.5 (BT p. 267, line 1 (p. 420)]; 1.6 (ET p. 259, line 8 (p. 417)]. 


33uan Torquemada (1388-1468) , especially in his Summa: De universa ec~ 


clesia, De universalibus conciliis. Torquemada wrote especially 


against Wyclif and Hus. 


Chapter 2 
Page 18 


lor, Luther, On the Councils and the Churches (1539), Luther's Works, 


American Edition [hereafter LWAE], 41.1; PE 5.4. 
Page 19 
1 


Luther, PE 5.150-152. 
Page 20 


toalvin, Inst. 1536, PA 4 (BT, p. 9]. 
Page 21 


loaivin, Inst. 1536, ET p. 267, line 29, n. (p.421); Inst. (1559 Ed.) 
4.9.3n4. 


302 ADDITIONAL NOTES 


*pL, 33.221. Cf. p. 229, below. This Epistle of Augustine is cited 
also by Luther, On the Councils and the Churches (1539) [PE 5. 
144-146], to the effect that Augustine could be speaking only of 
two Councils - Nicea I (AD 325) and Constantinople I (AD 381), 
neither of which he knew at first hand. Ephesus I (AD 431) oc- 
curred the year after Augustine died. 

Page 22 


*Cf. Zwingli, Exposition of the Sixty-Seven Articles, Art. 8. 
**Luther, On the Councils [PE 5.170]: "The dear holy Fathers were 


men...." 


Page 23 


cane On the Councils [PE 5.150f], attempts to show that even 
in the so-called "Apostolic Council" [Acts 15:28], "The Holy Ghost 
has decreed" is to be questioned. 

2 


Cf. Calvin, Comm, Gal., ad loc. 
Page 2h 
Droste, (AD 754) i 
*Nicea II (AD 787) 
Rimini (AD 359) 
“Milan (AD 355) 
Pantioch (AD 341) 


Ce aleueis in Isauria (AD 359) 


“calvin, Inst. 1536, ET p. 270, line 25, n. (p. 422); Inst, (1559 Ed.) 


4.9.9. 
Page 25 


; 
“Calvin, Inst. 1536, ET, p. 271, line #, n. (p. 422); Inst. (1559 Ed.) 
4.9.44n17, 


=See p. 41, below. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 303 


Page 27 


toe, Calvin, Inst. (1559 Ed.), PA 6, n. 46. 


Zauoted by Calvin, Inst. 153%, ET p. 15, line 9, n. (p. 325). 


Chapter 3 
Page 28 


tay the Leipzig Debate (1519), Eck debated with Luther the author- 


ity of the pope and the apostolic origin of the papacy. 
of Jean de Launoy, Epist. 7 (Opera, 5.2, pp. 101-104). 


Ant; aAnte-Nicene Fathers [hereafter, ANF], 5.374. 


Yor; ANF, 5.341. 


Sor Sermon 48, 


Oinatericall Psalm against the Party of Donatus, ET, Battles: 


lines 240f: 
"That is the proud rock which even hell's 
proud gates can never overcome." ([cf. Mt 16:18] 
Page 30 
*1541 Hd.: Tractat. 75. 
**Or 4,307 [ANF 7.133f]. 
Page 33 
*1541 Ed.: commonitionem. 1572 Ed.: communicationem 
*¥*",. Where Peter endures a passion like his Lord's!" 
***Note in 1529 Ed., fol. 8Y; also 1541 Ed., fol. 27%, margin. 
Page 35 


tneference to Orosius not in 1541 Ed. 


2 praetereas 1541 Ed., propterea = "for that reason." 
Chapter 5 
Page 59 
Sane Freedom of the Christian Man, LWAE 31.346; also Proceedings 
at Augsburg, LWAE 31.270. 


ener Explanation of the Ninety-Five Theses, Th. 38, LWAE 31.196. 


304 ADDITIONAL NOTES 


eens Proceedings at Augsburg, LWAE, 31.271. 


y aeaee tne On Faith and Works, cf. 14.21 | [CSEL 41.62] 


Stuther, 95 Theses, Th. 25, LWAE, 31.55. 
Chapter 6, Page 63 
ton Confirmation, see Gratian, Decr., 3.5.1-9 (Fr. 1.1413-1415); 
for Luther’s judgment on it, see Babylonian Captivity [PE 2.255f]. 


“oF, Calvin, Inst., 4.19.6. 


Jor, ipid., 4.19.6 


"On Luther’s adverse judgment of this pseudonymous work, see Baby~- 


lonian Captivity [PE 2.275]. 
Chapter 7 
Page 65 


tor Luther's judgment on Order, see Babylonian Captivity [PE 2. 
273-284. 


“tpia. [PE 2.277f.] 
Page 69 
*The "Priesthood of all believers" according to Eck. 


Chapter 8 
Page 72 


Taner Babylonian Captivity [PE 2.219]: "When men despair of the 
first plank, which is the ship, as though it had gone under, and 
fasten all their faith on the second plank, that is, penance ... 
this produces those endless burdens of vows, religious works, sat- 
isfactions, pilgrimages, indulgences and sects (factions in the 
monastic orders), whence has arisen that flood of books, questions, 
opinions and human traditions, which the world cannot contain; so 
that this tyranny plays worse havoc with the Church of God than any 
tyrant ever did with the Jewish people or with any nation under 
heaven. Cf. Luther, ibid. [PE 2.245-255]. 


“calvin, Inst., 3.4.20ff; also 4.12.1-13. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 305 
Page 73 
SOS. GEIR, Us) nee 
gratian, Deor., 2.33.3.1.88 (Fr. 1.1187f); Peter Lombard, Sent., 


4,18.6; ET in Calvin,Inst. 1536, p. 387. See also, Calvin, Inst. 
(1559 Ed.), 3.4.4. On sin as spiritual leprosy, see Calvin Inst. 
1536, ET, pp. 104f, 

Page 75 


tof. dbid., pp. 1BUf. 


208 Luther, Explanation of the 95 Theses, Th. 7, LWAE, 31.104. 

3o6, luther, Babylonian Captivity, LWAE, 36.120; also Calvin, Inst., 
3.4.12 

Cf. Luther, Babylonian Captivity, LWAE, 36.90. 

Sgquoted by Calvin, Inst. 1536, ET, p. 210, lines 33fy Inst. (1559 Ed.) 
3.4, 35n73. 


Cvatancithon, Loci Communes (1521), 9 [Lcc 19.143]; Calvin, Inst. 1536 
p. 187, line 32, n. 


4 


Chapter 9 
Page 80 
tPee ber defines true satisfaction [LWAE 36.89] as “the renewal of a 
man's life.” 
Chapter 10 
Page 85 
Tick apparently does not understand synecdoche as it applies to the 
Lord's Supper. 
Page 86 
ton. 20 [Pc 5.755f1. 
“pheims (AD 895) 
3agde, in Gaul (AD 506) 
ace Ed.: See Tome 4, Homily 3+. 


see Calvin, Inst. 1536, ET pp. 154f. 


306 ADDITIONAL NOTES 


Chapter 11 
Page 89 
tos, Luther, Babylonian Captivity, [PE 2.257-273]. 
“or. Calvin, Inst. 1536, ET, pp. 237f. 


Page 90 
Tee, 
Chapter 12, Page 91 
tor, Luther, Babylonian Captivity [PE 2.284-291]. 
Chapter 13 
Page 93 
“4 


Cf. Calvin, Inst., 4.10.6 (LCC 21.1184, n.16). 
of, ibid., 4.10.2 (LCC 21.1181, n.7). 

Page 94 
toe, ibid, 4.10.6, n.16 (1543). 


Page 96 


toe, Luther, Doctrines of Men are to be Rejected [PE 2.451]. 


erieher, Fo the Christian Nobility (PE 2.144]; cf. Babylonian Cap- 
tivity [PE 2.233]. 


Tipe ee Freedom of a Christian Man, LWAE 31.349. 


aT then, Heidelberg Disputation, 23, LWAE 31.54. 


of, luther, To the Christian Nobility [PE 2.76]. 
Page 98 


‘ef, Calvin on the Third Use of the Law [Inst., 2 etal, 
Chapter 14 
Page 102 


los, Calvin, Inst., 2.8.28. 
Page 106 


“Lanier: Babylonian Captivity [PE 2.433]. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 307 
Chapter 15 
Page 110 
*Zwingli, Exposition of the 67 Articles, Art. 20, CR Zw 2.202. 
**Also cf. Zwingli vs. Faber, First Zurich Disputation, 23 January 
1523, ET in S. M. Jackson, Select Works of Huldreich Zwingli, pp. 
64ff; Luther, Definition of Articles, Art. 38 [PE 3.112]; Calvin, 
Inst. , 3.20.21-27. Note that the Council of Trent took a moderate 


position on this as "good and useful" (but not necessary for salva- 
tion). The Greeks (Confession of Peter Mogiles, 1643/72) were more 
extreme: duty and propriety to implore the intercession of Mary and 
the Saints with God for us. 

Page 111 


lor, Zwingli, Exposition of the 67 Articles, Art. 20, CR Zw 2.198. 


etpid., 2.199. 


3rpid., 2.200. 


Orig 2, 200, 


Page 112 


tpor Zwingli's rejection of the Romanist "proof" of veneration of the 

saints on the basis of the liturgy or the canon of the Mass ("ora pro 

nobis"), see Exposition of the 67 Articles, Art. 20, OR ZW 2.213f. 
Page 114 


lipad., OR Zw 2.208. Zwingli actually questions the canonicity of 


the Apocalypse of Saint John at CR Zw 2.208f. 


2rpid., CR Zw 2.2108. 


Page 115 


log, abid., CR Zw 2.205f. 


Page 117 
*Used by Clichtoveus; quoted by Zwingli, Commentary on True and False 
Religion [ET, Latin Works, 3.269f]. Refutation by Zwingli, Exposition 
of the 67 Articles, Art. 20, CR Zw Peis 
**PL 38.1348-1376. 
Page 118 
lor, H. H. Howorth, "The Influence of St. Jerome on the Canon of the 
Western Church,” Journal of Theological Studies, 11 (1909-10), 323ff. 
Jerome’s title, alternatively, Prologue to the Book of Solomon. 


308 ADDITIONAL NOTES 


Page 120% 


to, Calvin, De Neccesitate Reformandae Ecclesiae, Schipper Ed., 


8.39; ET, Tracts, [CTS 1.134]. 
Page 121 
*On latria, see Augustine, Against Faustus, 20.22 typnrt 4.262f4; cf. 
Zwingli, Exposition of the 67 Articles, Art. 20, CR Zw 191f. 
Chapter 16 
Page 122 
*Cf. Calvin, Inst., 1.11.3 [Lcc 20.102}. 
**¥or Calvin's Critique of religious images, see Inst., 1.11-12; 
2.8.17. 
Page 124 


toe, ibid., 2.8.17ff. 


Chapter 17 
Page 128 


“Seale, Comm. Heb., 5:1 [CTS, p. 113]: “How extremely ridiculous 
then are they who seek by this passage to establish and support 
the sacrifice of the Mass! 

Page 129 

*Calvin, Comm. Heb., 10:11-14: “He has hitherto labored enough and 
more than enough in defending the priesthood of Christ; the con- 
clusion then is, that the ancient priesthood which is inconsistent 
with this, has ceased; for all the saints find a full consecration 
in the one offering of Christ." 


Chapter 18 
Page 134 
toe, Calvin, Inst., 4.13. 
Page 136 
*M. James, Apocryphal New Testament, p. 467. 
Chapter 19 
Page 142 
1 


Cf. Calvin, Inst., 4.12.22-28, 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 309 


Chapter 21 
Page 150 


lor, Calvin, Inst., 4.12 


Page 152 
toy 3.764 (Dt 24:7). 

Chapter 24 

Page 165 


1 

Cf. Supplementa Calviniana, 2.365.28f, on Isaiah 24:16: basis of 
the theory of indulgences. Cf. Clement VI, Unigenitus Dei Filius, 
Denziger, Enchiridion, 29th ed., #550-552. 


Chapter 25 
Page 170 
toe. Calvin, Inst., 3.5.9. 
eure Abldsy 3.5.76 
Page 171 


Hh owes yp Boies Wo Uso 


**Ibid,, 3.5.8. 
Chapter 30 
Page 201 


os baptism necessary to salvation? 

Yes: Augsburg Confession, 9: Baptism is necessary to salvation. 
[See also Book of Concord, 33; Apology of the Augsburg Confess- 
ion, 9 (p. 178). Cf. J. Westphal, Loci praecipui de vi, usu, et 
dignitate baptismi (Strasbourg, 1556), p. 2h2. 
Hubmaier: Where does the unbaptized infant go? Is he damned or 
blessed? What does Scripture say of him? 1 Cor 15:22, &c.; 
Eph 2:3 [Schriften, pp. 154rr]. 

No: Zwingli, On Baptism [LCC 24.138f]: "...baptism in the New Testa- 
ment is a covenant sign. It does not justify the one who is bap- 
tized, nor does in confirm his faith, for it is not possible for 


an external thing to confirm faith. For faith does not proceed 


310 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 


from external things. It proceeds only from the God who draws 
us. Therefore it cannot be grounded in any external thing." 
[Ibid., p. 153] Zwingli credits to his controversy with the 
Anabaptists, the fact that from it he was disabused of such 
erroneous views as the following: “the pouring of water washes 
away sin"; "the water of baptism cleanses children from a sin 
(which they never had); and that without it they would be damned." 
Calvin: Inst., 4.15.20:-"God promises that He adopts our babies 
as His own before they are born, when he promises that He will 

be our God, and the God of our descendents after us [Gen 17:7]. 
Their salvation is embraced in His Word." [LCC 21.1321] 

Inst., 4.15.22: "Infants are not barred from the kingdom of 
heaven just because they happen to depart the present life be- 
fore they have been immersed in water. Yet ... serious injustice 
is done to God's covenant if we do not assent to it, as if it 
were weak of itself, since its effect depends neither upon bap- 
tism nor upon any additions. Afterward, a sort of seal is added, 
the sacrament, not to confer efficacy upon God's promise as if 
were invalid of itself, but only to confirm it to us." &c. [Lcc 
21.1323]. 


Page 203 


*Cf. Calvin, Inst., 4.15.20: "It is not true to say that those who die 


without baptism will be deprived of the grace of regeneration," 


Chapter 31 
Page 210 


teen 4:7 - cf. Calvin, Inst., 2.5.16; Comm. Gen.,ad loc [CTS 1.204]. 


“Deut 30:11,15,19 - Cf. Calvin, Inst., 2.5.12 [Lec 20.331]. 


Calvin, Inst. 1536, p. 4, line 29, n. 


Ueenie 15:14-18 - Calvin, Inst. (1559 Ed.), 2.5.18 [LCC 20.338]; De 
Castro, Adv. Haer., 9.3. 


See also Herborn, Locorum communium enchiridion, 38 [Corpus Cathol- 


icorum, 12.129]; Cochlaeus, De libero arbitrio (1525); Acts of the 


Conference of Ratisbonne [Regensburg] (1541), CR, Opera Calvini, 5. 
518. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 311 


Page 211 


14 Cor 3:9 - cf. Calvin, Inst., 2.5.17. 


2 
1 Cor 15:10 - Inst., 2.3.12 [Lcc 20.306]; cf. Erasmus, De libero 


arbitrio. 


erinior net eo 10 (Loe 20.4271. 
Page 212 


log, Calvin, Comm. Zech., ad loc. 


Page 219 


toe, Calvin, Inst., 1.16.9, n.21 [Lcc 20.210]. 


Chapter 32, Page 231 


ton 107.816£. 
Chapter 33 
Page 243 


ton Calvin’s review of the history of the Church's Patrimony, see 
Inst. 1536, ET, pp. 275ff. 
Chapter 34 
Page 247 


los, Calvin, Harmony of the Four Last Books of Moses, Ex 25:23 [cTs 


2.160f]. Calvin opposed elaborate and rich utensils for the Church, 
citing Acacius, Bishop of Amida, and harmonizing his stripping of 
the sacred table (after Christ had come) with the precious sacred 
vessels that prevailed under Old Testament Law. Cf. Inst. (1559 Ed.) 
PA 4; 4.4.8; 4.5.18. 
Page 250 
*See p. 243, n. 1, above. 
Chapter 35 
Page 257 
ane Babylonian Captivity [ET, LWAE, 36.117]: "For that fiction 
of an ’indelible character’ has long since become a laughing-stock." 


Cf. Augustine, De Bono Conjugali, 29.32. 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 


312 
Chapter 37 
Page 265 


*Cf. Luther, Preface, The German Mass and Order of Service (Jan. 
1526), cited in Kidd, DCR, #95 (p. 195); Luther desires to retain 


the Latin service, alongside a German translation intended for 


simple laymen. 


fe 
S@Tri@S BOOKS IN THE SERIES 


THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES ......... ccc ceeeee ree eee e etree tenes Richard B. Rackham 
APOSTOLIC AND POST-APOSTOLIC TIMES (Goppelt) .............--+- Robert A. Guelich, tr. 
THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS .......... cee eee eee eee ee tee e ete eet ee nna J. B. Lightfoot 
THE ATONEMENT OF CHRIST ........-- 0. eee e eter eee ett t teen tenes Francis Turrettin 
THE AUTHORITY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT .........-.-. 02s eeee eee ee eee ners John Bright 
BACKGROUNDS TO DISPENSATIONALISM ..........0s eect eee e eee e eee Clarence B. Bass 
BASIG CHRISTIAN DOCTRINES ........--- cece eee c eect rete eee eee ee ees Carl F. H. Henry 
THE BASIC IDEAS OF CALVINISM .........c0- eee eee eee et te ee eee ees H. Henry Meeter 
THE CALVINISTIG CONCEPT OF CULTURE ............. sees sere cece eee e ane H. Van Til 
CHRISTIAN APPROACH TO PHILOSOPHY ............--- eee sects teen eens W. C. Young 
CHRISTIAN PERSONAL ETHICS ........--. 20sec cece cece eee eee e teen ees Carl F. H. Henry 
COMMENTARY ON DANIEL Vlerome) ........... 0. ee ee eee ee ees Gleason L. Archer, gy Us 
TSE (VAS VP TIS (PUES .ccoccccennusocacndnscuescacuasgnenconconDde _.. David Smith 
DISCIPLING THE NATIONS ......... 0. cece ec cece cece eect eee een eens Richard DeRidder 
THE DOCTRINE OF GOD ......... 1c cece ee ee eee eee eae Herman Bavinck 
EDUCATIONAL IDEALS IN THE ANCIENT WORLD ............-.----0ee see eee Wm. Barclay 
TRIE GPUSIUE OF DANIES oocccccsegocncenousgocdconncannooonneceedoND Joseph B. Mayor 
EUSEBIUS’ ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY 

FUNDAMENTALS OF THE FAITH ........---- cece cee eee cece rece eens Carl F. H. Henry, ed. 
COSC ENTIEREDM EVAN GELS Viennese rrstsietst titer rennet tain: R. B. Kuiper 
A EGYL PEMLOROEN cocconscanccoconnuccagnvudcosoonesoDonaucae D. Elton Tryeblood 
Woe Gee Os UAW cocuscecocsoounngonunancennpoocuenn seo Do oC pONn Ernest F. Kevan 
THE HIGHER CRITICISM OF THE PENTATEUCH ..................0005- William Henry Green 
THE HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINES .............. cc cece cece eeeeees Louis Berkhof 
THE HISTORY OF OOGIRINES. .c2-.c seme tice cere crete. cel ccomertraeneees Reinhold Seeberg 
THE HISTORY OF THE JEWISH NATION .............. eee ceeeeee eee eeee Alfred Edersheim 
HISTORYZORPRERGHING®2 202: on em chee Ween crecrne creer arrete cretre rane eR: E. C. Dargan 
LIGHT FROM THE ANCIENT EAST ............. 00 cecceeeteeceeeeeneees Adolf Deissmann 
NOTES ON THE MIRACLES OF OUR LORD ...............- cece eee eee ee eee R. C. Trench 
NOTES ON THE PARABLES OF OUR LORD ........... cc cece cece eee eee ee R. €. Trench 
OUR REASONABLE FAITH (Bavinck) ............. ccc cece te eee ee eens Henry Zylstra, tr. 
PYNUIL, AMOSUUE OF IMMER conceenoncendnssosoogconesococnmeconnese R. N. Longnecker 
PHIWOSOPHY OR RELIGION: ga cexccca cece 4 oa00 wece sce che elelne oueeveemeneree D. Elton Trueblood 
PROPHETS AND THE PROMISE .......... cece cece ccc e cece eee ee cee eens W. J. Beecher 
REASONSSEORERAIMH) atic cece sa cece cenacee onsacetaece che: ae John H. Gerstner 
MBER RERORMATIONGM ete cats a nee hoes cece cee aeons Hans J. Hillebrand, ed. 
REFORMED DOGMATICS (Wollebius, Voetius, Turretin) ............... J. Beardslee, ed., tr. 
REFORMED DOGMATICS ..............- PER RC PRM ee rote 5 er tr0.6 Heinrich Heppe 
REVELATION AND INSPIRATION ............. ccc ccc cee cece eee teat tenees James Orr 
REVERATIONMAND: THESBIBUES = csre. « cccc.s.oo cscs soccer sueeeiocs crc coeie cas tonene Carl F. H. Henry 
ROMAN SOCIETY AND ROMAN LAW IN THE NEW TESTAMENT .......... A. N. Sherwin-White 
THE ROOT OF FUNDAMENTALISM ......... 0... cece cee ccc ee eee e eee Ernest R. Sandeen 
THEBES ERVANITEMESSIAHL ores cca arg caus waste. ci cveterereteers susoecver verter tusrsoetee eet earene T. W. Manson 
STORY OF RELIGION IN AMERICA........... 0... 0 0c c ccc cece ee ee eee eens Wm. W. Sweet 
THE TESTS OF LIFE (third edition) ....... 0.0.0... cece cece ee ee eee ee eee eee Robert Law 
THEOLOGY OF THE MAJOR SECTS ......... 0. ccc eee e eee eee teens John H. Gerstner 
VARIETIES OF CHRISTIAN APOLOGETICS ...............0 0... cece cece reece ec ees B. Ramm 
THE VOYAGE AND SHIPWRECK OF ST. PAUL (fourth edition) .................. James Smith 
THES VIRGIN BIRTH i eertcccn. sc << e-ac ocuam easels ere encase career ee J. G. Machen 
A COMPANION TO THE STUDY OF ST. AUGUSTINE ................ Roy W. Battenhouse, ed. 
STUDIES IN THE GOSPELS «evcecrs reves cuseetoecorsvetaecistc ss crane vie ores eee ee R. C. Trench 
THE HISTORY OF THE RELIGION OF ISRAEL .....................0000- John Howard Raven 
THE HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE (revised edition) ................... E. H. Klotsche 
THE EPISTUES! OF JUDESAND SI) PETERG+s... 22. mee ements 1.) een eter Joseph B. Mayor 
IREORIES OR REVEEATION Sie terre is aries erent eee eee H. D. McDonald 
STUDIES IN THE BOOK OF DANIEL ............. 0... cee eee cece cease Robert Dick Wilson 
THE UNITY OF THE BOOK OF GENESIS .................... 0c cesses William Henry Green 
THE: APOCALYPSE: OR SIOHNeycmecs ccs ccere eater eerie Isbon T. Beckwith 


CHRIST THE MEANING OF HISTORY 250.02 eee Hendrikus Berkhof 


BX 
1780 
02313 


5830 


fl = — — 


Enchiridion of Commonplace: 


——_ @gainst Luther 
and Other Enemies — 
Of the Church 
John Eck 


Translated by Ford Lewis Battles 


John Eck was a chief spokesman for Roman Catholicism during the Refor- 
mation, and his Enchiridion of Commonplaces was his best-known and most 
unportant literary response to the Reformers. He published this work in 
1525, six years after debating Carlstadt and Luther at Leipzig. 


x study of Eck’s arguments in the Enchiridion will open up for the reader 
the whole Protestant-Roman Catholic dialogue from its inception in 1517 to 
the period immediatly preceding the Council of Trent. The earlier chapters 
reflect Eck’s fundamental initial debates with Luther and his followers; the 
later chapters generally answer Carlstadt, Zwingli, and Oecolampadius. 


Eck discusses such topics as soteriology, scriptural versus ecclesiastical au- 


thority, the sacraments (particularly the eucharis.), the veneration of the 
ee and the treatment of heretics, 
* 


John 2ck (14°6-1543) taught theology at the University at Ingolstadt, Ba- 
varia, for thirts’ years. J 


Ford Lewis Battles, visiting professor of church history at Calvin Theological 


Seminary, has also translated into English both the 1536 and the 1559 edi- 
tions of Calvin's Institutes. 


. | 
«- , 
BAKER BOOK HOUSE ; 
Grand Rap'ds, Michigan 
, Canada: G. R. Welch Co., Toronto 


South Africa: Word of Life Wholesale, Johannesburg 
Australia: S. John Bace = eee 


— New Zeaiand: G. W 


ry 

