LIBRARY     OF     FATHERS 


OF  THE 


HOLY  CATHOLIC   CHURCH, 


ANTERIOR  TO    THE   DIVISION   OF   THE    EAST    AND    WEST. 


TRANSLATED    BY    MEMBERS    OF    THE    ENGLISH    CHURCH. 


YET    SHALL   NOT   THV   TEACHERS   BE    REMOVED    INTO   A    CORNER   ANY    MORE,    HVT 
THINE    EYES    SHALL    s;EE   THY    TEACHERS.       hninf»    XXX.    '2<V 


OXFORD, 

JOHN   HENRY   PARKER; 

J.  G.  F.  AND  J.  RIVINGTON,  LONDON 

MDCCCXI.IV 


NO)/    .  4  ,54, 


TO  THE 
MOST  REVEREND  FATHER  IX  GOD 

WILLIAM 

LORD    ARCHBISHOP    OF    CANTERBURY, 
PRIMATE  ^OF   ALL    ENGLAND, 

FORMERLY  REGIITS   PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD, 

THIS     LIBRARY 
OF 

ANCIENT  BISHOPS,  FATHERS,  DOCTORS,  MARTYRS,  CONFESSORS, 
OF  CHRIST'S  HOLY  CATHOLIC  CHURCH, 

IS 

WITH    HIS    grace's    PERMISSION' 

RESPECTFULLY    INSCRIBED, 

IN  TOKEN  OF 

REVERENCE    FOR    HIS    PERSON    AND    SACRED    OFFICE, 

AND  OF 
GRATITUDE    FOR    HIS    EPISCOPAL    KIND.VESS. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/moralsonbool<ofj01greg 


MORALS 


ON 


THE     BOOK     OF     JOB, 


BY 


S.     GREGORY      THE      GREAT, 


THE  FIRST  POPE  OF  THAT  NAME, 


TRANSLATED, 


WITH     NOTES     AND     INDICES. 


IN  THREE  VOLUMES. 


VOL.  I.     PARTS  L  AND  IL 


OXFORD, 

JOHN  flENRY  PARKER; 
J.  O.  P.  AND  J.  RIVINGTON,  LONDON. 

1844. 


nAXTKR,    PKINTKR,  OxroRDj 


PREFACE. 


The  following  Commentary  may  perhaps  be  regarded  with 
the  less  interest  by  some  readers,  as  not  being  founded  on  a 
critical  examination  of  the  original  Text.  Perhaps,  however, 
there  may  also  be  readers,  who  are  glad  to  have  their  atten- 
tion withdrawn  from  difficulties,  to  them  insuperable,  and 
fixed  on  those  deep  and  pervading  characteristics,  which  it 
is  the  privilege  of  holiness  to  read  in  the  sacred  page. 
Criticism  may  contradict  the  interpretation  of  a  sentence, 
and  give  a  different  turn  to  particulars;  but  the  main  scope 
of  the  work  is  founded  on  principles  of  a  higher  order,  and 
involves  a  perception  of  truths  to  which  the  acutest  critic 
may  perchance  be  blind.  The  utmost  that  criticism  can  do 
for  the  study  of  Holy  Writ  is  to  furnish  as  it  were  a  correct 
Text  for  the  reading  of  the  spiritual  eye.  And  if  there  is  any 
Book  in  the  sacred  Canon  in  which  the  hearing  of  words  is 
more  important  than  the  mere  thing  said,  it  is  the  Book 
of  Job. 

Besides  the  actual  exposition  of  the  Text,  this  work  con- 
tains numerous  digressions  in  the  way  of  moral  application, 
more  or  less  connected  with  the  Commentary.  It  is  from 
these  that  it  takes  the  name  of  *  Morals,'  and  that  it  displays 
so  fully  the  character  of  its  Author.  Remarks  that  seem 
commonplace  at  first,  are  seen  upon  farther  study  to  be  full 
of  meaning  from  his  mouth,  and  to  be  the  result  of  close  and 
long-continued  self-discipline,  and  strict  observation  of  the 
innermost  workings  of  the  mind  and  heart. 

The  Introduction  gives  some  account  of  the  circumstances 
under  which  it  was  composed,  and,  together  with  the  Notes, 
supplies  some  information  with  regard  to  the  Author's  life. 


b  cob 


YAn 


iv  PREFACE. 

It  may  be  worth  while,  howeNrer,  to  give  a  slight  sketch  of 
the  remaining  parts  of  his  history.  He  was  the  son  of  Gor- 
dianus  and  Silvia,  Romans  of  a  good  family,  and  devoting  his 
early  life  to  civil  affairs,  he  became  first  a  senator,  and  after- 
wards (A.D.  581.  Cave,  574.  Ben.)  Prefect  of  the  City.  At 
this  time,  however,  he  was  already  longing  to  devote  himself 
entirely  to  religion,  and  gave  up  a  large  portion  of  his 
property  to  the  founding  of  six  Monasteries  in  Sicily,  and 
another  in  Rome.  Into  this  last  he  finally  entered,  whilst  it 
was  under  the  government  of  Valentius,  and  there  submitted 
himself  to  the  '  Rule  of  St.  Benedict,'  which  prescribes  a 
total  renunciation  of  property,  and  very  strict  obedience  to 
the  Abbot,  besides  a  certain  order  of  devotions,  and  regula- 
tions of  abstinence.  Pope  Pelagius,  however,  (or,  as  some 
say,  his  predecessor,)  shortly  drew  him  from  his  retirement, 
ordained  him  Deacon,  and  sent  him  as  his  Apocrisiarius,  or 
representative,  to  the  Emperor  Tiberius  at  Constantinople. 
To  this  period  he  refers  in  the  opening  of  his  Morals.  He 
remained  there  three  years,  till  A.D.  586,  during  which  time 
he  is  said  to  have  recovered  Eutychius,  Patriarch  of  Con- 
stantinople, from  the  error  of  denying  the  Resurrection  of  a 
real  palpable  body.  After  the  death  of  Tiberius,  he  returned 
to  his  monastery,  of  which  he  became  Abbot,  and  had 
leisure  for  reviewing  his  writings,  and  composing  some  fresh 
treatises.  But  on  the  death  of  Pelagius,  A.Dr  ^90,  he  was 
chosen  to  succeed  to  the  Papacy,  though  against  his  own  will. 
He  is  said  to  have  been  compelled  to  consent  by  a  Divine 
interference,  and  his  own  letters,  (Ep.  1.  21.  ad  Natal,  and 
vii.  4.  ad  Cyriac.)  confirm  this,  though  the  miracle  re- 
lated by  his  Biographers  is  hardly  consistent  with  con- 
temporary accounts.  He  bore  this  burdeu  thirteen  years, 
under  the  pressure  of  severe  bodily  disease  and  suffering,  but 
with  great  benefit  to  the  Church.  His  Epistles,  in  twelve 
books,  shew  the  variety  and  extent  of  the  relations  in  which 
he  was  called  upon  to  act,  and  the  important  services  he  was 
enabled  to  render  to  the  Church  in  various  countries.  The 
Emperor  Mauricius  was  a  liard  n)aster  to  the   Church,  and 


PREFACE.  r 

occasioned  him  some  difficulties,  as  did  also  the  ambition  of 
the  Archbishop  of  Constantinople,  whom  he  severely  reproved 
for  assuming  the  title  of  Universal  Bishop.  In  596,  he  sent 
St.  Augustine,  like  himself  a  Benedictine  Monk,  to  England, 
in  pursuance  of  a  design  he  had  long  entertained.  He  had 
indeed  been  himself  sent  out  on  a  similar  expedition,  at  his 
own  desire,  by  Pope  Benedict  I.  but  had  been  recalled 
immediately  after  he  had  set  out,  from  the  unwillingness  of 
the  people  to  part  with  him.  And  we  find  St.  Augustine, 
when  in  England,  still  refening  to  St.  Gregory  in  his 
difficulties,  and  receiving  his  directions. 

On  the  usurpation  of  the  Empire  by  Phocas,  A.D.  603,  he 
sent  letters  to  the  Tyrant,  for  which  he  has  been  severely 
blamed  by  Cave  and  other  writers.  His  Benedictine  bio- 
graper  defends  him  as  not  having  exceeded  the  honour  due 
to  a  de  facto  Emperor,  and  the  good  wishes  that  he  must 
have  felt  even  for  the  sake  of  the  Church.  He  died  the  next 
year,  and  was  buried  in  St.  Peter's  at  Rome.  He  appears  to 
have  watched  over  the  whole  Church  with  a  truly  pastoral 
solicitude,  and  to  have  exhausted  himself  by  his  perpetual 
labours  for  its  benefit.  His  powers  of  mind  were  evidently 
great,  though  he  has  sometimes  been  accused  of  an  excessive 
credulity,  especially  with  respect  to  the  contents  of  his 
Dialogues.  Some  writers  again  suspect  that  these  have  been 
interpolated. 

Perhaps  the  chief  characteristic  of  his  doctrine  in  the 
present  work  is  his  assertion  of  real  inherent  righteousness  in 
the  Saints,  combined  with  his  distinct  acknowledgment  and 
searching  investigation  of  sin  even  in  the  holiest  of  mere  men. 
In  this  respect  indeed  he  interprets  some  passages,  such  as 
the  latter  part  of  Rom.  vii.  differently  from  the  Fathers  in 
general,  yet  so  as  to  supply  a  corrective,  through  the  analogy 
of  the  Faith,  to  any  error  that  might  result  from  such  a  view. 
In  the  casejust  mentioned,  and  in  some  others,he  closely  follows 
St.  Augustine.  A  large  collection  of  practical  portions  from  this 
work  has  been  made,  under  the  title  of  Speculum,  the  Mss.  of 
which  are  of  frcfjuent  occurrence.  Of  tlie  whole  work  also  there 


Ti  PREFACE. 

are  many  Mss.  extant,  and  the  Benedictine  edition  presents 
a  text  generally  very  carefully  and  judiciously  made  out  from 
them.  The  Benedictine  Editors  used  occasionally  the  notes 
from  Mss.  at  Oxford  published  by  James  in  his  Vindicise  Gre- 
gorianae.  The  whole  collation  made  by  him  and  others  with  an 
edition  is  in  the  library  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford,  and 
through  the  kindness  of  that  Society,  and  the  assistance  of 
the  Rev.  H.  Coombs,  M.A.  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  the 
Editor  has  had  a  copy  of  the  various  readings  at  hand  in 
revising  the  translation.  It  is  not,  however,  very  much  that 
can  be  added  to  the  diligence  and  judgment  of  the  Bene- 
dictines, though  Oxford  possesses  some  valuable  Mss.  not 
hitherto  collated. 

For  the  Translation,  the  Editors  are  indebted  to  a  friend 

who  prefers  concealing  his  name.     It  is  hoped  that  the  two 

remaining  Volumes  will  appear  in  1845  and  6,  and  that  in 

due  time  the  Original  Text  may  also  be  reprinted  with  some 

few  corrections. 

CM. 

Oriel  Coll. 

Feast  of  St.  AndreWy 

1844. 


CONTENTS. 


THE  EPISTLE, 

Wherein  he  explains  the  time,  occasion,  division,  plan,  and  the  method  of 
discourse  and  of  interpretation  pursued  in  his  work.  Page  1 

THE  FIRST  PART. 

THE  PREFACE, 

Wherein  he  in  few  words  goes  through  the  particulars,  which  are  to  be 
laid  open  in  the  course  of  the  entire  work.  14 

BOOK  I. 

The  first  verses  of  the  first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job  are  explained  first 
historically,  then  in  an  allegorical,  and  lastly  in  a  moral  sense.  32 

BOOK  II. 

From  the  sixth  verse  of  the  first  chapter  to  the  end,  he  foUows  oat  the 
exposition  according  to  the  threefold  interpretation.  67 

BOOK  III. 

The  whole  of  the  second  chapter  of  the  book  of  Job  is  explained  after  the 
manner  of  the  former  Books,  historically,  allegorically,  and  morally.  130 

BOOK  IV. 

Wherein  Gregory,  having  in  the  Preface  set  forth  in  few  words,  that  the 
letter  of  Scripture  is  at  times  at  variance  with  itself,  and  that  the  im- 
precations of  Job,  as  of  Jeremiah  and  David,  cannot  be  understood 
without  absurdity  according  to  the  sound  which  they  convey,  explains 
the  words  of  Job  in  historical,  mystical,  and  moral  sense,  from  the 
commencement  of  the  third  chapter  to  the  twentieth  verse  of  the  same.  1 77 

BOOK  V. 

He  explaiu^  the  remainder  of  chap.  iii.  from  ver.  20.  the  whole  of  rhap.  iv. 
and  the  first  two  verses  of  rhap.  v.  241 


vm  CONTENTS. 


THE  SECOND  PART. 


BOOK  VI. 

The  whole  of  the  fifth  chapter,  beginning  at  the  third  verse,  is  explained 
first  in  a  spiritual  sense,  a  few  parts  in  an  allegorical,  and  a  great  many 
in  a  moral  sense.  313 

BOOK  VII. 

He  explains  the  whole  of  the  sixth  chapter,  except  the  three  last  verses,  in 
part  allegorically  and  in  part  morally.  364 

BOOK  VIII. 

He  explains  part  of  the  sixth  chapter,  from  verse  27,  and  the  whole  of 
the  seventh  and  eighth  chapters.  In  the  course  of  this  exposition,  from 
verse  11,  to  the  end  of  the  eighth  chapter,  he  speaks  at  length  on  the 
sin  of  hypocrisy.  414 

BOOK  IX. 

He  explains  the  ninth  chapter,  together  with  the  whole  of  the  tenth.     494 

BOOK  X. 

The  whole  of  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job,  and  the  five  first 
verses  of  the  twelfth,  being  made  out,  he  closes  the  Second  Part  of  this 
work.  575 


THE 
BOOKS  OF  THE  MORALS 


OF 


ST.    GREGORY    THE    POPE, 


OR 


AN  EXPOSITION  ON  THE  BOOK  OF  BLESSED  JOB. 


THE  EPISTLE, 

Wherein  he  explains  the  time,  occasion,  division,  plan,  and  the  method  of 
discourse  and  of  interpretation  pursued  in  his  work. 


To  the  Most  Devout  aud  Holy   Brother^  my  fellow  Bishop 
Leander^,  Gregory,  the  servant  of  God^s  servants. 

1.  When  I  knew  you  long  since  at  Constantinople,  ray 
most  blessed  brother,  at  the  time  that  I  was  kept  there  by  the 


■  Leander,  who  is  honoured  as  a  Saint 
and  Doctor  in  Spain,  was  a  native  of 
Carthagena ;  his  father  Severianus 
wa8  brother  in  Uw  to  Theodoric  kin.j; 
of  the  Ostrogoths.  He  early  devoted 
himself  to  a  monastic  life,  and  after  a 
long  continuance  in  it  he  was  made 
Bishop  of  Seville,  where  he  maintained 
the  Faith  against  the  Arianism  which 
then  prevailed,  and  received  Hermini- 
gild,  who  reigned  there  under  his  father 
TJuvigild,  into  the  Church.  He  went  on 
an  embassy  to  the  Emperor  Tiberius  as 
presently  stated,  after  which  he  returned 
to  Spain,  but  was  banished  for  a  time 
by  Liuvigild,  who,  however,  on  his 
deathbed  appointed  him  tutor  to  his 
son  Recared,  whom  he  converted  from 
ArianiMm,  and  with  bis  assistance  esta- 
blished the  Catholic  Faith  amongst  the 
Wisigoths  and  Suevi.  Hi'  took  part 
(and  perhaps  presided, see  Baronius  An. 
689.H.ix.  and  xliv.  Boll.  Act.  Sanct.  Ap. 
xiii.  p.  277.)  in  the  third  Council  of 
Toledo,  in  which  the  Goths  were  united 


to  the  Catholic  Chu-ch,  A.D.  589.  He 
died  in  51)5.  Ht-  wrote  a  ru'e  for 
Virgins  to  his  sister  Fir rentina,  which 
is  extant  in  Ifjlstein's  Codex  Regu- 
larum,  a  Homily  of  his,  on  the  con- 
version of  the  Goths,  accompanies  the 
acts  of  the  Synod  of  Toledo,  and  the 
Mozarabic  Missal  is  said  by  some  to  be 
founded  on  one  arranged  by  him ;  his 
other  works  are  lost.  See  Cave,  Hist. 
Lit.  an.  585.  also  the  Isidoriana  of  Are- 
valus  in  his  edition  of  St.  Isidore,  Rome 
17y7.  There  are  three  tpistles  of  St. 
Gregory  to  Leander.  Lib.  i.  Ep.  4  i. 
Lib.  V.  Ep.  49.  and  Lib.  ix.  1-21.  ac- 
companying the  Pallium.  His  brother 
Fulgcntius,  Hp.  of  Carthagena  and 
Eceja,  Bollaud.  Jan.  xiv.  p.  97L  and 
his  sister  Florentina,  A  p.  xiv.  and  Jun 
XX.  who  devoted  herself  to  a  life  of  Vir- 
ginity, are  locally  honoured  as  Sainl.<». 
He  was  succeeded  in  the  See  of  Se\ille 
(then  called  His/kilis,)  by  his  younger 
brother  St.  Isidore. 


B 


2  Secular  life  of  St,  Gregory.     His  retirement. 

Ep.  to  affairs^  of  the  Apostolical  See,  and  that  you  had  been  brought 
thither  by  an  embassage,  with  which  you  were  charged,  on 
counts  touching  the  faith  of  the  Wisigoths  %  T  then  detailed 
in  your  ears  all  that  displeased  me  in  myself,  since  for  late 
and  long  I  declined  the  grace  of  conversion,  and  after  that  I 
had  been  inspired  with  an  heavenly  affection  I  thought  it 
better  to  be  still  shrouded  in  the  secular  habit.  For  though 
1  had  now  disclosed  to  me  what  I  should  seek  of  the  love  of 
things  eternal,  yet  long-established  custom  had  so  cast  its 
chains  upon  me,  that  I  could  not  change  my  outward  habit : 

» animus  and  while  my  pui*pose^  still  compelled  me  to  engage  in  the 
service  of  this  world  as  it  were  in  semblance  only,  many 
influences  began  to  spring  up  against  me  from  caring  for  this 
same  world,  so  that  the  tie  which  kept  me  to  it  was  now  no 
longer  in  semblance  only,  but  what  is  more  serious,  in  my 
own  mind.  At  length  being  anxious  to  avoid  all  these 
inconveniences,  I  sought  the  haven  of  the  monastery,  and 
having  left  all  that  is  of  the  world,  as  at  that  time  I  vainly 


^  Responsa,   these  were  all  matters 
concerning  the  Roman  See,  that  were 
brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Emperor, 
and  the  person  intrusted  with  them  was 
entitled  Apocrisiarius. He  was  the  Pope's 
Ambassador  at  the  Imperial  Court  with 
varying  powers.     He  was  one  of  the 
Cardinal   Deacons,   for  which    reason 
S.  Grtg.  on  being  appointed  to  this  office, 
was  ordained  Deacon,  vide  Du  Cangein 
voceApocrisiarius ;  also  Bingham  Antiq. 
b.  iii.  c.  xiii.  s.  6.  where  the  office  is 
correctly  described,  vide  Baronius  Ann. 
torn.  X.  p.  378.  (an.  583.  xii.  xiii.)    Gib- 
bon speaks  of  St.  Gregory's  services  at 
the  Imperial  Court  thus;  "As  soon  as 
he  had  received  the  characterof  Deacon, 
Gregory  was  sent  to  reside  at  the  Impe- 
rial Court,  and  he  boldly  assumed  in  the 
name  of  St.  Peter  a  tone  of  independent 
dignity  which  would  have  been  criminal 
and  dangerous  in  the  most  illustrious 
layman  of  the  Empire."    See  his  history 
c.xlv.Lond.18 1 3.  t.  viii.  p.l  64.  alsop.  148. 
c  Herminigild  was  deposed  by  Liuvi- 
gild,  chiefly,  it  seems,  for  embracing  the 
Catholic  Faith.  The  contemporary  writ- 
ers however,  both  St.  Gregory  of  Tours 
and  St.  Isidore,  consider  him  to  have 
acted  wrongly  toward  his  father.    Baro- 
nius indeed  says  that  Leander  went  on 
an  emba<?sy  to  ask  help  for  him  from  the 
Emperor,  which  he  obtained,  but  the 
Greek    officers    betraved    his    cause. 


An  ancient  Roman  Breviary  however 
says  he  went  to  Constantinople  to  attend 
a  Council,  '  Pro  confirmandis  capitulis 
SanctaeTrinitatis, 'to  confirm  the  articles 
on  the  Holy  Trinity.  This  he  may  have 
done  previously,  the  fifth  General  Coun- 
cil being  A.D.  553.  Herminigild  was 
unsuccessful,  and  obliged  to  leave  his 
kingdom. 

Hefound  means  however  to  return  into 
Spain,  and  maintained  himselfby  the  help 
of  the  Greeks  against  his  father,  and  it  is 
at  this  time  that  his  conduct  in  attempt- 
ing a  surprise  is  severely  blamed  by  St. 
Gregory  of  Tours,  Hist.  Franc,  vi.  43. 
He  was  at  last  overpowered,  and  taken 
prisoner.  St.  Gregory  of  Rome,  Dial.  iii. 
31.  says,  that  he  was  then  urged  by  his 
father  to  communicate  with  an  Arian 
Bishop,  and,  after  resisting  alike  pro- 
mises and  threats,  was  put  to  death.  He 
also  mentions  a  supernatural  light  that 
surrounded  his  body.    These  circum- 
stances are  not  noticed  by  St.  Isidore 
or  St.  Greg,  of  Tours.    Liuvigild  how- 
ever very  soon  after  acknowledged  pri- 
vately the  true  faith,  and  recalled  Le- 
ander, and  placed  his  son  and  successor 
Recared  under  his  direction.    Hermini- 
gild is  honoured  as  a  Martyrby  the  Latin 
Church,  Apr.  13.    See  Isidoriana  caps, 
xviii.  and  Ixxxix.  S.  Isid.  Hist.  Goth.  c. 
49.  The  account  of  Mariana  is  more  cir- 
cumstantial, but  seemspartly  imaginary. 


His  Ordirnitioji,  Legation,  and  Pastoral  Charge.         3 

believed,  I  came  out  Daked  iVom  the  shipwreck  of  human  Leand, 
life.  For  as  the  vessel  that  is  negligently  moored,  is  very  often 
(when  the  storm  waxes  violent)  tossed  by  the  water  out  of 
its  shelter  on  the  safest  shore,  so  under  the  cloak  of  the 
Ecclesiastical  office,  I  found  myself*^  plunged  on  a  sudden 
in  a  sea  of  secular  matters,  and  because  I  had  not  held  fast 
the  tranquillity  of  the  monastery  when  in  possession,  1  learnt 
by  losing  it,  how  closely  it  should  have  been  held.  For 
whereas  the  virtue  of  obedience  was  set  against  my  own 
inclination  to  make  me  take  the  charge  of  ministering  at  the  holy 
Altar,  I  was  led  to  undertake  that  upon  the  grounds  of  the 
Church  requiring  it',  which,  if  it  might  be  done  with  impunity,  'subEc- 
I  should  get  quit  of  by^  a  second  time  withdrawing  myself ;  ^^^j^'* 
and  subsequently  notwithstanding  my  unwillingness  and 
reluctance,  at  the  very  time  when  the  ministry  of  the  Altar 
was  a  heavy  weight,  the  further  burden  of  the  Pastoral 
charge  was  fastened  on  me,  which  T  now  find  so  much  the 
more  difficulty  in  bearing,  as  I  feel  myself  to  be  unequal  to 
it,  and  as  I  cannot  take  breath  in  any  comfortable  assurance 
in  myself  For  because,  now  that  the  end  of  the  world  is  at 
hand  \  the  times  are  disturbed  by  reason  of  the  multiplied 

«*  He  was  sent  to  Constantinople  as  him  by  His  conversation,  to  give  an 

Apocrisiarius  immediately  upon  his  or-  example    to   those    that    follow    Him, 

dination,  Bar.  an.  683.  The  Benedictive  He  refused  to  be  made  King,  but  volun- 

Biographer  places  the  event  earlier,  in  tarilyconsented  to  the  stock  of  the  Cross. 

678.or  579.  life,  l.i.c.  5.op.t.iv.  p.211.  He  eschewed  the  proffered  trloryof  ex- 

•  There  is  an  allusion  to  this  in  the  altation,  He  sought  the  woe  of  an  igno- 
'Pastoral  Kule'whichbeginsthus,"  You  minious  death,  &c."  uh.  iii. 
blame  me,  most  dear  brother,  with  kind  ^  '  Amidst  the  arms  of  the  Lombards 
and  lowly  purpose,  that  1  would  have  and  under  the  despotism  of  the  Greeks, 
escaped  the  burthens  of  the  Pastoral  we  again  enquire  into  the  fate  of  Rome, 
charge  by  keeping  myself  concealed,  which  had  reached  about  the  close  of  the 
which  lest  any  should  take  to  be  light,  I  sixth  century  the  lowest  period  of  her 
set  forth  in  the  writing  of  this  present  depression.'  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall, 
work  all  that  reflection  has  impressed  on  Lond.  1813.  t.viii.  p.  158,  see  also  p. 159, 
me  concerning  their  weightiness."  In  169.  and  >.  Greg.  Orat.  ad  Pleb.  Rom. 
speaking  again  of  the  responsibility  of  t.  i.  p  1660.  Ben.  Bar.  Ann.  A.D.  690, 
the  office  he  says,  "  It  is  hence  that  the  xvii.xxii.  xxiv.  On  the  end  of  the  world 
very  Mediator  between  God  and  man  being  at  hand,  St.  Greg,  thus  delivers 
shunned  to  take  a  kingdom  upon  earth,  himself  in  Homily  on  St.  Luke  xxi.  26. 
"Who,  surpassing  the  knowledge  an  J  &r.  "  Of  all  which  (viz.  the  signs  de- 
faculties  even  of  spirits  above,  rules  in  scribed  liy  our  Lord, )somewe8eealready 
the  heavens  before  the  world  hegan.  accomplished,  otherswedread  to  be  upon 
For  who  could  have  exercised  authority  us  nigh  at  hand.  For  we  see  already  that 
over  man  so  entirely  without  blame  ai5  nation  rises  up  against  nation  and  that 
He  Who  would  only  be  governing  those,  the  push  and  press  of  them  has  settled  up- 
whom  He  had  Himself  formed  ?  But  on  the  lands  worse  in  our  own  times  than 
because  He  had  for  this  reason  come  in  we  read  in  records.  That  earthquakes 
the  flesh  that  He  might  not  only  redeem  overwhelm  countless  cities,  ye  knowhow 
man  by  His  Passion,  but  also  instruct  often  we  have  heard  from  other  parts  of 

b2 


4      St.  Gregory  accompayiiecl  on  fiis  Legation  by  Monks. 

Ep.  to  evils  thereof,  and  we  ourselves,  who  are  supposed  to  be  devoted 

to  the  inner  mysteries,  are  thus  become  involved  in  outward 

cares;  just  as  it  happened  then  also  when  I  was  brought  to 

the  ministry  of  the  Altar,  this  was   brought  about   for  me 

without  my  knowledge,  viz.  that  1  should  receive  the  mighty 

charge    of  the    Holy   Order,  to   the    end  that  I    might  be 

nicen-  quartered  under  less  restraint^  in  an  earthly  palace,  whither 

cubarem^"^^^^^    I    was    followed    by    many    of   my   brethren    from 

'germa-the    monastery,  who   were  attached   to    me   by  a   kindred' 

affection.  Which  happened,Iperceive,by  Divine  dispensation, 

in  order  that  by  their  example,  as  by  an  anchored  cable,  T 

might  ever   be  kept  fast  to    the   tranquil  shore  of  prayer, 

whenever  I  should  be  tossed  by  the  ceaseless  waves  of  secular 

affairs.     For  to  their  society  I  fled  as  to  the  bosom   of  the 

safest  port  from  the  rolling  swell,   and  fi'om   the  waves  of 

earthly  occupation ;  and  though  that  office  which  withdrew 

me  from  the  monastery  had  with  the  point  of  its  employments 

stabbed  me  to  death  as  to  my  former  tranquillity  of  life,  yet  in 

Reg-  S.  their  society,  by  means  of  the  appeals  of  diligent  reading,  I 

c.  38.     was  animated  with  the  yearnings  of  daily  renewed  compunc- 

and  42.  ^q^^      j^-    ^yr^g    ^j^g^    w^^^  \^   seemed   good   to   those    same 

brethren,  you  too  adding  your  influence,  as  you  yourself 
remember,  to  oblige  me  by  the  importunity  of  their  requests 
3i.e.ourtQ  Set  forth  the  book  of  blessed  Job  ;  and  as  far  as  the  Truth' 
should  inspire  me  with  powers,  to  lay  open  to  them  those 
mysteries  of  sucb  depth ;  and  they  made  this  too  an  additional 
burden  which  their  petition  laid  upon  me,  that  I  would  not 

the  world.  We  endure  pestilences  with-  "  But  because  I  being  unworthy  and 
out  pause,  but  signs  in  the  sun  and  weat  have  taken  upon  me  the  old  and 
moon,  and  stars,  we  do  not  at  all  as  much  battered  vessel,  for  the  waves  make 
yet  see  manifestly;  but  that  even  these  away  in  on  all  sides,  and  the  rotten 
things  are  not  far  off",  we  collect  from  planks  shattered  by  a  daily  and  vehe- 
the  mere  change  of  the  atmosphere  ment  tempest  tell  of  shipwreck,  I  be- 
already,  though  before  Italy  was  given  seech  you  by  Almighty  God,  to  stretch 
up  to  be  smitten  by  the  sword  of  a  the  hand  of  your  prayers  in  this  my 
Gentile  foe,  we  beheld*  fiery  ranks  in  peril,  since  you  may  implore  mercy 
the  heavens,  the  very  blood  itself  of  the  even  so  much  the  more  earnestly,  in 
human  race,  which  was  afterwards  spilt,  proportion  as  you  also  stand  the  further 
streaming.  Further  the  confounding  removed  from  the  agitated  state  of 
of  the  waves  and  of  the  sea  has  not  as  calamity  which  we  undergo  in  this 
yet  sprung  up  in  new  sort,  &c."  Hom.  land."  Ep.  iv.  6.  1.  written  soon  after 
i.  in  Ev.  §.  i.  see  also  sects.  3.  5.  he  had  succeeded  to  the  Pontificate. 

*  This  wa.s  probably  the  appearance  of  the  Aurora  Borealis,  which  Speed 
describes  as  '  fiery  dragons.'  Hist.  p.  300.  and  Matthew  of  Westminster  as 
*  appearances  of  lances  and  fiery  spears.'  Matth.  of  West.  p.  101.  Speed 
gpeaks  also  of  a  shower  of  blood,  and  bloody  crosses /all  i7ig  on  men's  garments. 


i 


He  expoiuided  the  book  of  Job  at  their  request.  5 

only  unravel  the  words  of  the  history  in  allegorical  senses,  Lean  p. 
but  that  I  would  go  on  to  give  to  the  allegorical  senses  the 
turn  of  a  moral  exercise,  with  the  addition  of  somewhat  yet 
harder,  that  I  would  crown  ^  the  several  meanings  with  testi-ior'for- 
monies^,  and  that  the  testimonies,  which  I  brought  forward,  *^ J'   ^^ 
should    they  chance  to  appear   involved,  should   be  disen- 
tangled by  the  aid  of  additional  explanation. 

II.  At  first  however,  when  in  this  obscure  work,  which 
hitherto  had  been  thoroughly  treated  by  none  before  us,  I 
learnt  the  extent  and  character  of  the  task  to  which  1  was 
forced,  being  overcome  and  wearied  with  the  mere  burthen 
of  hearing  of  it,  I  confess  that  I  sank  under  it.  Yet  im- 
mediately, when,  in  a  strait  between  my  alarms  and  my 
devout  aspirations,  I  lifted  up  the  eyes  of  my  mind  to 
the  Bestower  of  all  gifts,  waiving  my  scruples,  I  fixed  my  James 
thoughts  on  this,  that  what  an  affection  flowing  from  the  ' 
hearts  of  my  brethren  enjoined  upon  me,  could  not  certainly 
be  impossible,  I  despaired,  indeed,  of  being  a  match  for  these 
things,  but,  stronger  for  my  very  despair  of  myself,  I  forthwith 
raised  my  hopes  to  Him,  by  Whom  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  is 
opened.  Who  makefh  the  lips  of  babes  to  speak  eloquently j\;\si^. 
W^ho  has  marked  the  undistinguished  and  brute  brayings  of^^'^^* 
an  ass  with  the  intelligible  measures  of  human  speech. 
What  wonder,  then,  that  a  simple  man  should  receive  under- 
standing from  Him,  Who  whenever  He  willeth,  utters  His 
truth  by  the  mouths  of  the  very  beasts  of  burthen .''  Armed 
then  with  the  strength  which  this  thought  supplied,  I  roused 
mine  own  drought  to  explore  so  deep  a  well ;  and  though 
the  life  of  those,  to  whom  I  was  com])elled  to  give  my  in- 
terpretation, was  fai'  above  me,  yet  I  thought  it  no  harm  if 
the  leaden  pipe  should  supjjly  streams  of  water  for  the 
service  of  men.  ^\^le^eu])on,  without  further  delay,  I  delivered 
the  former  parts  of  the  book,  in  presence'',  to  the  same 
brethren  assembled  before  me;  and  because  I  found  my 
time  to  be  then  somewhat  more  free,  in  treating  of  the  latter 
portion  1  used  dictation;  and  when  longer  intervals  of  time 
were   at    my   disposal,  many  things    being  added,   a  small 

«  i.  e.  textij  of  Holy  Scripture,  see  683.  and  it  was  completed  in  the  first 

Vine.  Lir.  Common,  c.  xxv.  year  of  his  Pontificate,  A.D,  590.  Bar. 

•>  The   work   wa.s  begun   while    St.  t.  x.  an.  5!^3.  n.  xxxvi. 
Gregory  w.is  at  Constantinople,  A.D. 


6  Style  of  composition  and  of  commentary. 

Ep.  to  number  omitted,  and  some  few  left  as  they  were,  all  that  had 
been  taken  down'  in  my  presence  as  I  spoke,  I  arranged  in 
books  with  amendments.     For  when  I  was  giving  the  last 
part  by  dictation,  I  in  like  manner  carefully  considered  the 
style  in  which    I    had   spoken  the    first   part,  so  that   my 
business  was  both  with  regard  to  those  parts,  which  I  had 
given  orally,  by  going  through  them  with  a  careful  correction, 
to  bring  them  up  to  somewhat  like  dictation,  and  with  regard 
to  what  1  had  dictated,  that  it  should  not  greatly  differ  from 
the  style  of  colloquial  delivery;  so  that  the  one  being  drawn 
out,    and   the    other   contracted,  that   which    unlike    modes 
produced  might  be  formed  into  a   not   inconsistent   whole. 
Though  it  must  be  added  that  the  third  portion  of  this  work 
I  have  so  left  for  the  most  part  as  I  gave  it  by  word  of  mouth, 
because    the    brethren,  drawing  me    away  to   other   things, 
would  not  have  this  to  be  corrected  with  any  great  degree  of 
exactness.     Pursuing  my  object  of  obeying  their  instructions, 
which   1   must  confess  were  sufficiently  numerous,  now  by 
the  work  of  exposition,  now  by  the  flights  of  contemplation, 
and  now  by  moral  instruction,  I  have  completed  this  work 
»  volu-    extending  through  thirty-five  books  ^,  and  six   tomes  ^  and 
™^°^j^._  hence  I  shall  be  often  found  therein  to  put  rather  in  the 
b«i8        back-ground  the  order  of  exposition,  and  to  employ  myself 
at  greater  length  upon  the  wide  field  of  contemplation  and 
of  moral   instruction.    But  yet  whosoever  is  speaking  con- 
cerning  God,   must   be    careful    to    search    out   thoroughly 
whatsoever  furnishes  moral  instruction  to  his  hearers;  and 
should  account  that  to  be  the  right  method  of  ordering  his 
discourse,  if,  when  opportunity  for  edification   requires   it, 
he  turn  aside  for  a  useful  purpose  from  what  he  had  begun 
to  speak  of;  for  he  that  treats  of  sacred  writ  should  follow 
the  way  of  a  river,  for  if  a  river,  as  it  flows  along  its  channel, 
meets  with  open  valleys  on  its  side,  into  these  it  immediately 
turns  the  course  of  its  current,  and  when  they  are  copiously 
supplied,  presently  it  pours  itself  back  into  its  bed.     Thus 
unquestionably,  thus  should  it  be  with  every  one  that  treats 
of  the  Divive  Word,  that  if,  in  discussing  any  subject,  he 

i  '  Excepta  sub  oculis,' taken  down     the   time;    the    latter  would    be    'die- 
in  the  course  of  delivery,  but  not  de-     tated.' 
ivored  with  a  view  to  writing  oat  at 


SeTises  Historical,  Allegorical,  and  Mural.  7 

chance  to  find  at  hand  any  occasion  of  seasonable  edification,  Leand. 
he  should,  as  it  were,  force  the  streams  of  discourse  towards 
the  adjacent  valley,  and,  when  he  has  poured  forth  enough 
upon  its  level  of  instruction,  fall  back  into  the  channel  of 
discourse  which  he  had  proposed  to  himself. 

III.  But  be  it  known  that  there  are  some  parts,  which  we  See  note 

A  at  the 

go  through  in  a  historical  exposition,  some  we  trace  out  m  ^^^  ^f 
allegory  upon  an  investigation  of  the  typical  meaning,  some  ^^^ 
we  open  in  the  lessons  of  moral  teaching  alone,  allegorically 
conveyed,  while  there  are  some  few  which,  with  more  parti- 
cular care,  we  search  out  in  all  these  ways  together,  exploring 
them  in  a  threefold  method.  For  first,  we  lay  the  historical 
foundations  ;  next,  by  pursuing  the  typical  sense,  we  erect  a 
fabric  of  the  mind  to  be  a  strong  hold  of  faith ;  and  moreover 
as  the  last  step,  by  the  grace  of  moral  instruction,  we,  as  it 
were,  clothe  the  edifice  with  an  overcast  of  colouring.  Or  at 
least  how  are  the  declarations  of  tnith  to  be  accounted  of, 
but  as  food''  for  the  refreshment  of  the  mind?  These  being 
handled  with  the  alternate  application  of  various  methods,  we 
serve  up  the  viands  of  discourse '  in  such  sort  as  to  prevent 
all  disgust  in  the  reader,  thus  invited  as  our  guest,  who, 
upon  consideration  of  the  various  things  presented  to  him, 
is  to  take  that  which  he  determines  to  be  the  choicest 
Yet  it  sometimes  happens  that  we  neglect  to  inteqn-et  the 
plain  words  of  the  historical  account,  that  we  may  not  be  too 
long  in  coming  to  the  hidden  senses,  and  sometimes  they 
cannot  be  understood  according  to'"  the  letter,  because  when 
taken  superficially,  they  convey  no  sort  of  instruction  to  the 
reader,  but  only  engender  error ;  for  here,  for  instance,  it  is 
said,  Under  Whom  they  are  bent  who  bear  the  world"".    Now  Job  9, 

.  13 

in  the  case  of  one  so  great,  who  can  be  ignorant  that  he 
never  so  follows  the  vain  fictions  of  the  poets,  as  to  fancy  the 
Weight  of  the  world  to  be  sup])orted  by  the  labour  of  the 
giants.  Again,  under  the  jM'essure  of  calamities  he  exclaims, 
8o  that  )ny  soul  cliooaeth  strawjlintj,  and  death  rather  than  Job  r, 
H/e.     Now  who  that  is  in  his  right  senses  could  believe  that 

'■    See   S.   Chrys.  Horn.    iv.  on    St.  of    speech    used     mrtaphorirally     vide 

John,  init.  Tracts    for   the    I  imes,    No.    89.    On 

'   '  Ferculum  oris.'   A.   reads  '  ori,"  the  Mysticism,  &c.  pp.  'ob.  Sec. 

*  viands  for  the  palate.'  "  E.  V.    T/ic  prouti  hrlpcrs  do  sloop 

"  The  instances  given  are  only  forms  under  Him. 


8  Some  things  cannot  be  taken  literally^ 

]^£^£o^  a  man  of  so  high  praise,  who  in  a  word,  we  know,  received 
from  the  Judge  of  that  which  is  within "  the  reward  of  the 
virtue  of  patience,  settled  amidst  his  afflictions  to  finish  his 
life  by  strangling?  And  sometimes  even  the  very  literal 
words  forbid  its  being  supposed  that  perchance  they  ought  to 

Jobs, 3. be  understood  according  to  the  letter.  Thus  he  says,  Let 
the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  born,  and  the  night  in  which 
it  was  said,  There  is  a  man  child  conceived.     And  a  little 

ver.  5.  while  afterwards  he  subjoins,  Let  darkness  seize  it,  and  let 
it  he  involved  in  bitterness  \  And  in  cursing  the  same  night 
he  adds,  Lo/  let  that  night  be  solitary.  Assuredly  this  day 
of  his  birth,  which  rolled  itself  out  in  the  mere  current  of 
time,  could  never  stand  fast.  In  what  way  then  did  he  wish 
it  might  be  involved  in  darkness  ?  For  having  gone  by,  it  no 
longer  was,  neither  yet,  if  it  had  existence  in  the  nature  of 
things,  could  it  ever  feel  bitterness ;  it  is  evident  therefore 
that  the  words  cannot  possibly  be  spoken  of  a  day  without 
feeling,  when  the  wish  expressed  is  that  it  be  struck  with  a  feeling 
of  bitterness ;  and  if  the  night  of  his  conception  had  gone 
by,  blended  with  the  other  nights,  after  what  fashion  would 
he  have  it  become  solitary,  which  as  it  could  not  be  arrested 
from  the  flight  of  time,  so  neither  could  it  be  separated  from 

Job  7,  union  with  the  other  nights.  Again  he  says.  How  long  wilt 
Thou  not  depart  from  me,  nor  let  me  alone,  till  1  swallow 

iohQ,7.down  my  spittle.  Yet  he  had  said  a  little  above,  The  things 
which  my  soul  refused  to  touch  are  as  my  sorrowfid  meat.  Now 
who  does  not  know  that  spittle  is  more  easily  swallowed  than 
food }  it  is  wholly  inconceivable  then  in  what  connection  he, 
who  tells  of  his  taking  food;  declares  that  he  cannot  swallow 

Job  7,  his  spittle.  Again  he  says,  /  have  sinned;  what  shall  I  do 
unto  thee,  O  Thou  preserver  of  men?  Or  more  unequivocally, 

Job  13,   Wouldest  Thou  destroy  me  by  the  iniquities  of  my  youth? 

Job  27   ^"^^  y^^  ^^  another  answer  he  subjoins,  My  heart  shall  not 

6.  reproach  me  so  long  as  I  live.     How  then  does  his  heart 

not  condemn  him  so  long  as  he  lives,  who  by  a  public 
avowal  testifies  that  he  has  been  a  sinner,  for  faultiness  of 
practice  and  acquittal  of  conscience  can  never  meet  together. 
Yet  doubtless   whereas  the  literal  words   when   set   against 

"Interno.  some  edd.  read, 'the  Eternal         "  'E.Y .  Let  the  shadow  of  death  stain 
Judge.'  it. 


others  must.     The  tvork  composed  in  sickness.  J) 

each  other  cannot  be  made  to  agree,  they  point  out  some  Leand. 
other  meaning  in  themselves  which  we  are  to  seek  for,  as  if 
with  a  kind  of  utterance  they  said,  Whereas  ye  see  our  super- 
ficial  form    to  be  destructive  to  us,   look  for  what  may   be 
found  within  us  that  is  in  place  and  consistent  with  itself. 

IV.  But  sometimes,  he  who  neglects  to  interpret  the  histo- 
rical form  of  words  according  to  the  letter,  keeps  that  light  of 
truth  concealed  which  is  presented  to  him,  and  in  laboriously 
seeking  to  find  in  them  a  further  interior  meaning,  he  loses 
that  which  he  might  easily  obtain  on  the  outside.  Thus  the 
Saint  saith,  1/ I  have  ivithheld  the  poor  from  their  desire,  Job  3]  y 
or  have  caused  the  eyes  of  the  tcidow  to  fail :  or  have  eaten 
my  morsel  myself  alone,  and  the  fatherless  hath  not  eaten 
thereof;  . .  . .  If  I  have  seen  any  perish  for  want  of  clothing, 
or  any  poor  without  covering ;  if  his  loijis  have  not  blessed 
me,  and  if  he  were  not  warmed  with  the  fleece  of  my  sheep  ; 
where  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  if  these  words  be  violently 
strained  to  an  allegorical  signification,  we  make  void  all  his 
acts  of  mercy.  For  as  the  word  of  God,  by  the  mysteries  which 
it  contains,  exercises  the  understanding  of  the  wise,  so  usually 
by  what  presents  itself  on  the  outside,  it  nurses  the  simple- 
minded.  It  presenteth  in  open  day  that  wherewith  the  little 
ones  may  be  fed ;  it  keepeth  in  secret  that  whereby  men  of  a 
loftier  range  may  be  held  in  suspense  of  admiration.  It  is,  as 
it  were,  a  kind  of  river,  if  I  may  so  liken  it,  which  is  both 
shallow '  and  deep,  wherein  both  the  lamb  may  find  a  footing,  i  planus 
and  the  elephant  float  at  large.  Therefore  as  the  fitness  of 
each  passage  requires,  the  line  of  intei*pretation  is  studiously 
varied  accordingly,  in  that  the  true  sense  of  the  word  of 
God  is  found  out  with  so  much  the  greater  fidelity,  in  pro- 
portion as  it  shifts  its  course  through  the  different  kinds  of 
examples  as  each  case  may  require. 

V.  This  exposition  being  such  as  I  have  described,  1  have 
transmitted  to  your  Blessedness  for  your  inspection,  not 
as  being  due  for  its  worth's  sake,  but  because  I  remember  that  I 
promised  it  on  your  making  tlie  request.  In  which  whatsoever 
your  Holiness  may  discover  that  is  languid  or  unpolished,  let 
it  be  most  readily  excused  in  proportion  as  the  circumstance 
is  known  that  it  was  said  in  a  state  of  sickness;  for  when  the 
body  is  worn  down  with  sickness,  the  mind  being  also  affected, 


10  The  body  an  imperfect  organ  to  the  soul, 

Ep.  to  our  exertions  to  express  ourselves  likewise  become  faint  *'. 
For  many  a  year's  circuit  has  gone  by  since  I  have  been 
afflicted  with  frequent  pains  in  the  bowels,  and  the  powers  of 
my  stomach  being  broken  down,  makes  me  at  all  times  and 
seasons  weakly  ;  and  under  the  influence  of  fevers,  slow,  but 
in  constant  succession,  I  draw  my  breath  with  difficulty;  and 
when  in  the  midst  of  these  sufferings  I  ponder  with  earnest 

Heb.i2.heed,  that  according  to  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  He 
scourge th  every  son  whom  He  receiveth;  the  more  I  am 
weighed  down  by  the  severity  of  present  afflictions,  from  my 
anticipations  for  eternity,  I  gather  strength  to  breathe  with 
so  much  the  better  assurance.  And  perchance  it  was  this 
that  Divine  Providence  designed,  that  I  a  stricken  one,  should 
set  forth  Job  stricken,  and  that  by  these  scourges  I  should 
the  more  perfectly  enter  into  the  feelings  of  one  that  was 
scourged.  Yet  it  will  be  evident  to  all  that  consider  the 
thing  aright,  that  bodily  ailment  hinders  the  pursuits 
wherein  I  labour,  and  that  with  no  slight  power  of  opposi- 
tion "i  in  this  respect,  that,  when  the  powers  of  the  flesh  are  not 
strong  enough  to  discharge  the  office  of  speech,  the  mind 
cannot  adequately  convey  its  meaning.  For  what  is  the 
office  of  the  body  saving  to  be  the  organ  of  the  mind ;  and 

•cantan- though  the  musician  be  ever  so  skilled  in  playing^  he  cannot 
put  his   art  in   practice   unless   outward   aids   accord   with 

2  cantU  himself  for  that  purpose,  for  we  know  that  the  melody  ^  which 
the  hand  of  the  proficient  bids,  is  not  rightly  given  back  by 
instruments  that  are  out  of  order ;  nor  does  the  wind  express 
his  art,  if  the  pipe,  gaping  with  crevices,  gives  a  grating 
sound.  How  much  more  affected  in  quality  then  is  a  thing 
like  this  exposition  of  mine,  wherein  the  grace  of  delivery  is 
so  dissipated  by  the  broken  condition  of  the  instrument,  that 
no  contrivance  of  skill  can  avail  to  recover  it!  But  I  beg  that 
in  going  through  the  statements  of  this  work,  you  would  not 
seek  the  foliage  of  eloquence  therein  :  for  by  the  sacred 
oracles  the  vanity  of  a  barren  wordiness  is  purposely  debarred 
those  that  treat  thereof,  in  that  it  is  forbidden  to  plant  a  grove 
in  the  temple  of  God.     And  doubtless  we  are  all  of  us  aware, 

p  His  letters  add  severe  attacks  of  1  *  Adversitate.'  This  sense  should 
the  gout  to  the  infirmities  mentioned  be  borne  in  mind  when  the  Church 
here,  see  1.  xi.  ep.  32.  &c.  prays  against  '  adversity.' 


cum 


Artificial  refinement  ill  suits  Holy  IVrit. 


11 


that  as  often  as  the  overrank  crop  shews  stalks  that  abound  Leand. 
in  leaves,  the  grains  of  the  ears  are  least  filled  and  swelling. 
And  hence  that  art  of  speaking  itself,  which  is  conveyed  by 
rules  of  worldly  training,  I  have  despised  to   observe;  for 
as  the  tenor  of  this  Epistle  also  will  tell,  I  do  not  escape  the 
collisions  of  metacism"^,  nor  do  1  avoid  the  confusion  of  bar- 
barisms, and  I  slight  the  observing  of  situations  and  arrange- 
ments, and  the  cases  of  prepositions ;  for  I  account  it  very 
far  from  meet  to  submit  the  words  of  the  divine  Oracle  to  the 
rules  of  Donatus  *.     For  neither  are  these  observed  by  any 
of  the  translators  thereof,  in  the  authoritative*  text  of  Holy'  aucto- 
Writ.     Now  as  my  exposition  takes  its  origin  from  thence,  "^'^  ^ 
it  is  plainly  meet  that  this  production,  like  a  kind  of  offspring, 
should  wear  the  likeness  of  its  mother'.     Now  it  is  the  new 
Translation  that  I  comment  on  ;  but  when  a  case  to  be  proved 
requires  it,  1  take  now  the  new  and  now  the  old  for  testimony, 
that  as  the  Apostolic  See,  over  which  I  preside  by  ordinance 
of  God,  uses  both,  the  labours  of  my  undertaking  may  have 
the  support  of  both. 


'  i.  e.  either  the  collision  of  ms,  or 
the  letter  m  at  the  end  of  a  word, 
followed  by  a  vowel  at  the  beginning 
of  another.  Vide  Du  Cange,  in  voc. 

•  Donatus  was  a  great  grammarian 
of  the  fourth  centur) ,  the  preceptor  of 
S.  Jerome,  who  highly  commends  him. 
His  work  on  grammar  was  in  such 
general  use  as  to  be  called  a  '  Donatus,' 
as  we  speak  of  a  '  Virgil,'  or  a  '  Ho- 
race, or  '  an  A  ins  worth.'  Vide  Biogr. 
Univ.  Paris,  1814.  t.  xi. 

*  There  was  a  great  number  of 
Versions  of  both  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  in  the  Latin  tongue,  from 


the  Greek.  Of  these  there  was  one 
generally  received,  and  which  became 
by  prescription  the  Authorized  Version 
in  the  Latin  Church ;  this  long  dis- 
puted precedence  with  S.  Jerome's 
Version,  which  in  the  New  Testament 
was  only  a  correction  of  the  Text,  and 
in  the  Old  a  New  Translation  from  the 
Hebrew:  in  the  course  of  time,  but 
not  without  great  opposition,  this  Ver- 
sion superseded  the  '  Old"  or  '  Italian' 
Translation.  Vide  Du  Pin.  Bibl.  Writ- 
ers, t.  i.  c.  vii.  s.  1  and  2.  t  ii.  c.  iv. 
s.  1. 


NOTE  A. 


S.  Thorn.  Aq.  thus  settles  the  ques- 
tion of  the  hidden  sense  of  Holy  Writ. 
Summ.  Theol.Qu.i.  Art.  10. "  I  answer, 
it  is  to  be  said  that  God  is  the  Author  of 
Holy  Scripture,  Who  has  the  power  not 
only  to  adapt  words  to  convey  a  mean- 
ing, which  even  man  may  do,  but  even 
things  themselves,  and  so  whereas  in 
all  sciences  words  have  a  signification, 
this  particular  science  has  this  property, 
that  the  very  things  which  are  signified 
by  words  do  also  signify  somewhat 
farther.      That  primary  signification. 


therefore,  whereby  words  signify  things, 
relates  to  the  first  sense,  which  is  the 
historical  or  literal  sense,  but  that  sig- 
nification by  which  things  that  are 
signified  by  words  again  signify  other 
things  is  called  the  spiritual  sense,  and 
this  is  based  upon  the  literal  sense,  and 
supposes  it."  And  he  divides  the  hidden 
signification  thus.  "  Now  the  spiritual 
sense  is  divided  into  three  sorts.  For  aii 
the  Apostle  says  in  Heb.  vii.  The  Old 
Law  is  a  figure  of  the  New  Law,  and 
the  New  Law  itself,  a«  Dionysius  gays, 


1-2 


Senses  Historical,  Allegorical,  and  Moral. 


(Eccles.  Hier.  v.  part  1.)  is  a  figure  of 
future   glory.     In  the   New   Law   too 
the  things  that  were  done  in  our  Head 
are  signs  of  the  things  that  we  ought 
to  do  ourselves.     Therefore  in  so  far 
as  the  particulars  of  the  Old  Law  sig- 
nify those  which  are  of  the  New  Law, 
this  is  an  allegorical  sense,  but  in  so 
far  as  all  that  was  done  in  Christ,  or  in 
those  things  which  represent  Christ,  is 
significant  of  what  we  ourselves  ought 
to  do,  it  is  a  moral  sense ;  and  so  far 
as  they  signify  the  things  that  are  in 
eternal  glory,   it  is   an  anagogical  or 
celestial  sense.     And  since  the  literal 
sense  is  that  which  the  Author  intends, 
but  the   Author  of  Holy  Scripture  is 
God,  Who  comprehends  all  things  at 
once  in  His  intelligence,  '  it  is  not  in- 
consistent,' as  St.   Augustine   says  in 
his  Confessions,  b.  xii.  (see  caps.  18, 
19,  20,  24,  31.)  '  that  there  should  be 
more  meanings  than  one,  even  accord- 
ing to  the  literal  sense,  in  one  and  the 
same  letter  of  Holy  Writ.'  "    The  word 
'  anagogical'  is  used  by  Origen  merely 
to  describe  a  mystical  sense  in  general, 
here  it  expresses  a  sense  that  belongs 
to  the  state  and  condition  of  things  in 
heaven.     According  to  the  distinction 
made  by  our  Lord,  iii.  12.  "  If  I  have 
told  you  earthly  things,  and  ye  believe 
not,  how   shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell  you 
of  heavenly  things  ^"  The  earthly  things 
being  the  circumstances  of , the  Christian 
covenant,  as  the  heavenly  things  truths 
concerning  God  and  things  in  heaven. 
The  Rationale  of  this  manifold  sense 
of  Scripture  is  contained  in  this  account 
of  Origen.     *'  Which  things  being  so, 
we  have  to  give  a  sketch  of  the  many 
lines  of  the  interpretation  of  the  Scrip- 
tures as  they  appear  to  us.     And  first 
it  must  be  shewn  how  that  the  scope 
and    aim    of    the    Spirit,    Which    in 
God's  Providence  through  the  Word, 
Which  was  in  the  beginning  with  God, 
enlightened  the  ministers  of  truth,  the 
Prophets  and  Apostles,  was  fiist  and 
foremost  that  which  concerned  the  in- 
effable mysteries  of  things  relating  to 
men;  and  by  men  I  here  mean,  souls 
making  use  of  bodies  ;  that  whosoever 
is  fitted  to  be  instructed,  by  searching 
diligently  and  ap}ilying  hirast-lf  through 
the  words  to  the  inmost  depth  of  the 
sense,  may  be  made  partaker  of  all  the 
determinations   of  His    counsel.      But 
with  reference  to  things  concerning  the 
souls  of  men,  which  cannot  otherwise 
obtain  perfection  than  by  the  richness 
and   wisdom    of  the  truth    concerning 
God,  that  is  nc  essarily  set  in  the  first 


order,  which    concerns  God  and   His 
oniy-l3egotten  Son  ;    what  sort  of  na- 
ture He  is  of,  and  in  what  way  He  is 
the  Son  of  God,  and  what  are  the  causes 
of  His  having  descended  even  so  far  as 
to  human  Flesh,  and  to  have  entirely 
taken   Man  on  Himself;  and  what  is 
His    working  and   toward  whom,   and 
when  it  takes  place,  and  of  necessity, 
as  concerning  kindred  subjects,  about 
the  other  rational  creatures  also,  both 
those  diviner  ones,  and  those  that  are 
fallen  from  their  blessed  estate,  and  the 
causes   of  this   their    fall,   it  behoved 
that  a  place  should  be  assigned  in   the 
words  of  divine  instruction  ;  and  about 
the  difference    of    souls,    and  whence 
these  differences  have  arisen,  and  what 
the  world  is,  and  wherefore  it  came  to 
subsist;  and  further,  whence  that  great 
and  exceeding  wickedness  is  which  is 
spread  over  the  earth,  and  whether  not 
only  on  earth,  but  elsewhere  also,  it  is 
needful   for    us   to    learn.     All    these 
same  and  the  like  being  present  to  the 
Spirit  that  illumines  the  souls  of  the  holy 
s.^rvants  of  the  truth,  it  was  a  secondary 
aim,  for  the  sake  of  those  that  could  not 
undeigo  the  pains  required  for  finding 
out  these  things,  to  hide  the  revelation 
concerning  the  aforementioned  in  terms 
presenting  a  record  giving  an  account 
of  the  works  of  creation  that  are  objects 
of  sense,  and  the  creation  of  men,  and 
those  that  were  begotten  in  succession 
from  those  that  were  first  up  to  a  great 
number,  and  in  other  historical  accounts 
relating  the  deeds  of  the  righteous,  and 
the  sins  of  these  same  done  at  any  time 
forasmuch  as  they  were  but  men,  and 
the  evil  deeds,  and  bad   passions,  and 
selfish  outrages  of  lawless  and  ungodly 
men.     And  in  a  most  marvellous  man- 
ner, by  the  history  of  wars,  and  of  the 
conquerors  and  the  conquered,  certain 
particulars  of  ineffable  things  are  re- 
vealed to  those  that  are  able  to  prove 
these  mysteries;  and  >till  more  wonder- 
fully, through  the   written  delivery  of 
the  law,  the  laws  of  truth  are  proplie- 
tically  delivered  ;  all  being  written  down 
in  sequence  with  a  power  truly  worthy 
of  the  Divine  wisdom.     For  it  was  de- 
signed to  make  the  very  clothing  of  spi- 
ritual things,  I  mean  the  bodily  portion 
of  the  Scriptures,  not  profitless  in  many, 
but  calculated  to  better  the  generality  of 
men,  in  proportion  as  they  comprehend 
it."     Origen    de    Princ.    I.    iv.  c.   14. 
Origen's  theory  is  more  fully  brought 
out  and   exliibitcd  by  his  definition  of 
these  beings  for  whom  H.  S.  was  given 
7a,{    ;^^&;^evaf    i^u;^as    eufiUfftv,    '  souls 


Senses  Historicaf,  Allegorical^  and  Moral, 


IS 


using  bodies,'  which  both  illustrates  the 
relative  importance  of  the  primary  and 
secondary  uses  of  Scripture,  together 
with  their  connection,  and  also  accounts 
for  the  same  in  some  degree.  All 
Scripture  was  held  to  be  written,  '  ab 
intus,'/rom  //i€  inward  mystery ,  and  not 


'  nb  extra,'  with  a  mystical  sense  put 
into  it.  In  every  case  the  historical 
account  is  the  rind  or  coating,  the  mys- 
tical meaning  the  essence  of  Holy 
Scripture,  not  the  former  the  essential 
truth,  containing  a  mystical  sense. 


THE  FIRST  PART. 


THE  PREFACE, 

Wherein  he  in  few  words  goes  through  the  particulars,  which  are  to  be 
laid  open  in  the  course  of  the  entire  work. 

1.  It  is  often  a  question  with  many  persons,  who  should  be 

held  for  the  writer  of  the  Book  of  the  Blessed  Job  ;  and 

some  indeed  conjecture  that  Moses  was  the  author  of  this 

work,  others,  some  one  of  the  Prophets.     For  because  it  is 

Gen. 36,  related  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  that  Jobab  sprung  from  the 

33 

,  ^  ,  Stock  of  Esau,  and  that  he  succeeded  ^Bale  the  son  of  Beor 
E.  V.  upon  the  throne,  they  have  inferred  that  this  Blessed  Job 
lived  long  before  the  times  of  Moses,  evidently  from  ignorance 
of  the  manner  of  Holy  Writ,  which  in  the  earlier  parts  is  wont 
to  touch  slightly  upon  events  that  are  not  to  follow  till  long 
afterwards,  when  the  object  is  to  proceed  without  delay  to  par- 
ticularize other  events  with  greater  exactness.  Whence  it 
happens,  that  in  that  case  likewise  it  is  mentioned  of  Jobab, 
that  he  was  before  there  arose  kings  in  Israel.  Therefore  we 
clearly  see  that  He  never  could  have  lived  before  the  Law, 
who  is  marked  out  as  having  lived  during  the  time  of  the 
Judges  of  Israel;  which  being  little  attended  to  by  some, 
they  suppose  that  Moses  was  the  writer  of  his  acts,  as  placing 
»ut  vide-  him  long  before,  ^  so  that  in  effect  the  self-same  person  who  was 
able^  to  deliver  the  precepts  of  the  Law  for  our  instruction, 
should  be  supposed  also  to  have  commended  to  us  examples 
of  virtue  derived  from  the  life  of  a  man  that  was  a  Gentile. 
But  some,  as  has  been  said,  suppose  some  one  of  the 
Prophets  to  have  been  the  Author  of  this  work,  maintaining 
that  no  man  could  have  knowledge  of  those  words  of  God, 
which  have  such  deep  mystery,  save  he  whose  mind  was 
raised  to  things  above  by  the  spirit  of  Prophecy. 

*  Potuit.      It    is    difficult     to    see  giving    an   example   from    among   the 

whether  in  this  word  and  videlicet  he  Gentiles    a    farther    step,   taken  after 

means  to   imply   an   unfitness  that   it  the  Law  had  been  rejected.     Stick   a 

should  be  so.  §.  4,   might  lead  one  to  view  is  not  derogatory  to  the  book  of 

think  that  he  does,   as  he  makes  the  Job. 


Writers  of  Holy  Scripture  but  the  pens  of  the  Spirit.    15 

/  2.  But  who  was  the  writer,  it  is  very  superfluous  to  Pref. 
enquire ;  since  at  any  rate  the  Holy  Spirit  is  confidently 
believed  to  have  been  the  Author.  He  then  Himself  wrote 
them,  Who  dictated  the  things  that  should  be  written.  He  did 
Himself  write  them  Who  both  was  present  as  the  Inspirer  in 
that  Saint's  work,  and  by  the  mouth  of  the  writer  has  con- 
signed to  us  his  acts  as  patterns  for  our  imitation.  If  we 
'  were  reading  the  words  of  some  great  man  with  his  Epistle 
in  our  hand,  yet  were  to  enquire  by  what  pen  they  were 
written,  doubtless  it  would  be  an  absurdity,  to  know  the 
Author  of  the  Epistle  and  understand  his  meaning,  and  not- 
withstanding to  be  curious  to  know  with  what  sort  of  pen  the 
words  were  marked  upon  the  page.  When  then  we 
understand  the  matter,  and  are  persuaded  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  its  Author,  in  stirring  a  question  about  the  author, 
what  else  do  we  than  in  reading  a  letter  enquire  about  the 
pen  ? 

3.  Yet  we  may  with  greater  probability  suppose  that  the 
same  blessed  Job,  who  bore  the  strife  of  the  spiritual  con- 
flict, did  likewise    relate    the    circumstances   of   his  victory 
when  achieved  ;  nor  should  it  influence  us  that  it  is  said  in 
the  same  book,  '  Job  said,'  or,  '  Job  bore  this  or  that ;'  for  it  is 
the  manner   of  Holy    Scripture   for   the   persons    who    are 
WTiting  so  to  speak  of  themselves  in  it,  as  though  they  were 
speaking  of  others.     Whence  it  is  that  Moses  says,  Now  the  Numb. 
man  31oses  icas  very  meek  above  all  the  men  which  ^'^^^  V^ji^'io 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.     Hence  John  says,  that  Dis-26. 
ciple  whom  Jesus  loved;  hence  Luke  says,  that  two  of  them  \,x\\i%iA 
were  walking   by  the  way,   Cleophas  and  another;   which '^' 
other  indeed,  while  he  was  so  carefully  silent  about  him,  he 
shewed  to  have  been  no  other  than  himself,  as  some  assert. 
The  writers  then  of  Holy  Writ  because  they  are  moved  by 
the  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  do  therein  so  bear  witness  of 
themselves    as   though   of  other   persons.     Thus    the    Holy 
Spirit  by  the   mouth  of  Moses  spake  of  Moses,  the  Holy 
Spirit  speaking   by    John    spoke   of  John.     Paul    too   inti- 
mates that  he  did  not  speak  from  the  dictates   of  his  own 
mind,  by  saying.  Since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  speaking  i  Cor. 
in  me.     It  is  hence  that  the  Angel  who  is  described  to  have  ^^'  **' 
appeared  to  Moses,  is  now  mentioned  as  an  Angel,  now  as 


16      Job  inspired  miglil  speak  of  himself  as  of  another, 

Pref.  the  Lord;  an  Angel  in  truth,  in  respect  of  that  which  was 
subservient  to  the  external  delivery;  and  the  Lord,  because 
He  was  the  Director  within,  Who  supplied  the  effectual 
power  of  speaking.  Therefore  as  the  speaker  is  inwardly 
directed,  by  virtue  of  his  obedience  to  instructions,  he 
receives  the  name  of  Angel,  by   virtue   of  his  inspiration, 

Ps.78,i.^}jc^^  of  Lord.  Hence  David  exclaims,  Give  ear^  0  my 
people^  to  my  law ;  incline  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my 
mouth.  For  it  was  neither  David's  law,  nor  David's  people, 
but  he,  assuming  the  character  of  Him  from  whom  He  spoke, 
speaks  with  His  authority  with  Whose  inspiration  he  was 
filled.  This  we  perceive  to  be  daily  practised  in  tlie  Church, 
if  we  regard  the  thing  attentively ;  for  the  reader  standing 

Exod.3,in  the  midst  of  the  people  exclaims,  /  am  the  God  of 
Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.  Yet 
that  he  is  himself  God,  he  says  not  certainly  with  truth, 
nor  yet  by  saying  what  he  does  is  the  line  of  truth  deviated 
from  ;  for  by  his  voice  he  first  proclaims  the  sovereignty  of 
Him,  Whose  minister  he  is  in  the  office  of  reading.  Therefore 
the  writers  of  Holy  Writ,  because  when  full  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  they  are  lifted  above  their  own  nature,  are  as  it  were 
put  out  of  themselves,  and  in  this  manner  they  deliver  sen- 
timents about  themselves,  as  though  about  other  persons. 
In  this  way  Blessed  Job  also,  being  under  the  influence  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  might  have  written  his  own  acts,  which 
were,  for  that  matter,  gifts  of  inspiration  from  above,  as 
though  they  were  not  his  own  ;  for  in  so  far  as  it  was  a 
human  being,  who  spoke  things  which  were  of  God,  all  that 
he  spake  belonged  to  Another,  and  in  so  far  as  the  Holy 
Spirit  spake  of  what  is  proper  to  a  human  being,  it  was 
Another  that  gave  utterance  to  the  things  that  belonged  to 
him. 
ii.  4.  But  we  should  now  leave  these  points  behind  us,  and 

hasten  foi'ward  to  consider  the  particulars  of  the  Sacred 
History.  Every  man,  even  from  this,  that  he  is  a  man. 
ought  to  understand  the  Author  of  his  being,  to  Whose  will 
he  must  submit  the  more  completely,  in  the  same  proportion 
that  he  reflects  that  of  himself  he  is  nothing;  yet  we,  when 

»  conditi  created '  by  Him,  neglected  to  take  God  into  our  thoughts. 
Precepts  were  had  recourse  to :  precepts  likewise  we  have 


JoVs  example  given  io  shame  those  in  the  Laiv^  and  us.   17 

refused  to  obey.  Examples  are  added  ;  these  ver}'  examples  Pref. 
too  we  decline  to  follow,  which  we  see  were  set  forth  to  us  y 
by  those  under  the  Law;  for  because  God  did  openly  address 
Himself  to  particular  persons  who  were  placed  under  the 
Law,  we  regard  ourselves  as  unconcerned  with  those  par- 
ticular precepts,  to  whom  they  were  not  specially  addressed; 
wherefore  to^  confound  our  shamelcssness,  a  Gentile  is 
handed  down  to  be  our  exam])le,  that  as  he  that  is  set  under 
the  Law  disdains  to  pay  obedience  to  the  Law,  he  may  at 
least  be  roused  by  comparing  himself  with  him,  who  without 
the  Law  lived  as  by  law.  The  Law  then  was  given  to  one 
gone  astray ;  but  when  even  under  the  Law  he  still  strays, 
he  has  the  testimony  of  those  brought  before  him,  who  are 
without  the  pale  of  the  Law,  that  forasmuch  as  we  would  not 
keep  to  the  order  of  our  creation',  we  might  be  admonished  V'ondi- 
of  our  duty  by  precepts,  and  because  we  scorned  lo  obey  the 
precepts,  we  might  be  shamed  by  examples,  not,  as  we  have 
said,  the  examples  of  those  who  had  the  restraint  of  the  Law, 
but  of  those  who  had  no  law  to  restrain  them  from  sin. 

5.  The  Divine  Providence  has  compassed  us  about,  and 
cut  off'  all  excuse ;  all  opening  to  man's  equivocating  arts 
is  every  way  closed  ;  a  Gentile,  one  without  the  Law,  is 
brought  forward  to  confound  the  iniquity  of  those  that  are 
under  the  Law ;  which  is  well  and  summarily  shewn  by  the 
Prophet,  when  He  says.  Be  thou  ashamed,  0  Zidon,  saith  thel^^\.^i, 
sea ;  for  in  Sidon  we  have  a  figure  of  the  stedfastness  of 
those  settled  upon  the  foundation  of  the  Law,  and  in  the  sea 
of  the  life  of  the  Gentiles;  accordingly.  Be  thou  ashamed,  O 
Zidon,  saith  the  sea,  because  the  life  of  those  under  the 
Law  is  convicted  by  the  life  of  Gentiles,  and  the  con- 
duct of  men  in  a  state  of  religion  is  put  to  confusion  by  the 
conduct  of  those  living  in  the  world,  so  long  as  the  first  do 
not,  even  under  vows,  observe  what  they  hear  enjoined  in 
precepts:   the  latter  by  their  manner  of  life  keep  those  ways 

•*  "  Yet    though    assaulted    on    all  clared  concerning  a  resurrection.     Yet 

sides  by  a  flood  like  this,  when  there  we,  who  hear  both  Prophets  and  Apo- 

raged  around  him  a  fearful  storm,  &c.  sties  and  Evangelists  speaking  to    us, 

he  remained  himself  unmoved,  seated  and   have   innumerable    examples    set 

aa  it  were  in  the  midst  of  this  surge,  before  us,  and  have  been  taught  the 

as  in  a  perfect  calm,  and  no  murmur  tidings  of  a  Resurrection,  yet  harbour 

escaped  nim:  aod  this  before  the  gift  discontent,  &c."     S.  Chrys.  on  Ep.  to 

of  grace,  before  that  aught  was  de-  Phil.  Horn.  viii.  Moral,  Tr.  p.  97. 


18       Virtues  of  the  Saints  brought  out  by  tribulation. 

Pref.  whereunto  they  are  not  in  any  wise  bound  by  legal  enact- 
ments. Now  for  the  authority  this  book  has  received,  we 
have  the  weighty  testimony  of  the  sacred  page  itself,  where 
the  Prophet  Ezekiel  says,  that  those  men  alone  should  have 
deliverance  granted  to  them*,  viz.  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job; 
nor  is  it  without  propriety,  that  in  the  midst  of  Hebrew 
lives,  that  of  a  righteous  Gentile  is  placed  in  that  authority 
which  commands  the  reverence  of  men ;  because  as  our 
Redeemer  came  to  redeem  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  so  He 
was  willing  to  be  prophesied  of  by  the  lips  both  of  Jews  and 

1  utrum-  Gentiles,  that  He  might  be  named  by  either  people  S  Who  was 
puLm"  ^^  ^  future  time  to  suffer  for  both. 

6.  This  man  then,  with  all  the  surpassing  powers  whereby 
he  was  sustained,  was  known  to  his  own  conscience  and  to 
God;  but  had  he  not  been  stricken  he  would  never  have  been 
the  least  known  to  us.  For  his  virtue  had  its  exercise  indeed 
even  in  peaceful  times,  but  it  was  by  strokes  that  the  report  of 
his  virtue  was  stirred  up  to  fragrance :  and  he,  who  in  repose 
kept  within  himself  all  that  he  was,  when  disturbed  did  scatter 
abroad  the  odour  of  his  fortitude,  for  all  to  know.  For 
as  unguents,  unless  they  be  stirred,  are  never  smelt  far 
off,  and  as  aromatic  scents  spread  not  their  fragrance 
except  they  be  burned,  so  the  Saints  in  their  tribulations  make 
known  all  the  sweetness  that  they  have  of  their  virtues. 
Mat.i7,  Whence  it  is  well  said  in  the  Gospel,  If  ye  have  faith  as  a 
grain  of  mustard  seed,  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain. 
Remove  hence  to  yonder  place,  and  it  shall  remove.  For 
unless  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  be  bruised,  the  extent  of 
its    virtue  is   never   acknowledged.       For   without   bruising 

2  lene     it  is  insipid  ^,  but  if  it  is  bruised  it  becomes   hot,  and   it 

gives  out  all  those  pungent  properties  that  were  concealed 
in  it.  Thus  every  good  man,  so  long  as  he  is  not  smitten,  is 
^  lenis  regarded  as  insipid  ^,  and  of  slight  account.  But  if  ever  the 
grinding  of  persecution  crush  him,  instantly  he  gives  forth 
all  the  warmth  of  his  savour,  and  all  that  before  appeared  to 
be  weak  or  contemptible,  is  turned  into  godly  fervour,  and 
that  which  in  peaceful  times  he  had  been  glad  to  keep  from 
view  within  his  own  bosom,  he  is  driven  by  the  force  of  tribula- 
tions to  make  known;  so  that  the  Prophet  says  with  justice, 

c  i.e.  had  they  been  among  the  Jews.     Ez.  14,  14. 


Job* s  previous  character,     Satan'' s  assault  completes  it.    19 

Yet  the  Lord  hath  commanded  His  loringkindness  in  the  Pref. 
duy  time,  and  in  the  night  He  hath  declared  it;  for   the  Ps.42,9. 
lovingkindness  of  the  Lord  is  commanded  in  the  day  time, 
because  the  season  of  rest  is  perceived  by  the  sense  of  it*, 'cogno- 
but  *  in   the  night  it  is  declared,'  because  the  gift  which  is 
received  in  tranquilUty  is  made  manifest  in  tribulation. 

7.  But  we  ought  to  search  out  more  particulaily  why  so     iii. 
many  strokes  fell  to  the  lot  of  him  who  maintained  without 
blame  such  strict  guard  of  the  several  virtues  :  for  he  had 
humility,  as  he  himself  even  testifies.  If  I  did  despise  to  he^^^  31, 
judged  in  the  cause  of  my  manservant  or  of  my  maidservant, 
when  they  contended  with  me.     He  shewed  hospitality,  as 
himself  describes,  when  he  says;   77/6?  stranger  did  not  lodge  Joh  31, 
in  the  street:   but  I  opened  my  doors  to  the  traveller.     He 
maintained  a   vigorous    exercise   of  discipline,  as  his  own 
words  shew  ;    The  princes  refrained  talking,  and  laid  their  Job  29, 
Jingers  on  their  mouth.      With  that  vigour  he  yet  retained 
mildness,  according  to  his  own    confession,  where  he  says, 
/  sat  chief,  and  duelt  as  a  king  in  the  army,  yet  as  one  that  Job  29, 
comforteth    the   mourners.     In    almsdeeds    he   cherished    a 
bountiful    spirit,  as   he   himself  intimates  by   saying,   //"   7  Job  31, 
have  eaten  my  morsel  myself  alone,  and  the  fatherless  hath   ' ' 
not  eaten  thereof     Whereas  then  he  performed  all  the  pre- 
cepts of  the  several  virtues,  one  thing  was  wanting  to  him, 
viz.    that    when    stricken    even   he    should   learn   to  render 
thanks :  it  was  known  that  he  knew  how  to  serve  God  when 
surroimded  by  blessings,  but  it  was  meet  that  a  most  search- 
ing severity  should  put  it  to  the  test,  whether  even  under 
the  lash   he    would  yet    remain    constant   to   his   God,   for 
chastisement  is  the  test,  whether  when  let  to  rest  a  man 
really  loves.     Him  the  adversary  sought  indeed  to  obtain 
that  he  might  prove  deficient*  in  godliness,  but  obtained  that^defice- 
he  might  prove  a  proficient^  therein.     The  Lord  in  loving- J^'j.^^_ 
kindness  permitted  that  to  be  done,  which  the  devil  in  hisceret 
wickedness  required ;  for  when  the  enemy  had  got  leave  to 
have  him  with  the  purpose  of  destroying  him,  by  his  tempta- 
tions he  effected  that  his  merits  were  augmented.     For  it  is 
written.    In   all   this   Job   sinned  not   with    his   lips.     Yet  Job  l, 

22. 

^   Ps.  42, 8.     The   Vulgate  haa  "  In  die  mandavit  Dominus  misericorJiam 
snaro  et  nocte  canticum  ejus." 

c  2 


20         Job  not  to  he  lightly  charged  with  sinful  speech. 

Pbef.  doubtless  there  are  certain  words  of  his  rejoinders,  which 
sound  harshly  to  readers  of  little  experience,  for  the  sayings 
of  the  Saints  these  are  unable  to  understand  in  the  pious 
sense  in  which  they  are  spoken,  and  because  they  are  un- 
skilled to  make  their  own  the  feelings  of  the  afflicted  Saint, 
therefore  it  is  impossible  for  thera  to  interpret  aright  the 
expressions  of  grief,  for  it  is  a  sympathy  that  lowers  itself  to 
,  his  state  of  suffering,  that  knows  how  to  estimate  aright  the 
meaning  of  the  sufferer. 

8.  And  so  they  conclude  that  blessed  Job  was  a  defaulter 
in  his  speech,  without  sufficiently  considering,  that  if  they 
convict  the  blessed  Job's  replies,  they  at  the  same  time 
bear  witness  that  God's  sentence  concerning  him  was  untrue. 

Job  1^8.  For  the  Lord  saith  to  the  devil.  Hast  thou  considered  My 
servant  Job^  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a 
perfect  and  an   upiight  man,   one  that  feareth  God,  and 

V.  9. 10. escheweth  evil?  To  Whom  the  devil  presently  replies.  Doth 
Job  fear  God  for  nought  ?  Hast  not  Thou  made  an  hedge 
about  him,  and  about  his  house?  But  put  forth  Thine  hand 
now,  and  touch  him,  and  see  if  he  hath^  not  blessed  Thee  to 
Thy  face.  The  enemy  then  put  forth  his  strength  upon  the 
blessed  Job,  but  in  doing  this  he  entered  the  lists  against 
God,  and  in  this  way  blessed  Job  became  the  intermediate 
subject  of  the  contest  between  God  and  the  devil.  Whoever 
then  maintains  that  the  holy  man,  when  in  the  midst  of  the 
strokes,  committed  sin  by  the  words  which  he  uttered, 
what  else  doth  he  than  reproach  God,  Who  had  pledged 

1  propo-  Himself*  for  him,  with  having  been  the  loser.?  For  the  same 
God  was  pleased  to  take  upon  Himself  the  cause  of  the 
Saint  under  his  trial.  Who  both  extolled  him  before  his 
afflictions,  and  on  thus  extolling  allowed  him  to  undergo  the 
trial  of  those  scourges.  If  then  Job  is  said  to  have  gone 
wrong,  his  advocate  is  made  out  to  have  been  foiled :  though 
the  gifts  vouchsafed  him  alone  testify,  that  he  did  not  trans- 
gress at  all :  for  who  does  not  know  that  what  is  due  to 
faults  is  not  reward  but  chastisement.?  He  then  who  merited 
^  to  receive  back  double  what  he  had  lost,  proved  by  this 
compensation  that  there  was  nought  of  evil,  but  only  virtue 

•  See  his  comment  on  tne  passage,  book  ii.  e.  10.  where  he  takes  *  to  Thy  face  ^ 
as  meaning  '  because  of  Thy  favour.' 


Job's  praise  of  himself  not  uncalled  for.  21 

in  all  that  he  said,  and  to  this  declaiation  too  it  is  further  Pref. 


added,    that    he    is   himself   the    intercessor    in    behalf    of 
his  guilty  friends.     For  one  that  is  involved  in  great  sins, 
can    never,    when    burthened    with     his     own,    discharge 
another's  score;  he  then  is  shewn  to  be  clear  in  his  own  case, 
who  could  obtain  for  others  their  clearance  from  guilt.     If 
however  it  be  displeasing  to  any,   that  he  is    himself  the 
relator  of  his  own  goodness,  let  them  know  that  in  the  midst     "^ 
of  so  many  losses  of  his  substance,  amidst  so  many  wounds 
of  the  body,  amidst  so  many  deaths  of  his  children,  with  the 
friends,  who  had  come  to  comfort  him,  breaking  out  into 
reproaches,  he  was  urged  to  despair  of  his  life,  and  he  whom 
such   repeated    calamities    had    sorely   smitten,  was  further 
stricken  by  the  insulting  language  of  the   reproachers;  for 
these,  that  had  come  to  comfort  him,  while  they  upbraided 
him  with  his  unrighteousness  as  it  seemed  to  them,  were  driving 
him    quite  to   give  up   all  hope  of  himself;    whereas   then 
he  recalls  his  good  deeds  to  mind,  it  is  not  that  he  lifts  ; 
himself  up  in  self  applause,  but  sets  anew  *  his  mind  to  hope,  'jrefor- 
when  as  it  were  sunk  down  amid  those  reproaches  and  those 
strokes.     For  the   mind  is  smitten  with  a  heavy  weapon  of 
despair,  when  it  is  both  hard  pressed  with  the  tribulations  of 
wrath  from  above,  and  galled  by  the  reproaches  of  men's 
tongues  without.     Blessed  Job  therefore,  thus  pierced  with 
the  darts  of  so  many  woes,  when  he  now  feared  to  be  brought 
down   by  their   reproaches,  recalled  himself  to   a  state   of 
confidence,  by  the  assurance  derived  from  his  past  life.     He 
then  did  not  thereby  fall  into  the  sin  of  presumption,  because 
he  resisted  an  inward   imjjulse  to  despair   by  the  outward 
expression  of  his  own  eulogies,  to   the   end  that  while  he 
recounted  the  good  things  which  he  had  done  he  might  be 
saved  from  despairing  of  the  good  that  he  had  sought. 

9.  But  now  let  us  follow  out  the  actual  course  of  his  trial.  !▼"• 
Tlie  enemy,  full  of  rage,  and  striving  to  conquer  the  firm 
breast  of  that  holy  man,  set  up  against  him  the  engines  of 
temptation,  spoiled  his  substance,  slew  his  children,  smote 
his  body,  instigated  his  wife,  and  while  he  brought  his  friends 
to  console  him,  urged  them  to  the  harshest  upbraiding.  One 
friend  too,  who  was  more  cruel  in  his  reproaches,  he  reserved 
with  the  last  and  bitterest  invective,  that  by  the  frequency 


22  Various  assaults  on  Job  wiiJiout  and  within. 

Pref.  of  the  stroke,  if  not  otherwise,  the  heart  might  be  reached 
by  that  which  was  ever  being  repeated  with  a  fresh  wound. 
For  because  he  saw  that  he  had  power  in  the  world,  he 
thought  to  move  him  by  the  loss  of  his  substance,  and 
finding  him  unshaken,  he  smote  him  by  the  death  of  his 
children.  But  seeing  that  from  that  wound  which  made  him 
childless  he  even  gained  strength  to  the  greater  magnifying 
of  God's  praise,  he  asked  leave  to  smite  the  health  of  his 
/  body.      Seeing  moreover  that  by  the  pain   of  the  body  he 

^     1  passio- could  not  compass  the  affecting'  of  the  mind,  he  instigated 

^^^  his  wife,  for  he  saw  that  the  city  which  he  desired  to  storm 
was  too  strong;  therefore  by  bringing  upon  him  so  many 
external  plagues,  he  led  an  army  as  it  were  on  the  outside 
against  him,  but,  when  he  kindled  the  feelings  of  his  wife  into 
words  of  mischievous  persuasion,  it  was  as  though  he  corrupted 
the  hearts  of  the  citizens  within.  For  so  from  external  wars 
we  are  instructed  how  to  think  of  those  within.  For  an 
enraged  enemy,  that  holds  a  city  encircled  by  his  surrounding 
armies,  upon  perceiving  its  fortifications  to  remain  unshaken, 

«argu-  betakes  himself  to  other  methods-  of  attack,  with  this  object, 
that  he  may  corrupt  the  hearts  of  some  of  the  citizens  also 
within ;  so  that,  when  he  has  led  on  the  assailants  from  without, 
he  may  also  have  cooperators  within,  and  that  when  the  heat 
of  the  battle  increases  outside,  the  city  being  left  without 
succour  by  the  treachery  of  those  within,  of  whose  faith  no 
doubt  is  felt,  may  become  his  prey. 

10.  And  thus  a  battering  ram  having  been  planted  on  the 
outside,  as  it  were,  he  smote  the  walls  of  this  city  with  blows 
many  in  number,  as  the  several  times  that  he  brought  tidings 
of  calamities;  while  on  the  inside,  he,  as  it  were,  corrupted  the 
hearts  of  the  citizens,  when  he  set  himself  to  undermine  the 
strong  bulwarks  of  this  city  by  the  persuasions  of  the  wife. 
In  this  manner  he  brou^^ht  to  bear,  from  without,  an  hostile 
assault,  from  within,  baneful  counsels,  that  he  might  capture 
the  city  the  sooner,  in  proportion  as  he  troubled  it  both 
from  within  and  from  without.  But  because  there  are  times 
when  words  are  more  poignant  than  wounds,  he  armed 
himself,  as  we  have  said,  with  the  tongues  of  his  friends. 
Those  indeed  that  were  of  graver  years,  might  perchance  give 
the  less  pain  by  their  wojds.     The  younger  is  made  to  take 


His  way  of  meeting  them.     His  Friends  not  wicked.     23 

their  place,  to  deal  that  holy  bosom  a  wound  so  much  the  Pref. 
sharper,  the  meaner  was  the  arm  that  he  impelled  to  strike 
blows  against  it.  Behold  the  enemy  mad  to  strike  down 
his  indomitable  strength,  how  many  the  darts  of  temptation 
that  he  devised,  see,  what  numberless  beleaguering  engines 
he  set  about  him !  See  how  many  weapons  of  assault  he  let 
fly,  but  in  all  his  mind  continued  undaunted,  the  city 
stood  unshaken. 

11.  It  is  the  aim  of  enemies,  when  they  come  up  face  to     v. 
face,  to  send  off  some  in  secret,  who  may  be  so  much  the 
more  free  to  strike  a  blow  in  the  flank  of  the  hostile  force,  in 
proportion  as  he  that  is  fighting  is  more  eagerly  intent  upon 
the  enemy  advancing  in  front.     Job,  therefore,  being  caught 

in  the  warfare  of  this  conflict,  received  the  losses  which 
befel  him  like  foes  in  his  front;  he  took  the  words  of  his 
comforters  like  enemies  on  his  flank,  and  in  all  turning 
round  the  shield  of  his  stedfastness,  he  stood  defended  at 
all  points,  and  ever  on  the  watch,  parried  on  all  sides  the 
swords  directed  against  him.  By  his  silence  he  marks 
his  unconcern  for  the  loss  of  his  substance ;  the  flesh,  dead 
in  his  children,  he  bewails  with  composure ;  the  flesh  in  his 
own  person  stricken,  he  endures  with  fortitude ;  the  flesh  in 
his  wife  suggesting  mischievous  persuasions,  he  instructeth 
with  wisdom.  In  addition  to  all  this  his  friends  start  forth 
into  the  bitterness  of  upbraiding,  and  coming  to  appease  his 
grief,  increase  its  force.  Thus  all  the  engines  of  temptation 
are  turned  by  this  holy  man  to  the  augmentation  of  his 
virtues;  for  by  the  wounds  his  patience  is  tried,  and  by  the 
words  his  wisdom  is  exercised.  Every  where  he  meets  the 
enemy  with  an  undaunted  mien,  for  the  scourges  he  over- 
came by  resolution,  and  the  words  by  reasoning.  But  his 
fric^nds,  who  came  indeed  to  administer  consolation,  but  who 
deviate  from  their  pui'pose  even  to  using  terms  of  reproach, 
must  be  thought  to  have  erred  more  from  ignorance  than 
wickedness.  For  we  must  never  imagine  that  so  great  a 
man  had  evil-minded  friends,  but,  while  they  fail  to  discern  I 
the  cause  of  his  scourges,  they  slide  into  a  fault.  I 

12.  For  of  scourges  there  are  sundry  kinds;  for  there  is 
the  scourge  whereby  the  sinner  is  stricken  thai  he  may 
suffer  punishment  without  withdrawal*,  another  whereby  he*  retrac- 

tatione 


24  Various  ends/or  which  troubles  are  sent. 

Pref.  is   smitten,  that  he   may  be    corrected;    another  wherewith 
sometimes  a  man  is  smitten,  not  for  the  correction  of  past 
misdeeds,  but  for  the  prevention  of  future ;  another  which  is 
very  often  inflicted,  whereby  neither  a  past  transgression  is 
corrected,  nor  a  future  one  prevented,  but  which  has  this  end, 
that   when    unexpected    deliverance  follows  the  stroke,  the 
power   of  the    Deliverer    being   known    may  be   the    more 
ardently  beloved,  and    that   while    the    innocent   person  is 
bruised  by  the  blow,  his  patience  may  serve  to  increase  the 
gain  of  his  merits;  for  sometimes  the  sinner  is  stricken  that 
he   may  be  punished,  without  withdrawal,  as  it  is  said  to 
Jerem.  Judaea  when  doomed  to  destruction,  /  have  wounded  thee 
'     '  with  the  wound  of  an  enemy ^  with  the  chastisement  of  a 
ver.  15.  cruel  one;  and  again.  Why  criest  thou  for  thine  affliction 9 
thy  sorrow  is  incurable.      Sometimes  the  sinner  is  stricken 
that  he  may  be  amended,  as  it  is  said  to  one  in  the  Gospel, 
John  5,  Behold,  thou  art  made  whole,  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing 
come  unto  thee ;  for  the  words  of  his  deliverer  indicate  that 
it  was  past  sins  which  were  exacting  all  the  violence  of  the 
pain  which  he  had  endured.     In  some  cases  the  person  is 
smitten,  not  for  the  obliteration  of  a  past  offence,  but  for  the 
avoidance  of  a  future  one,  which  the  Apostle  Paul  openly 
2  Cor.    testifies  of  himself,  saying.  And  lest  I  shall  be  exalted  above 
'        measure  through  the  abundance  of  the  revelations,  there  was 
given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan  to 
buffet  me.     For  he  who  says,  not '  that  he  was  exalted,'  but, 
*  lest  he  should  be  exalted,'  clearly  shews  that  by  that  stroke 
it  is  held  in  check  that  it  may  not  take  place,  and  that  it  is  not 
a  fault  that  has  taken  place  now  clearing  away.     But  some- 
times   the    person    is   stricken  neither  for  past  not  yet  for 
future  transgression,  but  that  the  alone  mightiness  of  the 
Divine  power  may  be  set  forth  in  the  cutting  short  of  the 
striking;   whence  when  it  was  said  unto  the  Lord  concerning 
John  9,  the  blind  man  in  the  Gospel,  Who  did  sin,  this  man,  or  his 
2-  ^'      parents,  that  he  was  born  blind?  the  Lord  answered,  saying, 
Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,  nor  his  parents,  but  that  the 
works  of  Qod  should  be  made  manifest  in  him:   in  which 
manifestation  what  else  is  done,  saving  that  by  that  scourge 
the  excellence  of  his  merits  is  increased,  and  while  there 
is  no  past  transgression  wiped  away,  the  patience  may  en- 


\ 


The  Saints  shine  as  stars  in  their  several  virtues.         25 

gender  a    mighty  fortitude.       For   which  reason    the    same  Pref. 
blessed  Job  is  first  extolled  by  the  voice  of  the  Judge,  and 
is  then  given  up  into  the  hand  of  the  Tempter,  and  whereas 
God,  in  recompensing  him  after  the  scourge,  speaks  to  him 
in  a  more  familiar  manner,  it  is  plainly  shewn  how  much 
greater  he  became  by  the  stroke ;  so  then  the  friends  of  blessed 
Job,  while  they  were  unable  to  distinguish  the  different  kinds 
of  strokes,  believed  him  to  be  stricken  for  his  guiltiness,  and      / 
while  they  endeavoured  to  vindicate  the  justice  of  God  in  smit- 
ing him,  they  were  driven  to  reprove  blessed  Job  of  unrigh- 
teousness; not  knowing  in  fact  that  for  this  reason  he  was 
stricken,  viz.  that  the   stroke  might  redound  to  the  praise 
of  God's  glory,  and  not  that  by  those  strokes  he  might  be 
brought  to  amend  the  evil,  which  he  had  never  done  ;  and 
hence  they  are  the  sooner  restored  to  pardon,  because  they 
sinned  from  ignorance  rather  than  from  an  evil  disposition  ; 
and  their  pride  the  Divine  Justice  puts  down  with   so   much 
the  stronger  hand,  as  It  refuses  to  renew  them  in  Its  favour, 
saving  by  means   of  him  whom   they  had   despised.     For  a 
high  mind  is  effectually  struck  down  when  it  is  bowed  beneath 
the  very  person  over  whom  it  has  exalted  itself. 

13.  But  amongst  these  marvellous  works  of  Divine  Provi-     vi. 
dence  it  yields  us  satisfaction  to  mark, how,  for  the  enlightening 
the  night  of  this  present  life,  each  star  in  its  turn  appears  in 
the  face  of  Heaven,  until  that  towards  the  end  of  the  night 
the  Redeemer  of  mankind  ariseth  like  the  true  Morning  Star ; 
for  the  space  of  night,  being  enlightened  by  the  stars  as  they 
set  and  rise  in  their  courses,  is  passed  with  the  heavens  in 
exceeding  beauty.     Thus  in  order  that  the  ray  of  stars,  dart- 
ing forth  at  its  appointed  time,  and  changed  in  succession, 
might  reach  the  darkness  of  our  night,  Abel  comes  to  shew 
us  innocency;  Enoch,  to  teach  purity  of  practice;  Noah,  to 
win  admittance   for  lessons  of  endurance  in  hope  and  in 
work ;  Abraham,  to  manifest  obedience  ;  Isaac,  to  shew  an 
example    of  chastity   in   wedded  life ;  Jacob,  to  introduce 
patience  in  labour ;  Joseph,  for  the  repaying  evil  with  the 
favour  of  a  good  turn  ;  Moses,  for  the  shewing  forth  of  mild- 
ness; Joshua,  to  form   us  to  confidence  against  difficulties; 
Job,  to  shew  patience  amid  afflictions.     Lo  what  lustrous  stars 
see  we  in  the  sky,  that  the  foot  of  practice  may  never  stumble 


26  The  Church  sometimes  typified  ivith  her  Head. 

PREF.  as  we  walk  this  our  night's  journey;  since  for  so  many  Saints 
as  God's  Providence  set  forth  to  man's  cognizance,  He,  as  it 
were,  sent  just  so  many  stars  into  the  sky^,  over  the  darkness 
of  erring  man,  till  the  true  Morning  Star  should  rise.  Who, 
being  the  herald  to  us  of  the  eternal  morning,  should 
outshine  the  other  stars  by  the  radiance  of  His  Divinity. 

14.  And  all  the  elect,  whilst  by  their  holy  living  serving 
as  His  forerunners,  gave  promise  of  Him  by  prophesying 
both  in  deeds  and  words.  For  there  never  was  any  Saint  who 
did  not  appear  as  His  herald  in  figure;  for  it  was  meet  that 
all  should  display  that  goodness  in  themselves  whereby  both 
all  became  good,  and  which  they  knew  to  be  for  the  good  of 
all,  and  therefore  that  blessing  ought  also  to  be  promised 
without  pause  which  was  vouchsafed  both  to   be  received 

1  sine     without  price ^  and  to  be  kept  without  end,  that  all  generations 
sBstima-  jQigiit  together  tell  what  the  end  of  all  should  bring  to  light, 

in  the  redemption  of  which  all  were  partakers.  And  there- 
fore it  behoved  that  blessed  Job  also,  who  uttered  those  high 
mysteries  of  His  Incarnation,  should  by  his  life  be  a  sign  of 
Him,  Whom  by  voice  he  proclaimed,  and  by  all  that  he  under- 
went should  shew  forth  what  were   to  be    His    sufferings ; 

2  sacra-  and  should  so  much  the  more  truly  foretel  the  mysteries'  of 

His  Passion,  as  he  prophesied  then  not  merely  with  his  lips 
but   also    by    suffering.      But   because    our   Redeemer   has 
shewn  Himself  to  be  one  with  the  Holy  Church,  which  He 
Eph.  4,  has  taken  to  Himself;  for  of  Him  it  is  said,  Who  is  the  Head 
Jf  •        of  us  all ;    and  of  the  Church  it  is  written,   the  Body  of 
24.        Christ,    Which  is  the  Church;  whosoever  in  his  own  person 
betokens  Him,  at  one  time  designates  Him  in  respect  of  the 
Head,  at  another  of  the  Body,  so  as  to  have  not  only  the 
voice  of  the  Head,  but  also  of  the   Body;   and  hence   the 
Prophet  Isaiah,  in  giving  utterance  to  the  words  of  the  same 
Isa.  61,  Lord,  says.  He  hath  put  upon  me  a  mitre  like  unto  a  Bride- 
y ',       groom,  and  hath  decked  me  with  jewels  as  a  Bride.     There- 
fore   because   the    same    person    that   in    the    Head  is  the 
Bridegroom,  is  in  the  Body  the  Bride,  it  follows  that  when,  at 
times,  any  thing  is  spoken  from  the  Head,  there  must  be  a 
turning  down  by  degrees  or  even  at  once  to  tlie  voice  of  the 
Body,  and  again  when  any  thing  is  said  that  is  of  the  Body, 
d  Several  Mss.  read  ccelofor  ccelum,  which  gives  the  sense  rather  *  in  the  sky.' 


Joh^s  Wife  type  of  ill  livers^  his  friends  of  heretics.     27 

there  must  be  presently  a  rising  to  the  voice  of  the  Head.  Prrf. 
Accordingly  the  blessed  Job  conveys  a  type  of  the  Redeemer, 
Who  is  to  come  together  with  His  own  Body  :  and  his  wife 
who  bids  him  curse,  marks  the  life  of  the  carnal,  who  having 
place  within  the  Holy  Church  with  unamended  morals,  as  by 
their  faith  they  are  brought  near  to  the  godly,  press  them  the 
more  sorely  by  their  lives,  since  while  they  cannot  be  shunned 
as  being  of  the  faithful,  they  are  endured  by  the  faithful  as 
the  greater  harm  by  how  much  nearer  home^  i  dete- 

15.  But  his  friends,  who,  while  actinj?  as  his  counsellors,'""^^ 

...  .  quanto 

at  the  same  time  inveigh  against  him,  are  an  express  image  etinte- 
of  heretics,  who  under  shew  of  giving  counsel,  are  busied  in  ""^ 
leading  astray ;  and  hence  they  address  the  blessed  Job  as 
though  in  behalf  of  the  Lord,  but  yet  the  Lord  does  not  com- 
mend them,  that  is,  because  all  heretics,  while  they  try  to 
defend,  only  offend  God.     Whence  they  are  plainly  told,  and 
that  by  the  same  holy  man;  I  desire  to  reason  with  God;  first  ^^^'^^j 
shewing  that  ye  are  forgers  of  lies,  ye  are  followers  of  corrupt 
doctrines.     According  to   which  it   appears    that   these   by 
their  eiToneous  notions  stood  a  type  of  heretics,  whom  the 
holy  man  charges  with  adhering  to  a  creed-  of  corrupt  doc-'^cultui 
trines.     But  every  heretic,  in  this,  that  he  is  seen  to  defend 
God,  is  a  gainsayer  of  His  truth,  according  to  the  testimony 
of  the  Psalmist,   who    says.   That    Thou    mi gh test  still  ///^Ps.  8,2. 
enemy  and  the  defender^,  for  he  is  an  encnuj  and  defender, ^^-  '^• 
who  so  preaches  God  as  thereby  to  be  fighting  against  Him. 

10.  Now  that  blessed  Job  maintains  the  semblance  of  ^'H- 
the  Redeemer  to  come,  his  very  name  is  a  proof.  For  Job 
is,  if  interpreted,  *  grieving;'  by  which  same  grief  we  have  set 
forth,  either  our  Mediator's  Passion,  or  the  travails  of  Holy 
Church,  which  is  harassed  by  the  manifold  toils  of  this  present 
life.  Moreover  by  the  word  which  stands  for  their  name  his 
friends  mark  out  the  quality  of  their  conduct.  For  Eliphas 
is  called  in  the  Latin  tongue,  *  contempt  of  the  Lord,'  and 
what  else  do  heretics,  than  in  entertaining  false  notions  of 
God  contemn  Him  by  their  proud  conceits.  Baldad  is  by 
interpretation  '  Oldness  alone.'  And  well  are  all  heretics 
styled,  '  Oldness  alone,'  in  the  things  which  they  speak 
concerning  God,  forasmuch  as  it  is  with  no  right  purpose  but 
with  a  longing  for  temporal  honour  that  they  desire  to  appear 


28  Heretics  reconciled  through  the  Church, 

Prep-  as  preachers.  For  they  are  moved  to  speak  not  by  the  zeal 
of  the  new  man,  but  by  the  evil  principles  of  the  old  life. 
*  Sophar'  too  is  rendered  in  the  Latin  language  '  dissipation 
of  the  prospect,'  or,  '  one  dissipating  the  prospect.'  For  the 
minds  of  the  faithful  lift  themselves  to  the  contemplation  of 
things  above  ;  but  as  the  words  of  heretics  aim  to  prevent  them 
in  their  contemplation  of  right  objects,  they  do  their  best  to 
'  dissipate  the  prospect.'     Thus  in  the  three  names  of  Job's 

'  casus  friends,  we  have  set  forth  three  cases  ^  of  the  ruin  of  heretical 
minds.  For  unless  they  held  God  in  contempt,  they  would 
never  entertain  false  notions  concerning  Him;  and  unless 
they  drew  along  with  them  a  heart  of  oldness,  they  would 
never  err  in  the  understanding  of  the  new  life;  and  unless 

2  or,  of   they  marred  the  contemplations  of  good  things^,  the  Supreme 
men       judgments   would   never    condemn    them  with    so    strict    a 

scrutiny  for  the  guiltiness  of  their  words.  By  holding  God 
in  contempt,  then,  they  keep  themselves  in  oldness,  and  by 
being  kept  in  oldness,  they  injure  the  contemplation  of  right 

3  See      objects^  by  their  erring  discourses. 

viii.        17.  Now  because   it    sometimes    happens    that    heretics 
being  penetrated  with  the  bountiful  streams  of  Divine  grace 
return  to  the  unity  of  Holy  Church,  this  is  well  represented 
in  the  very  reconcilement  of  his  friends.     Yet  blessed  Job  is 
bidden  to  intercede  for  them,  because  the  sacrifices  of  heretics 
can  never  be  acceptable  to  God,  unless  they  be  offered  in 
their  behalf  by  the  hands  of  the  universal  Church,  that  by  her 
merits  they  may  obtain  the  recovery  of  salvation,  whom  they 
did  strike  before  by  assailing  her  with  the  darts  of  their  words; 
and  hence  seven  sacrifices  are  recorded  to  have  been  offered 
for  them,  for  whereas  in  confessing  they  receive  the  Spirit  of 
sevenfold  grace  %  they  do  as  it    were   obtain    expiation   by 
Rev.  1    seven  offerings.     It  is  hence  that  in  the  Apocalypse  of  John 
^^'        the  whole  Church  is  represented  by  the  number  of  seven 
Prov.  9,  Churches.     Hence  it  is  said  of  wisdom  by  Solomon,  Wisdoin 
^'  hath  builded  her  house;  she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  pillars. 

And  thus  by  the  very  number  of  the  sacrifices  those  reconciled 
heretics  set  forth  what  they  were  before,  in  that  these  are 
not  united  to  the  perfection  of  sevenfold  grace,  except  by 
returning. 

*  Alluding  to  the  imposition  of  hands  at  their  reception. 


Elihu  a  believer,  but  proud.  29 

18.  But   they   are  well    described    as  ha\nng   offered  for  Prff. 
themselves  bulls  and  rams.     For  in  the  bull  is  figured  the 
neck  of  pride,  and  in  the  ram,  the  leading  of  the  flocks  that 
follow.     AMiat  then  is  it  to  slaughter  bulls  and  rams  in  their 
behalf,  but  to  put  an  end  to  their  proud  leading,  so  that  they 

may  think  humbly  of  themselves,  and  not  seduce  the  hearts 
of  the  innocent  to  follow  after  them.  For  they  had  started 
away  from  the  unity  of  the  Church  with  a  swelling  neck,  and 
were  drawing  after  them  the  weak  folk  like  flocks  following 
behind.  Therefore  let  them  come  to  blessed  Job;  i.  e.  re- 
turn to  the  Church;  and  present  bulls  and  rams  to  be 
slaughtered  for  a  sevenfold  sacrifice,  and  that  they  may  be 
united  to  the  universal  Church,  let  them  with  the  inter]Dosi- 
tion  of  humility  kill  all  the  swelling  humour  wherewith 
their  proud  leadership  savoured  them. 

19.  >tow   by    Hcliu,    who    speaks    indeed    with    a   right    ix. 
sense,  yet  runs  down  *  into  foolish  words  of  pride,  is  set  forth  i  deri- 
a  representation  of  every  proud  person.     For  there  are  many^^^^"" 
within  the  pale  of  Holy  Church,  that  are  too  proud  to  put 
forward  in  a  right  manner  the  right  sentiments,  which  they 
profess,  and  hence  he  is  both   rebuked  with  the  words  of 
God's  upbraiding,  and  yet  no  sacrifices  offered  in  his  behalf,  in 

that  he  is  a  believer  indeed,  yet  high-minded.     By  the  truth 
of  his  belief  he  is  within,  but  by  the  obstacle  which  his  pride 
presents  he  is  not  acceptable.  Him  ^  therefore  rebuke  reproves, '  Read 
but   sacrifice   does  not  restore    him,    because  he  is  indeed     "^^^ 

'  pfgOj  as 

in  the  faith  that  he  ought  to  be  in,  yet  the  Supreme  Justice,  f' *  ed. 
charging  him  with  things  over  and  above  what  need  to  be, 
keeps  him  at  a  distance.  Hence  Heliu  is  well  rendered  in 
the  Latin  tongue,  '  That  my  God,'  or,  '  God,  the  Lord.'  For 
proud  men  within  Holy  Church,  though  they  keep  away  from 
God  by  living  proudly,  yet  acknowledge  Him  by  believing 
truly.  For  what  is  it  for  him  to  say  by  his  name,  '  That  my 
God,'  but  to  shew  forth  Him  Whom  he  believed  with  a  public 
avowal }  Or  what  is  it  to  say,  *  God  the  Lord,'  but  to  accept 
Him  both  as  God  by  virtue  of  His  Divinity,  and  to  hold  Him 
for  Man  by  His  Incaniation? 

20.  It  is  well  that  after  the  losses  of  his  substance,  after     x. 
the  death  of  his  children,  after  the  tortures  of  his  wounds,  after 
the  strife  and  conflict  of  words,  he  is  raised  up  again  with  a 


30  Double  reward  of  the  Church  like  that  of  Job. 

Pref.  double     reward,    clearly,     in     that    Holy     Church,     even 
while   yet   in   this   present  life,  receives   a  double   recom- 
pense for   the   toils   she  undergoes,  since   having  taken  in 
the  Gentiles  to  the  full,  at  the  end  of  the  world  she  con- 
verts to  herself  the  souls  of  the  Jews  likewise.     For  it  is 
^°'^-     on  this  account  written.    Until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be 
26.        co7ne  in.     And  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.     And  she  will 
afterwards  receive  a  double  recompense,  in  that,  when  the 
toils  of  this  present  time  are  over,  she  rises  not  alone  to  the 
joy  of  souls,  but  to  a  blessed  estate  of  bodies.     And  hence 
Isa.  61,  the  Prophet  rightly  says,  therefore  in  their  land  they  shall 
possess   the   double.      For   '  in   the    Land    of    the    Living' 
the    Saints    possess    the    double,    because    we   know   they 
are    gladdened  with    blessedness  both   of  mind  and   body. 
Hence  John  in  the  Apocalypse,  because  it  was  before  the  re- 
surrection  of  bodies  that  he  saw   the  souls  of  the  Saints 
crying,   beheld  how  that   they  had   given  them  a  stole   to 
l^ev.  6,  each,  saying.    And  white  robes  were  given,  one^  to  every 
»sirigulse  o;ze   of  them,  and  it  was  said,  that  they  should  rest  yet 
for  a  little  season  until  their  fellow-servants  also  and  their 
brethren,  that  should  be  killed  as  they  were,  should  be  ful- 
filled.    For  before  the  Resurrection  they  are  said  to  have 
received  a  stole  to  each,  for  that  as  yet  they  are  gifted  with 
blessedness  of  mind  alone ;  and  therefore  they  will  receive 
each  one  two,  whenever,  together  with  the  perfect  bliss  of 
souls,   they    shall  be  clothed  also    with  incorruptibility  of 
bodies. 

2L  Now  it  is  very  properly  that  the  affliction  indeed  of 
blessed  Job  is  told,  but  the  length  of  time  that  he  was  under 
the  affliction  is  kept  back,  for  we  see  the  tribulation  of  Holy 
Church  in  this  life,  but  know  nothing  for  how  long  she  is 
here  to  undergo  bruising  and  delay ;  and  hence  it  is  spoken 
Acts  1,  by  the  mouth  of  Truth,  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times 
'^'  or  the  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  His  own  power. 
Herein  then,  that  the  suffering  of  blessed  Job  is  told  us,  we  are 
taught  what  we  are  made  acquainted  withal  by  experience;  and 
herein,  that  the  length  of  time  that  he  continued  in  his  suffer- 
ing is  withheld,  we  are  taught  what  it  is  we  must  remain 
ignorant  of. 

We  have  drawn  out  these  words  of  preface  to  some  length, 


Historical  sense  the  root  of  the  allegorical.  31 

that  by  briefly  running  over  it  we  might  in  a  manner  give  a  Pref- 
view  of  the  whole.  Now  then  that  by  long  discoursing  we  have 
been  brought  to  the  commencement  of  our  discourse,  we  must 
first  settle  the  root  of  the  historical  meaning,  that  we  may 
afterwards  let  our  minds  take  their  fill  of  the  fruits  of  the 
allegorical  senses. 


BOOK  I. 

The  first  verses  of  the  first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job  are  explained  first 
historically,  then  in  an  allegorical,  and  lastly  in  a  moral  sense. 

Job  1 , 1 .  1 .  There  was  a  man  in  the  land  of  Uz,  whose  name  was  Job, 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  are  told  where  the  holy  man  dwelt, 
that  the  meritoriousness  of  his  virtue  might  be  expressed ; 
for  who  knows  not  that  Uz  is  a  land  of  the  Gentiles  ?  and 
the  Gentile  world  came  under  the  dominion  of  wickedness, 
in  the  same  proportion  that  its  eyes  were  shut  to  the  know- 
ledge of  its  Creator.  Let  us  be  told  then  where  he  dwelt, 
that  this  circumstance  may  be  reckoned  to  his  praise,  that 
he  was  good  among  bad  men;  for  it  is  no  very  great  praise 
to  be  good  in  company  with  the  good,  but  to  be  good  with 
the  bad ;  for  as  it  is  a  greater  offence  not  to  be  good  among 
good  men,  so  it  is  immeasurably  high  testimony  for  any 
one  to  have  shewn  himself  good  even  among  the  wicked. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  same  blessed  Job   bears   witness   to 

Job  30,  himself,  saying,  /  am  a  brother  to  dragons^  and  a  com- 
panion to  owls.  Hence  it  was  that  Peter  extolled  Lot  with 
high    commendation,  because   he    found    him   to   be    good 

2  Pet.  2,  among  a  reprobate  people  ;  saying,  And  delivered  just  Lot, 
*      vexed  with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked;  for  he  was 

hoYu\g.  righteous  in  seeing  and  hearing^,  dwelling  with  them  who 
vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day  with  their  unlawful 
deeds.  Now  he  evidently  could  not  have  been  vexed  unless 
he  had  both  heard  and  witnessed  the  wicked  deeds  of  his 
neighbours,  and  yet  he  is  called  righteous  both  in  seeing  and 
in  hearing,  because  their  wicked  lives  affected  the  ears  and 
eyes  of  the  Saint  not  with  a  pleasant  sensation,  but  with  the 
pain  of  a  blow.     Hence  it  is  that  Paul  says  to  his  disciples, 

Phil.  2,  In  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation,  among 
whom  ye  shine  like  lights  in  the  world.     Hence  it  is  said  to 

Rev.  2,  the  Angel  of  the  Church  of  Pergamos,  /  know  thy  works, 


Simplicity  needs  Uprightness  and  Zeal.  33 

and  where  thou  dwellest.  ei^en  where  Satan's  seat  is;  and  Book 
thou  holdcst  fast  My  name,  and  hast  not  denied  My  faith.  — '■ — 


Hence  the  Holy  Church  is  cominended  by  the  voice  of  the 
Spouse,  where  He  says  to  her  iu  the  Song  of  love,  As  the  Cant.  2, 
lily  among  the  thorns,  so  is  my  love  among  the  daughters.  ^' 
Well  then  is  the  blessed  Job  described,  (by  the  mention 
of  a  gentile  land,)  as  having  dwelt  among  the  wicked,  that 
according  to  the  testimony  bonie  by  the  Spouse,  he  might 
be  shewn  to  have  grown  up  a  lily  among  thorns,  for  which 
reason  it  is  well  subjoined  immediately  after,  A?id  that  7nan 
was  simple^  and  upjright,  'soVulg. 

2.  For   there    are   some   in    such   wise  simple  as  not  to     ii. 
know  what  uprightness  is,  but  these  walk  wide  of  the  inno- 
cence of  real  simplicity,  in  proportion  as  they  are  far  from 
mounting  up  to  the  virtue  of  uprightness;  for  while   they 
know   not   how   to  take  heed   to   their   steps   by    following 
uprightness,  they  can  never  remain  innocent  by  walking  in 
simplicity.     Hence  it  is  that  Paul  warns  his  disciples,  and 
says,    But  yet  I  would  have  you  wise  unto  that  which  is  B.om. 
good,  and  simple  concerning  evil.      Hence  again  he  says,  ^^'  ^^ 
Brethren,   be   not  children   in    understanding,   howheit  in  i  Cor. 
malice  he  ye  children.    Hence  Truth  enjoins  Her  disciples  by  ^^'  '^^' 
Her  own  lips,  saying.  Be  ye  wise  as  serpents  and  haniiless  Mat.io, 
flw  doves.      For  in  giving   them   admonition,  He  needfully  ^^' 
joined  the  two  together,  so  that  both  the  simplicity  of  the 
dove  might  be   instructed  by  the  craftiness  of  the  serpent, 
and  again  the  craftiness  of  the  serpent  might  be   attempered 
by  the  simplicity  of  the  dove.     Hence  it  is  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  manifested  His  presence  to  mankind,  not  in  the 
form  of  a  dove  only,  but  also  in  the  form  of  fire.     For  by  the 
dove  simplicity  is  indicated,  and  by  fire,  zeal.     Therefore 
He  is  manifested  in  a  dove,  and  in  fire,  because  all  they, 
who  are  full  of  Him,  yield  themselves  to  the   mildness  of 
simplicity,  in  such  sort  as  yet  to  kindle  with  a  zeal  of  u})rijj:ht- 
ness  against  the  ofTonces  of  sinners.     It  follows,  And  one 
that  feared  God  and  eschewed  evil. 

8.  To  fear  God  is  never  to  pass  over  any  good  thing,  that     iii. 
ought  to  be  done.     Whence  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  ^^^^^^OeccI.T 
fears  Qod^  neglects  nothing*;  but  because  there  are  some, '^• 

(Vulg.) 
■  E.  V.  He  that  feareth  Godshatl  com^  forth  ofthetn  all.  I  J* 

D 


34  Job^s  person  described  before  his  combat. 

Job    who  practise  some  good  actions^  yet  in   such  wise  that  they 

— l_l_  are  by  no  means  withheld  from  certain  evil  practices;  after 

he  is  said   to    have   been   one  that  feared  God,  it  is  still 

rightly  reported  of  him  that  he  also  eschewed  evil;  for  it  is 

Ps.  37,  written,  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good;   for  indeed  those 

good  actions  are  not  acceptable  to  God,  which  are  stained 

in  His  sight  by  the  admixture  of  evil  deeds;  and  hence  it  is 

Eccl.  9,  said  by  Solomon,   He  ivho  offendeth  in  one  point,  spoileth 

many,  good  deeds^.     Hence    James   bears  witness,  saying, 

James    Pqj-  lohosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in 

I'cor.    one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all.     Hence  Paul  saith,  A  little 

^>  ^'      leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump.     So  then  that  it  might  be 

shewn  us  how  spotless  the  blessed  Job  stood  forth  in  his 

good  actions,  it  is  wisely  done  that  we  have  it  pointed  out 

how  far  he  was  removed  from  evil  deeds. 

4.  But  it  is  the  custom  of  narrators,  when  a  wrestling 
match''  is  woven  into  the  story,  first  to  describe  the  limbs  of 
the  combatants,  how  broad  and  strong  the  chest,  how  sound, 
how  full  their  muscles  swelled,  how  the  belly  below  neither 
clogged  by  its  weight,  nor  weakened  by  its  shrunken  size,  that 
when  they  have  first  shewn  the  limbs  to  be  fit  for  the  combat, 
they  may  then  at  length  describe  their  bold  and  mighty  strokes. 
Thus  because  our  athlete  was  about  to  combat  the  devil,  the 
writer  of  the  sacred  story,  recounting  as  it  were  before  the 
exhibition  in  the  arena  the  spiritual  merits  in  this  athlete, 
'mentis  describes  the  members  of  the  souP,  saying.  And  that  man  was 
perfect  and  upright,  and  one  that  feared  God,  and  eschewed 
evil;  that  when  the  powerful  setting  of  the  limbs  is  known, 
from  this  very  strength  we  may  already  prognosticate  also 
the  victory  to  follow.  Next  comes, 
iv-  5.  Ver.  2.  And  there  were  horn  unto  him  seven  sons  and  three 
daughters.  The  heart  of  the  parent  is  often  enticed  into 
avarice  by  a  numerous  offspring,  for  he  is  the  more  inflamed 
with  ambition  for  laying  up  an  inheritance,  in  proportion  as 
he  abounds  in  the  number  to  inherit  it.  In  order  then  that  it 
might  be  shewn  what  holiness  of  mind  blessed  Job  possessed, 
he  is  both  called  righteous,  and  is  said  to  have  been  the 

''  Qui  in  uno  offenderit,  multa  bona         ^    Compare   St.   Chrys.   Horn.  i.  on 
p*irdtt.    Eng.  Vers.   But  one  sinner  de-     Stat.  Tr.  p.  18. 
stroyeth  much  good. 


Job  shewn  to  hare  valued  loealth  hut  Utile,  35 

father  of  a  numerous  offspring.     And  the  same  man  in  the   Book 

beginning  of  his  book  is  declared  devout  in  offering  sacrifices, '— 

and  besides  he  afterwards  with  his  own  mouth  records 
himself  as  ready  in  giving  alms.  Let  us  then  consider  with 
what  resolution  he  shewed  himself  to  be  endowed,  whom  no 
feelings  of  affection  for  so  many  heirs  could  ever  dispose  to 
be  greedy  of  an  inheritance  for  them.     It  proceeds  ; 

5.  Ver.  3.  His  substance  also  icas  seven  thousand  sheep,  and    '^i- 
three  thousand  camels,  and  Jive  hundred  yoke  of  oxen,  and 
five  hundred  she  asses,  and  a  very  great  household.    We  know 
that  the  greater  the  loss,  the  greater  the  grief  with  which  it 
affects  the  mind ;  to  shew  then  how  great  was  his  virtue,  we 
are  told  that  it  was  very  much,  that  he  lost  with  patience; 
for  never  without  pain  do  we  part  with  aught,  saving  that 
which  we  hold  without  fondness ;  therefore  while  the  gi'eat- 
ness   of  his    substance    is    described,  yet  soon  after  he   is 
reported  as  resigned  to  the  loss  of  it ;  thus  parting  with  it 
without  regret,  it  is  plain  that  he  had  kept  it  without  regard. 
It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  in  the  first  instance  the  riches  of 
his  heart  are  described,  and   afterwards   the   wealth  of  the 
body  ;  for  an  abundant  store  is  wont  to  make  the  mind  so 
much  the  more  slack  to  the  fear  of  God,  as  it  obliges  it  to  be 
occupied  with   a   diversity   of  cares ;   for   inasmuch  as  it  is 
dissipated  by  a  multitude  of  objects,  it  is  prevented  standing 
fast  in  that  which  is  within.     Which  was   pointed  out   by 
Truth  Itself  in  setting  forth  the  Parable  of  the  sower;     HeM&tt. 
also  that  received  seed  among  the  thorns,  is  he  that  heareth  ^^'  ^^* 
the  word,  and  the  care  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness 
qf  riches,  choke  the  word,  and  he  becometh  unfruitful.     See 
how  the  blessed  Job  is  both  said  to  have  great  possessions, 
and  a  little  after  is  related  to  be  devoutly  assiduous  in  the 
divine  sacrifices. 

7.  Let  us  then  consider  how  great  was  the  holiness  of  that 
man  who  though  thus  busied  disengaged  himself  for  such 
assiduous  attendance  upon  God.  Nor  had  the  power  of  that 
precept  as  yet  shone  out,  which  bids  us  leave  all  things ; 
yet  blessed  Job  already  kept  the  intent  of  it  in  his  heart,  in 
that  he  surely  had  left  his  substance  in  intention,  which  he 
kept  without  taking  delight  in  it. 

8.  So  that  this  man  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  ?7ien  qf 

o2 


36  Strictness  of  Job.     Feasting  apt  to  bring  sin. 

Job    the  East.     Who  does  not  know  that  the  men  of  the  East  are 
'       very  wealthy,  accordingly  '  he  was  the  greatest  of  all  the 


men  of  the  East;'  as  though  it  were  expressly  said  that  he 
was  even  richer  than  the  rich. 

9.  Ver.  4.  And  his  sons  icent and  feastedin  their  houses,  every 
one  his  day ;  and  sent  and  called  for  their  three  sisters  to  eat 

"^11-  and  to  drink  ivith  them.  Greater  wealth  usually  becomes 
the  cause  of  greater  discord  between  brethren.  O,  inesti- 
mable praise  of  a  father's  training!  the  father  is  both 
declared  rich,  and  the  sons  at  peace  together,  and  while  the 
wealth  to  be  divided  among  them  was  there,  an  undivided 
affection  yet  filled  the  hearts  of  all. 

10.  Ver.  5.  And  it  was  so,  when  the  days  of  their  feasting 
were  gone  about,  that  Job  sent,  and  sanctified  them,  and  rose 
up  early  in  the  morning,  and  offered  burnt-offerings  accord- 

viii.  ing  to  the  number  of  them  all.  When  it  is  said,  sent  and 
sanctified  them,  it  is  openly  shewn  what  strictness  he  prac- 
tised with  those  when  present,  for  whom  when  absent  he  was 
not  wanting  in  concern.  But  this  circumstance  demands  our 
discreet  consideration,  that,  when  the  days  of  feasting  were 
past,  he  has  recourse  to  the  purification  of  a  holocaust  for 
each  day  severally;  for  the  holy  man  knew  that  there  can 
scarcely  be  feasting  without  offence ;  he  knew  that  the 
revelry  of  feasts  must  be  cleansed  away  by  much  purification 
of  sacrifices,  and  whatever  stains  the  sons  had  contracted  in 
their  own  persons  at  their  feasts,  the  father  wiped  out  by  the 
offering  of  a  sacrifice ;  for  there  are  certain  evils  which  it  is 
either  scarcely  possible,  or  it  may  be  said  wholly  impossible, 
to  banish  from  feasting.  Thus  almost  always  voluptuousness 
is  the  accompaniment  of  entertainments ;  for  when  the  body 
is  relaxed  in  the  delight  of  refreshment,  the  heart  yields 
itself  to  the  admission  of  an  empty  joy.  Whence  it  is 
Exod.  written.  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up 
'   *     to  play. 

11.  Almost  always  talkativeness  is  an  attendant  upon 
feasts,  and  when  the  belly  is  replenished,  the  tongue  is 
unloosed;  whence  the  rich  man  in  hell  is  well  described  as 

Lukeie, thirsting  for  water,  in   these  words.  Father  Abraham,  have 

^'*-         mercy  on  me,  and  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of 

his  finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue,  for  I  am  tormented 


Tacit  indications.     Mysteries  of  the  numher  seven.      37 

in  tliisjiame.     He  is  first  said  to  have  fared  sumptuously  every  Book 
day,  and  then  it  is  recorded  that  he  craved  a  drop  of  water  — '- — 


upon  his  tongue;  for  as  we  have  said,  because  at  feasts 
talking  is  wont  to  give  itself  full  vent,  the  fault  is  indicated 
by  the  punishment,  in  that  he,  whom  the  Truth  had  said 
fared  sumptiiously  every  day,  was  described  as  most  on  fire 
in  his  tongue.  They  that  attune  the  harmony  of  stringed  in- 
struments arrange  it  with  such  exceeding  skill,  that  frequently, 
when  one  chord  is  touched,  a  very  difiercnt  one,  placed  with 
many  lying  between,  is  made  to  vibrate,  and  when  this  last 
is  sounded,  the  former,  which  is  attempered  to  the  same  tune^,  ^  cantu 
rings  without  the  others  being  struck.  According  to  which 
Holy  Scripture  very  often  so  deals  with  the  several  virtues, 
and  vices  too,  that  while  by  express  mention  it  conveys  one 
thing,  it  does  by  its  silence  bring  before  us  another,  for  nothing 
is  recorded  against  the  rich  man  relating  to  talkativeness, 
but  while  the  punishment  is  described  as  in  the  tongue,  we 
are  shewn,  which  among  others  was  his  greatest  offence  in 
his  feasting. 

12.  But  whereas  the  seven  brethren  are  described  as 
making  feasts,  each  one  in  his  day,  and  whereas,  when  the 
days  of  feasting  were  over,  Job  is  related  to  have  offered 
seven  sacrifices  ;  the  account  ])laiuly  indicates  that,  in  offer- 
ing a  sacrifice  on  the  eighth  day,  the  blessed  Job  was  cele- 
brating the  mystery  of  the  Resurrection.  For  the  day,  which 
is  now  named  '  The  Lord's  day,'  is  the  third  from  the  death  of 
our  Redeemer,  but  in  the  order  of  creation  it  is  the  eighth, 
which  is  also  the  first  in  the  work  of  creation  '^,  but  because, 
on  coming  round  again,  it  follows  the  seventh,  it  is  properly 
reckoned  the  eighth  ;  whereas  then  it  is  said  that  he  offered 
sacrifices  on  the  eighth  day,  it  is  shewn  that  he  was  full  of 
the  Spirit  of  sevenfold  grace,  and  served  the  Lord  for  the 
hope  of  resurrection.  Hence  that  Psalm  is  entitled  *  for  the 
Octave,'  wherein  joy  for  the  resurrection  is  proclaimed,  but, 

d  viz.  Ps.  vi.  the  title  of  which  in  of  the  number  six,  and  in  the  seventh 

the  LXX  is  translated  w<rb  T?,- iyJ^JJf,  may  be  at   rest   among   the   hosts   of 

&c.  see  S.  Greg.  Nyss.  in  l^salm:  *%p.  blessed  spirits;  so  that  in  the  eighth, 

E.  t.  i.  p.  301.  B.  and  other  fathers;  renewed  by  resurrection,  enriched  by 

also  S.  Greg.  Rom.  Lib.  Sacram.  Op.  the  remission  of  the  Jubileo,  ye  may 

t.  ii.  p    14.  in  the  Henediction  fi)r  the  arrive    at  the  joys  that  are  to  abide 

Octave  of  the  Nativity,  "  That  ye  may  without  end." 
no  live  in  this  world  in  the  perfectuess 


38  Job  feared  sins  of  thought  in  his  children. 

Job    that  the  sons  of  blessed  Job  had  been  forearmed  by  the 

— i— ^  discipline  of  such  perfect  training,  that  they  neither  offended 

by  word  nor  deed  at  their  feasts,  is  plainly  shewn,  in  that  it  is 

subjoined, 

ix.         13.  For  Job  said,  It  may  be  thai  my  sons  have  sinned,  and 

cursed''  God  in  their  hearts.     For  he  had  taught  them  to  be 

perfect  in  deed  and  in  word,  about  whose  thought  alone  the 

father  entertained  fears.      Now   that  we   should  not  judge 

rashly  of  other  men's  hearts,  we  perceive  in  the  words  of  this 

Saint,  who  does  not  say,  '  that  they  have  cursed  God  in  their 

hearts,'  but  it  may  be  that  they  have  cursed   God  in  their 

i  Cor. 4,  hearts.     Whence  it  is  well  said  by  Paul,  Therefore  judge 

nothing  before  the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,  Who  both  will 

bring  to  light  the  hidden  tilings  of  darkness,  and  will  make 

manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts;  for  whoever  deviates 

from  the  right  line  in  thought,  sins   in  darkness ;  we  then 

should  be  the  more  backward  boldly  to  condemn  the  hearts  of 

others,  in  proportion  as  we  know  that  we  cannot  by  our  own 

sight  throw  light  into  the  darkness  of  another  man's  thought. 

1  al.  this  But  here^  we  should  consider  with  discrimination,  with  what 

spotuit  severity  that  father  was  likely^  to  correct  the  deeds  of  his 

children,  who  set  himself  with  so  much  solicitude  to  purify 

their  hearts.     What  do  those  rulers  of  the   Faithful  say  to 

this,  who  know  nothing  even  of  the  very  overt  acts  of  their 

disciples }    What  are  they  thinking  of  in  excuse  for  themselves, 

who  mind  not  in  those  committed  to  them  even  the  wounds 

of  evil  actions  }     But  that  his  perseverance  too  in  this  holy 

work  may  be  demonstrated,  it  is  well  added, 

X.  14.   Thus  did  Job  all  the  days;  for  it  is  written.  But  he 

Mat. 24,  ^j^^^  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved.      In 

the  sacrifice  then,  the  holiness  of  his  conduct  is  shewn,  and 

in  the  entire  number  of  the  days  of  the  sacrifice,  perseverance 

in  that  holy  conduct.  These  particulars  we  have  gone  through 

cursorily  in  following  out  the  history.     Now   the  order  of 

interpretation  requires  that  beginning  afresh  we  should  at  this 

point  open  the  secrets  of  its  allegories. 

xi.         15.  Ver.  1.   There  was  a  man  in  the  land  of  Uz,  whose 

«   r>:it.  blessed,  as  the  Hebrew,  which     cursed,  see- on  c.  i.  8.  §.  31.  though  he 
however  he  treats  simply  as  meaning     deals  otherwise  with  ii.  11. 


Qriefand  Counsel^  Mercy  ^V  Upright nessj'oreshew  Christ.  39 

name  was  Job.     We  believe  from  the  history  that  these  things  Rook 

took  place,  but  let  us  here  turn  to  see  in  what  way  they  were '■ — 

allegorically  fulfilled;  for,  as  we  have  said,  Job  is  interpreted, 
*  a  mourner,'  and  Uz  '  a  counsellor.'     Whom  else  then  does 
the  blessed  Job  express  by  his  name,  saving  Him,  of  Whom 
the  Prophet  speaks,  saying,  Siirelt/  He  hath  borne  our  griefs?  Isa.  63, 
He  dwells  in  the  land  of   Vz.,  in  that  He  rules  the  hearts  of  ' 
a  people  of  wise  counsels;  for  Paul  saith,  that  Christ  is  ///el  Cor.  l, 
Wisdom  of  God  and  the  Power  of  God;   and   this   same 
Wisdom  Herself  by  the  lips  of  Solomon  declareth,  /  Wisdom  Prov.  8, 
dwell  with  Prudence,  and  ^am  in  the  midst  of  witty  inventions. 
So  Job  is  an  inhabitant  of  the  land  of  Uz,  because  Wisdom, 
Which  underwent  the  pain  of  the  Passion  in  our  behalf,  has 
made  an  habitation  for  Herself  in  those   hearts,  which  are 
instinct  with  the  counsels  of  life. 

1().  And  that  man  was  perfect  and  upright.     In  upright-   xii. 
ness,  justice  is  signified,  and  in  simplicity,  mercy  ^     Wein<°^  , 
following  out  the  straight  line  of  justice,  generally  leave  mercy  ness,' 
behind;  and  in  aiming  to  observe  mercy,  we  deviate  ft'oi" sue^tudo) 
the  straight  line  of  justice.     Yet  the  Incarnate  Lord  main- 
tained simplicity  with  uprightness;  for  He  neither  in  shewing 
mercy  parted  with  the  strictness  of  justice,  nor  again  in  the 
exactitude  of  justice  did  He  part  with  the  virtue  of  merciful- 
ness.     Hence   when    certain    persons,    having   brought    an 
adulteress  before  Him,  would  have  tempted  Him,  in  order 
that  He  might  step  into  the  fault  either  of  unmercifulness  or 
of  injustice,  He  answered  both   alternatives  by  saying, //e  John  8, 
that  is  without  sin  among  you,  let  him  first  cast  a  stone  at^' 
her.     He  that  is  without  sin  among  you,  gives  us  the  sim- 
plicity of  mercy,  let  him  first  cast  a  stone  at  her,  gives  us 
the  jealous  sense  of  justice.     Whence  too  the  Prophet  saith 
to  liim,  And  in    Thy  Majesty  ride  prosperously,  because  ofps.  46, 
truthf  and  meekness,  and  righteousness.     For  in  executing'*' 
truth,  He  kept  mercy  united  with  justice,  so  that  He  neither 
lost  the  jealous  sense  of  rectitude  in  the  prejxinderance  of 
mercy's  scale,  nor  again  unsettled  the  preponderance  of  mercy 
by  that  jealousy  of  rectitude. 

17.   And  one  that  /eared  God,  mid  rsrhewed  mil.      It  is    xiii. 

'  Inter  sum,  E.  y .  find  out  knowledge  of . 


40         How  Job's  seven  sons  typify  the  twelve  Apostles. 

Job  written  of  HiiHj  and  the  Spirit  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord^  hath 
— I--- filled  Him;  for  the  Incarnate  Lord  shewed  forth  in  His  own 
Isa.  11,  Person  whatsoever  He  hath  inspired  us  withal '',  that  what  He 
delivered  by  precept,  He  might  recommend  by  example. 
So  then  according  to  our  human  nature  our  Redeemer  feared 
God,  for  to  redeem  proud  man,  He  took  for  man's  sake  an 
humble  mind.  And  His  acting  likewise  is  fitly  designated 
hereby,  in  that  the  blessed  Job  is  said  to  eschew  evil.  For 
He  Himself  eschewed  evil,  not  evil  which  He  came  in  con- 
tact with  in  the  doing,  but  which  upon  meeting  with  it.  He 
rejected ;  for  He  forsook  the  old  life  after  man's  method, 
which  He  found  at  His  birth,  and  He  stamped  upon  the 
character  of  His  followers  that  new  life,  which  He  brought 
down  with  Him. 
xiv.  18.  Ver.  2.  And  there  were  horn  to  him  seven  sons  and  three 
daughters.  What  is  conveyed  to  us  in  the  number  of  seven, 
saving  the  sum  of  perfection  ?  for  to  say  nothing  of  the  argu- 
ments of  human  reasoning  which  maintain  that  it  is  therefore 
perfect,  because  it  consists  of  the  first  even  number,  and  of 
the  first  uneven;  of  the  first  that  is  capable  of  division,  and 
of  the  first  which  is  incapable  of  it;  w^e  know  most  certainly 
that  holy  Scripture  is  wont  to  put  the  number  seven  for 
perfection,  whence  also  it  tells  us  that  on  the  seventh  day 
the  Lord  rested  from  His  works;  and  it  is  hence  too  that  the 
seventh  day  was  given  to  man  for  a  rest;  i.  e.  for  a  '  Sabbath.' 
Hence  it  is  that  the  year  of  jubilee,  wherein  we  have  a  full 
rest  set  forth,  is  accomplished  in  seven  weeks,  being  com- 
pleted by  the  addition  of  the  unit  of  our  uniting  together. 

19.  Thus  the?-e  were  horn  to  him  seven  sons;  namely,  the 
Apostles  manfully  issuing  forth  to  preach ;  who  in  putting  in 
practice  the  precepts  of  perfection,  as  it  were  maintained  in 
their  manner  of  life  the  courage  of  the  superior  sex.  For 
hence  it  is  that  twelve  of  them  were  chosen,  who  should  be 
replenished  witli  the  perfection  of  the  sevenfold  grace  of  the 
Spirit.  As  from  the  number  seven  we  rise  to  twelve;  for 
seven  multiplied  in  its  component  parts  is  extended  to 
twelve ;  for  whether  four  be  taken  by  three  or  three  by  four, 

«    The    Vulgate    reads,    *   replebit'    feaY  of  the  LonV^ 
'■  shall  fill,'  the  Eng.  "Vers.  "  andshall        ''  some  Mss.  *  commanded  us.' 
mahc  him  of  quick  untlcr standing  in  the 


Tlie  three  dmtghters,  several  orders  of  Christians.       41 

seven  is  changed  into  twelve,  and  hence,  forasmuch  as  the  Book 

holy  Apostles  were  sent  to  proclaim  the  holy  Trinity  in  the '- — 

four  quarters  of  the  globe,  they  were  chosen  twelve  in 
number,  that  by  their  very  number  they  might  set  forth  that 
perfection,  which  they  proclaimed  both  by  their  lips  and  in 
their  lives. 

20.  And  three  daughters.  What  do  we  understand  by 
the  daughters  but  the  weaker  multitudes  of  the  faithful,  who, 
though  they  never  adhere  with  a  virtuous  resolution  to  per- 
fection of  life,  yet  cleave  with  constancy  to  the  belief  of  the 
Trinity  which  has  been  taught  them.  Thus  by  *  the  seven 
sons'  is  represented  the  order  of  the  Preachers,  and  by  ^  the 
three  daughters'  the  multitude  of  the  hearers.  By  '  the  three 
daughters'  may  also  be  signified  the  three  orders  of  the 
faithful,  for  after  mention  of  the  sons  the  daughters  are 
named,  in  that  succeeding  next  to  the  distinguished  courage 
of  the  Apostles  came  three  divisions  of  the  faithful,  in  the 
state  of  life  in  the  Church;  viz.  of  Pastors,  of  those  following 
continence,  and  of  the  married.  And  hence  the  prophet 
Ezekiel  declares  that  he  heard  three  men  named  that  were 
set  free;  viz.  Noah,  and  Daniel,  and  Job;  for  what  is  signi- 
fied by  Noah  who  guided  the  Ark  in  the  waters,  but  the 
order  of  rulers,  who,  while  they  govern  the  people  for  the 
fashioning  of  their  lives,  are  the  directors  of  holy  Church 
amidst  the  waves  of  temptation .''  What  is  represented  by 
Daniel,  whose  marvellous  abstinence  we  have  described  to 
us,  but  the  life  of  the  continent,  who,  while  they  give  up 
every  thing  that  is  of  the  world,  rule  with  elevated  mind  over 
Babylon  which  lies  beneath  them  ?  What  is  signified  by 
Job  but  the  life  of  the  good  that  are  married,  who,  while 
they  do  deeds  of  mercy  by  the  good  things  of  the  world 
which  they  possess,  do  as  it  were  advance  to  their  heavenly 
country  by  the  ])aths  of  earth  }  Therefore  because  after  the 
holy  Apostles  there  came  these  three  divisions  of  the  faith- 
ful, after  the  sons  rightly  follows  the  mention  of  the  three  . 
daughters  that  were  born  to  him.     It  proceeds : 

Ver.  3.  His  substance  also  was  three  thousand  sheep  and 
thfee  thousand  camels. 

21.  That  believing  hearers  have  been  gatliered  from  various    xv. 
manners  of  life,  a  truth  which  is  first  declared  generally  by 


42  Camels  a  type  of  the  Gentile  Churches. 

Job  the  mention  of  the  daughters,  the  same  is  afterwards  brought 
'  before  us  in  detail  by  the  specification  of  the  animals.  For 
what  does  he  set  forth  in  the  seven  thousand  sheep,  but  some 
men's  perfect  innocency,  which  comes  from  the  pastures  of  the 
Law  to  the  perfect  estate  of  grace'  ?  what  again  is  signified  by 
the  three  thousand  camels,  but  the  crooked  defectiveness  ^  of 
the  Gentiles  coming  to  the  fulness  of  faith.  Now  in  Holy 
Scripture,  sometimes  the  Lord  Himself  is  expressed  by  the 
title  of  a  camel,  and  sometimes  the  Gentile  people.  For  the 
Lord  is  signified  by  the  name  of  a  camel,  as  when  it  is  said 
by  that  very  Lord  to  the  Jews  that  set  themselves  against 
Mat.23,  fjini,  ivho  strain  at  a  gnat,  and  swallow  a  camel.  For 
a  gnat  wounds  while  it  whispers,  but  a  camel  of  free  will 
bends  to  receive  its  load.  Thus  the  Jews  strained  at  a  gnat, 
in  that  they  sought  that  a  seditious  robber  should  be  let  go, 
but  they  swallowed  a  camel,  in  that  Him,  Who  had  come 
down  of  His  own  accord  to  take  upon  Him  the  burthens  of 
our  mortal  nature,  they  strove  to  overwhelm  by  their  clamours. 
Again,  the  Gentile  state  is  signified  by  the  naming  of  a 
camel ;  and  hence  Rebecca  on  going  to  Isaac  is  brought  on 
a  earners  back,  in  that  the  Church,  which  hastens  from  the 
Gentile  state  to  Christ,  is  found  in  the  crooked  and  defective 
behaviour  of  the  old  life ;  and  she,  when  she  saw  Isaac,  de- 
scended, in  that  when  the  Gentile  world  knew  the  Lord,  it 
abandoned  its  sins,  and  descending  from  the  height  of 
self-elation  sought  the  lowly  walks  of  humility ;  and  she  too 
in  bashfulness  covers  herself  with  a  veil,  in  that  she  is  con- 
founded in  His  presence  for  her  past  life.  And  hence  it  is 
Rom.  6,  said  by  the  Apostle  to  these  same  Gentiles,  What  fruit  had 
^^*  ye  then  in  those  things  tvhereof  ye  are  now  ashamed? 
Whereas  then  by  the  sheep  we  understand  the  JIebrews_ 
coming  to  the  faith  from  the  pastures  of  the  Law,  nothing 
hinders  but  that  we  understand  by  the  camels  the  Gentile 
people,  crooked  in  their  ways  and  laden  with  idolatrous 
ceremonials.  For  because  they  devised  them  gods  of  their 
own  selves  whom  they  should  worship,  there  had  grown  up 
as  it  were  out  of  themselves  a  load  upon  their  back  which 
they  should  carry. 

'  al.  *  to  the  reception  of  grace/ al.     Eusebiusspeaksof  the  camel.    DeMart. 
'  to  the  grace  of  perfection.'  c.  xii. 

k  '  Torta  Gentilium  vitiositas.'  Thus 


Camels  perhaps  Samaritans;   Oxen^  the  simple.  43 

22.   Furthermore    in    that   they  are    common    animals,  it  Book 
is  possible   that  by  camels  is  represented  the  life    of  the 


.,  .  ,  ,  111  T    •  1     see§.  40. 

Samaritans,     ror  camels  chew  the  cud,  but  do  not  divide 

the  hoof.     So  likewise  the  Samaritans  do  as  it  were  chew  thc^^^-  H' 

4. 

cud,  in  that  they  receive  in  part  the  words  of  the  Law,  but  do 
not  divide  the  hoof  as  it  were,  forasmuch  as  they  despise  it 
in  part.  And  they  bear  a  grievous  burthen  upon  the  mind's 
back,  in  that  they  weary  themselves  in  whatsoever  they  do 
without  any  hope  of  eternity. 

For  they  are  strangers  to  faith  in  the  Resurrection,  and 
what  can  be  more  grievous  or  more  burthensome  than  to 
endure  the  tribulation  of  this  passing  state  of  existence,  and 
yet  never,  for  relief  of  mind,  to  look  forward  to  the  joy  of 
our  reward ;  but  forasmuch  as  the  Lord,  when  He  appeared  in 
the  flesh,  both  filled  the  Hebrew  people  with  the  grace  of 
perfection,  and  brought  some  of  the  Samaritans  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  faith  by  shewing  marvellous  works,  it  might 
well  be  said  of  the  shadow  which  was  to  express  the  reality, 
that  he  possessed  both  seven  thousand  sheep,  and  three 
thousand  camels.  It  goes  on;  And  Jive  hundred  yoke  of 
oxen,  and  Jive  hundred  she  asses. 

23.  We  have  said  above  that  by  the  number  fifty,  which    xvi. 
is  completed  by  seven  weeks   and  the  addition  of  an  unit, 
rest  is  signified,  and  by  the  number  *  ten'  the  sum  of  perfec- 
tion is  set  forth.     Now  forasmuch  as  the  perfection  of  rest  is 
promised  to  the  faithful,  by  multiplying  fifty  ten  times,  we  in 
this  way  arrive  at  five  hundred.     But  in   sacred   Writ,  the 
title  of  '  oxen'  sometimes  represents  the  dulness  of  the  foolish 
sort,  and  sometimes  the  life  of  well  doers.     For  because  the 
stupidity  of  the  fool  is  represented  by   the   title   of  an  ox, 
Solomon  says  rightly,  he  fjoeth  after  her  straightway,  as  an  Vroy.  7, 
ox  goeth    to    the  slaughter.     Again,  that   the  life  of  every     ' 
labourer  is  set  forth  by  the  title  of  oxen,  the  Precepts  of  the 
Law  are  a  testimony,  which  crijoined  through  Moses;   7%o?^  Deut. 
shall  not  muzzle  the  nx  when  he  trcadeth  out  the  corn.     And     ' 
this  again  is  declared  in  plain  words;  the  labourer  is  worthy  ]^^^e\o, 
of  his  hire.     By  the  title  of  asses,  too,  we  have  represented'* 
sometimes  the  inertness  of  fools,  sometimes  the  unrestrained 
indulgence  of  the  wanton,  .sometimes  the  simj)lemindcdness 
of  the  CJentilcs ;  for  the  inertness  of  fools  is  imaged  by  the 


44  The  ox  laborious,  the  ass  unreasoning. 

Job    designation  of  asses,  as  where  it  is  said  through  Moses,  Thou 
— ^— ^  shall  not  plough  tvith  an  ox  awl  an  ass  together.    As  though  he 
Deut.     said,  '  do   not   associate   fools   and   wise   men   together   in 
'     '  preaching,  lest  by  means  of  him  who  has  no  power  to  ac- 
complish  the    work,   jou   hinder   him    who    has   abundant 
power.'   The  unrestrained  indulgence  of  the  wanton  is  likewise 
set  forth  by  the  appellation  of  asses,  as  the  prophet  testifies, 
Ezek.     where  he  says,  whose  flesh  is  as  the  flesh  of  asses.     Again, 
'     '   by  the  title  of  asses  is  shewn  the  simplicity  of  the  Gentiles. 
Hence  when  the  Lord  went  up  toward  Jerusalem,  He  is  re- 
lated to  have  sat  upon  a  young  ass,  for  what  is  it  for  Him  to 
come  to  Jerusalem  sitting  upon  an  ass,  except  taking  pos- 
session of  the  simple  hearts  of  the  Gentiles  to  conduct  them 
to  the  vision  of  peace',  by  ruling  and  ordering  them?     And 
this  is  shewn  by  one  passage,  and  that  a  very  easy  one ;  in 
that  both  the  workmen  of  Judaea  are  represented  by  oxen, 
and  the  Gentile  peoples  by  an  ass,  when  it  is  said  by  the 
Is.  1,  3.  Prophet,  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master^ s 
crib.     For  who  appears  as  the  ox,  saving  the  Jewish  people, 
whose  neck  was  worn  by  the  yoke  of  the  Law  ?  and  who  was 
the  ass  but  the  Gentile  world,  which  was  found  like  a  brute 
animal  of  every  deceiver,  and  was  overlaid   with  whatever 
deceit  he  pleased,  without  resisting  by  any  exercise  of  reason  ? 
Thus  the  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's 
crib,  in  that  both  the  Hebrews  found  out  the  God  Whom 
they  worshipped  but  as  yet  knew  Him  not,  and  the  Gentile 
world  received  the  food  of  the  Law,  which  it  had  none  of. 
That  therefore  which  is  spoken  above  in  the  designation  of 
the  sheep  and  of  the  camels,  is  here  repeated  below  in  the 
oxen  and  the  asses. 

24.  Now  even  before  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer  Judaea 

possessed  oxen,  in  that  she  sent  out  labourers  to  preach,  to 

Mat.23,  whom  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  Truth,  Woe  unto  you,  Scribes 

^^'        and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  !  for  ye  compjass  sea  and  land  to 

make  one  proselyte;   and  when  he  is  made,  ye  make  him 

twofold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  yourselves.     These  were 

weighed  down  with  the  heavy  yoke  of  the  I^aw,  because  they 

were  burthened  with  the  ordinances  of  the  external  letter,  to 

Mat.ii,  whom  it  is  spoken  by  the  voice  of  Truth,  Come  unto  Me,  all 

28.  29. 

*  .So  the  Fathers  explain  the  name  Jeriisalcvi. 


Their  subjection  denotes  that  0/  Jen  and  Gentile  to  Christ.  45 

ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden^  and  I  will  refresh  yon.  Book 
Take  My  yoke  niwn  yov,  and  learn  of  Me., for  lam  meek  — '■ — 
and  lowly  in  heart.     Tliat  in  the  Gospel,  therefore,  rest  is 
promised  to  those  that  labour  well,  is  the  same  thing  as  that 
five  hundfed  yoke   of  oxen  are   made   mention    of  in   this 
place  ;  for  whereunto  does  their  way  lead,  who  submit  their 
necks  to  the  dominion  of  our  Redeemer,  excepting  to  rest  ? 
And  hence  we  are  told  of  five  hundred  she  asses,  forasmuch 
as  the  Gentile  folk  that  are  called,  so  long  as  they  desire  to 
attain  to  rest,  gladly  bear  all  the  burthens  of  the  command- 
ments;  and  hence,  that  this  rest  should  be  sought  of  the 
Gentiles,  Jacob  in  addressing  his  sons  did  mean  to  signify  by 
the  voice    of  prophecy,  saying,   Issachar  is   a   strong  ass, Gen. -i^, 
crouching  down  between  the  boundaries^ :  And  he  saiv  that  iyuiL 
rest  teas  good,  and  the  land  that  it  loas  pleasant,  and  bowed^^^^^^- 
the  shoulder  to  bear.     For  to  crouch    down    between    the  v.  bur- 
boundaries  is  to  rest  forestalling  the  end  of  the  world,  and  to*^^°^* 
seek  nought  of  those  things,  which  are  now  going  forward 
amongst  men,  but  to  long  after  the  things  that  sliall  be  at  the 
last;  and  the  strong  ass  sees  the  rest  and  the  pleasant  land, 
when  the  simple  Gentile  world  lifts  itself  up  to  the  strong 
effort  of  good  works,  and  that  because  it  is  on  its  way  to  the  land 
of  life  eternal ;    and  it  bows  the  shoulder  to  bear,  in  that 
having  beheld  the  rest  above,  it  submits  itself  in  doing  its 
work  even  to  severe  precepts,   and   whatever   littleness  of 
mind  represents  as  hard  to  bear,  the  hope  of  the  reward 
makes  this  appear  to  it  light  and  easy.     So  because  both 
Juda3a  and  the  Gentile  world  are  gathered  to  eternal  rest  as 
a  portion    of  the   elect,  he  is  rightly  related    to  have  pos- 
sessed five  hundred  yoke   of  oxen,   and  five  hundred  she 
asses.     The  account  goes  on  ; 

And  a  very  great  household. 

25.  AVhat  means  it  that  the  number  of  the  animals  is  first  xvii. 
described,  while  the  household  is  not  mentioned  till  the  end, 
but  that  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  are   first  gathered  in 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  faith,  that  afterwards  the  crafty  things 
of  the  world  may  also  be  called?   as  Paul  bears  witness,  who 
says;  For  ye  see  your  calling^  brethren,  how  that  not  fnanyiCor.i, 
wise  men  after  the  Jlesh,  not  many  noble,  not  many  might y,^^'^'' 
are  called ;  But  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the 


46         Feasting  of  Job's  sons  is  the  Apostles'  preaching. 

Job    world  to  confound  the  wise.    For  the  first  beginnings'  of  holy 
— L_:— Church    are   reputed  to   have   been  without   knowledge    of 

1  prin-  .  .  .  ^ 
cipia      letters,  plainly  for  this  reason,  that  in  His  preachers  the 

Redeemer  might  manifest  to  all,  that  it  was  not  their  dis- 

2populos  course,  but  their  cause,  which  had  influence  with  the  numbers^ 

that  believed  unto  life.     It  proceeds ; 

80  that  this  man  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the 

East. 

xviii.       26.  That  our  Redeemer  is  styled  The  East  is  declared  by 

Zech.  6,  w^Q  testimony  of  the  Prophet,  where  he  says,  And  lol  the  Man 

2  Vulg.  whose  name  is  The  East.  And  thus  all  that  live  in  this 
Orze/iA-,  Qpipi^t  ^y  faith,  are  rightly  called  men  of  the  East.  Now 
The       because  all  men  are  only  men,  whereas  '  The  East'  Himself 

ranci  ^^  -[^qW^  Go(\  and  Man,  it  is  rightly  said,  He  was  the  greatest 
of  all  the  men  of  the  East.  As  though  it  were  said  in  plain 
words.  He  surpassed  all  those  that  are  born  to  God  in  faith. 
Because  it  is  not  by  adoption,  as  others  are,  but  by  the 
Divine  Nature  that  He  is  exalted,  Who  though  He  appeared 
like  to  others  in  His  human  Nature,  yet  in  His  Divine  Nature 
continued  above  all  men  without  fellow. 

Ver.  4.  And  his  sons  went  and  feasted  in  their  houses. 

xix.        27.   The  sons  went  to  feast  at   their   houses,   when  the 

Apostles  as  preachers,  in  the  different  regions  of  the  world, 

served  the  banquet  of  virtue  to  hearers  as  it  were  to  eaters. 

And  hence  it  is   said  to  those   very   sons    concerning   the 

M^*- 14) hungering  multitude.  Give  ye  them  to  eat.    x4nd  again;  And 

MsLt.  15, 1  will  fwt  send  them  a  wag  fasting,  lest  theg  faint  by  the 

^^'         way;  that  is,  let  them  by  your  preaching  receive  the  word 

of  consolation,  that  they  may  not  by  continuing  to  fast  to 

the  food  of  truth,  sink  under  the  labours  of  this  life.     Hence 

John  6,  again  it  is  said  to  the  same  sons.  Labour  not  for  "  the  meat 

'^'^'        which  perisheth,  but  for   that  meat  which   endureth  unto 

everlasting  life.     And   how  these  feasts    were  set   forth  is 

added,  whereas  it  is  forthwith  subjoined. 

Every  one  in  his  day. 

XX.         28.  If  without  any  doubt  the  darkness  of  ignorance  is  the 

night  of  the  soul,  the  understanding  is  not  improperly  styled 

Rom.     the  day.     And  hence   Paul  says,   One  man  esteemeth  one 

'    '     day  above  attother ;  another  esteemeth  every  day  alike.     As 

■"  Or,  Work  not  at;  the  original  allows  it  to  be  taken  of  food  for  others. 


The  feast  they  yive  is  on  the  tiord  0/  God.  47 

if  he  had  said  in  plain  words  ;  '  One  man  understands  some  Book 
things  so  as  that  some  are  left  out,  and   another  acquaints '- — 


himself  with  all  things  that  are  possible  to  be  understood,  in 
such  sort  as  they  may  be  seen.     Thus  each  son  sets  forth  a 
feast  in  his  day,  in  that  every  holy  preacher,  according  to  the 
measure  of  the  enlightening  of  his  understanding,  feeds  the 
minds  of  his  hearers  with  the  entertainments  of  Truth.     Paul 
made  a  feast  in  his   own    day,  when   he  said,    But   site  is  icor. 
happier  if  she  so  abide  according  to  my  judyment.     He '^' ^*^* 
bade  each  to  take  account  of  his  own  day;  when  he  said. 
Let  every  man  he  fully  persuaded  in  his  own   mind.     It  Rom. u, 
goes  on ;  "• 

And  sent  and  called  for  their  three  sisters  to  eat  and  to 
drink  with  them. 

29.  The  sons  call  their  sisters  to   the   feast,  in  that  the    xxi. 
holy  Apostles  proclaim  to  hearers  that  are  weak  the  joys  of 
the  refreshment  above,  and  inasmucli  as  they  see  their  souls 
to  be  starved  of  the  food  of  truth,  they  feed  them  with  the 
feast  of  God's  Word.     And  it  is  well  said,  to  eat  and  to  drink 
with  them.     For  holy   Scripture  is  sometimes   meat  to   us, 
and  sometimes  drink,      ft  is  meat  in  the  harder  parts,  in  that 
it  is  in  a  certain  sense  broken  in  pieces  by  being  explained, 
and  swallowed  after  chewing;  and  it  is  drink  in  the  plainer 
parts,  in  that  it  is  imbibed  just  as  it  is  found.     The  Prophet 
discerned  holy  Scrij^ture  to  be  meat,  which  was  to  be  broken 
in    pieces   in    the    explaining,    when    he    said,    The   youny  Lam.  4, 
children  ask,  and  no  man  hreaketh  it  unto  them,  i.  e.  the  ^' 
weak    ones   sought    that  the    stronger  declarations   of  holy 
Scripture  might  be  crumbled  for  them  by  explanation,  but 
he  could  no  where  be   found  who  should   have   explained 
them.     The  Proi)het  saw  that  holy  Writ  was  drink,  when  he 
said,  Ho^  every  one  that  thirstcth  come  ye  to  the  waters.  Is,  66, 
Had  not  the  j)lain  commandments  been  drink.  Truth  would   ' 
never  have  cried  out  with  His  own  lips;  If  any  man  thirst,  John  5, 
let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink.     Tlie  Prophet  saw  that^'' 
there  was,  as  it  were,  a  lack  of  meat  and  drink  in  Juda?a, 
when  he  declared.  And  their  honourable  meii  are  famished,  is.6,13. 
and  their  multitude  dried  up  with  thirst.     For  it  belongs  to 
the  few  to  attain   a   knowledge  of  the  mighty  and    hidden 
meanings,  but  to  the  nurlitude  it  is  given  to  understand  the 


48     Our  Lord  cleansed  the  Apostles  after  their  preaching. 

Job    plain  sense  of  the  history.     And  therefore  he  declares  that 
'       the  honourable  men  of  Judaea  had  perished  not  by  thirst, 


but  hunger,  in  that  those  who  seemed  to  stand  first,  by 
giving  themselves  wholly  to  the  outward  sense,  had  not 
wherewithal  to  feed  themselves  from  the  inward  parts  by 
sifting  their  meaning,  but  forasmuch  as  when  loftier  minds 
fall  away  from  the  inward  sense,  the  understanding  of  the 
little  ones  even  in  the  outward  meaning  is  dried  up;  it  is 
rightly  added  in  this  place,  And  the  multitude  dried  up  with 
thirst.  As  if  he  said  in  plainer  words,  *  whereas  the  common 
sort  give  over  taking  pains  in  their  own  lives,  they  now 
no  longer  seek  even  the  streams  of  history.'  And  they 
bear  witness  that  they  understood  both  the  deep  and 
the  plain  things  contained  in  divine  Writ,  who  in  com- 
Lukeis  plaining  to  the  Judge  that  rejects  them,  say,  We  have  eaten 
26.  and  drunk  in  Thy  presence ;  and  this  they  subjoin  in  plain 
terms  by  explaining  it;  And  thou  hast  taught  in  our  streets. 
Therefore  because  the  sacred  oracles  are  broken  in  the  more 
obscure  parts,  by  the  explanation  thereof,  but  in  the  plainer 
parts  are  drunk  in  just  as  they  are  found,  it  may  be  truly 
said,  And  they  sent  and  called  for  their  three  sisters,  to  eat 
and  to  drink  with  them.  As  though  it  were  said  in  plain 
terms,  they  drew  every  weak  one  to  themselves  by  the 
mildness  of  their  persuasions,  that  both  by  setting  forward 
great  truths  contemplatively,  they  might  feed  their  minds, 
and  by  delivering  little  things  historically,  they  might  give 
them  nourishment.  The  account  proceeds: 
»v.  thug  Ver.  5.  And  it  was  so,  ivhen  the  days  of  their  feasting^  were 
gone  about,  that  Job  sent  and  sanctified  them,  and  rose  up 
early  in  the  morning,  and  offered  burnt  offerings  according 
to  the  number  of  them  all. 
xxii.  30.  *  The  days  of  feasting  are  gone,'  when  the  ministrations 
of  preaching  are  brought  to  an  end ;  and  when  the  feasts  were 
ended.  Job  offered  an  holocaust  for  his  sons,  in  that  our 
Redeemer  besought  the  Father  in  behalf  of  the  Apostles, 
when  they  returned  from  preaching.  Now  it  is  rightly  said 
that  he  '  sent  and  sanctified,'  in  that  when  He  bestowed  the 
j  Holy  Spirit  Which  proceeds  from  Himself,  upon  the  hearts 

of  His  disciples,  He  cleansed  them  from  whatsoever  might  be 
in  them  of  offence,  and  it  is  rightly  delivered  that  he  rose  up 


Job's  Intercession.     Blessini/  God  in  an  ill  sense.        49 

early  to    offer    sacrifices;    forasmuch   as   through  this    His  Book 
offering  up  the  prayer  of  His  Intercessions  in  our  behalf, ^— 


He  dispelled  the  night  of  error,  and  illumined  the  darkness 
of  man's  mind;  that  the  soul  might  not  be  polluted  in  secret 
by  any  defilements  of  sin  contracted  from  the  very  grace  of 
preaching;  that  it  might  never  attribute  to  itself  aught  that 
it  does;  that  it  might  not,  by  attributing  them  to  itself,  lose 
all  the  things  it  had  done.     Hence  it  is  well  added. 

For  Job  said,  It  may  be  that  my  sons  have  sinned,  and 
blessed  God  in  their  hearts. 

31.  For  this  blessing  God,  which  means  cursing,  is  the  xxiii. 
taking  glory  to  one's  self  from  a  gift  of  His  hand.     Hence  the 
Lord  did  well  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  holy  Apostles  after  their 
preaching,  doubtless  with  this   view,  that  He  might   shew 
plainly,  both  that  very  frequently  in  doing  good  the  dust  of 
sin  is  contracted,  and  that  the  steps  of  the  speakers  are  often 
defiled  by  the  same  means  whereby  the  hearts  of  their  hearers 
are  purified.    For  it  often  happens  that  some  in  giving  words 
of  exhortation,   however    poorly,   are    inwardly   lifted    up, 
because  they  are  the  channel,  by  which  the  grace  of  purifi- 
cation comes  down;  and  while  by  the  word  they  wash  away 
the  deeds  of  other  men,  they  as  it  were  contract  the  dust  of 
an  ill  thought  from  a  good  course.    What  then  was  it  to  wash 
the  disciples'  feet  after  their  preaching,  but  after  the  glorious- 
ness  of  preaching  to  wipe  off  the  dust  of  our  thoughts,  and 
to  cleanse  the  heart's  goings  from  inward  pride.?    Nor  does  it 
hinder  the    universal  knowledge    which   our  Mediator  has, 
that  it  is  said.  It  may  be;   for  knowing  all  things,  but  in 
His  mode  of  speech  taking  upon  Him  our  ignorance",  and,  in 
taking  the  same,  giving  us  a  lesson,  He  sometimes  speaks 
as  it  were  with  our  doubts;  as  where  He  says.  Nevertheless, 'Lrike 

1 R    ft 

whe?i  the  Son  of  Man  coineth  shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  '  ' 
When  the  feasting  then  was  over.  Job  offered  a  sacrifice  for 
his  sons,  saying,  It  may  he  that  my  sons  have  sinned,  and 
cursed  God  in  their  heart;  in  that  our  Saviour,  after  He  had 
cleansed  His  preachers  from  the  evils  that  beset  them  even  in 
the  midst  of  the  good  things  which  they  had  done,  ke])t  ihcm 
from  temptations.     It  goes  on, 

»  So  Mm.  old    Edd.  'in   Himself,'     hardly  have  said,  see  Ep.  ad  Eulog.  I.  x. 
which  it  has  been  noted  St.  Greg,  would     Kp..39,al.42.andBen.adS.Ath.t.i  p.693. 


50        Job  represents  Counsel  and  Grief  in  the  Church. 

JQ^  ^  a      Thus  did  Job  continually. 

xxiv.  32.  Job  does  not  cease  '  to  oflfer  sacrifice  continually,' 
in  that  our  Redeemer  offers  a  holocaust  for  us  without  ceasing, 
Who  without  intermission  exhibits  to  the  Father  His  Incar- 
nation in  our  behalf  For  His  verv  Incarnation  is  itself 
the  offering  for  our  purification,  and  while  He  shews  Himself 
as  Man,  He  is  the  Intercession  that  washes  out  man's 
misdeeds,  and  in  the  mystery  of  His  Humanity  He  offers  a 
perpetual  Sacrifice,  even  because  those  things  too  are  eternal 
which  He  purifies. 

33.  Now  because  in  the  very  opening  of  our  exposition 
we  so  made  the  Lord  to  be  set  forth  in  the  person  of  blessed 
Job,  that  we  said  that  both  the  Head  and  the  Body,  i.  e.  both 
Christ  and  His  Church,  were  represented  by  him;  therefore 
since  we  have  shewn  how  our  Head  may  be  taken  to  be 
represented,  let  us  now  point  out,  how  His  Body,  which  we 
are,  is  set  forth;  that  as  we  have  heard  from  the  history 
somewhat  to  admire,  and  learnt  from  the  Head  somewhat  to 
believe,  we  may  now  deduce  from  the  Body  somewhat  to 
maintain  in  our  lives.  For  we  should  transform  within  our- 
selves that  we  read,  that  when  the  mindis  moved  by  hearing,  the 
life  may  concur  to  the  execution  of  that  which  it  has  heard. 

Job  i,i.  There  was  a  man  in  the  land  of  Uz,  whose  name  was  Job, 
XXV.  34.  If '  JoV  signifies  '  grieving'  and  *  Uz'  ^  a  Counsellor,' 
every  elect  person  is  not  improperly  represented  by  either 
name ;  in  that  he  certainly  abides  in  a  mind  of  wise  counsel, 
who  hastens  grieving  from  things  present  to  things  eternal. 
For  there  are  some  that  take  no  heed  to  their  life,  and  whilst 
they  are  seeking  transitory  objects,  and  either  do  not  understand 
those  that  are  eternal,  or  understanding  despise  them,  they  nei- 
ther feel  grief  nor  know  how  to  entertain  counsel,  and  when  they 
are  taking  no  account  of  the  things  above  which  they  have  lost, 
they  think,  unhappy  wretches,  that  they  are  in  the  midst  of 
good  things.  For  these  never  raise  the  eyes  of  their  mind  to 
the  light  of  truth  which  they  were  created  for,  they  never  bend 
the  keenness  of  desire  to  the  contemplation  of  their  eternal 
country,  but  forsaking  themselves"  amidst  those  things  in 
which  they  are  cast  away,  instead  of  their  country  they  love 
the  exile  which  is  their  lot,  and  rejoice  in  the  darkness  which 

»  Perhaps  alluding  to  the  Prodigal  son,  who  is  said  to  '  come  to  himself,' 


Careless  livers  have  not  the  sorroivs  of  thought.  51 

they  undergo  as  if  in  the  brightness  of  the  light.     But,  on  the    Book 
contrary,  when  the  minds  of  the  elect  perceive  that  all  things 


transitory  are  nought,  they  seek  out  which  be  the  things  for 
which  they  were  created f',  and  whereas  nothing  suffices  to 
the  satisfying  them  out  of  God,  thought  itself,  being  wearied 
in  them  by  the  effort  of  the  search,  finds  rest  in  the  hope  and 
contemplation  of  its  Creator,  longs  to  have  a  place  among 
the  citizens  above;  and  each  one  of  them,  while  yet  in  the 
body  an  inhabitant  of  the  world,  in  mind  already  soars 
beyond  the  world,  bewails  the  weariness  of  exile  which  he 
endures,  and  with  the  ceaseless  incitements  of  love  urges 
himself  on  to  the  country  on  high.  When  then  he  sees 
grieving  how  that  that  which  he  lost  is  eternal,  he  finds  the  / 
salutarj"  counsel,  to  look  down  upon  this  temporal  scene 
which  he  is  passing  through,  and  the  more  the  knowledge 
of  that  counsel  increases,  which  bids  him  forsake  perishable 
things,  the  more  is  grief  augmented  that  he  cannot  yet  attain 
to  lasting  objects.  Hence  Solomon  well  says,  He  that Ecclea. 
increase th  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow;  for  he  that  already  ^'  ^^' 
knows  the  high  state  which  he  does  not  as  yet  enjoy,  is 
the  more  grieved  for  the  low  condition,  in  which  he  is  yet 
held. 

35.  Job  therefore  is  well  said  to  dwell  in  the  land  of  Uz, 
in  that  the  mind  of  every  elect  person  is  kept  going  grieving  in 
the  counsels  of  knowledge.  We  must  also  observe  what 
absence  of  grief  of  mind  there  is  in  precipitancy  of  action. 
For  they  that  live  without  counsel,  who  give  themselves  over 
precipitately  to  the  issue  of  events,  are  meanwliile  harassed 
by  no  grief  of  reflection.  For  he  that  discreetly  settles 
his  mind  in  the  counsels  of  life,  heedfully  takes  account 
of  himself,  exercising  circumspection  in  his  every  doing,  and 
lest  from  that  which  he  is  doing  a  sudden  and  adverse  issue 
should  seize  him,  he  first  feels  at  it,  gently  ajiplying  to  it 
the  foot  of  reflection;  he  takes  thought  that  fear  may  not 
withhold  him  from  those  things  which  ought  to  be  done,  nor 
precipitance  hurry  him  into  those  which  ought  to  be  deferred; 
that  evil  things  may  not  get  the  better  of  him  through  his 
desires  by  an  open  assault,  nor  good  things  work  his  down- 
fall insidiously  by  vain  glory.     Thus  Job  dwells  in  the  land 

P  See  the  opening  of  St.  Hilary  de  Trinitate,  St.  Aug.  Conf.  b.  iv.  &c. 

e2 


52  Good  begun  in  fear  ^  perfected  in  love. 

Job  1,1.  of  Uz,  in  that  the  more  the  mind  of  the  elect  strives  to  live 
by  following  counsel,  so  much  the  more  is  it  worn  with  the 
grief  of  so  narrow  a  way.     It  goes  on ; 
himpiex,     j^^^  fj^at  man  sincere  ^  and  upright^  one  that  feared  Qod, 
perfect    and  eschewed  evil. 

xxvi.  30.  Whoso  longs  for  the  eternal  country,  lives  without 
doubt  sincere  and  upright;  I  media, perfect  in  practice,  and 
right  in  faith,  sincere  in  the  good  that  he  does  in  this  lower 
state,  right  in  the  high  truths  which  he  minds  in  his  inner 
self  For  there  are  some  who  in  the  good  actions  that  they 
do  are  not  sincere,  whereas  they  look  to  them  not  for  a  reward 
within  but  to  win  favour  without.     Hence  it  is  well  said  by 

Ecclus.  a  certain  wise  man,  Woe  to  the  sinner  that  goeth  two  ways  ; 

^'  ^^'  for  the  sinner  goes  two  ways,  when  at  the  same  time  that 
what  he  sets  forth  in  deed  is  of  God,  what  he  aims  at  in 
thought  is  of  the  world. 

37.  Now  it  is  well  said,  one  that  feared  God  and  eschewed 
evil;   in  that  the  holy  Church  of  the  elect   enters   indeed 

2al. from  upon  its  paths  of  simplicity  and  of  uprightness  in^  fear,  but 
finishes  them  in  charity,  and  it  is  hers  then  entirely  '  to  depart 
from  evil,'  when  she  has  begun  now  from  the  love  of  God  to  feel 
unwillingness  to  sin.  But  whilst  she  still  does  good  deeds 
from  fear,  she  has  not  entirely  departed  from  evil;  because 
she  sins  even  herein,  that  she  would  sin  if  she  could  have 
done  it  without  punishment.  So  then  when  Job  is  said  to 
fear  God,  it  is  rightly  related  that  he  also  '  departs  from  evil,' 
in  that  whereas  charity  follows  upon  fear,  that  offence  which 
is  left  behind  in  the  mind  is  even  trodden  under  foot  in  the 
purpose  of  the  heart.  And  forasmuch  as  each  particular  vice 
is  stifled  by  fear,  whilst  the  several  virtues  spring  from  charity, 
it  is  rightly  added. 

And  there  were   horn  unto  him  seven  sons  and  three 
daughters. 

xxvii.  38.  For  there  are  seven  sons  born  to  us,  when  by  the 
conception  of  good  intent  the  seven  virtues  of  the  holy  Spirit 
spring  up  in  us.  Thus  the  Prophet  particularizes  this 
inward  offspring,  when  the  Spirit  renders  the  mind  fruitful, 

Isa.  11   in  these  words;   And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon 

2'  Him,  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of 

counsel  and  might,  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  piety,  and 


Job's  sons  and  daughters  represent  divers  virtues.        53 

the  spirit  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  shall  fill  him.     So  when  by  Book 
the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  there  is  engendered  in  each  — '■ — 
of  us,  *  wisdom,  understanding,  counsel,  might,  knowledge, 
piety,  and  the  fear  of  the   Lord,'  something  like  a  lasting 
posterity  is  begotten  in  the  mind,  which  preserves  the  stock 
of  our  nobility   that  is   above   unto  life,   for  so   much   the 
longer  as  it  allies  it  with  the  love  of  eternity.     Yet  surely 
fhe  seven  sons  have  in  us  three  sisters,  forasmuch  as  all  that 
manly  work  which  these  virtuous  affections*  do,  they  unite*  virtu- 
with  faith,  hope,  and  charity.     For  the  seven  sons  never  attain  sensas 
the  perfection  of  the  number  ten,  unless  all  that  they  do  be 
done  in  faith,  hope,  and  charity.     But  because  this  store  of 
antecedent  vu-tues  is  followed  by  a  manifold  concern  for  good 
works,  it  is  rightly  added, 

Ver.  8.  His  substance  also  was  seven  thousand  sheep  and 
three  thousand  camels. 

39.  For,  saving  the  historical  truth,  we  are  at  liberty  toxxviii 
follow  in  a  spiritual  way  that  which  our  ears  receive  in  a 
carnal  shape.     Thus  we  possess  seven  thousand  sheep,  when 

we  feed  the  innocent  thoughts  within  our  breast,  in  a  perfect 
purity  of  heart,  with  the  food  of  truth  which  we  have  sought 
after. 

40.  And  we  shall  have  three  thousand  camels  likewise  in 
our  possession,  if  all  that  is  high  and  crooked  in  us  be  subdued 

to  the  order*  of  faith,  and  when  of  our  own  free  will,  and  in  our^rationi 
longing  after  humility,  it  is  made  to  bow^  down  itself  under 
a  knowledge  of  the  Trinity.  For  we  possess  camels,  when- 
soever we  put  down  in  humility  all  the  high  notions  that  we 
entertain.  Surely  we  are  in  possession  of  camels,  when  we 
bend  our  thoughts  to  sympathy  with  a  brother's  weakness, 
that  bearing  our  burthens  by  turns,  we  may  by  lowering 
ourselves  thereto  know  how  to  compassionate  the  weakness 
of  another  man.  By  camels,  too,  which  do  not  cleave  the 
hoof,  but  chew  the  cud,  may  be  understood  the  good 
stewardships  of  earthly  things,  which,  in  that  they  have 
something  of  the  world,  and  something  of  God,  nuist  needs 
be  represented  by  a  common  "^  animal.  For  though  earthly 
stewardshij)  may  be  subseiTient  to  our  eternal  welfare,  yet 

•  Commune,  one  that  is  partly  like  the  clean,  partly  like  the  unclean. 


54         What  may  be  meant  by  camels^  oxen,  and  asses. 

JobI,3.  we  cannot  acquit  ourselves  of  it  without  inward  disquietude. 
Therefore  because  both  at  the  present  time  the  mind  is 
disturbed  thereby,  and  also  a  reward  laid  up  for  ever,  like  a 
common  animal,  it  both  has  something  of  the  Law,  and  some- 
thing it  has  not.  For  it  does  not  cleave  the  hoof,  in  that  the 
soul  does  not  wholly  sever  itself  from  all  earthly  doings,  but 
yet  it  ruminates,  in  that  by  the  right  dispensation  of  temporal 
things,  it  gains  a  hope  of  heavenly  blessings  with  an  assured 
confidence.  Thus  earthly  stewardships  agree  with  the  law 
in  the  head,  disagree  therewith  in  the  foot;  forasmuch  as 
while  the  objects  which  they  desire  to  obtain  by  living 
righteously  are  of  heaven,  the  concerns  with  which  they  are 
busied  by  their  performances  are  of  this  world.  When  then 
we  submit  these  earthly  stewardships  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  Trinity,  we  have  camels  in  possession,  as  it  were,  by 
faith.     The  account  goes  on  ; 

And  jive  hundred  yoke  of  oxen,  and  Jive  hundred  she  asses, 
xxix.  41.  There  are  yokes  of  oxen  for  us  in  our  possession, 
when  the  virtues  in  harmony  plough  up  the  hardness  of  our 
mind.  We  also  possess  five  hundred  she  asses,  when  we 
restrain  wanton  inclinations,  and  when  whatever  of  a  carnal 
nature  seeks  to  rise  up  in  us,  we  curb  in  the  spiritual  mastery 
of  the  heart.  Or  indeed  to  possess  she  asses  is  to  govern  the 
simple  thoughts  within  us,  which,  while  they  have  no  power 
to  run  in  a  more  refined  intelligence,  by  how  much  more 
lowly  they  walk,  bear  with  so  much  the  more  meekness  their 
brother's  burthens.  For  there  are  some  who  not  understanding 
deep  things  constrain  themselves  the  more  humbly  to  the  outward 
works  of  duty  \  Well  then  do  we  understand  the  simple  thoughts 
by  she  asses,  which  are  an  animal  slow  indeed,  yet  devoted  to 
carrying  burthens,  in  that  very  often  when  made  acquainted 
with  our  own  ignorance,  we  bear  the  more  lightly  the  burthens 
St.  Aug.  of  others;  and  whereas  we  are  not  elevated  as  by  any  special 
T?  ^^t  ^^^S^^^  ^f  wisdom,  our  mind  bends  itself  in  patience  to  sub- 
16, 16.  mit  to  the  dulness  of  another's  soul.  Now  it  is  well  done, 
whether  it  be  the  yokes  of  oxen  or  the  she  asses,  that  they  are 
mentioned  as  five  hundred,  in  that,  whether  in  the  case  that 
through  prudence  we  are  wise,  or  in  the  case  that  we  remain 

^  Convcrsalionis ,  which  docs  not  imply  obligation. 


JVell  ordered  thoughts  are  '  a  great  household'  55 

in  humble  ignorance,  so  long  as  we  are  in  search  of  the  rest  Book 
of  eternal  peace,  we  are  as  it  were  kept  within  the  number  of  — '- — 
the  Jubilee.     It  goes  on; 
And  a  very  great  household. 

42.  We  possess  a  very  great  household,  when  we  restrain  xxx. 
our  host  of  thoughts  under  the  mastery  of  the  mind,  that 
they  may  not  by  their  rery  number  get  the  better  of  the  soul, 

nor  in  disordered  array  tread  under  the  authority  which 
belongs  to  our  faculty  of  discernment.  And  the  multitude  of 
our  thoughts  is  well  marked  out  by  the  designation  of  a  very 
great  household.  For  we  know  that  when  the  mistress  is 
away  the  tongues  of  the  handmaids  wax  clamorous,  that  they 
cease  from  silence,  neglect  the  duties  of  their  allotted  task, 
and  disarrange  the  whole  ordered  method  of  their  life.  But 
if  the  mistress  suddenly  appear,  in  a  moment  their  noisy 
tongues  are  still,  they  renew  the  duties  of  their  several  tasks, 
and  return  to  their  own  work  as  though  they  had  never  left  it. 
Thus  if  reason  for  a  moment  leave  the  house  of  the  mind,  as 
if  the  mistress  were  absent,  the  den  of  our  thoughts  redoubles 
itself,  like  a  bevy  of  talkative  maids.  But  so  soon  as  reason 
has  returned  to  the  mind,  the  confused  tumult  quiets  itself 
at  once,  and  the  maids  as  it  were  betake  themselves  in  silence 
to  the  task  enjoined,  whilst  the  thoughts  forthwith  submit 
themselves  to  their  appropriate  occasions  for  usefulness.  We 
possess,  then,  a  great  household,  when  with  righteous  autho- 
rity we  rule  our  innumerable  thoughts  by  a  discerning  use 
of  reason;  and  assuredly  when  we  do  this  wisely,  we  are 
aiming  to  unite  ourselves  to  the  Angels  by  that  very  exercise 
of  discernment :  and  hence  it  is  rightly  subjoined; 

So  that  this  man  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the 
east. 

43.  For  we  are  then  rendered  great  amongst  all  them  of  xxxi. 
the  east,  when  the  cloud  of  carnal   corruption  being  kept 
down  by  the  rays  of  our  discernment,  we  are,  as  far  as  the 
possibility  of  the  thing  admits,  made  the  associates  of  those 
spirits,  which   abide   in  the  eastern  light:   and  hence  Paul 
says.  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven.     For  he  that  follows  Phil.  3, 
after  temporal  things,  which  are  subject  to  decay,  seeks  the 
west',  Init  whoso  fixes  his  desires  upon  things  above,  proves 'occa- 
that  he   dwells  in  tlie  east.     He  then   is   great  not  among 
them  of  the  west  but  among  them  of  the  east,  who  aims  to 


56  The  virtues  refresh  each  other  hy  turns. 

JoBi,4.excel  not  amid  wicked  men's  scenes  of  action,  who  seek  low 
and  fleeting  things,  but  amongst  the  choirs  of  the  citizens 
above.     It  proceeds ; 

Ver.  4.  And  his  sons  went  and  feasted  in  their  houses, 
every  one  his  day. 

xxxii.  44.  '  The  sons  feast  in  their  houses,'  when  the  several 
virtues  feed  the  mind  after  their  proper  sort ;  and  it  is  well 
said,  Every  one  his  day,  for  each  son's  day  is  the  shining 
of  each  virtue.  Briefly  to  unfold  then  these  same  gifts 
of  sevenfold  grace,  wisdom  has  one  day,  understanding 
another  day,  counsel  another,  fortitude  another,  knowledge 
another,  piety  another,  fear  another,  for  it  is  not  the  same 
thing  to  be  wise  that  it  is  to  understand ;  for  many  indeed 

'sapiuntare  wise^  in  the  things  of  eternity,  but  cannot  in  any  sort 
understand  them.  Wisdom  therefore  gives  a  feast  in  its  day 
in  that  it  refreshes  the  mind  with  the  hope  and  assurance  of 
eternal  things.  Understanding  spreads  a  feast  in  its  day, 
forasmuch  as,  in  that  it  penetrates  the  truths  heard,  refreshing 
the  heart,  it  lights  up  its  darkness.  Counsel  gives  a  feast  in 
its  day,  in  that  while  it  stays  us  from  acting  precipitately, 
it  makes  the  mind  to  be  full  of  reason.  Fortitude  gives  a  feast 
in  its  day,  in  that  whereas  it  has  no  fear  of  adversity,  it  sets 
the  viands  of  confidence  before  the  alarmed  soul.  Know- 
ledge prepares  a  feast  in  her  day,  in  that  in  the  mind's  belly, 
she  overcomes  the  emptiness  of  ignorance.  Piety  sets  forth  a 
feast  in  its  day,  in  that  it  satisfies  the  bowels  of  the  heart 
with  deeds  of  mercy.  Fear  makes  a  feast  in  its  day,  in  that 
whereas  it  keeps  down  the  mind,  that  it  may  not  pride  itself 
in  the  present  things,  it  strengthens  it  with  the  meat  of  hope 
for  the  future. 

45.  But  I  see  that  this  point  requires  searching  into  in 
this  feasting  of  the  sons,  viz.  that  by  turns  they  feed  one 
another.  For  each  particular  virtue  is  to  the  last  degree 
destitute,  unless  one  virtue  lends  its  support  to  another.  For 
wisdom  is  less  worth  if  it  lacks  understanding,  and  under- 
standing is  wholly  useless  if  it  be  not  based  upon  wisdom, 
in  that  whilst  it  penetrates  the  higher  mysteries  without  the 
counterpoise  of  wisdom,  its  own  lightness  is  only  lifting  it  up 
to  meet  with  the  heavier  fall.  Counsel  is  worthless,  when 
the  strength  of  fortitude  is  lacking  thereto,  since  what  it 
finds  out  by  turning  the  thing  over,  from  want  of  strength  it 


Good  works  invite  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.  57 

never  carries  on  so  far  as  to  the  perfecting  in  deed ;  and  fortitude  Book 
is  very  much  broken  down,  if  it  be  not  supported  by  counsel, 


since  the  greater  the  power  which  it  perceives  itself  to  have, 
so  much  the  more  miserably  does  this  virtue  rush  headlong 
into  ruin,  without  the  governance  of  reason.  Knowledge  is 
nought  if  it  hath  not  its  use  for  piety ;  for  whereas  it  neglects 
to  put  in  practice  the  good  that  it  know^s,  it  binds  itself  the 
more  closely  to  the  Judgment :  and  piety  is  very  useless,  if 
it  lacks  the  discernment  of  knowledge,  in  that  while  there  is 
no  knowledge  to  enlighten  it,  it  knows  not  the  way  to  shew 
mercy  \  And  assuredly  unless  it  has  these  virtues  with  it, 
fear  itself  rises  up  to  the  doing  of  no  good  action,  forasmuch 
as  while  it  is  agitated  about  every  thing,  its  own  alarms 
renders  it  inactive  and  void  of  all  good  works.  Since  then 
by  reciprocal  ministrations  virtue  is  refreshed  by  virtue,  it 
is  truly  said  that  the  sons  feast  w^ith  one  another  by  turns; 
and  as  one  aids  to  relieve  another',  it  is  as  if  the  numerous 
offspring  to  be  fed  were  to  ])repare  a  banquet  each  his  day. 
It  follows ; 

Afid  sent  and  called  for  their  three  sisters,  to  eat  and  to 
drink  xvith  them. 

46.  When  our  virtues  invite  faith,  hope,  and  charity  into  xxxin. 
every  thing  they  do,  they  do,  as  sons  employed  in  labour, 

call  their  three  sisters  to  a  feast;  that  faith,  liope,  and  charity 
may  rejoice  in  the  good  work,  which  each  virtue  provides; 
and  they  as  it  were  gain  strength  from  that  meat,  whilst  they 
are  rendered  more  confident  by  good  works,  and  whereas 
after  meat  they  long  to  imbibe  the  dew  of  contemplation, 
they  are  as  it  were  from  the  cup  inebriated*. 

47.  But  what  is  there  that  we  do,  in  this  life,  without 
some  stain  of  defilement,  howsoever  slight  ?  For  sometimes  by 
the  very  good  things  we  do  we  draw  near  to  the  worse  part, 
since  while  they  beget  mirth  in  the  mind,  they  at  the  same 
time  engender  a  certain  security,  and  when  the  mind  enjoys 
security,  it  unlooses  itself  in  sloth;  and  sometimes  they 
defile  us  with  some  self-elation,  and  set  us  so  much  the  lower 

'  This  refers  to  the  Latin  sense  of  '  when    one    that    is    to    be    relieved 

jtietaa,   which   however   seems    not  to  relieves  another.' 

I'XciuJe  piety  towards  God.  •  Debriantur  Mss.  Ben.  '  Ebriantur,' 

•  *  Sublevando  publevat,*  some  Ms».  but  the  other  word  occurs  elsewhere;  set* 

have  '  sublevanda,'    which    is    better,  Pufresne. 


58         Prayer  gives  deeper  insight  than  understanding. 

Job  1)5.  with  God,  as  they  make  us  bigger  in  our  own  eyes.     Hence 
it  is  well  added, 

Ver.  5.  And  it  was  so,  when  the  days  of  their /easting  were 
gone  about,  that  Job  sent  and  sanctified  them. 
xxxiv.  47,  Por^  when  the  round  of  the  days  of  feasting  is  gone 
about,  to  send  to  his  sons  and  to  sanctify  them,  is  after  the 
^sensum perception^  of  the  virtues  to  direct  the  inward  intention,  and 
to  purify  all  that  we  do  with  the  exact  sifting  of  a  reexamin- 
ation, lest  things  be  counted  good  which  are  evil,  or  at 
least  such  as  are  truly  good  be  thought  enough  when  they 
are  imperfect.  For  thus  it  very  often  happens  that  the  mind 
is  taken  in,  so  that  it  is  deceived  either  in  the  quality  of  what 
is  evil  or  the  quantity  of  what  is  good.  But  these  senses  of 
the  virtues  are  much  better  ascertained  by  prayers  than  by 
examinings.  For  the  things  which  we  endeavour  to  search 
out  more  completely  in  ourselves,  we  oftener  obtain  a  true 
insight  into  by  praying  than  by  investigating.  For  when  the 
mind  is  lifted  up  on  high  by  the  kind  of  machine  of  com- 
punction, all  that  may  have  been  presented  to  it  concerning 
itself,  it  surveys  the  more  surely  by  passing  j  udgment  upon  it 
beneath  its  feet.     Hence  it  is  well  subjoined, 

And  rose  up  early  in  the  morning  and  offered  burnt 
offerings,  according  to  the  number  of  them  all, 
XXXV.  48.  For  we  rise  up  early  in  the  morning,  when  being 
penetrated  with  the  light  of  compunction  we  leave  the 
night  of  our  human  state,  and  open  the  eyes  of  the  mind 
to  the  beams  of  the  true  light,  and  we  oflfer  a  burnt  offering 
for  each  son,  when  we  offer  up  the  sacrifice  of  prayer  for 
each  virtue,  lest  wisdom  may  uplift;  or  understanding,  while 
it  runs  nimbly,  deviate  from  the  right  path  ;  or  counsel,  while 
it  multiplies  itself,  grow  into  confusion ;  that  fortitude,  while 
it  gives  confidence,  may  not  lead  to  precipitation,  lest 
knowledge,  while  it  knows  and  yet  has  no  love,  may  swell 
the  mind;  lest  piety",  while  it  bends  itself  out  of  the  right 
line,  may  become  distorted;  and  lest  fear,  while  it  is  unduly 
alarmed,  may  plunge  one  into  the  pit  of  despair.     When  then 


"  i.  e.  mercy,  for  he  speats  of  the  LORD.'   If  mistakes  creep  in  thus,  there 

'  pietaH' of  God  towards  man.     Yet  in  is  often  truth  hidden  in  them.    Compare 

Is.   xi.    3.   it    stands  for    the    Greek  James  1,  27. 
tuft(iti»,  and  that  for  Heb.  ^/ear  of  the 


Thoughts  unuatched  lead  to  IshboshetKs  fate.         59 

we  pour  out  our  prayers  to  the  Lord  in  behalf  of  each  several  Book 
virtue,  that  it  be  free  from  alloy,  what  else  do  we  but  according  — ^- 


to  the  number  of  our  sons  offer  a  burnt  offering^  for  each  ? '  hoio- 

^  caustum 

for  an  holocaust  is  rendered  '  the  whole  burnt.'  Therefore 
to  pay  a  '  holocaust'  is  to  light  up  the  whole  soul  with  the 
fire  of  compunction,  that  the  heart  may  bum  on  the  altar  of 
love,  and  consume  the  defilements  of  our  thoughts,  like  the 
sins  of  our  own  offspring. 

49.  But  none  know   how   to   do   this  saving  those,  who, 
before  their  thoughts  proceed  to  deeds,  restrain  with  anxious 
circumspection  the  inward  motions  of  their  hearts.     None 
know  how  to  do  this  saving  they  who  have  learnt  to  fortify 
their  soul  with  a  manly  guard.     Hence  Ishbosheth  is  rightly 
said   to   have    perished   by   a   sudden    death,  *  whom   holy 
Scripture  at  the  same  time  testifies  to  have  had  not  a  man 
for  his  doorkeeper  but  a  woman,  in  these  words;    And  the 2  Sa.m. 
sopis  of  Rimmon  the  Beerothite,  Rechah  and  Baanah,  ^'^'^^  y^i^ 
and  came  about  the  heat  of  the  day  to  the  house  of  Ishbosheth, 
ii'ho  lay  on  a  bed  at  noon  ;    and  they  came  thither  into  the 
midst  of  the  house,  and  the  portress  of  the  house  was  fallen 
asleep,  winnouing  wheat.     And  they  came  privily  into  the 
house  fetching  ears  of  wheat,  and  they  smote  him  in   the 
groin.  The  portress  winnows  the  wheat,  when  the  wardkeeping 
of  the  mind  distinguishes  and  separates  the  virtues  from  the 
vices;  but  if  she  falls  asleep,  she  lets  in  conspirators  to  her 
master's  destruction,  in  that  when  the  cautiousness  of  dis- 
cernment is  at  an  end,  a  way  is  set  open  for  evil  spirits  to 
slay  the  soul.  They  enter  in  and  carry  off  the  ears,  in  that  they 
at  once  bear  off  the  germs  of  good  thoughts;    and  they  smite 
in  the  groin,  in  that  they  cut  off  the  virtue  of  the  soul  by 
the  delights  of  the  flesh.     For  to  smite  in  the  groin  is  to 
pierce  the  life  of  the  mind  with   the  delights  of  the  flesh. 
But  this  Ishbosheth  would  never  have  perished  by  such  a 
death,  if  he  had  not  set  a  woman  at  the  entrance  to  his  house, 
i.  c.  set  an  easy  guard  at  the  way  of  access  to  the  mind. 
For  a  strong  and  manly  activity  should  be  set  over  the  doors 
of  the  heart,  such  as  is  never  surprised  by  sleep  of  neglect,  and 
never  deceived  by  the  errors  of  ignorance ;  and  hence  he  is 
rightly  named  Ishbosheth,  who  is  exposed  by  a  female  guard 
to  the  swords  of  his  enemies,  for  Ishbosheth  is  rendered  *  a 


60  Satan  entices  our  good  to  turn  against  God. 

JoBi,4.man  of  confusion.'  And  he  is  *  a  man  of  confusion,'  who  is 
not  provided  with  a  strong  guard  over  his  mind,  in  that  while 
he  reckons  himself  to  be  practising  virtues,  vices  stealing  in 

1  ai.       kill  him^  unawares.     The  entrance  to  the  mind  then  must  be 

kill  his  £Qj.^-^g(j   with   the    whole    sum  of  virtue,  lest   at  any  time 

enemies  with  insidious  intent  penetrate  into  it  by  the  opening 

Prov.  4,  of  heedless  thought.     Hence  Solomon  says,  Keep  thy  heart 

^^'  with  all  diligence^  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life.  It  is 
meet  then  that  we  form  a  most  careful  estimate  of  the  virtues 
that  we  practise,  beginning  with  the  original  intent,  lest  the 
acts  which  they  put  forth,  even  though  they  be  right,  may 
proceed  from  a  bad  origin:  and  hence  it  is  rightly  subjoined 
in  this  place; 

For  Job  said,  It  may  he  that  my  sons  have  sinned,  and 
cursed  God  in  their  hearts. 

xxxvi.  50.  Our  sons  curse  God  in  their  hearts,  when  our 
righteous  deeds  proceed  from  unrighteous  thoughts;  when 
they  put  forth  good  things  in  public,  but  in  secret  devise 
mischief.  Thus  they  curse  God,  when  our  minds  reckon  that 
they  get  from  themselves  that  which  they  are.  They  curse 
God  when  they  can  miderstand  that  it  is  fi*om  Him  that  they 
have  received  their  powers,  and  yet  seek  their  own  praise  for 
His  gifts.  But  be  it  known  that  our  old  enemy  proceeds 
against  our  good  actions  in  three  ways,  with  this  view,  namely, 
that  the  thing  which  is  done  aright  before  the  eyes  of  men,  may 
be  spoiled  in  the  sight  of  the  Judge  within.  For  sometimes 
in  a  good  work  he  pollutes  the  intention,  that  all  that  follows 
in  the  doing  may  come  forth  impure  and  unclean,  because  it 
is  hereby  made  to  rise  troubled  from  its  source.  But  some- 
times he  has  no  power  to  spoil  the  intention  of  a  good  deed, 
but  he  presents  himself  in  the  action  itself  as  it  were  in  the 
pathway ;  that  whereas  the  person  goes  forth  the  more  secure 
in  the  purpose  of  his  heart,  evil  being  secretly  there  laid,  he 
may  as  it  were  be  slain  from  ambush.  And  sometimes  he 
neither  corrupts  the  intention,  nor  overthrows  it  in  the  way, 
but  he  ensnares  the  good  deed  at  the  end  of  the  action;  and 
in  proportion  as  he  feigns  himself  to  have  gone  further  off, 
whether  from  the  house  of  the  heart  or  from  the  path 
of  the  deed,  witli  the  greater  craftiness  he  watches  to  catch 
the  end  of  the  good  action;  and  the  more  he  has  put  a  man 


Snares  of  mal-intenlion^  and  subsequent  pride.  61 

off  his    guard    by    seeming  to  retire,   so    much  the  more  Book 
incurably  does  he  at  times  pierce  him  with  an  unexpected 
wound. 

51.  For  he  defiles  the  intention  in  a  good  work,  in  that 
when  he  sees  men's  hearts  ready  to  be  deceived,  he  presents 
to  their  ambition  the  breath  of  passing  applause,  that  wherein 
they  do  aright,  they  may  swerve  by  crookedness  in  the 
intention  to  make  the  lowest  things  their  aim;  and  hence 
under  the  image  of  Judaea,  it  is  well  said  by  the  Prophet  of 
every  soul  that  is  caught  in  the  snare  of  mal-intention,  //e-r  Lament. 
adversaries  are  the  chief.  As  though  it  were  said  in  plain  '  ^* 
words,  *  when  a  good  work  is  taken  in  hand  with  no  good 
intent,  the  spirits  that  ai"e  against  us  have  dominion  over  her 

from  the  commencement  of  the  conception,  and  the  more 
completely  possess  themselves  of  her,  even  that  they  hold  her 
under  their  power  by  the  very  beginning.' 

52.  But  when  they  are  unable  to  corrupt  the  intention, 
they  conceal  snares  which  they  set  in  the  way,  that  the  heart, 
lifting  itself  up  in  that  which  is  done  well,  may  be  impelled 
from  one  side  to  do  evil;   so  that  what  at  the  outset  it  had 
set  before  itself  in  one  way,  it  may  go  through  in  act  far 
other^-ise  than  it  had  begun.     For  often  whilst  human  praise 
falls  to  the  lot  of  a  good  deed,  it  alters  the  mind  of  the  doer, 
and  though  not  sought  after,  yet  when  offered  it  pleases;  and 
whereas  the  mind  of  the  well-doer  is  melted  by  the  delight 
thereof,  it  is  set  loose  from  all  vigorousness  of  the  inward 
intention.     Often  when  our  sense  of  justice  has  begun  to  act 
aright,  anger  joins  it  from  the  side;  and  whereas  it  troubles 
the  mind  out  of  measure,  by  the  quickness  of  our  sense  of 
uprightness,  it  wounds  all    the   healthiness   of  our  inward 
tranquillity.     It  often  happens  that  sadness,  attaching  itself 
from  the  side,  as  it  were,  becomes  the  attendant  of  seriousness 
of  mind,  and  that  every  deed  which  the  mind  commences 
with  a  good  intention,  this  quality  overcasts  with  a  veil  of 
sadness,  and  we  are  sometimes  the  slower  in  driving  it  away 
even  in  that  it  waits  as  it  were  in    solemn  attendance'  on 
the  depressed  mind.    Often  immoderate  joy  attaches  itself  to  a 

'  Ms8.   A.B.C.D.E.M.  '  quasi  serio     *  quasi  superior  famulatur/'ioaa  it  vrere 
famnlatur.'  Ben.  and  K.  'senior,'  which     a  superior  waiting.' 
hardly  gives  a  tolerable  sense,  L.  htxs 


62       Satan  entraps  like  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah. 

Job  1,4.  good  deed,  and  while  it  calls  upon  the  mind  for  more  mirth 
than  is  meet,  it  discards  all  the  weight  of  gravity  from  our 
good  action.  For  because  the  Psalmist  had  seen  that  ev^en 
those  that  set  out  well  are  met  by  snares  on  the  way,  being 

Ps.  142, filled  with  the  prophetic  spirit,  he  rightly  delivered  it;    In 

^'  this  way  that  I  walked  they  hid  a  snare  for  me.     Which 

Jeremiah  well  and  subtilly  insinuates,  who,  while  busied  with 
telling  of  outward  events,  points  out  what  things  were  done 

Jer.  41,  inwardly  in  ourselves,  Tliere  came  certain  from  Shechon, 
from  Shiloh,  and  from-  Samaria^  even  fourscore  men.,  having 
their  beards  shaven,  and  their  clothes  rent,  and  having  cut 
themselves,  with  offerings  and  incense  in  their  hand,  to 
bring  them  to  the  house  of  the  Lord.  And  Ishmael  the  son 
of  Nethaniah  toent  forth  from  Mizpah  to  meet  them,  weep- 
ing all  along  as  he  went;  and  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  met 
them,  he  said  unto  them.  Come  unto  Gedaliah  the  son  of 
Ahikam.  And  it  was  so,  when  they  came  into  the  midst  of 
the  city,  that  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah  slew  them.  For 
those  shave  their  beard,  who  remove  from  them  confidence 
in  their  own  powers.  They  rend  their  clothes,  that  spare  not 
themselves  in  tearing  in  pieces  outward  appearance.  They 
come  to  offer  up  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  frankincense  and 
gifts,  who  engage  to  set  forth  prayer  in  union  with  works  in 
sacrifice  to  God.  But  if  in  the  very  path  of  holy  devotion 
they  skill  not  to  keep  a  wary  eye  on  every  side,  Ishmael  the 
son  of  Nethaniah  goes  forth  to  meet  them ;  in  that  assuredly 
every  evil  spirit,  after  the  example  of  its  chief,  even  Satan, 
begotten  in  the  erring  principle  of  pride,  presents  itself  as  a 
snare  to  deceive .  And  it  is  likewise  well  said  concerning  him ; 
weeping  all  along  as  he  went ;  forasmuch  as  in  order  that  he 
may  cut  off  devout  souls  by  smiting  them,  he  hides  himself 
as  it  were  under  the  guise  of  virtue,  and  whereas  he  feigns  to 
agree  with  those  that  really  mourn,  being  thus  with  greater 
security  admitted  to  the  interior  of  the  heart,  he  destroys 
whatsoever  of  virtue  is  there  hidden  within.  And  most  often 
he  engages  to  guide  to  higher  things ;  and  hence  he  is  related 
to  have  said,  Come  unto  Gedaliah  the  son  qf  Ahikam;  and 
while  he  promises  greater  things  he  robs  us  even  of  the  very 
little  that  we  have ;  and  hence  it  is  rightly  said,  And  it  was 
so,  when  they  came  into  the  midst  qf  the  city,  that  Ishmael 


Satan  bruises  the  good  in  the  heely  or  end,  63 

the  son  qf  Nethaniah  slew  thein.     So  then  he  slays  in  the  Book 

midst  of  the  city  the  men  that  are  come  to  oflfer  gifts  to  God, '- — 

iir  that  those  souls  which  are  devoted  to  works  of  God, 
unless  they  watch  over  themselves  with  great  circumspection, 
lose  their  life  on  the  very  way,  through  the  enemy  intercept- 
ing them  unawares,  as  they  go  bearing  the  sacrifice  of  devo- 
tion ;  and  from  the  hands  of  this  enemy  there  is  no  escape, 
unless  they  speedily  hasten  back  to  repentance.  Hence  it  is 
fitly  added  there.  But  ten  men  were  found  among  //^e/w,  Jer.4i, 
that  said  unto  Ishmael,  Slay  us  not,  for  we  have  treasures 
in  the  field,  of  wheat,  of  barley,  and  of  oil,  and  of  honey. 
So  he  slew  them  not.  For  the  treasure  in  the  field  is  hope  in 
repentance,  which,  in  that  it  is  not  discernible,  is  kept  buried 
closely  in  the  earth  of  the  heart.  They  then  that  had  trea- 
sures in  the  field  were  saved,  in  that  they  who  after  the  fault 
of  their  unwariness  return  to  the  lamentation  of  repentance, 
do  not  likewise  perish  when  taken  captive. 

53.  But  when  our  old  adversary  neither  deals  a  blow  at 
the  outset  of  the  intention,  nor  intercept  us  in  the  path  of  the 
execution,  he  sets  the  more  mischievous  snares  at  the  end, 
which  he  so  much  the  more  wickedly  besets,  as  he  sees  that 
it  is  all  that  is  left  to  him  to  make  a  prey  of     Now  the  Prophet 
had  seen  these  snares  set  at  the  end  of  his  course,  when  he 
said.  They  will  mark  my  heel.     For  because  the  end  of  the  P3.56,6. 
body  is  in  the  heel,  what  is  signified  thereby  but  the  end  of 
an  action }    Whether  then  it  be  evil  spirits,  or  all  wicked 
men  that  follow  in  the  steps  of  their  pride,  they  '  mark  the 
heel"  when  they  aim  at  spoiling  the  end  of  a  good  action; 
and  hence  it  is  said  to  that  serpent,  it  shall  mark  thy  head.  Gen.  s, 
and  thou  shall  mark  his  heel.     For  to  mark  the  serpent's  YnW. 
head  is  to  keep  an  eye  upon  the  beginnings  of  his  suggestions,  *h"« 
and    with    the    hand    of    needful    consideration    wholly    to 
eradicate  them  from  the  avenues  of  the  heart ;  yet  when  he 
is  caught  at  the  commencement,  he  busies  himself  to  smite  the 
heel,  in  that  though  he  does  nol  strike  the  intention  with  his 
suggestion  at  the   first,  he  strives   to  ensnare    at   the  end. 
Now  if  the  heart  be  once  corrupted   in   the  intention,  the 
middle   and   the  end  of  the  action  that  follows  is  held  in 
secure  possession  by   the  cunning  adversary,  since  he  sees 
that  that  whole  tree  bears  fruit  to  himself,  which  he  has 


64       Each  virtue,  and  whole  character,  to  he  ivatched. 

Job  1,4.  poisoned  at  the  root  with  his  baleful  tooth.  Therefore  because 
we  have  to  watch  with  the  gi'eatest  cai'e,  that  the  mind  even  in 
the  service  of  good  works  be  not  polluted  by  a  wicked  in- 
tention, it  is  rightly  said,  It  may  be  that  my  sons  have 
sinned,  and  cursed  God  in  their  hearts.  As  if  it  were  said  in 
plain  words,  that  is  no  good  work  which  is  performed  out- 
wardly, unless  the  sacrifice  of  innocency  be  inwardly  offered 
for  it  upon  the  altar  of  the  heart  in  the  presence  of  God. 
The  stream  of  our  work  then  is  to  be  looked  through,  all  we 
can,  if  it  flows  out  pure  from  the  well-spring  of  thought. 
With  all  care  must  the  eye  of  the  heart  be  guarded  from  the 
dust  of  wickedness,  lest  that  which  in  action  it  shews  upright 
to  man,  be  within  set  awry  by  the  fault  of  a  crooked  inten- 
tion. 

54.  We  must  take  heed,  then,  that  our  good  works  be  not 
too  few,  take  heed  too  that  they  be  not  unexamined,  lest  by 
doing  too  few  works  we  be  found  barren,  or  by  leaving  them 
unexamined  we  be  found  foolish ;  for  each  several  virtue  is 
not  really  such,  if  it  be  not  blended  with  other  virtues;  and 

Exod.    hence  it  is  well  said  to  Moses,  Take  unto  thee  sweet  spices, 

35.'  '  stacte,  and  onycha,  and  galbanum,  of  good  scent,  ivith  pure 
frankincense ;  of  each  shall  there  be  a  like  iceight:  And 
thou  shall  make  it  a  perfume,  a  confection  after  the  art  of 
the  apothecary,  icell  tempered  together,  and  pure.  For  we 
make  a  perfume  compounded  of  spices,  when  we  yield  a 
smell  upon  the  altar  of  good  works  with  the  multitude  of  our 
virtues;  and  this  is  *  tempered  together  and  pure,'  in  that  the 
more  we  join  virtue  to  virtue,  the  purer  is  the  incense  of 

ver.  36.  good  works  we  set  forth.  Hence  it  is  well  added.  And 
thou  shall  beat  them  all  very  small,  and  put  of  it  before  the 
Tabernacle  of  the  Testimony.  We  *  beat  all  the  spices  very 
small,'  when  we  pound  our  good  deeds  as  it  were  in  the 
mortar  of  the  heart,  by  an  inward  sifting,  and  go  over  them 
minutely,  to  see  if  they  be  really  and  truly  good:  and 
thus  to  reduce  the  spices  to  a  powder,  is  to  rub  fine  our 
virtues  by  consideration,  and  to  call  them  back  to  the  utmost 
exactitude  of  a  secret  reviewal ;  and  observe  that  it  is  said  of 
that  powder,  and  thou  shall  put  of  it  before  the  Tabernacle 
of  the  Testimony :  for  this  reason,  in  that  our  good  works 
are  then  truly  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  our  Judge,  when  the 


Strict  self-examination  an  offerimj  ofjine  incense.     65 

mind  bruises  them  small  by  a  more  particular  reexamination,  Book 
and  as  it  were  makes  a  powder  of  the  spices,  that  the  good '■ — 


that  is  done  be  not  coarse'  and  hard,  lest  if  the  close  hand'  S^^- 
of  reexammation  do  not  bruise  it  fine,  it  scatter  not  from 
itself  the  more  refined  odour.  For  it  is  hence  that  the 
virtue  of  the  Spouse  is  commended  by  the  voice  of  the  Bride- 
groom, where  it  is  said,  Who  is  this,  that  cometh  out  of  the  CQ.\ii,3^ 
ivilderness  like  a  rod  of  smoke  of  the  perfume  of  myrrh  and 
frankincense,  icith  all  powders  of  the  merchant?  For  holy 
Church  rises  up  like  a  rod  of  smoke  from  spices,  in  that  by 
the  virtues  of  her  life  she  duly  advances  to  the  uprightness  of 
inward  incense,  nor  lets  herself  run  out  into  dissipated 
thought,  but  restrains  herself  in  the  recesses  of  the  heart  in 
the  rod  of  severity :  and  while  she  never  ceases  to  reconsider 
and  go  over  anew  the  things  that  she  does,  she  has  in  the 
deed  myn'h  and  frankincense,  but  in  the  thought  she  has 
powder.  Hence  it  is  that  it  is  said  again  to  Moses  of  those 
who  offer  a  victim.  And  he  shall  flay  the  burnt  offering^^Q'^'^y 
and  cut  it  into  his  pieces.  For  we  strip  the  skin  of  the 
victim,  when  we  remove  from  the  eyes  of  the  mind  the  over- 
cast of  virtue  ;  and  we  *  cut  it  in  his  pieces,'  when  we  minutely 
dissect  its  interior,  and  contemplate  it  piecemeal.  We  must 
therefore  be  careful,  that  when  we  overcome  our  evil  habits, 
we  are  not  overthrown  by  our  good  ones  running  riot,  lest 
they  chance  to  run  out  loosely,  lest  being  unheeded  they  be 
taken  captive,  lest  firom  error  they  forsake  the  path,  lest 
broken  down  by  weariness  they  lose  the  meed  of  past 
labours.  For  the  mind  ought  in  all  things  to  keep  a  wary 
eye  about  it,  aye  and  in  this  very  forethought  of  circumspec- 
tion to  be  persevering ;  and  hence  it  is  rightly  added, 
Thus  did  Job  all  the  days. 

55.  For  vain  is  the  good  that  we  do,  if  it  be  given  overxxxvii. 
before  the  end  of  life,  in  that  it  is  vain  too  for  him  to  run 
fast,  who  fails  before  he  reaches  the  goal.     For  it  is  hence 
that  it  is  said  of  the  reprobate.  Woe  unto  you  that  have  lost  Ecc\ua. 
patience.     Hence  IVuth  says  to  His  elect.  Ye  are  they  Ma/^'ukeaa 
have  contifiued  with  Me  in  My  tetnptations.     Hence  Joseph,  28. 
who  is   described   to    have  remained    righteous  among   his 
brethren  until  the  very  end,  is  the  only  one  related  to  have 

p 


66        Historical  sense  not  to  be  slighted  for  the  other. 

JOB  1,4.  had  '  a  coat  reaching  to  the  ancles  ^'  For  what  is  a  coat  that 
G^^^  reaches  to  the  ancles  but  action  finished  ?  For  it  is  as  if  the 
Y^lg     extended  coat  covered  the  ancle  of  the  body,  when  well 

doing  covers  us  in    God's  sight  even  to   the   end  of  life. 

Hence  it  is  that  it  is  enjoined  by  Moses  to  offer  upon  the 

Lev.  3,  altar  the  tail  of  the  sacrifice,  namely,  that  every  good  action 

^^''    that  we  begin  we  may  also  complete  with  perseverance  to  the 

""  ^*     end.     Therefore  what  is  begun  well  is  to  be  done  every  day, 

that  whereas  evil  is  driven  away  by  our  opposition,  the  very 

victory  that  goodness  gains  may  be  held  fast  in  the  hand  of 

constancy. 

66.  These  things  then  we  have  delivered  under  a  three- 
fold sense,  that  by  setting  a  variety  of  viands  before  the 
ifastidi- delicate  1  sense  of  the  soul,  we  may  offer  it  something  to 
^""^^       choose  by  preference.     But  this  we  most  earnestly  entreat, 
that  he  that  lifts  up  his  mind  to  the  spiritual  significaUon,  do 
not  desist  from  his  reverence  for  the  history. 

h  Vulg.  tunica  talari,  where  talari  stands  for  the  words  tMt  was  on  (or  over)  him. 


/ 


BOOK     11. 

From  the  sixth  verse  of  the  first  chapter  to  the  end,  he  follows  out  the 
exposition  according  to  the  threefold  interpretation. 

1.  Holy  Writ  is  set  before  the  eyes  of  the  mind  like  a  kind 
of  mirror,  that  we  may  see  our  inward  face  in  it;  for  therein 
we  learn  the  defonnitics,  therein  we  learn  the  beauties  that 
we  possess;  there  we  are  made  sensible  what  progress  we 
are  making,  there  too  how  far  we  are  from  proficiency.     It 
relates  the  deeds  of  the  Saints »,  and  stirs  the  hearts  of  theui. 
weak  to  follow  their  example,  and  while  it  commemorates '  ""^'^^^ 
their  victorious  deeds,  it  strengthens  our  feebleness  against '^'°°^'' 
the  assaults  of  our  vices ;  and  its  words  have  this  effect,  that 
the  mind  is  so  much  the  less  dismayed  amidst  conflicts  as 
It  sees  the  triumphs   of  so  many  brave  men   set  before  it. 
Sometimes  however  it  not  only  informs  us  of  their  excellen- 
cies, but  also  makes  known  their  mischances,  that  both  in 
the  victory  of  brave  men  we  may  see  what  we  ought  to  seize 
on  by  imitation,  and  again  in  their  falls  what  we   ought  to 
stand   in   fear  of.      For,   observe  how  Job   is   described   as 
rendered   greater  by   temptation,  but   David  by   temptation 
brought  to   the  gi'ound,  that    both   the   virtue  of  our  pre- 
decessors may  cherish  our  hopes,  and  the   downfall  of  our 
predecessors  may  brace  us  to  the  cautiousness  of  humility, 
so  that  whilst  we  are  uplifted  by  the   former  to  joy,  by  the 
latter  we   may  be  kept  down   through   fears,  and  that  the 
hearer's  mind,  being  from  the  one  source  imbued  with  the 
confidence  of  hope,  and  from  the  other  with  the  luunility 
arising  from  fear,  may  neither  swell  with  rash  pride,  in  that 
it  is  kept  down  by  alarm,  nor  be  so  kept  down  by  fear  as  to 
despair,  in  that  it  finds   support    for    confident  'hope  in  a 
precedent  of  virtue. 

F  -2 


68       Little  circumstances  significative  in  Holy  Writ. 

Job  1,6.     Ver.  6.  Now  there  was  a  day  when  the  sons  of  God  came 
to  present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also 
among  them. 
ii.  2.  It  is  interesting  to  observe   the   method  followed  by 

Holy  Writ  in  delineating,  at  the  commencement  of  its  rela- 
tions, the  qualities  and  the  issues  of  the  particular  cases.     For 
one  while  by  the  position  of  the  place,  now  by  the  posture  of 
the  body,  now  by  the  temperature  of  the  air,  and  now  by  the 
character  of  the  time,  it  marks  out  what  it  has  coming  after  con- 
cerning the  action  which  is  to  follow ;  as  by  the  position  of  the 
place  Divine  Scripture  sets  forth  the  merits  of  the  circumstances 
that  follow,  and  the  results  of  the  case,  as  where  it  relates  of 
Ex.  19,  Israel  that  they  could  not  hear  the  words  of  God   in   the 
''        mount,  but  received  the  commandments  on  the  plain  ;  doubt- 
less betokening  the  subsequent  weakness  of  the  people  who 
could  not  mount  up  to  the  top,  but  enfeebled  themselves 
by  living  carelessly  in  the  lowest  things.     By  the  posture  of 
the  body  it  tells  of  future   events,  as  where  in  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,   Stephen   discloses  that   he   saw   Jesus,  Who 
Acts  7,  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Power  of  God,  in  a  standing 
^'     •    posture;  for   standing  is  the  posture   of  one  in   the  act  of 
rendering  aid,   and  rightly  is  He  discerned  standing,  Who 
gives  succour  in  tlie  press  of  the  conflict.     By  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  air,  the  subsequent  event  is  shewn,  as  when  the 
Evangelist  was  telling  that  none  out  of  Judaea  were  at  that 
time  to  prove  believers  in  our  Lord's  preaching,  he  prefaced 
Johnio,  it  by  saying,  and  it  was  winter,  for  it  is  written,  Because 
M    24  ^'^^H'^^^iy  shM  abound,  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold.  There- 
12.         fore  he  took  care  to  particularize  the  winter  season,  to  indicate 
that  the  frost  of  wickedness  was  in  the  hearers'  hearts.   Hence 
it  is  that  it  is  beforehand  remarked  of  Peter,  when  on  the 
John  18,  point  of  denying  our  Lord,  that  it  was  cold,  and  Peter  stood 
^^'        with  them,  and  warmed  himself.     For  he  was  now  inwardly 
unenlivened  by  the  warmth  of  Divine  love,  but  to  the  love  of 
this  present  life  he  was  warming  up,  as  though  his  weakness 
were  set  boiling  by  the  persecutors'  coals.     By  the  character 
of  the  time  moreover  the  issue  of  the  transaction  is  set  forth, 
as  it  is  related  of  Judas,  who  was  never  to  be  restored  to 
pardon,  that  he  went  out  at  night  to  the   treachery  of  his 
betrayal,  where   upon  his  going  out,  the   Evangelist   says, 


How  Angels  come  to  God,  Whotn  they  leave  not.       69 

And  it  was  night.     Hence  too  it  is  declared  to  the  wicked  Book 
rich  man,  This  night  shall  thy  soul  be  required  of  thee  ;  for 


Johnl3, 


that  soul  which  is  conveyed  to  darkness,  is  not  recorded  as  so. 
required  in  the  day  time,  but  in  the  night.     Hence  it  is  that  20^  ^  '' 
Solomon  who  received  the   gift  of  wisdom,  but  was  not  to 
persevere,  is  said  to  have  received  her  in  dreams  and  in  the 
night.     Hence  it  is  that  the  Angels  visit  Abraham  at  midday.  Gen.  18, 
but  when  proposing  to  punish   Sodom,  they  are   recorded  to  ^*  ^' 
have  come  thitlier  at  eventide.     Therefore,  because  the  trial  Gen.  19, 
of  blessed  Job  is  carried  on  to  victory,  it  is  related  to  have  ^* 
begun  by  day,  it  being  said. 

Now  there  was  a  day,  when  the  sons  of  Qod  came  to 
present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also 
among  them. 

3.  Now  who  are  called  the  sons  of  God,  saving  the  elect    iii. 
Angels  }  and  as  we  know  of  them  that  they  wait  on  the  eyes  of 
His  Majesty,  it  is  a  worthy  subject  of  inquiry*,  whence  they 
come  to  present  themselves  belbre  God.    For  it  is  of  these  that 
it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  Truth,  Tlieir  angels  do  always  behold  Mat.  18, 
the  face  of  My  Father,  IVJiich  is  in  heaven  ?    Of  these  the  ^^* 
Prophet  saith,   llioiisand  thousands  ministered    unto  Hiniy'Da.ii.Tt 
and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood  before  Him.     If     * 
then  they  ever  behold  and  ever  stand  nigh,  we  must  carefully 
and  attentively  consider  whence  they  are  come,  who  never 
go  from  Him  ;  but  since  Paul  says  of  them.  Are  they  not  all  Heh.  i, 
ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  that  shall 
he  heirs  of  salvation  ?  in  this,  that  we  learn  that  they  are  sent, 
we  discover  whence  they  are  come.  Rut  see,  we  add  question 
to  question,  and  as  it  were  while  we  strive  to  unloose  the  loop, 
we  are  only  fastening  a  knot.    For  how  can  they  either  always 
be  in  presence,  or  always  behold  the  face   of  the  Father,  if 
ihey  are  sent  upon  external  ministration  for  our  salvation  ? 
Which  will  however  be  the  sooner  believed,  if  we  think  of 
how  great  subtlety  is  the  angelical  nature.     For  they  never 
so  gb  forth  apart  from  tlie  vision  of  God,  as  to  be  deprived 
of  tlic  joys  of  interior  contemplation;   for  if  when  they  went 
forth  they  lost  the  vision  of  the  Creator,  ihcy  could  neither 
have  raised  up  the  fallen,  nor  announced  the  truth  to  those  in 
ignorance ;   and  that  fount  of  light,  which  by  departing  they 
were  themselves  de])rived  of,  they  could  in  no  wise  proffer  to 


70  How  Satan  could  come  before  God. 

JoBi,6.  the  blind.    Herein  then  is  the  nature  of  Angels  distinguished 

from  the  present  condition  of  our  own  nature,  that  we  are 

,'     both  circumscribed  by  space,  and  straitened  by  the  blindness 

of  ignorance ;  but  the  spirits  of  Angels  are  indeed  bounded  by 

,      space,  yet  their  knowledge  extends  far  above  us  beyond  com- 

;     parison  ;  for  they  expand  by  external  and  internal  knowing, 

since  they  contemplate  the  very  source  of  knowledge  itself. 

For  of  those  things  which  are  capable  of  being  known,  what 

is  there  that  they  know  not,  who  know  Him,  to  Whom  all 

things  are  known  ?     So  that  their  knowledge  when  compared 

with   ours  is  vastly  extended,  yet  in    comparison  with  the 

;;    Divine  knowledge  it  is  little.     In  like  manner  as  their  very 

1   spirits  in  comparison  indeed  with  our  bodies  are  spirits,  but 

^-  being   compared  with  the  Supreme    and  Incomprehensible 

Spirit,  they  are  Body.     Therefore  they  are  both  sent  from 

Him,  and  stand  by  Him  too,  since  both  in  that  they  are 

circumscribed,  they  go  forth,  and  in  this,  that  they  are  also 

entirely  present,  they  never  go   away.     Thus  they  at  the 

same  time  always  behold  the  Father's  face,  and  yet  come  to 

us ;  because  they  both  go  forth  to  us  in  a  spiritual  presence, 

and  yet  keep  themselves  there,  whence  they  had  gone  out, 

by  virtue  of  interior  contemplation ;    it  may  then  be  said, 

The  sons  of  God  came  to  present  themselves  before  the  Lord  ; 

inasmuch  as  they  come  back  thither  by  a  return  of  the  spirit, 

whence  they  never  depart  by  any  withdrawal  of  the  mind. 

And  Satan  came  also  among  them. 

iv.         4.  It  is  a  very  necessary  enquiry,  how  Satan  could  be 

present  among  the  elect  Angels,  he  who  had  a  long  time 

before   been    damned    and    banished    from    their    number, 

as    his    pride    required.      Yet    he    is   well    described    as 

having   been  present  among  them ;  for  though  he  lost  his 

blessed   estate,  yet  he  did  not  part  with  a  nature  like  to 

theirs,  and  though  his  deserts  sink  him,  he  is  lifted  up  by 

the  properties  of  his  subtle  nature.     And  so  he  is  said  to  have 

come  before  God  among  the  sons  of  God,  for  Almighty  God, 

with  that  eye  with   which  He  regards  all  spiritual  things, 

beholds  Satan  also  in  the  rank  of  a  more  subtle  nature,  as 

Prov.     Scripture  testifies,  when  it  says.  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in 

'   '     every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good;    but  this,  viz. 

that  Satan  is  said  to  have  come  before  the  presence  of  God, 


Satan  comes  before  God  uithout  seeing  Him.  71 

comes  under  a  grave   question  with   us;    for   it  is  written,  Book 
Blessed  are  the  pure  in  hearty  for  they  shall  see  God.     But  ^^^^^  . 
Satan,  who  can  never  be  of  a  pure  heart,  how  could  he  haves, 
presented  himself  to  see  the  Lord? 

5.  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  he  is  said  to  have  come 
before  the  Lord,  but  not  that  he  saw  the  Lord.  For  he  came 
to  be  seen,  and  not  to  see.  He  was  in  the  Lord's  sight,  but  the 
Lord  was  not  in  his  sight ;  as  when  a  blind  man  stands  in 
the  sun,  he  is  himself  bathed  indeed  in  the  rays  of  light,  yet 
he  sees  nothing  of  the  hght,  by  which  he  is  brightened.  In 
like  manner  then  Satan  also  appeared  in  the  Lord's  sight 
among  the  Angels.  For  the  Power  of  God,  which  by  a  look 
penetrates  all  objects,  beheld  the  impure  spirit,  who  saw  not 
Him.  For  because  even  those  very  things  which  flee  from 
God's  face  cannot  be  hidden,  in  that  all  things  are  naked  to 
the  view  of  the  Most  High,  Satan  being  absent  came  to  Him, 
Wlio  was  present. 

Ver.  7.  And  the  Lord  said,  unto  Satan,  Whence  comest 
thou  ? 

6  How  is  it  that  it  is  never  said  to  the  elect  Angels,  when 
they  come,  '  Whence  come  ye  ?'  while  Satan  is  questioned 
whence  he  comes }  For  assuredly  we  never  ask,  but  what 
we  do  not  know ;  but  God's  not  knowing  is  His  condemning. 
Whence  at  the  last  He  will  say  to  some,  /  knoic  you  wo/Liikei3, 
whence  ye  are ;  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity.  In  ' ' 
the  same  way  that  a  man  of  truth,  who  disdains  to  sin  by  a 
falsehood,  is  said  not  to  know  how  to  lie,  not  in  being 
ignorant  if  he  had  the  will  to  lie,  but  in  disdaining  to  tell 
a  falsehood,  from  love  of  truth,  ^^^lat  then  is  it  to  say  to 
Satan,  Whence  comest  thou?  but  to  condemn  his  ways,  as 
though  unknown.  The  light  of  truth  then  knows  nought  of 
the  darkness,  which  it  reproves;  and  the  paths  of  Satan,  which 
as  a  judge  it  condemns,  it  is  meet  that  it  should  inquire  after 
as  though  in  ignorance  of  them.  Hence  it  is  that  it  is  said 
to  Adam  in  liis  sin  by  his  Creator's  voice,  Adam,  where  ar/ Gen.  3, 
thou  ?  For  Divine  Power  was  not  ignorant  to  what  hiding 
place  His  senant  had  fled  after  his  oflence,  but  for  that  He 
saw  that  he,  having  fallen  in  his  sin,  was  now  as  it  were  hidden 
under  sin  from  the  eyes  of  Truth,  in  that  He  approves  not  the 
darkness  of  his  error,  He  knows  not,  as  it  were,  where  the 


72  Satan,  as  fallen  from  heaven,  tcalks  on  earth. 

Job  1,7.  sinner  is,  and  both  calls  him,  and  asks  him,  saying,  Adam, 
where  art  thou?  hereby,  that  He  calls  him,  He  gives  a  token 
that  He  recalls  him  to  repentance;  hereby,  that  He  questions 
him,  He  plainly  intimates  that  He  knows  not  sinners,  that 
justly  deserve  to  be  damned.  Accordingly  the  Lord  never 
calls  Satan,  but  yet  He  questions  him,  saying,  Whence 
comest  thou  f  without  doubt  because  God  never  recalls  the 
rebel  spirit  to  repentance,  but  in  not  knowing  his  paths  of 

1  discu-  pride.  He  condemns  him;  therefore  while  Satan  is  examined* 
concerning  his  way,  the  elect  Angels  have  not  to  be  questioned 
whence  they  come,  since  their  ways  are  known  to  God  in  so 
much  as  they  are  done  of  His  own  moving,  and  whilst  they 
are  subservient  to  His  will  alone,  thev  can  never  be  unknown 
to  Him,  in  so  far  as,  by  His  approving  eye,  it  is  Himself 
from  Whom  and  before  Whom  they  are  done.     It  follows, 

Then  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said,  From  going  to 
and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  from  walking  up  and  down  in  it. 
vi.  7.  The  toilsomeness  of  labour  is  wont  to  be  represented 
by  the  round  of  circuitous  motion.  Accordingly  Satan  went 
toiling  round  about  the  earth,  for  he  scorned  to  abide  at 
peace  in  the  height  of  heaven ;  and  whereas  he  intimates 
that  he  did  not  fly,  but  that  he  walked,  he  shews  the  weight 
of  sin,  by  which  he  is  kept  down  below.  Walking  then  up 
and  down,  he  went  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  for  tumbling 
down  from  that  his  soaring  in  spiritual  mightiness,  and 
oppressed  by  the  weight  of  his  own  wickedness,  he  came 
forth  to  his  round  of  labour.     For  it  is  for  no  other  reason 

Ps.12,3.  that  it  is   said  of  his  members  also  by   the  Psalmist,   The 

"V .  in  .  . 

circuitu  wicked  walk  on  every  side ;  for  while  they  seek  not  things 
within,  they  weary  themselves  with  toiling  at  things  without. 
It  follows  ; 

Ver.  8.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Hast  thou  considered 
My  servant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a 
perfect  and  upright  man,  one  that  fear  eth  God,  and  escheu-eth 
evil  ? 
vii.  8.  This  point,  viz.  that  blessed  Job  is  by  the  voice  of  God 
called  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  Qod, 
and  escheweth  evil,  having  explained  above  minutely  and 
particularly,  we  forbear  to  rehearse  what  we  have  said,  lest 
while  we  go  over  points  that  have  been  already  examined,  we 


How  Spirit  speaks  with  Spirit.  73 

should  be  slow  in  coming  to  those  which  have  not.  This  Book 
then  requires  our  discreet  consideration,  how  it  is  either  that 
the  Lord  is  said  to  speak  to  Satan,  or  that  Satan  is  said  to 
answer  the  Lord,  for  we  must  make  out  what  this  speaking 
means.  For  neither  by  the  Lord  Who  is  the  supreme  and 
unbounded  Spirit,  nor  by  Satan,  who  is  invested  with  no 
fleshly  nature,  is  the  breath  of  air  inhaled  by  the  bellows  of 
the  lungs,  after  the  manner  of  human  beings,  so  that  by  the 
organ  of  the  throat  it  should  be  given  back  in  the  articulation 
of  the  voice ;  but  when  the  Incomprehensible  Nature  speaks 
to  an  invisible  nature,  it  behoves  that  our  imagination  rising 
above  the  properties  of  our  corporeal  speech  should  be  lifted 
to  the  sublime  and  unknown  methods  of  interior  sj^eech.  For 
we,  that  we  may  express  outwardly  the  things  which  we  are 
inwardly  sensible  of,  deliver  these  through  the  organ  of  the 
throat,  by  the  sounds  of  the  voice,  since  to  the  eyes  of  others 
we  stand  as  it  were  behind  the  partition  of  the  body,  within 
the  secret  dwelling  place  of  the  mind;  but  when  we  desire  to 
make  ourselves  manifest,  we  go  forth  as  though  through  the 
door  of  the  tongue,  that  we  may  shew  what  kind  of  persons 
we  are  within.  But  it  is  not  so  with  a  spiritual  nature,  which 
is  not  a  twofold  compound  of  mind  and  body.  But  again  we 
must  understand  that  even  when  incorporeal  nature  itself  is 
said  to  speak,  its  speech  is  by  no  means  characterized  by 
one  and  the  same  form.  For  it  is  after  one  method  that  God 
speaks  to  the  Angels,  and  after  another  that  the  Angels 
speak  to  God ;  in  one  manner  that  God  speaks  to  the  souls 
of  Saints,  in  another  that  the  souls  of  Saints  speak  to  God ; 
in  one  way  God  speaks  to  the  devil,  in  another  the  devil 
speaks  to  God. 

9.  For  because  no  corporeal  obstacle  is  in  the  way  of 
a  spiritual  being,  God  speaks  to  the  holy  Angels  in  the  very 
act  of  His  revealing  to  their  hearts  His  inscrutable  secrets, 
that  whatsoever  they  ought  to  do  they  may  read  it  in  the 
simple  contemplation  of  truth,  and  that  the  very  dt'lights  of 
contemplation  should  be  like  a  kind  of  vocal  precepts,  for  that 
is  as  it  were  spoken  to  them  as  hearers  which  is  inspired  into 
them  as  beholders.  Whence  when  God  was  imparting  to 
their  hearts  His  visitation'  of  vengeance  upon  the  pride  of 

•  or  '  an  observant  senw,'  aDimadversionem. 


74  God  speaks  to  Angels  hy  inward  Revelation. 

Job  1,8.  man,  He  said,  ^  Come,  let  us  go  down,  and  there  confound 
^^^'^^1  their  language.  He  saith  to  those  who  are  close  about 
Him,  Come,  doubtless  because  this  very  circumstance  of 
never  decreasing  from  the  contemplation  of  God,  is  to 
be  always  increasing  in  the  contemplation  of  Him,  and  I 
never  to  depart  from  Him  in  heart,  is  as  it  were  to  be  f 
always  coming  to  Him  by  a  kind  of  steady  motion.  To 
them  He  also  says.  Let  us  go  down,  and  there  confound 
their  language.  The  Angels  ascend  in  that  they  behold 
their  Creator;  the  Angels  descend  in  thai  by  a  strict 
examination  they  put  down  that  which  exalts  itself  in  un- 
lawful measure.  So  then  for  God  to  say,  Let  us  go  down, 
and  confound  their  speech,  is  to  exhibit  to  them  in  Himself 
that  which  would  be  rightly  done,  and  by  the  power  of 
interior  vision  to  inspire  into  their  minds,  by  secret  influences, 
the  judgments  which  are  fit  to  be  set  forth. 

10.  It  is  after  another  manner  that  the  Angels  speak  to 
Kev.  5,  God,  as  in  the  Revelation  of  John  also  they  say,  Worthy  is  the 

^'  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  power,  and  inches'",  and 
wisdom ;  for  the  voice  of  the  Angels  in  the  praises  of  God 
is  the  very  admiration  itself  of  inward  contemplation.  To  be 
struck  dumb  at  the  marvels  of  Divine  goodness  is  to  utter  a 
voice,  for  the  emotion  of  the  heart  excited  with  a  feeling  of 
awe  is  a  mighty  utterance  of  voice  to  the  ears  of  a  Spirit  that 
is  not  circumscribed.  This  voice  unfolds  itself  as  it  were  in  dis- 
tinct words,  while  it  moulds  itself  in  the  innumerable  modes  of 
admiration.  God  then  speaks  to  the  Angels  when  His  inner 
will  is  revealed  to  them  as  the  object  of  their  perception; 
but  the  Angels  speak  to  the  Lord  when  by  means  of  this, 
which  they  contemplate  above  themselves,  they  rise  to  emotions 
of  admiration. 

11.  In  one  way  God  speaks  to  the  souls  of  Saints,  in 
another  the  souls  of  Saints  speak  to  God ;  whence  too  it  is 

Rev.  G,  again  said  in  the  Apocalypse  of  John,  I  saw  under  the  altar 

^'  ^^'     the  sonls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  the  word  qf  God,  and 

for  the  testimony  which   they  held:  and  they  cried  with  a 

loud  voice,  saying.  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost 

Thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on 

'•  Vulg.  '  venite,'  come.  Engl.  Vers.        "^  Divi7iitatem,^  Godhead,* andsoyulg. 
Go  to.  for  divitias. 


God's  will  that  we  pray  for  mercies  delayed.  75 

the  earth  ?    Where  in  the  same  place  it  is  added,  And  ivhile  Book 
robes  were  given  unto  every  one  of  them,  and  it  was  mid  nnto 


Rev.  6 

them  that  they  should  rest  for  a  little  season,  until  their  n.  ' 
fellowservants  also  and  their  brethren  that  should  be  killed  as 
they  were  should  be  fulfilled ;  for  what  else  is  it  for  souls  to 
utter  the  prayer  for  vengeance,  but  to  long  for  the  day  of 
final  judgment,  and  the  resurrection  of  their  lifeless  bodies? 
For  their  great  cry  is  their  great  longing ;  for  every  one  cries 
the  less,  the  less  he  desires ;  and  he  utters  the  louder  voice 
in  the  ears  of  an  uncircumscribed  Spirit  in  proportion  as  he 
more  entirely  pours  himself  out  in  desire  of  Him,  and  so  the 
words  of  souls  are  their  very  desires.  For  if  the  desire  were 
not  speech,  the  Prophet  would  not  say.  Thine  ear  hath  heard  Ps.  lo, 
the  desire  of  their  heart ;  but  as  the  mind  which  beseeches  '* 
is  usually  affected  one  way  and  tlie  mind  which  is  besought 
another,  and  yet  the  souls  of  the  Saints  so  cleave  to  God  in  the 
bosom  of  their  inmost  secresy,  that  in  cleaving  they  find 
rest,  how  are  those  said  to  beseech,  who  it  appears  are  in 
no  degree  at  variance  with  His  interior  will  ?  How  are  they 
said  to  beseech,  who,  we  are  assured,  are  not  ignorant,  either 
of  God's  will  or  of  those  things  which  shall  be  ?  Yet  whilst 
fixed  on  Himself  they  are  said  to  beseech  any  thing  of  Him, 
not  in  desiring  aught  that  is  at  variance  with  the  will  of 
Him,  Whom  they  behold,  but  in  proportion  as  they  cleave 
to  Him  with  the  greater  ardour  of  mind,  they  also  obtain  \ 
from  Him  to  beseech  that  of  Him,  which  they  know  it  is  His 
will  to  do ;  so  that  they  drink  from  Him  that  which  they 
thirst  after  from  Him.  And  in  a  manner  to  us  incomprehensible 
as  yet,  what  they  hunger  for  in  begging,  they  are  filled  wilhal 
in  foreknowing ;  and  so  they  would  be  at  variance  with  their 
Creator's  will,  if  they  did  not  pray  for  that  which  they  see  to 
be  His  will,  and  they  would  cleave  less  closely  to  Him,  if 
when  He  is  willing  to  give,  they  knocked  with  less  lively 
longing.  These  receive  the  answer  spoken  from  God,  Rest 
yet  for  a  little  season,  till  your  fellowservants  and  your 
brethren  be  fulfilled.  To  say  to  those  longing  souls,  rest  yet 
for  a  little  season,  is  to  breathe  uj)on  them  amid  their 
burning  desires,  by  the  very  foreknowledge,  the  soothings 
of  consolation ;  so  that  both  the  voice  of  the  souls  is  that 
desire  which  through  love  they  entertain,  and  God's  address  in 


76  How  Satan  cannot  hut  speak  to  God. 

Job  1,8.  answer  is  this,  that  He  reassures  them  in  their  desires  with 
the  certainty  of  retribution.  For  Him  then  to  answer  that 
they  should  await  the  gathering  of  their  brethren  to  tlieir 
number,  is  to  infuse  into  their  minds  the  delays  of  a  glad 
awaiting,  that  while  they  long  after  the  resurrection  of  the 
flesh,  they  may  be  further  gladdened  by  the  accession  of  their 
brethren  who  remain  to  be  gathered  to  them. 

12,  It  is  in  one  way  that  God  speaks  to  the  devil,  and  in 
another  that  the  devil  speaks  to  God.  For  God's  speaking 
to  the  devil  is  His  rebuking  his  ways  and  dealings  with  the 
visitation  of  a  secret  scrutiny,  as  it  is  here  said.  Whence 
comest  thou  ?  But  the  devil's  answering  Him,  is  his  being 
unable  to  conceal  any  thing  from  His  Omnipotent  Majesty; 
whence  he  says.  From  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and 
from  walking  up  and  down  in  it.  For  it  is  as  it  were  for 
him  to  say  what  he  had  been  doing,  that  he  knows  that  he 
cannot  hide  his  doings  from  the  eyes  of  That  Being.  But  we 
must  understand  that,  as  we  learn  in  this  place,  God  has  four 
ways  of  speaking  to  the  devil,  and  the  devil  has  three  ways  of 
speaking  to  God.  God  speaks  to  the  devil  in  four  modes, 
for  He  both  reprehends  his  unjust  ways,  and  urges  against 
him  the  righteousness  of  His  Saints,  and  lets  him  by  permis- 
sion try  their  innocence,  and  sometimes  stops  him  that  he  dare 
not  tempt  them.  Thus  he  rebukes  his  unjust  ways,  as  has  been 
just  now  said.  Whence  comest  thou  ?     He  urges  against  hiui 

Job  1,8.  the  righteousness  of  His  own  elect,  as  He  saith.  Hast  thou 
considered  My  servant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  all 
the   earth  f      He    allows  him   by  permission    to  put  their 

Ter.  12.  innocence  to  the  test,  as  when  He  says.  All  thai  lie  hath  is 
in  thy  power.  And  again  He  prevents  him  from  tempting, 
when  He  says.  But  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thy  hand. 
But  the  devil  speaks  to  God  in  tliree  ways,  either  when  he 
communicates  to  Him  his  dealing,  or  when  he  calumniates 
the  innocence  of  the  elect  with  false  charges,  or  when 
he  demands  the   same  innocence   to  put  it   to  trial.      For 

ver.  7.    he  communicates  his  ways  who   says.  From  going  to  and 

fro  in  the  earth,  and  front  walking  up  and  down  hi  it.    He 

calumniates   the    innocence    of    the    elect,   when   he    says, 

ver.9  10.  DotJi  Job  fear  God  for  nought  ?  Hast  not  Thou  made 
an    hedge    about    him,    and    about    all    his    house,    and 


He  speaks  against  tlie  Saints  from  envy.  77 

about  all  that  he  hath  on  even/  side  ?     He  demands  the  Book 

II 
same  innocence   to   be   subjected   to   trial,  when    be   says, 1— 


But  put  forth  Thine  hand  noip  and  touch  all  that  he 
hath,  and  he  will  curse  Thee  to  Thy  J  ace.  But  God's  say- 
ing, Whence  comest  thou?  is  His  rebuking  by  virtue  of  His 
own  goodness  that  one's  paths  of  wickedness.  His  saying, 
Hast  thou  considered  My  sen-ant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like 
him  in  all  the  earth  ?  is  His  making  the  elect,  by  justifying 
them,  such  as  a  rebel  angel  might  envy.  God's  saying.  All 
that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power,  is,  for  the  probation  of  the 
Saints,  His  letting  loose  upon  them  that  assault  of  the 
wicked  one,  by  the  secret  exercise  of  His  power.  God's  say- 
ing. Only  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  hand,  is  His  re- 
straining him  from  an  excessive  assault  of  temptation,  even 
in  giving  him  permission.  But  the  devil's  saying,  From 
going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  from  walking  up  and 
down  in  it,  signifies  His  inability  to  conceal  from  His  unseen 
eyes  the  cunning  of  his  wickedness.  The  devil's  saying, 
Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought  Y  is  his  complaining  against 
the  just  within  the  hiding  places  of  his  own  thoughts,  his 
envying  their  gains,  and  from  envy  searching  out  flaws  for 
their  condemnation.  The  devil's  saying.  Put  forth  Thine 
hand  now  and  touch  all  that  he  hath,  is  his  panting  with 
the  fever  of  wickedness  to  afflict  the  just.  For  in  that 
through  envy  he  longs  to  tempt  the  just,  he  seeks  as  it  were 
by  entreaty  to  put  them  to  the  test.  Now  then,  as  we  have 
briefly  described  the  methods  of  inward  speaking,  let  us 
return  to  the  thread  of  interpretation,  which  has  been  slightly 
interrupted. 

Ver.  8.  Hast  thou  considered  My  servant  Job,  that  there 
is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect  and  an  upright  tnan, 
one  that  /caret h  God,  and  eschewelh  evil  ? 

13.  The  point  has  been  already  discussed  in  the  foregoing 
discourse,  that  the  devil  proposed  a  contest  not  with  Job  but 
with  God,  blessed  Job  being  set  between  them  as  the  subject 
of  the  contest ;  and  if  we  say  that  Job  amid  the  blows  erred  in 
his  speech,  we  assert  what  it  is  impious  to  imagine,  that  God 
was  the  loser  in  His  ])ledge.  For,  lo,  here  also  it  is  to  be  re- 
marked, that  tlie  devil  did  not  first  beg  the  blessed  Job  of 
the  Lord,  but  the  Lord  commended  him  to  the  contempt  of 


78  Satan  searches  for  matter  of  accusation . 

JoBi,8.the  devil ;  and  unless  He  had  known  that  he  would  continue 
in  his  uprightness,  He  would  not  assuredly  have  undertaken 
for  him.  Nor  would  He  give  him  up  to  perish  in  the  tempt- 
ation, against  whom,  before  the  temptation  was  sent,  those 
firebrands  of  envy  were  kindled  in  the  tempter's  mind  from 
God's  own  commendations. 

14.  But  the  old  adversary,  when  he  fails  to  discover  any 
evil  of  which  he  might  accuse  us,  seeks  to  turn  our  very  good 
points  into  evil,  and  being  beaten  upon  works,  looks  through 
our  words  for  a  subject  of  accusation  ;  and  when  he  finds  not 
in  our  words  either  ground  of  accusation,  he  strives  to  blacken 
the  purpose  of  the  heart,  as  though  our  good  deeds  did  not 
come  of  a  good  mind,  and  ought  not  on  that  account  to  be 
reckoned  good  in  the  eyes  of  the  Judge.  For  because  he 
sees  the  fruit  of  the  tree  to  be  green  even  in  the  heat,  he  seeks 
as  it  were  to  set  a  worm  at  its  root.     For  he  says, 

Ver.  9,  10.  Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought?  Hast  Thou  not 
made  an  hedge  about  him,  and  about  his  house,  and  about 
all  that  he  hath  on  every  side?  Thou  hast  blessed  the 
work  of  his  hands,  and  his  substance  is  increased  in  the 
land, 

15.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  terms,  *  What  wonder  is  it,  if  he 
who  has  received  so  many  blessings  upon  earth  should 
behave  without  offence  in  return  for  them  ?  He  would  then 
be  really  innocent,  if  he  continued  good  in  adversity ;  but 
why  is  he  to  be  called  great,  whose  every  work  has  its 
recompense  attending  upon  him,  in  all  this  abundance  of 
good  things  V  For  the  crafty  adversary,  when  he  bethinks 
himself  that  the  holy  man  had  acted  well  in  prosperity, 
hastens  by  means  of  adversity  to  prove  him  guilty  before  the 
Judge.     Whence  it  is  well  said  by  the  voice  of  the  Angel  in 

Rev.  12,  the  Apocalypse,  The  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast  down, 
which  accused  them  before  God  day  and  night.  Now  holy 
Scripture  is  often  used  to  set  the  day  for  prosperity,  and  the 
night  for  adversity.  Accordingly  he  ceases  not  to  accuse  us 
by  day  and  by  night ;  forasmuch  as  he  strives  to  shew  us  to 
be  chargeable  one  while  in  prosperity,  another  while  in  ad- 
versity. In  the  day  he  accuses  us,  when  he  slanders  us 
that  we  abuse  our  good  fortune ;  in  the  night  he  accuses  us, 
when  he  shews  that  we  do  not  exercise  patience  in  adversity ; 


Trial  by  day  or  night.     Satan  tempts  by  Ood's  power.    79 

and  therefore  because  no  strokes  had  as  vet  touched  blessed  Book 

II. 
Job,  he  was  as  it  were  still  wholly  without  that  whereof  he 

might  be  able  to  accuse  him  by  night,  but  because  in  pros- 
perity he  had  thriven  in  a  great  holiness  *^,  he  pretended  that  it 
was  in  return  for  his  good  fortune  that  he  had  done  well,  lying 
in  the  crafty  assertion,  that  he  did  not  keep  his  substance  for 
the  profit*  of  the  Lord,  but  that  he  served  the  Lord  for  the^usum 
profit*  of  his  substance.     For  there  are  some  who,  to  enjoy  «usum 
God,  deal  with  this  life  like  stewards,  and  there  are  some  who 
to  enjoy  this  life  would  make  use  of  God  by  the  bye.    ^Vllen  ^ S.  Aug. 
then  he  describes  the  gifts  of  Divine  bounty,  he  thinks  to  make  chr.i.3. 
light  of  the  acts  of  the  resolute  doer,  that  he  might  impeach^  'addicat 
the  heart  of  him  as  though  on  the  score  of  secret  thoughts, 
whose  life  he  was  unable  to  reprove  on  the  score  of  works ; 
falsely  asserting  that  whatever  outward  innocence  of  life  there 
might  be,  was  in  compliance  not  with  the  love  of  God,  but 
with  his  longing  after  temporal  prosperity.     And  so  knowing 
nothing  of  the  powers  of  blessed  Job,  and  yet  being  well  aware 
that  every  one  is  most  truly  tried  by  adversity,  he  demands 
him  for  trial,  that  he  who  throughout  the  day  of  prosperity 
had  walked  with  unfailing  foot,  at  least  in  the  night  of  adversity 
might  stumble,  and  by  the  offence  of  impatience  might  be 
laid  low  before  the  eyes  of  his  commender.  Whence  he  adds, 

Ver.  11 .  But  put  forth  Tltine  hand  noic^  and  touch  all  that 
he  hath,  and  he  will  curse  Tliee  to  TJnjface. 

16.  When  Satan  has  a  desire  to  tempt  the  holy  man,  and  x. 
yet  tells  the  Lord  that  He  must  put  forth  His  hand  against 
him,  it  is  very  deserving  of  notice  that  even  he,  who  is  so 
especially  lifted  up  against  the  Maker  of  all  things,  never 
claims  to  himself  the  power  to  strike ;  for  the  devil  knows 
well  that  he  is  unable  to  do  any  thing  of  himself,  for  neither 

in  that  he  is  a  spirit  does  he  subsist  by  himself  Hence  it  is 
that  in  the  Gos})cl,  the  legion,  which  was  to  be  cast  out  of  the 
man,  exchiimcd,  //'  Thou  cast  us  out,  suffer  us  to  go  atcay  yi^^^^g 
into  the  herd  qf  swine ;  for  what  wonder  is  it  if  he,  who^^* 
could  not  by  his  own  power  enter  into  the  swine,  had  no 
power  without  the  Creator's  hand  to  touch  the  holy  man's 
house  ? 

17.  But  we  must  know  that  the  will  of  Satan  is  always 

«•  Many  Mss.  re^id  '  .sanitate,'  '  soundnew.' 


80  Satan'' s  evil  will  made  to  work  out  good. 

joBi,  evil,  but  his  power  is  never  unjust,  for  his  will  he  derives 
^^'    from    himself,  but    his  power   he   derives  from   God.     For 
what  he  himself  unrighteously  desires  to  do,  God  does  not 
allow  to  be  done  except  with  justice.     Whence  it  is  well 
1  Sam.   said  in  the  book  of  Kings,  tlie  evil  spirit  of  God  came  upon 
^^'  ^^'  Saul.    You  see  that  one  and  the  same  spirit  is  both  called  the 
Lord's  spirit  and  an  evil  spirit;   the  Lord's,  that  is,  by  the 
concession  of  just  power,  but  evil,  by  the  desire  of  anygCiijust ' 
will,  so  that  he  is  not  to  be  dreaded,  who  has  no  power  but 
by  permission;  and,  therefore,  that  Power  is  the  only  worthy 
object  of  fear,  w^hich  when  It  has  allowed  the  enemy  to  vent 
his  rage,  makes  even  his  unjust  will  serve  the  purpose  of  a 
just  judgment.     But  he  requires  that  His  hand  should  be 
put  forth  a  little;   they  being  external  things,  of  which  he 
seeks  the  hurt.     For  Satan  even  does  not  consider  himself 
to  accomplish  much,  unless  he  inflicts  a  wound  in  the  soul, 
that  by  so  smiting  he  may  bring  one  back  from  that  country, 
from  which  he  lies  far  removed,  laid  prostrate  by  the  weapon 
of  his  own  pride. 
SoVuiff       1^*  ^^^  ^^y  ^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^  says,  if  he  have  not  blessed  Thee  to 
Thy  face  f  We  look,  it  means,  toward  that  we  love,  but  that  we 
would  be  quit  of,  we  turn  away  our  face  from  it.     What  then 
is  the  face  of  God,  unless  the  regard  of  His  favour  is  set  before 
us  to  be  understood?   Accordingly  he  says.  But  put  forth 
1  Vulg.  Thine  hand  a  little^,  and  touch  all  that  he  hath,  and  he  will 
pauUu-  f,n^.gg  Thee  to  Thy  face.     As  if  he  had  said  in  plain  words, 
E.  V.    Withdraw  the  things  which  Thou  hast  given  him,  for  if  he 
"'^       lose  Thy  gifts,  he  will  no  longer  seek  the  regard  of  Thy  favour, 
when  his  temporal  good  things  are  taken  away.     For  if  he 
no  longer  has  the  things  in  which  he  takes  delight,  he  will 
despise  Thy  favour  even  to  cursing  Thee.     By  which  crafty 
address  The  Truth  Whom  he  challenges  is  in  no  wise  over- 
come; but  that  is  permitted  the  enemy  to  his  own  undoing, 
which  may  be  reckoned  to  the  faithful  servant  for  the  increase 
of  his  reward;  for  which  cause  it  is  immediately  subjoined, 

Ver.  12.  Behold,  all  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power ;  only 

upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  hand. 

-.:  19.  We  should  mark  in  the  Lord's  words  the  dispensations 

of  heavenly  pity,  how  He  lets  go  our  enemy,  and  keeps  him 

in ;  how  He  looses,  and  yet  bridles  him.     He  allows  him  some 


IVfti/  Job^s  person  was  spared  at  first.  81 

things  for  temptation,  but  withholds  him  from  others.     All   Book 
that  he  hath  is  in  thy  hand,  only  upon  hiinself  put  not  forth  — ^— 
thine  hand.     His  substance  He  delivers  over,  but  still  He 
protects  his  person,  which  notwithstanding  after  a  while  He 
designs  to  give  over  to  the  tempter ;  yet  He  does  not  loose 
the  enemy  to  every  thing  at  once,  lest  he  should  crush  His 
own  subject^  by  striking  him  on  every  side.     For  whenever'  civem 
many  evils  betide  the  elect,  by  the  wonderful  graciousness  of 
the   Creator  they  are   dealt  out  by  seasons,   that  what  by 
coming  all   together  would  destroy,   may  when  divided  be 
borne  up  against.     Hence  Paul  says,  God  is  faithful,  Who  i  Cor. 
loill  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able,  but    ' 
will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye 
may  be  able  to  bear  it.     Hence  David  says,  Examine  me,  P9.26,2. 
O  Lord,  and  prove  me.    As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,  ^  first 
examine  my  powers,  and  then,  as  I  am  able  to  bear,  let  me 
undergo  temptation.'     But  this  that  is  said.  Behold,  all  that 
he  hath  is  in  thy  power,  only  upon  himself  put  not  forth 
thine  hand,  is  also  capable  of  another  sense,  viz.  that  the 
Lord  knew  well,  indeed,   that   His   soldier   was  brave,   yet 
chose  to  divide  for  him  his  contests  with  the  enemy,  that, 
though  victory  should  in  every  case  be  sure  to  that  staunch 
wanior,  yet  that  from  one  conflict   first   the  enemy   might 
return    to    the    Lord    defeated,    and    that    then    he    might 
grant  him  another  encounter  to  be  again  worsted,  so  that  his 
faithful  follower  might  come   forth  the  more    incomparable 
conqueror,  in  proportion  as  the  vanquished  foe  had  repaired 
his  forces  again  for  fresh  wars  with  him.     It  follows, 

So  Satan  went  forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

20.  What  is  this,  that  Satan  is  said  to  go  forth  from  the    xii. 
presence  of  the  Lord?    For  how  is  it  possible  to  go  forth 
from    Him,  Who   is   every    where  present  ?     Whence   it   is 
that  He  says.  Do  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth?    Hence  it  isJer.  23, 
written  comceming  His  Spirit,  For  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord^.\,  . 
filleth  the  world.     Hence  it  is  that  His  Wisdom  saith,  /  alone  7. 
compassed  the  circuit  of  heaven.     Hence  it  is  that  the  Lord  2/*^5!' 
says  again.   The  heaven  is  My  throne,  and  the  earth  is  J/y  Ts.G6,i. 
footstool.      And    again    it    is    written  of  Him,   He   meteth  Is.  -lO, 
out  heaven  with  the  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust  of  the    '   "  ^* 
earth  in  a  measure,  for  He  abides  both  within  and  without 

6 


82  Hoir  Satan  could  leave  God's  Presence. 

Job  1,  the  seat,  whereon  He  rules.  By  His  '  meting  out  heaven 
^^^g^  vvith  a  span,  and  comprehending  the  earth  in  a  measure,'  He 
is  shewn  to  "be  Himself  on  every  side  beyond  the  circuit  of 
all  things  which  He  has  created.  For  that  which  is  enclosed 
within  is  from  without  held  in  by  that  which  encloseth  it. 
By  the  throne,  therefore,  whereon  He  is  seated,  it  is  meant 
that  He  is  within  and  above;  by  the  '  measure,'  wherewith 
'  He  comprehends,'  He  is  represented  to  be  beyond  and 
beneath  ;  for  whereas  the  same  Being  abides  within  all 
things,  without  all  things,  above  all  things,  beneath  all 
things,  He  is  both  above  by  virtue  of  His  Dominion,  and 
beneath  by  virlue  of  His  Upholding;  without,  by  His 
Immensity,  and  within,  by  His  Subtlety ;  ruling  from  on 
high,  holding  together  from  below:  encompassing  without, 
penetrating  within ;  not  abiding  by  one  part  above,  by  another 
beneath,  or  l)y  one  part  without,  and  by  another  part  within, 
but  One  and  the  Same,  and  wholly  every  where,  upholding  in 
ruling,  ruling  in  upholding ;  penetrating  in  encompassing, 
encompassing  in  penetrating ;  whence  He  ruleth  from  above, 
thence  upholding  from  beneath,  and  whence  He  enfoldeth 
from  without,  thence  filling  up  within ;  ruling  on  high  without 
disquietude,  upholding  below  without  effort;  within,  pene- 
trating without  attenuation,  without,  encompassing  without 
expansion.  So  that  He  is  both  lower  and  higher,  without 
place ;  He  is  wider  without  breadth  ;  He  is  more  subtle  with- 
out rarity. 

21.  Whither  then  is  there  any  ^  going  forth'  from  Him, 
Who  being  through  the  bulk  of  a  body  no  where  present,  is 
through  a  Substance  unlimited  no  where  absent  ?  Still,  so 
long  as  Satan,  kept  down  by  the  power  of  His  Majesty,  was 
unable  to  execute  the  longing  of  his  wickedness,  he,  as  it 
were,  stood  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  but  he  '  went  forth' 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  because,  being  freed  from 
above  from  the  pressure  of  an  inward  withholding,  he  went 
to  the  execution  of  his  desire.  He  went  forth  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  his  evil  will,  long  bound 
by  the  fetters  of  a  severe  control,  did  at  length  proceed  to 
fulfilment.  For,  as  has  been  said,  whilst  that  which  he 
desired  he  had  no  power  to  fulfil,  in  a  manner,  he  '  stood  in 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,'  because  the  Supreme  Providence 


Satan^s  skill  in  choosing  uhen  and  how  to  tempt.       83 

resirained  liim  from   the  execution  of  his  wickedness,  but  Booi 
*  he  went  forth  from    His   presence/  because  in  receiving 


the  power  to  tempt,  he  arrived  at  the  goal,  at   which  his 
wickedness  aimed.     It  goes  on  : 

Ver.  13,  14,  15.  And  there  was  a  day  when  his  so7is  and 
his  daughters  were  eating  and  drinking  wine  in  their  eldest 
brother's  house  :  And  there  canie  a  messenger  unto  Job,  a?id 
said,  The  oxen  were  plowing,  and  the  asses  feeding  beside 
them :  And  the  Sabeans  fell  upon  them,  and  took  them 
away;  yea,  they  have  slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  qf  the 
sword;  and  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee. 

22.  We  ought  to  observe  what  times  are  suited  for  xiii. 
temj^talions ;  for  the  devil  chose  that  as  the  time  for  tempt- 
ing, when  he  found  the  sons  of  the  blessed  Job  engaged  in 
feasting ;  for  tlie  adversary  does  not  only  cast  about  what  to 
do,  but  also  when  to  do  it.  Then  though  he  had  gotten  the 
power,  yet  he  sought  a  fitting  season  to  work  his  overthrow, 
to  this  end,  that  by  God's  disposal  it  might  be  recorded  for 
our  benefit,  that  the  delight  of  full  enjoyment  is  the  fore- 
runner of  woe.  But  we  should  observe  the  craft  with  which 
the  losses  that  were  inflicted  by  him  are  themselves  related; 
for  it  is  not  said,  *  the  oxen  have  been  carried  off  by  the 
Sabeans,'  but  '  the  oxen,  which  have  been  carried  away, 
were  ploughing,'  with  the  view  doubtless  that  by  mention  of 
the  profit  of  their  labour,  his  cause  for  sorrow  should  be 
increased;  for  the  same  reason  also'  among  the  Greeks  it  is'  LXX, 
not  only  asses,  but  asses  with  young,  that  are  reported  lo*';]*^"" 
have  been  taken  away,  that  while  such  insignificant  animals 
might  less  hurt  tlic  mind  of  the  hearer  from  their  value,  they 
might  from  their  productiveness  inflict  the  sorer  wound;  and 
as  misfortunes  afflict  the  mind  the  more  in  proportion  as, 
being  many  in  number,  they  are  also  suddenly  announced, 
the  measure  of  his  woes  was  enlarged  even  through  the 
junctures*  at  which  the  tidings  arrived.     For  it  follows, 

Ver.  16.  While  he  teas  yet  speaking,  there  came  also 
another,  and  said,  The  fire  of  Hod  is  J  alien  from  heaven, 
and  hath  burned  up  the  sheep,  and  the  servants,  and  con- 
sumed them  ;  and  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee. 

«  Articula,  A.B.  CD. E.,  Ben.* par-     a    ini*print,   and    the   tni«  reading  of 
ticulai',  but  the  note   shews  this  to  be     that  Edition,  articulas. 

G  2 


84  Job  seemed  to  suffer  directly  from  God. 

Job  1,       23.  Lest  the  loss  of  his  property  might  not  stir  up  suffi- 
cient grief  at  the  hearing,  he  urges  his  feelings  to  exceed  by 


Hist.  -x        r   ^  x-.       •     •  i 

^■^y^    the  very  words  of  the  messengers.     For  it  is  to  be  remarked 

how  craftily  it  is  said,  the  fire  of  God,  as  though  it  were  said, 
thou  art  suffering  the  visitation  of  Him,  Whom  thou  desiredst 
to  appease  by  so  many  sacrifices :  thou  art  undergoing  the 
wrath  of  Him,  in  Whose  service  thou  didst  daily  weary  thy- 
self! For  in  signifying  that  God,  Whom  he  had  served, 
had  brought  upon  him  his  misfortunes,  he  mentions  a  sore 
point  on  which  he  may  break  forth ;  to  the  end  that  he 
might  recall  to  mind  his  past  services,  and  reckoning  that  he 
had  served  in  vain,  might  be  lifted  up  against  the  injustice  of 
the  Author.  For  the  godly  mind,  when  it  finds  itself  to  meet 
with  crosses  from  the  hands  of  man,  finds  repose  in  the 
consolations  of  Divine  favour ;  and  when  it  sees  the  storms 
of  trial  gather  strength  without,  then  seeking  the  covert  of 
trust  in  the  Lord,  it  takes  refuge  within  the  haven  of  the 
conscience.  But  that  the  cunning  adversary  might  at  one  and 
the  same  moment  crush  the  bold  heart  of  the  holy  man,  both 
by  strokes  from  man  and  by  despair  ^  in  God,  he  both 
brought  tidings  at  first  that  the  Sabeans  had  made  an  irrup- 
tion, and  announced  immediately  afterwards  that  the  fire  of 
God  had  fallen  from  heaven,  that  he  might  as  it  were  shut 
up  every  avenue  of  consolation,  whereas  he  shews  even  Him 
to  be  against  him.  Who  might  have  solaced  his  spirit  amidst 
his  adversities ;  so  that  considering  himself  in  his  trials  to  be 
on  every  side  forsaken,  and  on  every  side  in  a  strait,  he 
might  burst  into  reviling  with  so  much  the  more  hardihood 
as  he  did  it  in  the  greater  desperation.     It  goes  on ; 

Ver.  17.    Willie  he   was   yet    speaking,   there   came   also 

another,  and  said,  The  Chaldeans  made  out  three  bands,  and 

fell  upon  the  camels,  and  have  carried  them  away,  yea,  and 

slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  of  the  sword ;  and  I  only 

am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee. 

x^'-        24.  Lo  again,  lest  any  thing  should  be  wanting  to  his  grief  for 

the  adversity  that  came  of  man,  he  brings  tidings  that  bands 

of  the  Chaldeans  had  broken  in,  and  lest  the  calamity  that 

came  from  above  should  strike  him  with  too  little  force,  he 

•  in  aeie shews  that  wrath  is  repeated  in  the  heavens ^    For  it  follows; 

^    al.  by  a  dispensation  of  God. 


I 


Salaries  pouet'  in  the  elements.     Order  of  Job's  trials.  85 
Ver.  18,  19.    While  he  was  yet  speaking,  there  came  also   Rook 


another,  and  said,  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  were  eating 
and  drinking  nine  in  their  eldest  brother^ s  house:  And, 
behold,  there  came  a  great  uind  from  the  wilderness,  and 
smote  the  four  corners  of  the  house,  and  it  fell  upon  the  young 
men,  and  they  are  dead;  and  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to 
tell  thee. 

25.  He  who  is  not  laid  low  by  oue  wound  is  in  consequence 
stricken  twice  and  thrice,  that   at   one  time  or  another  he 
may  be  struck  to  the  very  core.     Thus  the  blow  from  the 
Sabeans  had  been  reported,  the  Divine  visitation  by  fire  fiom 
heaven  had  been  reported,  tidings  are  brought  of  the  plunder- 
ing of  the  camels,  by  man  again,  and  of  the  slaughter  of  his 
ser\'ants,  and  the  fmy  of  God's  displeasure  is  repeated,  in 
that  a  fierce  wind  is  shewn  to  have  smitten  the  corners  of 
the  house,  and  to  have  overwhelmed  his  children.      For  be- 
cause  it  is  certain   that  without  the  Sovereign  dictate   the 
elements  can  never  be  put  in  motion,  it  is  covertly  implied 
that  He,  Who  let  them  be  stirred,  did  Himself  stir  uj)  the 
elements  against  him,  though,  when  Satan  has  once  received 
the  power  from  the  Lord,  he  is  able  even  to  put  the  elcnicnis 
into  commotion  to  serve  his  wicked  designs.     Nor  should  it 
disturb  us,  if  a  spirit  cast  down   from  on  high  should  have 
the  power  to  stir  the  air  into  stonus,  seeing  that  we  know 
doubtless  that  to  those  even  who  are  sentenced  to  the  mines 
fire  and  water  render  service  to  supply  their  need.     So  then 
he  obtained  that  tidings  should  be  brought  of  misfortunes; 
he    obtained    that    thev    should    be    many    in    number;    he 
obtained   that  they  should   come   suddenly.     Now  tlie   first 
time  that  he  brought  bad  tidings  he  infiicted  a  wound  upon 
his  yet  peaceful  breast,  as  upon  sound  members ;   but  when 
he  went  on  smiting  the  stricken  soul,  he  dealt  wound  upon 
wound,  tliat  he  might  urge  him  to  words  of  impatience. 

2(j.  But  we  should  observe  with  what  craftiness  the 
ancient  foe  busied  himself  to  break  down  the  })aticnce  of  the 
holy  man,  not  so  uuich  by  the  loss  of  his  substance  as  by 
the  very  order  of  tlie  announcements.  He,  taking  pains  to 
announce  first  the  slight  disasters,  and  afterwards  the  greater 
ones,  last  of  all  brought  him  intelligence  of  the  death  of  his 
sons,  lest  the  father  should  account  the  los.ses  of  his  property 


ir. 


86  Worst  trial  last.     Danger  of  elders'  feasting . 

Job  1,  of  slight  importance,  if  he  heard  of  them  when  now  childless, 
— '—'-  and  lest  it  should  the  less  disturb  him  to  part  with  his  goods, 
after  he  had  learnt  the  death  of  his  children,  consideiing 
that  the  inheritance  were  no  more,  if  he  first  removed  out  of 
the  way  those  who  were  reserved  to  inherit  it.  So  beginning 
from  the  least,  he  announced  the  worst  intelligence  last;  that 
while  worse  disasters  were  made  known  to  him  in  succession, 
every  wound  might  find  room  for  pain  within  his  breast. 
Take  notice  of  the  craft  with  which  so  many  a  weight  of  ill 
is  announced,  both  separately  and  at  the  same  time  suddenly, 
that  his  grief  being  increased  both  of  a  sudden  and  in  point 
after  point,  might  not  contain  itself  within  the  hearer's  breast, 
and  that  it  might  so  much  the  more  inflame  him  to  utter 
blasphemy,  as  the  fire,  kindled  within  him  by  those  sudden 
and  multiplied  tidings,  raged  in  a  narrower  space. 

27.  Nor  do  I  think  that  this  ought  to  be  lightly  passed 
over,  that  the  sons  when  they  perish  were  feasting  in  the 
house  of  their  elder  brother.  For  it  has  been  declaimed  above 
that  feasts  can  scarcely  be  gone  through  without  transgres- 
sion. To  speak  then  of  our  own  concerns  and  not  of  theirs, 
the  lesson  we  ought  to  learn  is,  that  what  the  younger  ones 
do  for  pleasure's  sake  is  checked  by  the  control  of  the  elder, 
but  when  the  elder  are  themselves  followers  of  pleasure,  then, 
we  may  be  sure,  the  reins  of  license  are  let  loose  for  the 
younger;  for  who  would  keep  himself  under  the  control  of 
authority,  when  even  the  very  persons,  who  receive  the  right 
of  control,  freely  give  themselves  to  their  pleasures?  And  so 
while  they  are  feasting  in  the  house  of  their  elder  brother, 
they  perish,  for  then  the  enemy  gets  more  effective  power 
against  us,  when  he  marks  that  even  those  very  persons,  who 
are  advanced  for  the  keeping  of  discipline,  are  abandoned  to 
joviality.  For  he  is  so  much  the  more  free  and  forward  to 
strike,  as  he  sees  that  they  too,  who  might  intercede  for  our 
faults,  are  taken  up  with  pleasure.  But  far  be  it  from  us  to 
suspect  that  the  sons  of  so  great  a  man  were  by  devotedness 
to  feasts  given  up  to  the  gorging  of  the  belly.  But  still  we 
know  for  certain  that  though  a  man,  by  the  observance  of 
self  control,  may  not  pass  the  bounds  of  necessity  in  eating, 
yet  the  animated  earnestness  of  the  mind  is  dulled  amidst 
feasting,  and  that  mind  is  less  apt  to  reflect  in  what  a  conflict 


Chastisement  is  to  be  fell,  but  borne  patiently.         87 


temptations  it  is  placed,  which  throws  off  restraint  in  a   i^ooK 
»se  of  security.     In  the  eldest  brother's  day  then  he  over-  — '■ — 


of 

sense  of  security.  In  the  eldest  brother's  day 
whelmed  the  sons,  for  the  old  foe  in  compassing  the  death  of 
the  younger,  seeks  an  inlet  for  their  ruin  through  the  care- 
lessness of  the  elder  ones.  But  as  we  have  marked  with 
what  piercing  darts  the  tidings  stnick  him,  let  us  hear  how 
our  man  of  valour  stands  fast  amid  the  blows.  It  proceeds ; 
Ver.  20.  Then  Job  arose,  and  rent  his  mantle,  and  shaved 
his  head,  and  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  and  worshipped. 

28.  There  are   some   who    account   it  a   high    degree  of  xvi. 
philosophical  fortitude,  if,  when  corrected  by  severe  disci- 
pline, they  are  insensible  to  the  strokes,  and  to  the  pains  of 
those  stripes.     And  there  are  some  who  feel  to  such  excess 

the  infliction  of  the  blows,  that  under  the  influence  of  imme- 
diate grief,  they  even  fall  into  excesses  of  the  tongue.  But 
whoever  strives  to  maintain  true  philosophy,  must  go  between 
eithtr  extreme,  for  the  weightiness  of  tnie  virtue  consists  not 
in  dulness  of  heart,  as  also  those  limbs  are  very  unhealthy  from 
numbness  which  cannot  feel  any  pain  even  when  cut.  Again, he 
deserts  his  guard  over  virtue,  who  feels  the  pain  of  chastise- 
ment beyond  what  is  necessary ;  for  while  tlie  heart  is 
affected  with  excessive  sorrow,  it  is  stin'ed  up  to  the  extent 
of  impatient  reviling,  and  he  who  ought  to  have  amended 
his  misdeeds  by  means  of  the  stripes,  does  his  part  that  his 
wickedness  should  be  increased  by  the  correction.  Agreeably 
to  which,  against  the  insensibility  in  the  chastised,  the  words 
of  the  Prophet  are.  Thou  ha^t  stricken  them,  but  they  have  Jer.6,3. 
not  grieved;  Thou  hast  consumed  them,  but  they  have  re- 
fused to  receive  correction.  Against  the  faintheartedness  of 
the  chastened  the  Psalmist  hath  it.  They  will  never  ^''-  j^o> 
utandfast  in  adversity;  fur  they  would  *  stand  fast  in  adver-  *  "  ^' 
»ity,'  if  they  bore  calamities  with  patience,  but  so  soon  as 
tX\cy  sink  in  spirit,  when  pressed  with  blows,  they  as  it  were 
lose  the  firumess  of  tlieir  footing,  amidst  the  miseries  in- 
flicted on  them. 

29.  Thus  because  blessed  Job  observed  ti.ie  rule  <  i  the 
true  philosophy,  he  kept  himself  from  either  extreme  witli 
the  evenness  of  a  marvellous  skill,  that  he  might  not  by 
being  insensible  to  the  pain  contemn  the  strokes,  nor  again, 
by  feeling  the  pain  immoderately,  be  hurried  madly  against 


88        Job  honoured  God  the  more  in  that  lie  grieved. 

Job  1,  the  visitation  of  the  Striker.    For  when  all  his  substance  was 

--—  lost,  all  his  children  aone,  he  rose  up.  and  rent  his  mantle. 
Hist.  o         '  .i.  > 

and  shaved  his  head,  and  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  and 
worshipped.  In  that  he  rent  his  mantle,  in  that  he  shaved  his 
head^  and  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  he  shews,  we  see, 
that  he  has  felt  the  pain  of  the  scourge;  but  in  that  it  is 
added  that  he  worshipped,  it  is  plainly  shewn  that  even  in 
the  midst  of  pain,  he  did  not  break  forth  against  the  decree 
of  the  Smiter.  He  was  not  altogether  unmoved,  lest  by  his 
very  insensibility  he  should  shew  a  contempt  of  God;  nor  was 
he  completely  in  commotion,  lest  by  excess  of  grief  he 
should  commit  sin.  But  because  there  are  two  command- 
ments of  love,  i.  e.  the  love  of  God,  and  of  our  neighbour; 
that  he  might  discharge  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  he  paid 
the  debt  of  mourning  to  his  sons ;  that  he  might  not  forego 
the  love  of  God,  he  performed  the  office  of  prayer  amidst 
his  gioans.  There  are  some  that  use  to  love  God  in  prosperity, 
but  in  adversity  to  abate  their  love  of  Him  fi'om  whom  the 
stroke  comes.  But  blessed  Job,  by  that  sign  which  he 
outwardly  shewed  in  his  distress,  proved  that  he  acknowledged 
the  coiTection  of  his  Father,  but  herein,  that  he  continued 
humbly  worshipping,  he  shewed  that  even  under  pain  he 
did  not  give  over  the  love  of  that  Father.  Therefore  that 
he  might  not  shew  pride  by  his  insensibility,  he  fell  down 
at  the  stroke,  but  that  he  might  not  estrange  himself  from 
the  Striker,  he  so  fell  down  as  to  worship.  But  it  was  the 
practice  of  ancient  times  for  every  one,  who  kept  up  the 
appearance  of  his  person  by  encouraging  the  growth  of  his 
hair,  to  cut  it  off  in  seasons  of  mourning;  and,  on  the  other 
hand  that  he  who  in  peaceful  times  kept  his  hair  cut,  should 
in  evidencing  his  distress  cherish  its  growth.  Thus  blessed 
Job  is  shewn  to  have  preserved  his  hair  in  the  season  of  rest, 
when  he  is  related  to  have  shaven  his  head  for  the  purpose 
of  mourning,  that  whereas  the  hand  of  the  Most  High  was 
fallen  upon  him  in  all  the  circumstances  of  his  condition, 
the  altered  mien  of  penance  might  even  by  his  own  act 
overcloud  him.  But  such  an  one,  spoiled  of  his  substance, 
bereft  of  his  children,  that  rent  his  mantle,  that  shaved  his 
head,  that  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  let  us  hear  what  he 
says ! 


Job  reflects  for  comfort  on  his  tenure  of  earthly  goods.    89 

Ver.  2 1 .  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mothefs  womb,  and  naked  Book 
shall  I  return  thither.  ^^' 

30.  Oh  !  upon  how  elevated  a  seat  of  the  counsels  of  the  xvii. 
heart  does  he  sit  enthroned,  who  now  lies  prostrate  on  the 
earth  with  his  clothes  rent !     For  because  by  the  judgment 

of  the  Lord  he  had  lost  all  that  he  had,  for  the  preserving 
his  patience  he  brought  to  mind  that  time,  when  he  had 
not  as  yet  those  things  which  he  had  lost,  that,  whilst  he 
considers  that  at  one  time  he  had  them  not,  he  may  moderate 
his  concern  for  having  lost  them ;  for  it  is  a  high  consolation 
in  the  loss  of  what  we  have,  to  recall  to  mind  those  times, 
when  it  was  not  our  fortune  to  possess  the  things  which  we 
have  lost.  But  as  the  earth  has  produced  all  of  us,  we  not 
unjustly  call  her  our  mother.  As  it  is  written.  An  heavy 'S.ccUn. 
yoke  is  upon  the  sons  of  Adam,  from  the  day  that  they  go'^^*  ^' 
out  of  their  mothers  womb,  till  the  day  that  they  return  to 
the  mother  of  all  things. 

Blessed  Job  then,  that  he  might  mourn  with  patience  for 
what  he  had  lost  here,  marks  attentively  in  what  condition 
he  had  come  hither.  But  for  the  furtherance  of  preserving 
patience,  with  still  more  discretion  he  considers,  how  he  will 
go  hence,  and  exclaims,  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mothefs 
womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return  thither.  As  though  he 
said,  '  Naked  did  the  earth  bear  me,  when  I  came  upon  this 
scene,  naked  it  will  receive  me  back,  when  I  depart  hence. 
1  then  who  have  lost  what  1  had  indeed  given  me,  but  what 
must  yet  have  been  abandoned,  what  have  I  parted  with  that 
was  my  own  V  But  because  comfort  is  not  only  to  be  derived 
from  the  consideration  of  our  creation^,  but  also  from  the'condi- 
justice  of  the  Creator,  he  rightly  adds,  *^condi- 

The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away;  '^as  i^toris.' 
hath  pleased  the  Lord,  so  is  it  done.  and  ixx. 

31.  The  holy  man,  under  trial  from  the   adversary,  had  xviii. 
lost   every   thing,  yet   knowing   that  Satan  had   no    power 
against  him  to  tempt  him,  saving  by  the  Lord's  permission, 

he  does  not  say,  '  the  Lord  hath  given,  the  devil  hath  taken 
away,'  but  the  Lord  gave,  the  Lord  hath  taken  away.  For 
perchance  it  would  have  been  a  thing  to  grieve  for,  if  what 
his  Creator  had  given  him,  his  enemy  had  taken  from  hira : 
but   when   no    other   hath  taken    it  away,  saving  He  Who 


90    God  takes  but  His  own.     Satan  shamed  by  patience. 

JoBi,  Himself  gave  it,  He  hath  only  recalled  what  was  His  own, 
and  hath  not  taken  away  what  was  ours.     For  if  we  have 


Hist. 

from  Him  all  that  we  make  use  of  in  our  present  life,  what 

cause  for  grief  that  by  His   own  decree  we  are  made  to 

surrender,  of  Whose  bounty  we  have  a  loan  }    Nor  is  he  at 

any  time  an  unfair  creditor,  who  while  he  is  not  bound  to 

any  set  time  of  restitution,  exacts,  whenever  he  will,  what  he 

lends  out.     Whereupon  it  is  well  added.  As  it  hath  pleased 

the  Lord^  so  is  it  done;  for  since  in  this  life  we  undergo 

things  which  we  would  not,  it  is  needful  for  us  to  turn  the 

bias  of  our  will  to  Him,  Who  can  will  nought  that  is  unjust. 

For  there  is  great  comfort  in  what  is  disagreeable  to  us,  in 

that  it  comes  to  us  by  His  disposal,  to  Whom  nought  but 

justice  is  pleasing.     If  then  we  be  assured  that  what  is  just 

is  the  Lord's  pleasure,  and  if  we  can  suffer  nothing  but  what 

is  the  Lord's  pleasure,  then  all  is  just  that  we  undergo,  and 

it  is  great  injustice,  if  we  murmur  at  a  just  suffering. 

32.  But  since  we  have  heard  how  the  intrepid  speaker  put 
forward  the  vindication  of  his  cause  against  the  adversary, 
now  let  us  hear  how  in  the  end  of  his  speech  he  extols  the 
Judge  with  benedictions.  It  follows,  Blessed  be  the  Name 
of  the  Lord.  See  how  he  concluded  all  that  he  felt  aright 
with  a  blessing  on  the  Lord,  that  the  adversary  might  both 
perceive  hence,  and  for  his  punishment  under  defeat  take 
shame  to  himself,  that  he  himself  ev^en  though  created  in 
bliss  had  proved  a  rebel  to  that  Lord,  to  Whom  a  mortal 
even  under  His  scourge  utters  the  hymn  of  glory. 

I3ut  be  it  observed,  that  our  enemy  strikes  us  with  as 
many  darts  as  he  afflicts  us  with  temptations ;  for  it  is  in  a 
field  of  battle  that  we  stand  every  day,  every  day  we  receive 
the  weapons  of  his  temptations.  But  we  ourselves  too  send 
our  javelins  against  him,  if,  when  pierced  with  woes,  we 
answer  humbly.  Thus  blessed  Job,  when  stricken  with  the 
loss  of  his  substance  and  with  the  death  of  his  children,  for- 
asmuch as  he  turned  the  force  of  his  anguish  into  praise  of 
his  Creator,  exclaiming,  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  an  ay;  as  it  hath  pleased  the  Lord,  so  is  it  done; 
b/^ssed  be  the  Name  of  the  I^ord:  by  his  humility,  struck 
down  the  enemy  in  his  pride,  and  by  his  patience,  laid  low 
the  cruel  one.     Let  us  never  imagine  that  our   combatant 


Job  sinned  not  even  in  thought .  91 

received   wounds,   and    yet   inflicted    none.      For   whatever  Book 
words  of  patience  he  gave  forth  to  the  praise  of  God,  when 


he  was  stricken,  he  as  it  were  hurled  so  many  darts  into  the 
breast  of  his  adversary,  and  inflicted  much  sorer  wounds 
than  he  underwent;  for  by  his  afl^liction  he  lost  the  things  of 
eaith,  but  by  bearing  his  affliction  with  humility,  he  multi- 
plied his  heavenly  blessings.     It  follows, 

Ver.  22.  In  all  this  Job  sinned  7wt,  nor  charged  God 
foolish  I g. 

33.  Since,  when  we  are  laid  hold  of  by  distressing  trials,    xix. 
we  may  even  in  the  silent  working  of  our  thoughts,  without 
word  of  mouth,  be  guilty  of  sin ;  the  testimony  both  of  the 

lips  and  of  the  heart  is  given  to  blessed  Job.  For  it  is  first 
said,  he  sinned  not,  and  then  it  is  afterwards  added,  nor 
charged  God J'oolishlg  :  for  he,  who  uttered  nothing  foolishly, 
kept  offence  from  his  tongue,  and  whereas  the  words,  he 
sinned  not,  come  before,  it  appears  that  he  excluded  the 
sin  of  munnuring  even  from  his  thought,  so  that  he  neither 
sinned  nor  spake  foolishly,  since  he  neither  swelled  with 
indignation  in  his  silent  consciousness,  nor  gave  a  loose  to 
his  tongue  in  reviling.  For  he  does  '  charge  God  foolishly,' 
who,  when  the  strokes  of  divine  chastisement  are  fallen  upon 
him,  strives  to  justify  himself  For  if  he  venture  in  pride  to 
assert  his  innocence,  what  else  does  he,  but  impugn  the 
justice  of  the  chastiser  }  Let  it  suffice  for  us  to  have  run 
through  the  words  of  the  history  thus  far :  let  us  now  turn 
the  discourse  of  our  exposition  to  investigate  the  mysteries 
of  allegory.     And  heroin,  that  it  is  written, 

Ver.  6.  Now  there  was  a  day  when  tJte  sons  of  God  came 
to  present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also 
among  them. 

34.  It  is  first  to  be  made  out,  wherefore  any  thing  is  said  to    xx. 
be  done  on  a  particular  day  before  the  Lord,  whereas  with  Him  Alleo. 
the  progress  of  time  is  never  marked  by  the  variation  of  day 

and  night.  For  neither  does  that  light,  which  without  coming 
eidighteneth  whatsoever  it  chooseth,  and  without  going  Ibr- 
saketh  those  things  which  it  rejects,  admit  any  imperfection 
of  mutability ;  for,  while  it  abideth  unchangeable  in  itself,  it 
orders  all  things  that  are  subject  to  change,  and  has  in  such 


92  God^s  One  Day  Eternity.  Known  things  put  for  unknown. 

Job  1,  sort  created  all  transient  beings  in  itself,  that  in  it  they  are 

r — '—  incapable  of  transition,  nor  is  there  inwardly  in  His  sight 

any  lapse  of  time,  which  with   us,  without   Him,  has   its 

course.     Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  those  revolutions  of 

the  world  remain  fixed  in  His  eternity,  which,  having  no 

'  ema-    fixedness  out  of  Him  issue  into  existence  ^     Why  then  in 

nonf 

relation  to  Him  is  it  said,  one  day,  in  that  His  one  day  is  His 
eternity  ?    Which  same  the  Psalmist  perceived  to  be  closed 
by  no  ending,  and  to  open  with  no  beginning,  where  he 
Ps.  84,  says.  One  day  in  Thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand. 

^'  35.  But  as  Holy  Scripture  speaks  to  those  who  are 
brought  forth  in  time,  it  is  meet  that  it  should  use  words 
significant  of  time,  in  order  that  it  may  lift,  us  up  by  so  con- 
descending, and  that  while  it  relates  something  that  belongs 
to  eternity  after  the  manner  of  time,  it  may  gradually  transfer 
to  the  eternal  world  those  who  are  habituated  to  the  things 
of  time,  and  that  that  eternity,  which  is  unknown,  while  it 

2  blan-    amuses'^  us  with  words  that  are  known,  may  successfully 

"^  impart  itself  to  our  minds.  And  what  wonder  is  it,  if  in  Holy 
Writ  God  is  not  overhasty  to  disclose  the  unchangeableness 
of  His  Nature  to  the  mind  of  man,  since  after  He  had  cele- 

3  solem-  brated  the  triumph^  of  His  Resurrection,  it  was  by  certain  pro- 

gressive steps  that  He  made  known  the  incoiTuptibility  of  the 
Body  which  He  resumed  again.  For  we  have  learnt  from  the 
testimony  of  Luke,  that  He  first  sent  Angels  to  some,  that 
were  seeking  for  Him  in  the  tomb ;  and  again  to  the 
disciples  who  were  talking  of  Him  by  the  way,  He  Himself 
appeared,  yet  not  so  as  to  be  known  by  them.  Who  indeed 
after  the  delay  of  an  exhortation  did  shew  Himself  to  be 
known  of  them  in  the  breaking  of  bread ;  but  at  last,  entering 
suddenly.  He  not  only  presented  Himself  to  be  known  by 
sight,  but  to  be  handled  also.  For  because  the  disciples  still 
carried  about  with  them  faint  hearts,  in  coming  to  the  know- 
ledge of  this  marvellous  mystery  they  were  to  be  nourished 
by  such  a  method  of  its  dispensation,  that  by  little  and  little 
in  seeking  they  might  find  some  portion,  that  finding  they 
might  gain  growth,  and  growing  they  might  hold  the  faster 
the  truths  which  they  had  learnt.  Inasmuch  then  as  wc  arc 
not  led  to  the  eternal  world  at  once,  but  by  a  progression  of 


Satan'' s  darkness  penetrated  by  God's  Light.  98 

cases  and  of  words  as  though  by  so  many  steps,  this  or  tliat  Book 
is  said  to  be  done  on  a  certain  day  before  Him  within,  Who  --— 
views  even  time  itself  also  out  of  time. 

36.  Or  forasmuch  as  Satan  too  was  there,  was  it  the  aim 
of  Holy  Scripture,  when  it  says  that  this  was  done  on  a  cer- 
tain day,  to  point  out  that  in  the  light  God  beheld  the  dark- 
ness ?  For  we  are  unable  to  embrace  light  and  darkness  in 
one  and  the  same  view,  in  that  when  the  eye  is  fixed  upon 
darkness,  the  light  is  put  to  flight,  and  when  the  eye  is 
directed  to  the  glittering  rays  of  light,  the  shades  of  darkness 
disappear.  But  to  that  Power,  Which  in  unchangeableness 
beholds  all  things  changeable,  Satan  was  present  as  in  the 
day,  in  that  It  embraces  undimmed  the  darkness  of  the  apo- 
state Angel.  We,  as  we  have  said,  cannot  survey  at  one 
view  both  the  objects  which  we  choose  in  approval,  and 
those  which  we  condemn  in  disapproval ;  for  while  the  mind 
is  directed  to  the  one  subject,  it  is  withdrawn  from  the  other, 
and  when  it  is  brought  back  to  this  latter  it  is  taken  off 
from  that,  to  which  it  had  attached  itself. 

37.  But  forasmuch  as  God  without  changing  beholds  all 
things  at  the  same  instant,  and  without  extension  embraces 
all,  i.  e.  both  the  good  that  He  aids,  and  the  evil  that  He 
judges ;  both  that  which  thus  aiding  He  rewards,  and  that 
which  so  judging  He  condemns;  He  is  not  Himself  different 
in  the  things  which  He  sets  in  different  order.  Accordingly 
Satan  is  said  to  have  come  before  Him  on  a  day,  in  that  the 
light  of  His  eternity  is  proof  against  the  overclouding  of  any 
change;  and  herein,  that  the  darkness  is  made  present  to 
Him,  he  is  said  to  have  presented  himself  among  the  sons 
of  God,  because  in  fact  the  impure  spirit  is  penetrated  by 
the  self-same  Power  of  Righteousness,  wherewith  the  hearts 
of  pure  spirits  are  replenished ;  and  that  being  is  pierced 
through  with  the  same  ray  of  light,  which  is  so  shed  abroad 
in  them  as  that  they  shine. 

38.  He  came  among  the  sons  of  God,  in  that,  though  they 
serve  God  in  rendering  aid  to  the  elect,  he  does  this,  in  put- 
ting them  to  trial.  He  presented  himself  among  the  sons  of 
God,  in  that,  although  they  dispense  the  succours  of  mercy 
to  all  that  labour  in  this  present  life,  this  one  unwittingly 
serves  the  ends  of  His  secret  justice,  while  he  strives  to 


94  An  evil  spirit  served  to  deceive  Ahab, 

Job  1,  accomplish  the  ministry  of  their  condemnation.     Whence  it 

alleo  ^^  J^^^^b'  s^i^  ^y  th^  Prophet  in  the  books  of  Kings,  I  saw 
1  Kings  the  Lord  sitting  upon  His  throne,  and  all  the  host  of  Heaven 
^p  *  standing  by  Him,  on  His  right  hand  and  on  His  left.  And 
it  was  said,  Wherewith  shall  I  deceive  Ahab,  that  he  may 
go  up  and  fall  at  Ramoth  Gilead?  And  one  said  on  this 
manner,  and  another  said  on  that  manner.  And  there 
came  forth  one  and  stood  before  the  Lord,  and  said,  I  will 
deceive  him.  And  it  was  said.  Wherewith  ?  and  he  said,  I 
will  go  forth,  and  I  will  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all 
his  prophets. 

For  what  is  the  throne  of  the  Lord,  unless  we  understand 
the  Angelic  Powers,  in  whose  minds  enthroned  on  high  He 
disposeth  all  things  below  ?  And  what  is  the  host  of  heaven, 
unless  the  multitude  of  ministering  Angels  is  set  forth? 
Why  then  is  it,  that  the  host  of  heaven  is  said  to  stand  on 
His  right  hand  and  on  His  left  ?  For  God,  Who  is  in  such  sort 
within  all  things,  that  He  is  also  without  all,  is  neither 
bounded  on  the  right  hand  nor  on  the  left.  However,  the 
right  hand  of  God  is  the  elect  portion  of  the  Angels,  and 
the  left  hand  of  God  signifies  the  reprobate  portion  of  Angels. 
For  not  alone  do  the  good  serve  God  by  the  aid  which  they 
render,  but  likewise  the  wicked  by  the  trials  which  they 
inflict ;  not  only  they  who  lift  upward  them  that  are  turning 
back  from  transgression,  but  they  who  press  down  those  who 
refuse  to  turn  back.  Nor  because  it  is  called  the  host  of 
heaven,  are  we  hindered  from  understanding  therein  the 
reprobate  portion  of  the  Angels,  for  whatsoever  birds  we 
know  to  be  poised  in  the  air,  we  call  them  '  the  birds  of  heaven.' 
Ephes.  And  it  is  of  these  same  spirits  that  Paul  saith.  Against 
'  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.     And  describing  their 

Ephes.  i^gad,  he  says.  According  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the 
air.  On  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left  hand  of  God,  then, 
stands  the  Angelic  Host,  forasmuch  as  both  the  will  of  the 
elect  spirits  harmonizes  with  Divine  mercy,  and  the  mind  of 
the  reprobate,  in  serving  their  own  evil  ends,  obeys  the 
judgment  of  His  strict  decrees.  Hence  too  it  is  said,  that  a 
spirit  of  falsehood  immediately  leaped  forth  in  the  midst,  to 
deceive  king  Ahab,  as  his  deserts  called  for.  For  it  is  not 
right  to  imagine  that  a  good  spirit  would  ever  have  served 


Satan  rebuked  hi  tite  Day  of  our  LonVs  hicarnaiioH.  96 

the  ends  of  deceit,  so  as  to  say,  /  uill  go  forth  ^  aud  1  will  he  Book 
a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all  his  prophets.     But  because 


king  Ahab  by  his  previous  sins  had  made  himself  worthy  to 
be  cursed  with  such  deception,  in  order  that  he  who  had 
many  times  wilHngly  fallen  into  sin,  might  for  once  unwillingly 
be  caught  for  his  punishment,  leave  is  given  by  a  secret 
justice  to  the  evil  spirits,  that  those  whom  with  willing  minds 
they  strangle  in  the  noose  of  sin,  they  may  drag  to  the 
punishment  of  that  sin  even  against  their  will.  What  then 
it  is  there  to  describe  the  Host  of  heaven  as  having  stood  on 
the  right  hand  and  on  the  left  hand  of  God,  the  same  it  is 
here  to  declare  Satan  to  have  presented  himself  among  the 
sons  of  God.  So  on  the  right  hand  of  God  there  stood 
Angels,  for  that  the  sons  of  God  are  named ;  so  on  His  left 
hand  Angels  are  standing,  because  Satan  presented  himself 
among  them. 

39.  But  as  we  have  determined  to  search  out  the  hidden 
senses  of  the  allegory,  we  not  unfitly  take  it  to  mean,  that 
the  Lord  beheld  Satan  in  the  day,  in  that  He  restrained  his 
ways  in  the  Incarnation  of  His  Wisdom  ;  as  though  it  were 
not  to  have  seen  him,  to  have  for  so  long  borne  with  his 
wickedness  in  the  ruin  of  the  human  race.  Whence  it  is 
straightway  said  to  him  by  the  voice  of  God, 

Ver.  7.    Whence  coinest  thou  ? 

40.  In  the  day  Satan  is  demanded  of  his  ways,  for  that  in    xxi. 
the  light  of  revealed  Wisdom  the  snares  of  the  hidden  foe 

are  discovered.  Because,  then,  the  devil  is  rebuked  by 
the  Incarnate  Lord,  and  restrained  from  his  baneful  license, 
it  is  well  subjoined.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  JJ'hence 
contest  thou?  For  He  then  by  an-aigning  attainted  the 
ways  of  Satan,  when  by  the  Advent  of  the  Mediator  restrain- 
ing the  wickedness  of  his  persuasions.  He  rebuked  the  same. 
And  it  is  not  without  reason  that  the  sons  of  God  are  related 
to  have  stood  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  on  this  day,  foras- 
nuich  as  it  is  by  the  light  of  Wisdom  illuminating  them  that 
all  the  elect  are  gathered  to  the  calling  of  their  eternal 
country.  Who,  though  Incarnate  Wisdom  came  to  assemble 
them  in  actual  deed,  were  yet  by  virtue  of  His  foreknowledge 
already  inwardly  present  to  His    Divinity.     But  sinc«  the 


96       SaM?i\<i  work  ott  e<trtli.     C/trist  df scribed  in  Job. 

Job  1,  old  eneiny,  at  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer,  is  questioned  o( 

-ii  ■    his  ways,  let  us  hear  what  he  says. 

Ver.  7.  Fro7n  going  to  and  fro   in   the  earth,  and  from 
walking  up  and  down  in  it. 

xxii.  41.  For  from  the  time  of  Adam  till  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  he  drew  after  him  all  the  nations  of  the  Gentiles;  he 
went  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  walked  up  and  down  in  it, 
in  that  he  stamped  the  foot-prints  of  his  wickedness  through- 
out the  hearts  of  the  Gentiles.  For  when  he  fell  fi'om  on 
high  he  gained  lawful  possession  of  the  minds  of  men,  be- 
cause he  fastened  them  as  willing  captives  in  the  chains  of 
his  iniquity  ;  and  he  wandered  the  more  at  large  in  the  world, 
in  proportion  as  there  was  no  one  found  who  was  in  all 
things  free  from  that  his  guilt.  And  his  having  gone  to  and 
fro  in  the  world  as  with  power,  is  his  having  found  no  man 
who  could  thoroughly  resist  him.  But  now  let  Satan  return 
back,  i.  e.  let  the  Divine  power  withhold  him  from  the  exe- 
cution of  his  wickedness,  since  He  has  now  appeai'ed  in  the 
flesh,  Who  had  no  part  in  the  infection  of  sin  from  the 
infirmity  of  the  flesh.  He  came  in  humility  for  the  proud 
enemy  himself  to  wonder  at,  that  he  who  had  set  at  nought  all 
the  mightiness  of  His  Divinity,  might  stand  in  awe  even  of 
the  very  infirmities  of  His  Humanity.  Wherefore  also  this 
very  weakness  of  His  human  nature  is  immediately  set  forth 
against  him  with  wonderful  significance  as  an  object  to 
confound  him;  whereas  it  is  said, 

Ver.  8.  Hast  thou  considered  My  servant  Job,  that  there 
is  none  like  him  in  the  earth  ? 

xxiii.  42.  That  Job  means  by  interpretation,  '  Grieving,'  we 
have  already  said  a  little  above.  And  He  is  truly  called 
'  Grieving'  in  figure.  Who  is  declared  by  the  testimony  of 

l8.63,4.  the  Prophet  ^  to  bear  our  griefs.'  Who  has  not  His  like  on 
the  earth ;  for  every  man  is  only  man,  but  He  is  both  God 
and  Man.  He  has  not  His  like  on  earth,  because  though 
every  son  by  adoption  attains  to  the  receiving  of  the  Divine 
nature,  yet  none  ever  receives  so  much,  as  to  be,  by  nature, 
God.  He  was  even  rightly  styled  a  servant,  because  He  did 
not  disdain  to  take  the  form  of  a  servant.  Nor  did  His 
taking  the  humility  of  the  flesh  injure  His  sovereignty,  for  in 


Cltrist\s  perfect  Hutnanity  a  rebuke  to  Satan.  1)7 

order  that  He  might  both  take  upon  Him  that  which  He  Book 
was  to  save,  yet  not  undergo  alteration  in  that  which  He  had,  — '- — 
He  neither  lessened  the  Divine  by  the  Human,  nor  swal- 
lowed up  the  Human  in  the  Divine ;  for  although  Paul  hath 
it,  Who  being  in  the  form  of  God  thought  it  not  robbery  to  Phil.  2, 
be  equal  with  God;  but  *•  emptied  Himself ^  and  took  upon 
Him  the  form  of  a  servant;  yet  to  Him  it  is  ^  emptying 
Himself,'  of  the  greatness  of  His  Invisible  Being  to  manifest 
Himself  as  Visible;  so  that  the  form  of  a  servant  should  be 
the  covering  of  That  ^^^]ich  without  limitation  enters  into 
all  things  by  virtue  of  Godhead.  Again,  God's  saying  to 
Satan  in  figure,  Hast  Thou  considered  My  servant  Job,  is  His 
exhibiting  in  his  despite  the  Only-Begotten  Son  as  an  object 
of  wonder  in  the  fonn  of  a  servant.  For  in  that  He  made 
Him  known  in  the  flesh  as  of  so  great  virtue.  He  as  it  were 
pointed  out  to  the  adversary  in  his  pride  what  it  would 
grieve  him  to  contemplate;  but  now  that  He  had  brought 
before  him  a  perfect  object  for  him  to  admire,  it  remains  that 
in  order  to  strike  down  his  pride  he  should  further  go  on  to 
enumerate  its  excellencies.     It  goes  on, 

Ver.  8.  A  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth 
God,  and  escheiceth  evil, 

43.  For  there   came  among  men   the   Mediator  between  xxiv, 
God  and   Man,  the  Man   Christ  Jesus,  for  the   giving  an 
example  of  living, /?e//<?c/*;  in  respect  of  His  rigour  towards  "simplex 
the  evil  spirits,  upright;  for  the  exterminating  -priAe,  fearing 
God;  and  for  the  wiping  off  impurity  of  life  in  His  Elect,  de- 
parting from  evil.    For  it  is  said  of  Him  by  Isaiah  in  a  special 
manner.  And  shall  make  him  of  quick  understanding  in  the  Js.ii,^. 
fear  of  the  Lord.     And  He  did  in  a  special  manner  depart 
from  evil,  who  refused  to  imitate  the  actions  which  He  found 
among  men,  since,  as  Peter  bears  witness.  He   did  no  sin,  i'Pet.2, 
neither  uas  guile  found  in  His  mouth.     It  follows;  ^'^' 

Ver.  9,  10.  Then  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said. 
Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought?  Hast  not  Thou  made  an 
hedge  about  hiin,  and  about  his  house,  and  about  all  that  he 
hath  on  every  side?  Thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his 
hands,  and  his  substance  is  increased  in  the  land. 

The  old  enemy  knew  that  tlie  Redeemer  of  mankind  was 

■  E.  V.  made  Himse/f  of  no  r^utation,  which  is  le»."«  literal. 

H 


98  Salon  utider stood  not  our  Lord's  humiliation. 

Job  1,  come  to  be  the  conqueror  of  himself;  and  hence  it  is  said  by 

--^ — -  the  man  possessed  in  the  Gospel,  What  have  we  to  do  ivith 

Matt.  8 j  Thee,  Jesus,  Thou  Son  of  God?  Art  Thou  come  hither  to  tor- 

^^'        mentus  before  the  timef  Yet  before,  when  he  perceived  Him 

to  be  subject  to  passion,  and  saw  that  He  might  suffer  all  the 

mortal  accidents  of  humanity,  all  that  he  imagined  concerning 

His  Divinity  became  doubtful  to  him  from  his  exceeding 

pride.     For  savouring   of  nothing  else  but  pride,  whilst  he 

beheld   Him  in  humility,  he   doubted    of  His   being  God ; 

Matt.  4,  and  hence  he  has  recourse  to  proof  by  temptation,  saying,  If 

Thou  he  the  Son  of  God,  command  that  these  stones  be  made 

bread.     In  this  way,  because  he  saw  that  He  was  subject  to 

passion,  he  did  not  believe  Him  to  be  God  by  birth,  but  to 

be  kept  by  the  grace  of  God.     And  for  the  same  reason  too 

he  is  in  this  place  said  to  allege, 

Ver.  10.  Hast  not  Thou  made  an  hedge  about  him^  and 
about  his  house,  and  about  all  that  he  hath  on  every  side? 
Thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands,  and  his  substance 
is  increased  in  the  land. 
XXV.  44.  For  he  urges  that  both  himself  and  his  house  are 
hedged  about  by  God ;  because  he  could  not  find  an 
entrance  to  His  conscience  by  tempting  him.  He  declares 
his  substance  to  be  hedged  about,  in  that  he  dares  not  to 
attack  His  elect  servants.  He  complains  that  God  had 
blessed  the  work  of  his  hands,  and  that  his  substance  was 
increased  in  the  land,  for  this  reason,  that  he  pines  at 
beholding  that  faith  in  Him  enlarges  its  bounds,  in  man's 
coming  to  the  knowledge  of  Him  by  the  preaching  of  the 
Apostles.  For  His  substance  is  said  to  be  increasing,  all  the 
time  that  by  the  labours  of  the  preachers  the  number  of  the 
faithful  daily  waxes  larger.  Satan's  saying  this  to  God,  is 
his  seeing  these  things  with  an  envious  eye.  Satan's  saying 
this  to  God,  is  his  grieving  at  these  things  with  a  pining 
spirit.     It  proceeds: 

Ver.  11.  But  put  forth  Thine  hand  a  little,  and  touch  all 
that  he  hath,  and  he  will  curse  Thee  to  TJiyface. 
xxvi.  45.  For  He,  Whom  he  thought  in  time  of  tranquillity  to  be 
under  the  keeping  of  God's  grace,  he  imagined  might  be  led 
to  sin  by  means  of  sufl'ering ;  as  though  he  had  plainly  said, 
*  One,  Who  for  the  miracles  which  He  works  is  accounted  God, 


The  Jewish  Church  ChrlsVs  heritage  and  first-horn .    i)J) 

being  put  to  llio  lest  by  afflictions,  is   discovered  to  be  a  Book 

sinner,  and  nothing  better.'     So  the  Lord  said  to  Satan,  '- — 

Ver.  12.  Behold,  all  Unit  he  hath  is  in  thy  jtower;  only 
upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  hand. 

46.  Whereas  we  are  examining  Holy  Scripture  under  its  xxvii. 
figurative  import,  by  the  hand  of  Satan  is  to  be  understood 

not  his  power,  but  the  extent  of  his  tempting.  All,  then,  that 
he  hath  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  Tempter,  and  he  is 
only  forbidden  to  put  forth  his  hand  upon  him,  which 
nevertheless,  when  his  substance  is  gone,  is  permitted  him ; 
for  that  first  Judaea,  which  was  His  possession,  was  taken 
from  Him  in  unbelief,  and  that  afterwards  His  flesh  was 
nailed  to  the  stock  of  the  Cross.  He  then  Who  first  under- 
went the  opposition  of  Juda3a,  and  afterwards  came  even  to 
the  Cross,  in  a  manner  first  lost  that  He  had,  and  then  in 
His  own  Person  endured  the  wickedness  of  the  adversar}^ 
So  Satan  went  forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

47.  Just  as  it  was  said  above,  Satan  went  forth  from  Mexxviii. 
presence  of  the  Lord,  in  that  he  attained  the  objects  of  his 
desire ;  for  he  was  in  a  certain  sense  in  His  presence,  all  the 

time  that  on  account  of  Him,  he  failed  to  accomplish  all  that 
he  mischievously  thirsted  after. 

Ver.  13.  And  there  was  a  day,  nJien  his  sons  and  his 
daughters  were  eating  and  drinking  wine  in  their  eldest 
brother  s  house. 

48.  We  have  said  that  the  sons  and  daughters  of  blessed  xxix. 
Job  were  a  representation  either  of  the  order  of  the  Apostles, 

or  of  the  whole  multitude  of  the  faithful.  Now  the  Lord 
Incarnate  first  chose  a  few  out  of  Judiea  unto  faith,  and 
afterwards  He  gathered  to  Himself  the  multitude  of  the 
Gentile  ])eople.  But  who  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  Lord, 
unless  the  Jewish  people  is  to  be  understood,  which  had 
been  a  long  time  bom  to  Him  by  the  teaching  of  the  Law 
which  He  gave }  and  who  the  younger  son  but  the  Gentile 
people,  which  at  the  very  end  of  the  world  was  gathered 
together }  And  therefore  whereas,  when  Satan  was  unwittingly 
contributing  to  the  welfare  of  the  human  race,  and  having 
cornipted  the  hearts  of  those  persecutors  was  demanding 
warrant  for  the  Passion  of  the  Lord,  the  Holy  Apostles  were 
as  yet  ignorant  that  the  (ientile  world  were  to  be  gathered 

H  '2 


100   The  shnple  near  to  the  wise  by  obedience  and  charity. 

JoBi,  to  God,  and  preached  to  Judaea  alone  the  mysteries  of  the 
Faith.     When  Satan  is  said  to  have  gone  out  from  the  Lord, 


Alleg 

the  sons  and  daughters  are  described  to  be  feasting  in  the 

house  of  their  elder  brother.  For  it  had  been  commanded 
Mat.io,  them,  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles.  Now  after  the 
^'  Death  and  Resurrection  of  our  Lord,  they  turned  to  preaching 

to  the  Gentiles,  for  which  reason  too  in  their  Acts  we  find 
Acts  13,  them  saying,  It  teas  necessary  that  the  word  of  God  should 
^  '       Jirst  have  been  spoken  to  you,  but  since  ye  put  it  from  you, 
and  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life,  lo,  we 
turn  to  the  Gentiles.     And  thus  these  children  of  the  bride- 
groom, of  whom  it  is   declared,  and  that  by  the   voice  of 
Matt.  9,  the  same  Bridegroom,  The  children  of  the  bridechamber  shall 
^^'        not  fast  as  long  as  the  bridegroom  is  with  them,  are  feasting 
in  the  house  of  their  elder  brother,  for  this  reason,  that  the 
Apostles  still  continued  to  be  fed  with  the  sweets  of  Holy 
Scripture  in  the  gathering  of  the  single  people  of  the  Jews. 

Ver.  14,  15.  And  there  came  a  messenger  unto  Job,  and 
said.  The  oxen  were  ploughing,  and  the  asses  feeding  beside 
them  ;    And  the  Sabeansfell  upjon  them,  and  took  all  away ; 
yea,  they  have  slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  of  the  sword, 
and  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee. 
XXX.       49.  What  else  do  we  take  the  oxen  to  mean  in  figure,  but 
well-doers;  what  the  asses,  but  certain  men  of  simple  ways  1 
These  are  properly  described  to  be  feeding  beside  the  oxen, 
because    simple    souls,    even  when    they    are    incapable    of 
comprehending  deep  mysteries,  are  near  to  the  great  %  inas- 
much as  they  account  the  excellencies  of  their  brethren  to  be 
their  own  also  by  force  of  charity ;  and  while  envy  of  the  know- 
i  gg^gj.  ledges^  of  others  is  a  thing  unknown,  they  are  never  divided 
'^"'^        at  pasture.     The  asses  then  take  their  food  in  company  with 
the  oxen,  in  that  duller  minds,  when  joined  with  the  wise,  are 
fed   by  their   understanding.     Now  the   Sabeans  mean  by 
intei*pretation  ^  captivators ;'   and  who  are  signified  by  the 
name  of  '  captivators,'  but  the  impure  spirits  who  lead   all 
men    captive    to    infidelity,   whom    they   make    subject    to 
5  pueros  themselves }    These  too  strike  the  youths^  with  the  sword, 
in  that  they  infiict  grievous  wounds,  with  the  darts  of  tempta- 
tion, upon  those  whom  the  constancy  of  manhood  does  not 
»  Mss.  A.  B.  D.  TjUJ^frrcrnt-'-Trm^iUs' for  '  magi'sif 


The  messenger  that  escapes  is  Prophecy.  101 

yet  maintain  in  freedom  and  hardiness.     These  indeed  enter  Rook 
fairly  upon  well-doing,  but  while  still  in  the  delicate  state  of- '— 


a  first  beginning,  they  are  prostrated  beneath  the  unclean 
spirits  that  take  captive ;  these  are  stricken  with  the  sword 
of  the  enemy,  in  that  he  pierces  them  with  despair  of  life 
eternal. 

oO.  But  what  is  this,  that  the  messenger  comes  with  these 
words,  a?id  1 0)ily  am  escaped  alone  ?    Who  is  this  messenger, 
who,  when  the  rest  are  destroyed,  *  escapes  alone,'  but  the 
prophetic  w^ord,  which,  whilst  all  the  evils  happen,  which  it 
foretold,  alone   returns  as  it   were   unharmed  to  the  Lord? 
For  when  it  is  known  to  speak  the  truth  concerning  the  fate 
of  the  lost,  it  is  in  a  certain  sense  shewn  to  live  among  the 
dead.     It  is  hence  that  the  servant  is  sent  to   bring  down 
Rebecca,   on   the  occasion  of  Isaac's  marrying ;    doubtless 
because  the  intervening  Prophecy  does  service  in  espousing 
the  Church  to  the  Lord.     So  when  the  Sabeans  made  their 
assault,  one  servant  alone  escaped  to  give  the  tidings,  because 
by  means  of  malignant  spirits  leading  captive  weak  minds, 
that  declaration  of  Prophecy  was  confirmed,  which,  in  fore- 
telling the  same  captivity,  saith.  Therefore  My  people  cire^^^  ^^ 
gone  into  captivity,  because  they  have  no  knowledge.     The 
prophecy  therefore  is  in  a  manner  preserved  safe,  when  the 
captivity,  which  it  foretold,  is  brought  to  light.     It  proceeds, 
Ver.   16.    While   he  was  yet  speaking,  there   came   also 
another,  and  said,  The  fire  of  God  is  fallen  from  Heaven, 
and  hath  burned  up  the  sheep,  and  the  servants,  and  con- 
sumed them ;  and  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee. 

51.  All,  who  held  the  office  of  preaching  in  the  Synagogue, 
were  rightly  named,  *  the  heavens,'  plainly  because  they 
were  supposed  to  be  imbued  with  heavenly  wisdom ;  and  (or 
this  reason,  when  Moses  was  urging  the  Priests  and  the 
people  to  take  heed  of  his  words  of  admonition,  he  exclaimed, 
Give  ear,  O  ye  Heavens,  and  I  will  speak;  and  hear,  O  earth,  -q^^^ 
the  words  of  my  mouth  ;  evidently  signifying  by  the  Heavens  32,  i. 
the  order  of  rulers,  and  by  the  earth  the  people  under  them. 
There  is  then  in  this  ])lace  no  unfitness  in  interpreting  tlie 
Heavens  to  mean  cither  the  Priests  or  the  Pharisees,  or  tlie 
Doctors  of  the  Law,  who,  to  the  eyes  of  men,  while  they 
attended  on  heavenly  duties,  seemed  as  it  were  to  shed  light 


102    The  sheep,  the  simple;  the  fire,  the  Rulers'  envy. 

Job  I,  from  on  high.  Now  because  they  were  greatly  stirred  up 
^j^^^^  in  opposition  to  our  Redeemer,  it  was  as  though  '  fire  fell 
from  heaven;'  whilst  from  those  very  men,  who  were  ac- 
counted teachers  of  the  truth,  the  flames  of  eYixy  burst 
out,  to  the  deceiving  of  the  ignorant  people.  For  we 
know  from  the  testimony  of  the  Gospel,  that  through 
envy  at  the  truths  which  He  taught  they  sought  an 
opjiortunity  for  His  betrayal,  but  that  from  fear  of  the 
people  they  dared  not  make  known  what  they  went  about. 
Hence  too  it  is  therein  written,  that  in  order  to  dissuade  the 
John  7,  people  they  say,  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees 
' .  believed  on  Him?  but  this  people,  ivho  knoweth  not  the  Law, 
are  cursed.  But  what  do  we  understand  by  the  sheep  and 
the  servants,  save  all  inoffensive,  but  still  as  yet  fainthearted 
persons,  who,  while  they  feared  to  undergo  the  persecution  of 
the  Pharisees  and  the  Rulers,  were  devoured  by  the  fires  of 
infidelity.  So  let  it  be  said;  The  fire  of  God  is  fallen  from 
Hcaien,  and  hath  burned  up  the  sheep  and  the  servants;  i.  e. 
the  flame  of  envy  has  come  down  from  the  hearts  of  the 
rulers,  and  burnt  up  all  that  there  was  of  good  springing  up 
in  the  people;  for  while  the  wicked  rulers  are  claiming 
honour  to  themselves  in  opposition  to  the  Truth,  the  hearts 
of  their  followers  are  turned  from  every  right  way.  And  here 
too  it  is  well  added.  And  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell 
thee;  for  whereas  the  predicted  case  of  wickedness  is  fulfilled, 
that  word  of  prophecy  escapes  the  extinction  of  falsehood, 
Is.  26,  wherein  it  is  said,  yea,  the  fire  of  thine  enemies  shall  devour 
^^'  them;  as  though  it  were  plainly  expressed,  *  not  only  are  the 
wicked  afterwards  tormented  by  fire  sent  in  vengeance,  but 
even  now  they  are  consumed  therewith  through  envy;'  in 
that  they  who  are  hereafter  to  be  visited  with  the  punishment 
of  just  retribution,  inflict  upon  themselves  here  the  tortures 
of  envy.  And  thus  the  servant  flies  and  returns  alone,  and 
announces  that  the  sheep  and  the  servants  have  been  de- 
stroyed by  fire,  when  Prophecy  in  forsaking  the  Jewish  people 
Is.  26,  shews  that  she  has  declared  the  trutli,  saying.  Jealousy  has 
^^'  ^^'  taken  hold  of  a  people  uithout  knowledge;  as  though  it  said 
in  plain  words,  *  when  the  people  would  not  make  out  the 
words  of  the  Prophets,  but  gave  their  belief  to  the  words  of 
the    envious,   the    fire     of  jealousy   consumed  them,  seeing 


Chaldeans  fierce  enemies ;   Camels,  half-believers.     103 

that  thev  were  burat  in  the  fire  of  other  men's  envy.'     It  Book 

•^               II. 
goes  on,  

Ver.  17.  JVhilst  he  was  yet  speaking,  there  came  also 
another,  and  said,  The  Chaldeans  made  out  three  bands,  and 
fell  upon  the  camels,  and  have  carried  them  away,  yea,  and 
slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  of  the  suord ;  and  I  only  am 
escaped  alone  to  tell  thee. 

5'2.  Knowing  that  the  Chaldeans  are  to  be  interpreted  ^xxii. 
*  fierce  ones,'  who  else  are  represented  by  the  name  of  Chal-. 
deans  but  the  stirrers  of  that  of  the  persecution,  who  burst  out 
even  in  open  cries  of  malice,  saying.  Crucify  Him  !  Crucify  Luke 
Him  I  These  made  themselves  into  three  bands,  when  the  ^jg^j^ ' 
Pharisees,  Herodians,  and  Sadducees  came  severally  to  put  i?'  ^3. 
questions.  Assuredly  they  were  vanquished  by  the  mouth 
of  Wisdom,  but  forasmuch  as  we  must  suppose  that  they 
drew  some  foolish  ones  after  them,  having  made  themselves 
into  bands,  they  earned  away  the  camels;  for  each  set  of 
them  poisoned  the  hearts  of  the  foolish  according  to  the  evil 
notions,  mth  which  it  was  itself  embued  ;  and  while  by  their 
persuasions  they  drag  them  to  destruction,  it  was  as  if  they 
led  captive  the  crooked'  minds  of  the  weaker  sort.  Thus  i  tortu- 
when  the  Lord  preached  in  Samaria,  there  were  many  of  the 
Samaritans  that  were  joined  to  the  heritage  of  that  our 
Redeemer.  But  did  not  they,  who,  on  the  ground  of  the 
seven  husbands  of  one  woman  that  were  dead,  tempted  the 
Lord  against  the  hope  of  resurrection,  do  their  best  to  bring 
back  the  believing  Samaritans  from  their  faith,  who  plainly 
knew  nothing  of  the  hope  of  a  resurrection  ?  Who,  while  they 
receive  some  things  out  of  the  Law,  and  disregard  others,  do 
as  it  were,  after  the  manner  of  camels,  ruminate  indeed  like  a 
clean  animal,  but  like  an  unclean  animal  do  not  cleave  the 
hoof.  Though  camels  which  ruminate,  yet  do  not  cleave  the 
hoof,  are  likewise  a  representation  of  those  in  Judaea,  who 
had  admitted  the  historical  fact  after  the  letter,  but  could 
not  spiritually  discern  the  proper  force  thereof.  Upon  these 
the  Chaldeans  seize  in  three  bands,  in  that  the  Pharisees, 
Herodians,  and  Sadducees,  by  their  evil  persuasions,  tuni 
them  aside  from  all  right  understanding.  And  at  the  same 
lime  they  smite  the  servants  with  the  sword;  for  though  there 
were    those    among  the  people  who  were    now   capable   of 


OS  as 


104      The  wilderness,  men  or  spirits  forsaken  of  God. 

Job  1,  exercising  reason,  yet   these   they   met  not  with  force   of 
*     *  reasoning,  but  with  authoritativeness  of  power;    and  while 


they  desire  to  be  imitated  as  rulers  by  their  subjects,  not- 
withstanding if  their  followers  can  understand  somewhat, 
yet  they  drag  them  to  destruction  by  the  prerogative  of 
assumed  authority.  And  it  is  fitly  that  one  servant  escapes 
from  them  to  bring  the  tidings,  in  that  when  the  Pharisees, 
Herodians,  and  Sadducees  do  wickedly,  that  word  of  Pro- 
phecy, whilst  forsaking  them,  is  established  sure,  which  saith, 

Jer.2,8.  J;?c?  they  that  handle  the  Law  knew  me  not.     The  account 
proceeds, 

Ver.  18,  19.  While  he  was  yet  speaking,  there  came  also 
another,  and  said.  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  were  eating 
and  drinking  wine  in  their  eldest  brother'' s  house:  Ajid, 
behold,  there  came  a  great  wind  from  the  wilderness,  and 
smote  the  four  corners  of  the  house,  ojid  it  fell  upon  thy 
children,  and  they  are  dead. 

xxxiii.  53.  We  have  said  a  little  above  that  by  the  sons  and  the 
daughters  we  understand  the  Apostles  that  preached,  and 
the  people  under  them ;  who  are  said  to  be  feasting  in  their 
eldest  brother'' s  house,  for  that  it  was  in  the  lot  of  the  Jewish 
people  still  that  they  were  fed  with  the  sweets  of  the  sacred 
truths  preached.  And,  behold,  there  came  a  great  wind  from 
the  ivilderness»  The  wilderness  is  the  heart  of  unbelievers, 
which  being  forsaken  by  the  Lord  is  without  an  inhabitant 
to  tend  it.  And  what  is  the  great  wind,  but  strong  tempt- 
ation ?  Accordingly  there  came  a  great  wind  from  the 
wilderness ;  for  at  the  Passion  of  our  Redeemer  there  came 
from  the  hearts  of  the  Jews  strong  temptation  against  His 
faithful  followers.  The  wilderness  may  likewise  not  unaptly 
be  taken  for  the  forsaken  multitude  of  impure  spirits,  from 
whom  came  a  wind  and  smote  the  house,  in  that  they  were 
the  source  whence  the  temptations  proceeded,  and  overturned 
the  hearts  of  the  persecutors. 

54.  But  this  house  wherein  the  sons  were  feasting  was 
builded  on  four  corners.  Now  we  know  the  three  orders  of 
Rulers  in  the  Synagogue,  viz.  the  Priests,  the  Scribes,  and 
the  Elders  of  the  people  ;  to  whom  if  we  add  the  Pharisees 
likewise,  wc  shall  have  found  the  four  corners  in  this  house. 
There  came  then  a  wind  from  the  wilderness,  and  smote  the 


Four  corners  J  four  orders.    Job's  rising^  ChrisCsjudyiug.  105 

four  corners  of  the  house  ;  in  that  temptation  burst  forth   Book 
from  the  unclean  spirits  and  stirred  up  the  niinds  of  the  four '■ — 


orders  to  the  wickedness  of  persecution.     That  house   fell 
and  overwlu'lmed   His  children,  forasmuch  as  when  Judaja 
fell  into  the  cruelty  of  persecuting  our  Lord,  it  overwhelmed 
the  faith  of  the  Apostles  with  fears  of  despair.     For  they  had 
only  to  see  their  Master  laid  hold  of,  and,  lo,  they  fled  every 
way,  denying  Him.     And  though  the  Hand  within  did   by 
foreknowledge  hold  their  spirits  in  life,  yet  meanwhile  carnal 
fear  cut  them  off  from   the  life   of  faith.     They  then   who 
forsook  their  Master,  when  Judaea  raged  against  Him,  were 
as  if  killed  by  the  house  being  overthrown,  when  its  comers 
were  smitten.     But  what  do  we  think  became  of  the  flock  of 
the  faithful  at  that  time,  when,  as  we  know,  the  very  rams 
took    to    flight?     Now    in   the   midst   of   these    events    one 
escaped    to   bring  tidings,  in    that   the  word  of  Prophecy, 
which  had  given  warning  of  these  things,  approves  itself  to 
have   been  confirmed  in  saying  of  the  persecuting  people, 
3Iy  beloved  one  hath  done  many  crimes  in  Mine  house;  of  Jer.  n, 
the  preachers,  who  though  good  yet  fled  at  the  Passion,  My  pj^g'^* 
neighbours  stood  afar  off;  saying  again  of  the  whole  number,  12. 
who  were  greatly  afraid.  Smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  13  7* 
shall  be  scattered.     It  proceeds  ;  ^Utt. 

26   31 

Ver.  20.   T7ien  Job  arose,  and  ?'ent  his  mantle. 

55.  When  his  sons  were  destroyed  in  the  ruin  of  thexxxiv. 
house.  Job  arose,  because  when  Judaea  was  lost  in  unbelief, 
and  when  the  Preachers  were  fallen  in  the  death  of  fear,  the 
Redeemer  of  mankind  raised  Himself  from  the  death  of  His 
carnal  nature*^;  He  shewed  in  what  judgment  He  abandoned 
His  persecutors  to  themselves.  For  His  rising  is  the  shewing 
with  what  severity  He  forsakes  sinners,  just  as  His  lying 
down  is  the  patient  endurance  of  ills  inflicted ''.  He  rises 
then,  when  He  executes  the  decrees  of  justice  against  the 
re])robate.  And  hence  He  is  rightly  described  to  have  rent 
his  ynantle.  For  what  stood  as  the  mantle  of  the  Lord,  but 
the  Synagogue,   which    by   the   preaching   of  the   Prophets 

f  Man  J  Mss.  omit  '  raised  Himself,  •»  Several  Mss.  omit  *  just    as'    &c. 

&C.'       An    old   edition   reads  *  in  that  Pen.  doubts  if  the  clause  be  genuine. 

He  Hhewed.'     Ms.  K.  '  as  indeed   He  That  in   the  last  note   is   perhaps  not 

did  rise  in  that  He  shewed.'     M.  '  in  less  doubtful, 
that  He  raised  &c ;  shewed.' 


106  Judtea  rent.  Head  of  Priesthood, Beard  of  Royalty,  shorn. 

Job],  clung  to  the  expectation  of  His  Incarnation?     For  in  the 
same  way  that  He  is  now  clothed  with  those  by  whom  He  is 


Eph.  5,  loved,  as  Paul  is  witness,  who  says,  TJiat  He  might  present 

^^'        it  to  Himself  a  glorious  church,  not  having  spot  nor  wrinkle; 

(for  that  which  is  described  as  having  neither  spot  or  uTinkle 

J  vestis  is  surely  made    appear  as    a    spiritual  robe  * ;    and  at  once 

raiona-^lg^^  in  practice,  and  stretched  in  hope;)   so  when  Judaea 

believed  Him  as  yet  to  be  made  Incarnate,  it  was  no  less 

a  garment  through  its  clinging  to  Him. 

56.  But  because  He  was  looked  for  before  He  came,  and 
coming,  taught  new  truths,  and  teaching,  wrought  wonders, 
and  working  wonders,  underwent  wrongs.  He  rent  His  mantle, 
which  He  had  put  on  Him,  seeing  that  in  Judaea  some  he 
withdrew  from  unbelief,  whilst  some  He  left  therein.  What 
then  is  the  rent  mantle  but  Judaea  divided  in  contrary 
opinions }  For,  if  His  mantle  had  not  been  rent,  the 
Evangelist  would  not  have  said  that,  at  the  preaching  of  our 
John  7,  Lord,  there  arose  strife  among  the  people  ;  For  some  said,  He 
is  a  good  man;  others  said,  Nay^  hut  He  deceiveih  the  people. 
For  that  mantle  of  His  was  rent,  in  that  being  divided  in 
opinions  it  lost  the  unity  of  concord '.     It  proceeds ; 

And  shaved  his  head,  and  fell  down  upon  the  ground,  and 

worshipped. 

XXXV.      57.  What  is  signified  by  the  hair  that  was  shorn  but  the 

ssubtili-^i^^^teness^  of  Sacraments  .?   what  by  the  head  but  the  High 

tas         Priesthood  }   Hence  too  it  is  said  to  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  And 

1.        '  thou,  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  sharp  knife,  take  thee  a  harher''s 

razor,  and  cause  it  to  pass  upon  thine  head,  and  upon  thy 

heard;  clearly  that  by  the  Prophet's  act  the  judgment  of  the 

Redeemer  might  be  set  out,  Who  when  He  came  in  the  flesh 

'  shaved  the  head,'  in  that   He   took   clean   away  from  the 

Jewish  Priesthood  the  Sacraments  of  His  commandments ; 

'  and  shaved  the  beard,'  in  that  in  forsaking  the  kingdom  of 

Israel,  He  cut  off  the  glory  of  its  excellency.     And  what  is 

here  expressed  by  tJie  earth,  but  sinful  man  }    For  to  the 

Gen.  3,  first  man  that  sinned  the  words  were  spoken  ;  Dust  thou  art, 

^^'        and  unto  dust  shall  thou  return.     By  the  name  of  the  earth 

'  Some  Edd.  and  one  Ms.  in  marg.  some  that  would  not  believe  P"    This 

here  add,    "  "Whereas  after  His  Resur-  seems   out   of  place,    and   of  a    piece 

rection    He    appeared    to    some    that  with    the    two    douhtful     clauses    just 

would  believe,  and   hid   Himself  from  mentioned. 


Our  Lord  fell  down  to  sinners  and  Gentiles.         107 

then  is  signified  the  sinful  Gentile  world ;   for  whilst  Judaea  Book 
thought   herself   righteous,    it   appears   how    damnable    she '— 


thought  the  Gentile  world,  as  Paul  is  witness,  who  saith. 
We  who  are  Jews  hy  nature^  and  not  sinners  of  the  Gentiles.  Gal.  2, 
Therefore  our  Mediator,  as  it  were,  shaved  His  head,  and  fell  ^' 
down  upon  the  earth,  seeing  that  in  forsaking  Judaea,  whilst 
He  took  awav   His  Sacraments   from   her   Priesthood,   He 
came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Gentiles.     For  He  '  shaved 
the  hair  from  His  Head,'  because  He  took  away  from  that 
His  first  Priesthood  the  Sacraments  of  the  Law.     And  He 
fell   upon  the  earth,   because  He  gave  Himself  to  sinners 
for  their  salvation ;  and  while  He  gave  up  those  who  appeared 
to  themselves  righteous.  He  took  to  Himself  those,  who  both 
knew  and  confessed  that  they  were  unrighteous.     And  hence 
He  Himself  declares  in   the  Gospel,  For  judgment  I  «/// John  9 
come  into  this  world,  that  they  that  see  not  might  see,  and^^- 
that  they  which  see  might  be  made  blind.     And  hence  the 
pillar  of  the  cloud,  which  went  before  the  people  in  the 
wilderness,  shone  with  a  radiant  flame  of  fire  not  in  the  day 
but  in   the  night ;    for  this  reason,  that  our  Redeemer,  in 
giving  guidance  to  those  that  followed  Him  by  the  example  of 
lite  and  conduct,  yielded  no  light  to  such  as  trusted  in  their 
own  righteousness,  but  on  those  who  acknowledged  the  dark- 
ness of  their  sins.  He  shone  with  the  fire  of  His  love.    Nor,  be- 
cause Job  is  said  to  fall  on  the  earth,  let  us  account  this  to 
be  an  unworthy  representation  of  our  Redeemer.     For  it  is 
written,   'Die   Lord  sent  a    Word   into  Jacob,  and   it   hath  is.  9, 8. 
fallen  '  upon  Israel.     For  Jacob  means  one  that  overthrows!  e.  v. 
another,  and  Lsrael,  one  that  sees  God.     And  what  is  signi-''^'^''^'' 
fled  by  Jacob  but  the  Jewish  people,  and  l)y  Israel  but  the 
Gentile  world }    For  in  that  very  One  Whom  Jacob  aimed  to 
overthrow  by  the  death  of  the  flesh,  the  Gentile  world,  by 
the  eyes  of  faith,  beheld  God.     And  thus  the  Word,  that 
was  sent  to  Jacob,  lighted  upon  Israel ;  for  Him  whom  tlxe 
Jewish  people  rejected  when  He  came  to  them,  the  Gentile 
world  at  once  owned  and  found.     For  concerning  the  Holy 
Spirit  it  is  written,  The  Spirit  of'  God  fell  upon  them,  Acuii, 

58.  And  for  this  reason  either  the  Word  of  God  or  the^'"** 
Holy  Spirit  is  said  to  fall  in  Holy  Scripture,  to  describe  the 
suddenness  of  His  coming.      For  whatever  rushes  down  or 


108       The  Synagoyue  our  Lord's  Mother  in  the  Flesh.  . 

Job  i»  falls,  comes  to  the  bottom  directly.     And  therefore  it  is  as  if 
7—^  the  Mediator  had  fallen   upon  the  earth,  that  without  any 
previous  signs  He  unexpectedly  came  to  the  Gentiles.     And 
it   is    well    said,  that   He  fell  down    upon   the   earth    and 
worshipped,  in  that  whilst  He  Himself  undertook  the  low- 
estate  of  the  flesh.  He  poured  into  the  hearts  of  believers 
the  breathings  of  humility.    For  He  did  this,  in  that  He  taught 
the  doing  of  it,  in  the  same  way  that  it  is  said  of  His  Holy 
Roin.  8,  Spirit,  But  the  Spirit  itself  make  lit  requesf^   for  us  with 
1  ^yi     (jroanings  which  cannot  he  uttered.     Not  that  He  petitions, 
poatatat  WTho  is  of  perfect  equality,  but  He  is  said  to  make  request 
for  no   other  reason  than  that  He   causes   those   to   make 
request  whose  hearts  He  has  filled :   though  our  Redeemer, 
moreover,  manifested  this  in   His  own  Person,  Who   even 
besought  the  Father  when   He   was   drawing   nigh  to  His 
Passion.     For  what  wonder  if,  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  He 
submitted  Himself  to  the  Father  by  pouring  out  His  suppli- 
cations to  Him,  when  in  the  same  He  even  underwent  the 
violence    of  sinners,  to    the   very  extremity   of  death.     It 
proceeds : 

Ver.  21.  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and 
naked  shall  I  return  thither, 

59.  The  mother  of  our  Redeemer,  after  the  flesh,  was  the 
Synagogue,  from  whom  He  came  forth  to  us,  made  manifest 
by  a  Body.  But  she  kept  Him  to  herself  veiled  under 
the  covering  of  the  letter,  seeing  that  she  neglected  to  open 
the  eyes  of  the  understanding  to  the  spiritual  import  thereof. 
Because  in  Him,  thus  veiling  Himself  with  the  flesh  of  an 
human  Body,  she  would  not  see  God,  she  as  it  were  refused 
to  behold  Him  naked  in  His  Divinity.  But  He  '  came  naked 
out  of  His  mother's  womb,'  because  when  He  issued  from  the 
flesh  of  the  Synagogue''  He  came  openly  manifest  to  the 
Gentiles;  which  is  excellently  represented  by  Joseph's 
leaving  His  cloak  and  fleeing.  For  when  the  adulterous 
woman  would  have  used  him  to  no  good  end,  he,  leaving  his 
cloak,  fled  out  of  the  house;  because  when  the  Synagogue, 
believing  Him  to  be  simply  man,  would  have  bound  Him  as 
it  were  in  an  adulterous  embrace.  He  too  left  the  covering 
of  the  letter  to  its  eyes,  and  manifested  Himself  to  the  Gentiles 
^  i\\.  coming  forth  from  the  Synagogue  in  the  Flesh. 


1 


How  our  Lord  receii'ed,  and  losi^  the  Jexrs.  109 

without  disguise  for  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Power  of  His  Book 
Divinity.     And  hence  Paul  said,  But  even  to  this  day,  when-^—^ — 
Moses   is   read,    the    vail   is    upon    their    hearts;     for   this  16.       ' 
reason,  that  the  adulteress  kept  the  cloak  in  her  own  hands, 
but  Him,  Whom  she  wickedly  laid  hold  of,  she  let  go  naked. 
He  then  Who  coming  from  the  Synagogue  plainly  disclosed 
Himself  to  the  faith  of  the  Gentiles,  *  came  naked  out  of  His 
mother's  womb.'    But  does  He  wholly  give  her  up.?    Where 
then  is   that  which   the  Prophet    declares.  For    though  thy  u.io, 
people  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  yet  a  remnant  of^^' 
them  shall  return  ?    where  that  which  is  written.  Until  the  Rom. 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in;  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be^^^  ^^* 
saved/    The  time  will  be,  then,  when  He  will  shew  Himself 
clearly  to  the  Synagogue  also.     Yes,  the  time  will  doubtless 
come  in  the  end  of  the  world,  when  He  will  make  Himself 
known,  even  as  He  is  God,  to  the  remnant  of  His  People. 
Whence  it  is  likewise  justly  said  in  this  place,  and  naked 
shall    I   return    (hither.      For   be  '  returns    naked    to    His 
mother's  womb,'  when,  at  the  end  of  the  world.  He,  Who 
being  made  Man  in  time  is  the  object  of  scorn,  is  revealed  to 
the   eyes  of  His  Synagogue  as  God  before  all  worlds.     It 
proceeds; 

Ver.  21.  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ; 
as  it  hath  pleased  the  Lord,  so  is  it  coine  to  pass;  blessed  be 
the  Name  of  the  Lord. 

60.  Our  Redeemer,  in  that  He  is  God,  gives  all  things  withxxxvii 
the  Father;  but  in  that  He  is  Man,  He  receives  at  the  hands 
of  the  Father,  as  one  among  all.  Therefore  let  Him  say  of 
Judaja,  so  long  as  she  believed  in  the  mystery  of  His  Incar- 
nation to  come,  the  Lord  hath  given.  Let  Him  say  of  her, 
when  she  slighted  the  looked  for  coming  of  His  Incarnation, 
the  Ijyrd  hath  taken  away.  For  she  was  *  given,*  when  in  the 
persons  of  a  certain  number  she  believed  what  was  to  be; 
but  she  was*  taken  away,' as  the  just  desert  of  her  blindness, 
when  she  scorned  to  hold  in  veneration  the  truths  believed 
by  those. 

Gl.  But  let  Him  instruct  all  that  believe  in  Him,  that  when 
under  scourges  they  may  know  how  to  bless  God,  in  the  words 
that  are  added.  As  it  hath  pleased  the  Lord,  so  is  it  done^ ;  i  not  in 
blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord.     Whence  likewise,  as  the  ^'  ^  • 


110        Clirist  typified  in  Job  as  suffering  without  sin. 

Job  1,  Gospel  is  witness,  when  He  is  described  to  be  drawing  near 
- — '- —  to  His  Passion,  He  is  said  to  have  taken  bread  and  given 

Alleg.  '  ... 

thanks.  And  so  He  gives  thanks  Who  is  bearing  the  stripes 
of  the  sins  of  others.  And  He,  Who  did  nothing  worthy 
of  strokes,  blesses  humbly  under  the  infliction  of  them, 
doubtless  that  He  might  shew  from  hence  what  each  man 
ought  to  do  in  the  chastisement  of  his  own  transgressions,  if 
He  thus  bears  with  patience  the  chastisement  of  the  trans- 
gressions of  others,  that  He  might  shew  hence  what  the 
servant  should  do  under  correction,  if  He  being  equal  gives 
thanks  to  the  Father  under  the  rod.     It  proceeds; 

Ver.  22.  In   all   this   Job   sinned  not,  nor  charged  God 
foolishly. 

62.  '  That  he  neither  sinned,  nor  charged  God  foolishly,' 
Peter,  as  we  have  said,  above  testifies  of  Him  in  plain  terms, 

1  Pet.  saying.  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His 
mouth.  For  guile  in  the  mouth  is  so  much  the  more  senseless 
folly  with  God,  the  moi*e  that  in  the  eyes  of  men  it  passes  for 

1  Cor. 3,  crafty  wisdom,  as  Paul  bears  witness,  saying.  The  wisdom  of 
this  world  is  foolishness  with  God.  Forasmuch  then  as 
there  was  no  guile  in  His  mouth,  verily  He  said  nothing 
foolishly.  The  Priests  and  the  Rulers  believed  that  He 
charged  God  foolishly,  when,  being  questioned  at  the  time 
of  His  Passion,  He  testified  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God. 


Matt. 
26,  65. 


And  hence  they  question,  saying.  What  further  need  have 
we  of  witnesses  ?  Behold  now  we  have  heard  His  blasphemy. 
But  He  did  not  charge  God  foolishly,  in  that  speaking  the 
words  of  truth,  even  in  dying  He  brought  before  the  unbe- 
lievers that  concerning  Himself,  which  He  soon  after 
manifested  to  all  the  redeemed  by  rising  again. 

Moral      (j3.  We   have  briefly  gone  through  these  particulars,  re- 

^^'  garded  under  the  view  of  representing  our  Head.     Now,  as 

they  tend  to  the  edification  of  His  Body,  let  us  explain  them 

to  be  considered  in  a  moral  aspect;  that  we  may  learn  how 

/  that,  which  is  described  to  have  been  done  in  outward  deed, 

is  acted  inwardly  in  our  mind.  Now  when  the  sons  of  God 
present  themselves  before  God,  Satan  also  presents  himself 
among  tliem,  in  that  it  very  often  happens  that  that  old  enemy 
craftily  blends  and  unites  himself  with  those  good  thoughts, 
which  are  sown  in  our  hearts  through  the  instrumentality  of 


Satan  walks  up  and  dotcn  in  cart  lily  minds.         \  1 1 

the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  disorder  all  that  is  rightly  Book 
conceived,  and  tear  in  pieces  what  is  once  wrongly  disordered. ^— 


But  He,  Who  created  us,  does  not  forsake  us  in  our  tempt- 
ation. For  our  enemy,  who  hid  himself  in  ambush  against 
us,  He  makes  easy  to  be  discovered  by  us,  through  the  illu- 
mination of  His  light.  Wherefore  He  saith  to  him  immediately, 
Whence  comest  thoui 

fi4.  For  His  interrogating  the  crafty  foe  is  the  discovering xxxix. 
to  us  his  ambush,  that   where  we    see  him   steal   into  the 
heart,  we  may  watch  against  him  with  resolution  and  with 
caution. 

Ver.  7.  Then  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said,  From 
going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  from  walking  up  and  down 
in  it. 

65.  Satan's  going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth  is  his  exploring  xl. 
the  hearts  of  the  canial,  and  seeking  diligently  whence  he 
may  find  grounds  of  accusation  against  them.  He  ^  goeth  Vulg. 
round  about  the  earth,'  for  he  comes  about  the  hearts  of  men,  ^'*^"' 
that  he  may  carry  oft'  all  that  is  good  in  them,  that  he  may 
lodge  evil  in  their  minds,  that  he  may  heap  up  on  that  he 
has  lodged,  that  he  may  perfect  that  he  has  heaped,  that  he 
may  gain  as  his  fellows  in  punishment  those  whom  he  has  per- 
fected in  sin.  And  observe  that  he  does  not  say  that  he  has 
been  flying  through  the  earth,  but  that  he  has  been  walking 
up  and  down  in  it;  for,  in  truth,  he  is  never  quick  to  leave 
whomsoever  he  tempts;  but  there  where  he  finds  a  soft  heart, 
he  plants  the  foot  of  his  wretched  persuasion,  so  that  by 
resting  thereon,  he  may  stamp  the  prints  of  evil  practice, 
and  by  a  like  wickedness  to  his  own  may  render  reprobate 
all  whom  he  is  able;  but  in  despite  of  him  blessed  Job  is 
commended  in  these  words; 

Ver.  8.  Hast  thou  considered  My  servant  Job,  that  there 
is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man, 
one  thatfeareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil? 

C(i.  To  him,  whom  Divine  Inspiration  makes  strong  to  xli. 
meet  the  enemy,  God  gives  praise  as  it  were  in  the  ears  of 
Satan  ;  for  His  giving  him  praise  is  the  first  vouchsafing 
virtues,  and  aftenvards  preserving  them  when  vouchsafed. 
But  the  old  enemy  is  the  more  enraged  against  the  righteous, 
the  more  he  perceives  that  they  are  hedged  around  by  the 


112  God  upholds  the  Electa  but  inwardly. 

Job  1,  favour   of  God's   protection.     And   hence   he  rejoins,  and 
,  ~      says, 

Moral.       ''    ' 

Ver.  10.  Doth  Job  fear  Ood  for  nought?  Hast  not  Thou 
made  an  hedge  about  him,  and  about  his  house,  and  about 
all  that  he  hath  on  every  side  ?  Thou  hast  blessed  the  work 
of  his  hands,  and  his  substance  is  increased  in  the  land. 
xlii.  67.  As  though  he  plainly  said ;  '  Wherefore  dost  Thou 
extol  him  whom  Thou  stablishest  with  Thy  protection }  for 
man  would  deserve  Thy  praises,  while  Thou  despisest  me,  if 
he  withstood  me  by  his  own  proper  strength.'  Hence  also 
he  immediately  demands  on  man's  head  with  evil  intent, 
what  man's  Defender  concedes  though  with  a  merciful  design. 
For  it  is  added, 

Ver.  11.  But  put  forth  Thine  hand  now,  and  touch  all 
that  he  hath;  and  he  will  curse  Thee  to  Thy  face, 
xliii.  68.  For  when  we  yield  plentifully  the  fruits  of  virtue,  and 
when  we  are  flourishing  in  uninterrupted  prosperity,  the  mind 
is  somewhat  inclined  to  be  lifted  up,  so  as  to  imagine  that 
all  the  excellency  that  she  hath  comes  to  her  from  herself. 
This  same  excellency,  then,  our  old  enemy  with  evil  intent 
desires  to  lay  hands  on,  whilst  God  no  otherwise  than  in  mercy 
allows  it  to  be  tried ;  that  while  the  mind,  under  the  force  of 
temptation,  is  shaken  in  the  good  wherein  it  exulted,  learning 
the  powerlessness  of  its  own  frail  condition,  it  may  become 
the  more  strongly  established  in  the  hope  of  God's  aid;  and 
it  is  brought  to  pass  by  a  marvellous  dispensation  of  His 
Mercy,  that  from  the  same  source,  whence  the  enemy  tempts 
the  soul  to  destroy  it,  the  merciful  Creator  gives  it  instruction 
that  it  may  live;  and  hence  it  is  rightly  added, 

Ver.  12.  Behold,  all  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power ;  only 
upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  hand. 
xliv.  69.  As  if  He  said  in  plain  words;  *  I  give  thee  so  to  try 
the  good  that  is  in  each  one  of  Mine  Elect  by  temptation 
from  without,  that  thou  mayest  acquaint  thine  own  self  that 
I  keep  him  holding  on  to  Me  by  the  inward  root  of  the 
mind;  and  hence  it  is  rightly  added. 

So  Satan  went  out  front,  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 
xlv.        70.  For  in  that  he  is  not  suffered  to  prevail  so  far  as  to 
withdraw  the  heart,  being  thus  shut  out  from  the  interior,  he 
roams  without.     Who,  even  if  he  very  often  work  confusion 


The  virtues  feasted  hy  the  eldest  horn  in  us,  Faith.   113 

in  the  virtues  of  the  soul,  herein  does  it  without,  in  that,  Book 
through  God's  withholding  him,  he  never  wounds  the  hearts 
of  the  good  to  their  utter  ruin.  For  he  is  permitted  so  far 
to  rage  against  them  as  may  be  necessary,  in  order  that 
they,  thus  instructed  by  temptation,  may  be  stablished,  that 
they  may  never  attribute  to  their  own  strength  the  good 
which  they  do,  nor  neglect  themselves  in  the  sloth  of  security, 
loosing  themselves  from  the  bracings  of  fear,  but  that  in 
keeping  guard  over  their  attainments  they  may  watch  with  so 
much  the  greater  prudence,  as  they  see  themselves  to  be 
ever  confronting  the  enemy  in  the  fight  of  temptations. 

Ver.  13,  14,  15.  And  there  was  a  day  ichen  his  sons  and 
his  daughters  were  eating  and  drinking  nine  in  their  eldest 
brothefs  house:  And  there  came  a  messenger  unto  Job,  and 
said,  The  oxen  were  plowing,  and  the  asses  feeding  beside 
them:  and  the  Sabeans  fell  upon  them  ;  yea,  they  have  slain 
the  servants  with  the  edge  of  the  sword ;  and  I  only  am 
escaped  alo7ie  to  tell  thee. 

71.  In  the  hearts  of  the  Elect  wisdom  is  first  engendered,  xlvi.    ^ 
before  all  the  graces  that  follow ;  and  she  comes  forth  as  it 

were  a  first  born  offspring  by  the  gift  of  the   Holy   Spirit. 
Now  this  wisdom  is  our  faith,  as  the  Prophet  testifies,  saying, 
If  ye  will  not  believe,  surely  ye  shall  not  understand^ .     For  Is,  7,  9. 
then  we  are  truly  wise  to  understand,  when  we  yield  the  assent  ^/'J^^^l 
of  our  belief  to  all  that  our  Creator  says.     Thus  the  sons  are  hUshed 
feasting  in  their  eldest  brother's  house,  when  the  other  virtues 
are   feasted   in  faith.       But  if  this  latter  be  not  first  pro- 
duced in  our  hearts,  all  besides  cannot  be  good,  though  it 
may    seem    to   be    good.       The   sons   feast   in    their   eldest 
brothefs  house,  so  long  as  our  virtues  are  replenished  with 
the  good  of  holy  writ,  in  the  dwelling  place  of  faith  ;  for  it  is 
written,  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God;  and  so^^^*^^' 

o. 

our  virtues  taste  the  true  feasts  of  life,  when  they  begin  to  be 
sustained  with   the  mysteries'   of  faith.      The  sons  feast  in^  ^^^^!^' 

1     •        1  ,         t         1      •>      t  '1  mentis 

their  eldest  fjrother  s  house,  ni  that  except  the  other  virtues, 
filling  themselves  with  the  feast  of  wisdom,  do  wiselv  all  that 
they  seek  to  do,  they  can  never  be  virtues. 

72.  But  observe,  while  the  good  that  we  do  is  fed  with  the 
rich  fare  of  wisdom  and  of  faith,  our  enemy  carries  off  the 
oxen  that  are  plowing,  and  the  asses  feeding  beside  them, 

I 


114  The  oxen  are  serious  thoughts  toward  labours  of  love. 

Job  1,  and  kills  the  servants  with  the  sword.     What  are  the  oxen 
~    '  plowing,  except  we  understand  our  serious  thoughts,  v^^hich 
1  confi- '  while  they  wear  ^  the  heart  with  diligent  tillage,  yield  abundant 
'''''°*      fruits   of  increase?    and  what  do  we   take  to  be   the  asses 
feeding  beside  them,  but  the  simple  emotions  of  the  heart, 
which,  whilst  carefully  withheld  from  straying  in  double  ways, 
we  feed  in  the  free  pasture  of  purity?     But  oftentimes  the 
crafty  enemy,  spying  out  the  serious  thoughts  of  our  heart, 
corrupts  them  under  the  cloak  of  that  beguiling  pleasure 
which  he  insinuates  ;  and  when  he  sees  the  simple  emotions 
of  the  heart,  he  displays  the  subtleties  and  refinements  of 
discoveries,  that  while  we  aim  at  praise  for  subtlety,  we  may 
part  with  the  simplicity  of  a  pure  mind ;  and  though  he  has 
not  the  power  to  draw  us  to  a  deed  of  sin,  nevertheless  by 
secret  thefts  he  spoils  the  thoughts  of  good  things  through 
his  temptations,  that  while  he  is  seen  to  trouble  the  good 
that  is  in  their  mind,  he  may  seem  as  though  he  had  com- 
pletely made  spoil  of  it.     By  the  oxen  ploughing  may  also 
be  understood  the  intents  of  charity,  whereby  we  endeavour 
to  render  service  to   others,  when  we   desire  to  cleave  the 
hardness  of  a  brother's  heart  by  preaching ;  and  by  the  asses 
also,  for  that  they  never  resist  with  a  mad  rage  those  that  are 
loading  them,  may  be  signified  the  meekness  of  patience, 
and  oftentimes  our  old  enemy,  seeing  us  anxious  to  benefit 
others  by  our  words,  plunges  the  mind  into  a  certain  sleepy 
state  of  inactivity,  that  we  are  not  disposed  to  do  good  to 
others,  even  though  our  own  concerns  leave  us  at  liberty. 
Accordingly  he  carries  away  the  oxen  that  are  ploughing, 
when,  by  insinuating  sloth  that  causes  negligence,  he  breaks 
the  force  of  those  inward  purposes,  which  were  directed  to 
produce  the  fruit  of  a  brother's  welfare,  and  although  the 
hearts  of  the  Elect  keep  watch  within  the  depths  of  their  own 
thoughts,  and,  getting  the  better  of  it,  take  thought  of  the 
mischief,  which  they  receive  at  the  hands  of  the  tempter, 
yet  by  this  very  circumstance,  that  he  should  prevail  over 
the  thoughts  of  good  things  though  but  for  a  moment,  the 
malicious  enemy  exults  in  having  gotten  some  booty. 

73.  Now  oftentimes,  when  he  sees  the  mind  in  a  readiness 

•  Subripiens.     Some  Edd.  here  read  '  subrepens,'  '  creeping  in  secretly,'  as 
well  as  in  some  other  places. 


Jlie  asses  are  our  innocent  affections.  115 

to  endure,  he  contrives  to  find  out  wliat  it  loves  the  best,  and  Book 

11 
there  sets  his  traps  of  offence ;  that  the  more  the  object  is '— 

beloved,  our  patience  may  be  the  sooner  disquieted  by  means 
of  it.  And  indeed  the  hearts  of  the  Elect  ever  return  heed- 
fully  to  themselves,  and  chastise  themselves  sorely,  even  for 
the  slighest  impulse  to  go  wrong,  and  whilst  by  being 
moved  they  learn  how  they  should  have  stood  fast,  they  are 
sometimes  the  more  firmly  established  for  being  shaken. 
But  the  ancient  enemy,  when  he  puts  out  our  purposes  of 
patience,  though  but  for  a  moment,  exults  that  he  has,  as  it 
were,  carried  off  the  asses  fi'om  the  field  of  the  heart.  Now  in 
the  things  which  we  determine  to  do  w^e  carefully  consider, 
with  the  watchfulness  of  reason,  what  is  proper,  and  to  what 
cases.  But  too  often  the  enemy,  by  rushing  upon  us  with 
the  sudden  impulse  of  temptation,  and  coming  unawares 
before  the  mind's  looking  out,  slays  as  it  were  with  the 
sword  the  very  servants  that  are  keeping  watch,  yet  one 
escapes  to  tell  that  the  rest'  is  lost ;  for  in  whatsoever  the  mind '  alia 
is  affected  by  the  enemy,  the  discernment  of  reason  ever 
returns  to  it,  and  she  doth  in  a  certain  sense  shew  that  she 
hath  escaped  alone,  which  doth  resolutely  consider  with 
herself  all  that  she  has  undergone.  So  then  all  the  rest 
perish,  and  one  alone  returns  home,  when  the  motions  of 
the  heart  are  in  the  time  of  temptation  put  to  rout,  and 
then  discernment  comes  back  to  the  conscience ;  that  what- 
ever the  mind,  which  has  been  caught  by  a  sudden  onset, 
calculates  that  she  has  lost,  she  may  recover,  when  bowed 
down*"  with  heartfelt  contrition. 

Ver.  16.  While  he  was  yet  speaking^  there  came  also 
another,  and  said,  The  fire  of  Ood  is  fallen  from  heaven, 
and  hath  burned  up  the  sheep  a?id  the  servants,  and  consumed 
them  ;  and  I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee, 

74.  What  is  signified  by  sheep  but  the  innocency  of  our  xlvii. 
thoughts?  what  is  signified  by  sheep,  but  cleanness  of  heart 
in  the  good?  Now  we  have  said  a  little  above  that  we  speak 
of  the  aerial  '  heaven,'  whence  too  we  name  the  birds  of 
heaven.  And  \sv  know  that  the  impure  spirits,  that  fell 
from  the  ethereal  heaven,  roam  abroad  in  the  midsj^ace 
between  this  heaven  and  earth.    These  are  the  more  envious  \ 

"  afllicta.  Some  Mss.  afflata,  '  inspired.' 
I  2 


116    Fire  of  envy  from  devils  suffered  to  try  our  purity. 

Job  1,  that  the  hearts  of  men  should  mount  up  to  the  realms  of 
heaven,  that  they  see  themselves  to  have  been  cast  down 


from  thence  by  the  impurity  of  their  pride.  Forasmuch  then 
as  the  glances  of  jealousy  burst  forth  from  the  powers  of  the 
air  against  the  purity  of  our  thoughts, '  fire  fell  from  heaven 
upon  the  sheep ;'  for  oftentimes  they  inflame  the  pure  thoughts 
of  our  minds  with  the  fires  of  lust,  and  they  do  as  it  were 
consume  the  sheep  with  fire,  when  they  disorder  the  chaste 
feelings  of  the  mind  with  the  temptations  of  sensuality. 
This  is  called  the  fire  of  God,  for  it  owes  its  birth,  though 
not  to  the  making,  yet  to  the  permission  of  God.  And  because 
by  a  sudden  onset  they  sometimes  overwhelm  the  very 
cautions  of  the  mind,  they  slay  with  the  sword  as  it  were  the 
servants  that  are  their  keepers.  Yet  one  escapes  in  safety, 
so  long  as  persevering  discernment  reviews  with  exactness  all 
that  the  mind  suffers,  and  this  alone  escapes  the  peril  of 
death ;  for  even  when  the  thoughts  are  put  to  rout,  discretion 
does  not  give  over  to  make  known  its  losses  to  the  mind,  and 
as  it  were  to  call  upon  her  lord  to  lament. 

Ver.  17.  While  he  was  yet  speaking  there  came  also 
another,  and  said,  The  Chaldeans  made  out  three  bands, 
and  fell  upon  the  camels,  a7id  have  carried  them  atvay,  yea, 
and  slain  the  servants  with  the  edge  of  the  sword;  and 
I  only  am  escaped  alone  to  tell  thee. 

75.  By  the  camels,  which  have  a  clean  mark,  in  that  they 
ruminate,  and  an  unclean,  in  that  they  do  not  cleave  the 
hoof,  are  meant,  as  we  have  already  said  above,  the  godly 
stewardships  of  temporal  things,  in  which  in  proportion  as 
'the  charge  is  more  extensive,  the  more  doth  the  enemy 
multiply  his  plots  against  us.  For  every  man  who  is  set 
over  the  management  of  temporal  affairs,  is  the  more  largely 
open  to  the  darts  of  the  hidden  foe.  For  some  things 
he  aims  to  do  with  an  eye  to  the  future,  and  often  whilst, 
thus  cautious,  he  forecasts  future  events  with  exactness, 
he  incautiously  neglects  to  regard  present  evils.  Often 
while  his  eye  is  on  the  present,  he  is  asleep  to  the  anticipa- 
tion of  coming  events.  Often  in  doing  some  things  sloth- 
fully,  he  neglects  what  should  be  done  with  energy.  Often 
in  shewing  himself  overactive  in  the  execution,  by  the  very 
restlessness  of  his  mode  of  acting  he  hurts  the  more  the 


The  camels,  or  secular  charges,  assailed  by  three  hands.  117 

interests  of  his  charge.     Again,  sometimes  lie  strives  to  put  Book 

restraint  upon  his  lips,  but  is  prevented  keeping  silence  by  —^ 

the   requirements   of  his   business.      Sometimes,  whilst  he 
restrains   himself  with   excessive  rigour,  he   is  silent   even 
when  he  ought  to  speak.     Sometimes,  while  he  gives  himself 
more  liberty  to  communicate   necessary   things,  he  says  at 
1      the  same  time  what  he  should  never  have  given  utterance  to. 
And  for  the  most  part  he   is  embarrassed  with  such   vast 
complications  of  thoughts,  that  he  is  scarce  able  to  bear  the 
mere  things,  which  with  foresight  he  ponders  in  his  mind, 
and  while  he  produces  nothing  in  deed,  he  is   grievously 
overburdened'  with  the  great  weight  upon  his  breast.     ForUnsudat 
as  that  is  hard  to  bear  which  he  is  subject  to  within  his  own 
bosom,  even  while  unemployed  and  at  rest  from  work  with- 
out, he  is  yet  wearied.     For  very  frequently  the  mind  as  it 
were   views  coming  events,   and   every   euergy  is  strung  to 
meet  them ;    a  vehement  heat   of  contention  is  conceived, 
sleep  is  put  to  flight,  night  is  turned  into  day,  and  while  the 
bed  holds  our  limbs  which  are  outwardly  at  rest,  the  cause  is 
inwardly  pleaded  with  vehement  clamours  in  the  court  of 
our  own   heart.     And  it   verv'   often  happens   that   nothing 
comes  to  pass  of  the  things  foreseen,  and  that  all  that  think- 
ing of  the  heart,  which  had  so  long  been  strung  up  in  pre- 
paration to  the  highest  degree  of  intensity,  proves  vain,  and 
is  stilled  in  a  moment.     And  the  mind  is  so  much  the  longer 
detained  from  necessary  concerns,  as  it  thinks  on  trifles  to  a 
wider  extent.     Forasmuch  therefore  as  the  evil  spirits  one 
while  deal  a  blow  against  the  charges  of  our  stewardship  by  a 
slothful  or  a  headlong  mode  of  action,  at  another  time  throw 
them  into  disorder  by  a  backward  or  an  unchecked  use  of 
speech,  and  are  almost  always  burthening  them  with  exces- 
sive loads  of  care,  the  Chaldeans  in  three  bands  carry  off 
the  camels.     For  it  is  as  it  were  to  make  three  hands  against 
the  camels,  to  spread  confusion  amidst  the  business  of  earthly 
stewardship,  now  by  unwananted   deed,  now  by  overmuch 
speech,  now  by  unregulated  thought,  so  that  while  the  mind 
is  striving  to  direct  itself  eflectually  to  outward  ministrations, 
it  should  be   cut  off  from   the  consideration   of  itself,  and 
know  nothing  of  the  injuries  which  it  sustains  in  itself,  in 
the  same  proportion  that  it  exerts  itself  in  the  affairs  of  others 


1  ISDiscretion,  the  one  that  escapes.  The  Wilderness^evil  spirits. 

Job  1,  with  a  zeal  above  what  is  befitting.     But  when  a  right  mind 
*     -undertakes  any  charge  of  stewardship,  it  considers  what  is 


*  due  to  self  and  what  to  neighbours,  and  neither  by  excess  of 
concern  for  others  overlooks  its  own  interests,  nor  by  atten- 
tion to  its  own  welfare,  puts  behind  the  affairs  of  others. 
But  yet  it  very  often  happens  that  while  the  mind  is  dis- 
creetly intent  upon  both,  while  it  keeps  itself  clear  for  the 
utmost  precautions,  both  as  regards  itself  and  the  things 
which  have  been  entrusted  to  it,  still  being  thrown  into 
confusion  by  some  unexpected  point  in  any  case  that  arises, 
it  is  so  hurried  away  headlong,  that  all  its  precautions  are 
overwhelmed  thereby  in  a  moment.  And  hence  the  Chal- 
deans strike  with  the  sword  the  servants  that  were  the 
keepers  of  the  camels.  Yet  one  returns ;  for  amidst  all  this 
the  rational  thought  of  discretion  meets  the  eyes  of  our  mind, 
and  the  soul,  taking  heed  to  herself,  is  led  to  comprehend 
what  she  has  lost  within  by  the  sudden  onset  of  temptation. 
It  follows  ; 

Ver.  18,  19.  While  he  was  yet  speaking,  there  came  also 
another y  and  said.  Thy  sons  and  thy  daughters  were  eating 
and  drinking  icine  in  their  eldest  brother'' s  house:  And, 
behold,  there  came  a  great  wind  from,  the  wilderness,  and 
smote  the  four  corners  of  the  house,  and  it  fell  upon  the 
young  men,  and  they  are  dead;  and  I  only  am  escaped  alone 
to  tell  thee. 
xlix.  76.  As  we  have  before  said, '  the  wilderness'  is  the  deserted 
multitude  of  impure  spirits,  which  when  it  forsook  the  felicity 
of  its  Creator,  as  it  were  lost  the  hand  of  the  cultivator.  And 
from  the  same  there  came  a  strong  wind,  and  overthrew  the 
house ;  in  that  strong  temptation  seizes"  us  from  the  unclean 
spirits,  and  overturns  the  conscience  from  its  settled  frame 
of  tranquillity.  But  this  house  stands  by  four  corners  for 
this  reason,  that  the  firm  fabric  of  our  mind  is  upheld  by 
Prudence,  Temperance,  Fortitude,  Justice.  This  house  is 
grounded  on  four  corners,  in  that  the  whole  structure  of  good 
practice  is  raised  in  these  four  virtues.  And  hence  do  four 
rivers  of  Paradise  water  the  earth.  For  while  the  heart  is 
watered  with  these  four  virtues,  it  is  cooled  from  all  the  heat 

"  K.  '  Steals  on  U3,'  which  is  justified  by  the  mention  of  hidden  impulfles'  at 
the  end  of  the  paragraph. 


Cornersofthe  house, Cardinal  Virtues. Children, sei'etiGi/ts.\\9 

of  carnal  desires.     Yet  sometimes  when  idleness  steals  on "  Book 

the  mind,  prudence  waxes  cold ;  for  when  it  is  weary  and '— 

turns  slothful,  it  neglects  to  forecast  coming  events.  Some- 
times while  some  delight  is  stealing  on**  the  mind,  our 
r  temperance  decays  **.  For  in  whatever  degi'ee  we  are  led  to 
take  delight  in  the  things  of  this  life,  we  are  the  less  temperate 
to  forbear  in  things  forbidden.  Sometimes  fear  works  its  way 
into  the  heart  and  confounds  the  powers  of  our  fortitude, 
and  we  prove  the  less  able  to  encounter  adversity,  the  more 
excessively  we  love  some  things  that  we  dread  to  part  with. 
And  sometimes  self-love  invades  the  mind,  makes  it  swerve 
by  a  secret  declension  from  the  straight  line  of  justice:  and 
in  the  degree  that  it  refuses  to  refer  itself  wholly  to  its  Maker, 
it  goes  contrary  to  the  claims  of  justice.  Thus  '  a  strong 
wind  smites  the  four  comers  of  the  house,'  in  that  strong 
temptation,  by  hidden  impulses,  shakes  the  four  virtues ; 
and  the  corners  being  smitten,  the  house  is  as  it  were  up- 
rooted ;  in  that  when  the  virtues  are  beaten,  the  conscience 
is  brought  to  trouble. 

77.  Now  it  is  within  these  Xour  corners  of  the  house  that 
the  sons  are  feasting,  because  it  is  within  the  depths  of 
the  mind,  which  is  carried  up  to  the  topmost  height  of 
perfection  in  these  four  virtues  especially,  that  the  others 
like  a  kind  of  offspring  of  the  heart  take  their  food  together. 
For  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  which,  in  the  mind  It  works  on, 
forms  first  of  all  Prudence,  Temperance,  Fortitude,  Justice, 
in  order  that  the  same  mind  may  be  perfectly  fashioned  to 
resist  every  species  of  assault,  doth  afterwards  give  it  a 
temper  in  the  seven  virtues,  so  as  against  folly  to  bestow 
Wisdom,  against  dulness.  Understanding,  against  rashness, 
Counsel,  against  fear.  Courage,  against  ignorance.  Knowledge, 
against  hardness  of  heart.  Piety,  against  pride.  Fear. 

78.  Hut  sometimes,  whilst  the  mind  is  sustained  with  the 
plenitude  and  richness  of  a  gift  so  large,  if  it  enjoys  unin- 
terrupted security  in  these  things,  it  forgets  from  what  source 
it  has  them,  and  imagines  that  it  derives   that  from  itself, 

°  '  Surripit  menti,'  but  K. '  surrepit,'  also,  p.  114,  where  K.  does  not. 
which  has  been  followed  here  as  giving         P  or  '  stealing  from,'  as  above, 
the  better  sense.    Ed.  Par.  1523,  has         4  S.  Aug.  Conf.  x.  44.  describes  this 

the  same,  and  it  professes  to  be  from  sort  of  temptation  in  eating, 
three  ancient  Msa.     But  it  reads  thus 


r20      Seeming  loss  of  Gifts  teaches  whence  they  come. 
Job  1,  which  it  sees  to  be  never  wantine:  to  it.     Hence  it  is  that 

18.  19.        . 
Moral  ^^^^  same    grace   sometimes  withdraws   itself  for  our  good, 

and  shews  the  presumptuous  mind  how  weak  it  is  in  itself. 
For  then  we  really  learn  whence  our  good  qualities  proceed, 
when,  by  seemingly  losing  them,  we  are  made  sensible  that 
they  can  never  be  preserved  by  our  own  efforts.  And  so 
for  the  purpose  of  tutoring  us  in  lessons  of  humility,  it  very 
often  happens  that,  when  the  crisis  of  temptation  is  upon  us, 
such  extreme  folly  comes  down  upon  our  wisdom,  that  the 
mind  being  dismayed,  knows  nothing  how  to  meet  the  evils 
that  are  tlireatened,  or  how  to  make  ready  against  tempta- 
tion. But  by  this  very  folly,  the  heart  is  wisely  instructed; 
forasmuch  as  from  whatever  cause  it  turns  to  follv  for  a 
moment,  it  is  afterwards  rendered  by  the  same  the  more 
really,  as  it  is  the  more  humbly,  wise;  and  by  these  very 
means,  whereby  wisdom  seems  as  if  lost,  it  is  held  in  more 
secure  possession.  Sometimes  when  the  mind  lifts  itself  up 
in  pride  on  the  grounds  of  seeing  high  things,  it  is  dulled 
with  a  remarkable  obtuseness  in  the  lowest  and  meanest 
subjects;  that  he,  who  with  rapid  flight  penetrated  into  the 
highest  things,  should  in  a  moment  see  the  very  lowest  closed 
to  his  understanding.  But  this  very  dulness  preserves  to 
us,  at  the  very  time  that  it  withdraws  from  us,  our  power  of 
understanding.  For  whereas  it  abases  the  heart  for  a 
moment,  it  strengthens  it  in  a  more  genuine  way  to  understand 
the  loftiest  subjects.  Sometimes  while  we  are  congratulating 
ourselves  that  we  do  every  thing  with  grave  deliberation, 
some  piece  of  chance  takes  us  in  the  nick,  and  we  are  carried 
off  with  a  sudden  precipitancy;  and  we,  who  believed  our- 
selves always  to  have  lived  by  method,  are  in  a  moment  laid 
waste  with  an  inward  confusion.  Yet  by  the  discipline  of 
this  very  confusion  we  learn  not  to  attribute  our  counsels  to 
our  own  powers ;  and  we  hold  to  gravity  with  the  more 
matured  endeavours,  that  we  return  to  the  same  as  if  once 
lost.  Sometimes  while  the  mind  resolutely  defies  adversity, 
when  adverse  events  rise  up,  she  is  struck  with  violent  alarm. 
But  when  agitated  thereby,  she  learns  to  Whom  to  attribute 
it,  that  on  any  occasion  she  stood  tirm;  and  she  afterwards 
holds  fast  her  fortitude  the  more  resolutely,  as  she  sees  it 
now  gone  as  it  were  out  of  her  hand  the  moment  that  terror 


The  Virtues  of  good  men  never  really  destroyed.     121 

came   upon   her.     Sometimes  whilst  we   are  congratulating  Book 

ourselves  that  we  know  great  things,  we  are  stunned  with  a  _ 

blindness  of  instantaneous  ignorance  ^  But  in  so  far  as  the 
eye  of  the  mind  is  for  a  moment  closed  by  ignorance,  it  is 
afterwards  the  more  really  opened  to  admit  knowledge,  in 
that  in  fact  being  instructed  by  the  stroke  of  its  blindness,  it 
may  know  also  from  Whom  it  has  its  very  knowing.  Some- 
times while  ordering  all  things  in  a  religious  spirit,  when  we 
congratulate  ourselves  that  we  have  in  abundant  measure  the 
bowels  of  pious  tenderness,  we  are  struck  with  a  sudden  fit  of 
hardness  of  heart.  But  when  thus  as  it  were  hardened,  we 
learn  to  Whom  to  ascribe  the  good  dispositions  of  piety  which 
we  have ;  and  the  piety,  which  has  been  in  a  manner  ex- 
tinguished, is  recovered  with  more  reality,  seeing  that  it  is 
loved  with  fuller  affection  as  having  been  lost.  Sometimes 
while  the  mind  is  overjoyed  that  it  is  bowed  under  the  fear 
of  God,  it  suddenly  waxes  stiff  under  the  temptations  of 
pride.  Yet  immediately  conceiving  great  fears  that  it  should 
have  no  fear,  it  speedily  turns  back  again  to  humility,  which 
it  recovers  upon  a  finner  footing,  in  proportion  as  it  has  felt 
the  weight  of  this  virtue  by  seeming  to  let  it  go. 

79.  When  the  house,  then,  is  overthrown,  the  sons  perish ; 
because  when  the  conscience  is  disturbed  under  temptation, 
the  virtues  that  are  engendered  in  the  heart,  for  any  ad- 
vantage from  ourselves  knowing  them,  are  speedily  and  in 
the  space  of  a  moment  overwhelmed.     Now  these  sons  live 

*1    This    passage    will    remind    the  and  study,  for  God  will  endue  thee  with 

reader  of  whai  is  related  of  Albertus  such  abundance  of  His  wisdom,  that 

Magnus  by LouisofValleoletum, "while  by  the  books  of  thy  learning  the  whole 

Master  Albert,  spent  with  age,  was  one  Church  will  be  enlightened.     And  lest 

day   lecturing   in   the  schools    in    the  thou  shouldest  have  the  power  to  waver 

monastery  at  Cologne  in  the  presence  in  the  faith,  before  thy  death  all  syllo- 

of  a  full  auditory,  and  wa-s    bringing  gistic    cunning    shall    be    taken    from 

together  and  urging  certain  arguments,  thee,  and  God  shall  remove  thee  from 

his  memory  wavered.     All  were  asto-  this  world  in  thy  boyish  innocence  and 

nished  at  this  not  a  little;  he  however  sincerity    and   truth    of   faith.      Thou 

but  for  a  little  while  remaining  silent,  shalt    know  the   time  from   this,  that 

then   with    rallied    spirits   said   before  thy   memory  shall  fail   thee   in   public 

tliem  all,"  Listen,  dearest  brethren,  ..  .  lecture,' &c.  &c.    This  said,  amid  the 

when  I  was  but  young  1  entered  this  tears  of  all,  he  descended  from  the  chair, 

order  of  Preachers  at  the  admonition  of  and  thenceforth  never  wrote  or  lectured 

the  glorious  Virgin  Mother  of  God"  .  .  .  again,  but  as  if  a  boy  lived  for  five  years 

(norne  sentences  follow  involving  prayers  among  the  brethren  all  his  remaining 

to  St.  Mary  which  cannot  fitly  be  in-  time,  innocent  and  dove-like,  devoting 

troduced  here,)  "  She  deigned  to  say,  himself  to  continual  prayers,"  &c. 
*  Be  faithful  and  persevering  in  virtue 


122        Joli's  risifig  is  the  mind's  awakening  by  trial. 

Job  1,  inwardly  by  the  Spirit,  though  they  perish  outwardly  in  the 
-jrr-^ — ^ flesh:  because,  forsooth,  althouojh  our  virtues  in  the  time  of 
temptation  be   disordered  in  a  moment,  and  fall  from  the 
safety    of   their   seat,    yet   by    perseverance    in    endeavour 
they    hold     on    unimpaired    in    the    root    of    the     mind. 
With  these   the  three  sisters  likewise  are  slain,  for  in  the 
heart,   sometimes   Charity   is   ruffled   by    afflictions,    Hope 
shaken  by  fear,  Faith  beaten   down  by  questionings.     For 
oftentimes  we  grow  dull  in  the  love  of  our  Creator,  while  we 
are  chastened  with  the  rod  beyond  what  we  think  suitable 
for  us.     Often  while  the  mind  fears  more  than  need  be,  it 
weakens  the  confidence  of  its  hopes.     Often  while  the  in- 
tellect is  exercised  with   endless  questionings,  faith  being 
staggered  grows  faint,  as  though  it  would  fail.     But  yet  the 
daughters  live,  who  die  when  the  house  is  struck.     For  not- 
withstanding that  in  the  seat  of  the  conscience  the  disorder 
by  itself  tells  that  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity,  are  almost  slain, 
yet  they  are  kept  alive  in  the  sight  of  God,  by  perseverance 
in  a  right  purpose  of  mind ;    and  hence  a  servant  escapes 
alone  to  tell  these  things,  in  that  discretion  of  mind  remains 
unhurt  even  amid  temptations.    And  the  servant  is  the  cause 
that  Job  recovers  his  sons  by  weeping,  whilst  the  mind,  being 
grieved  at  what  discretion  reports,  keeps  by  penitence  the 
powers  which  it  had  in  a  manner  begun  to  part  with.     By  a 
marvellous   dispensation    of  Providence  are  w^e  thus  dealt 
with,  so  that  our   conscience  is  at   times  struck   with  the 
smitings  of  guilt.    For  a  person  would  count  himself  possessed 
of  great  powers  indeed,  if  he  never  at  any  time  within  the 
>  see  S.  depth  of  his  mind  felt  the  failure  of  them  ^     But  when  the 
riug       mind  is  shaken  by  the  assaults  of  temptation,  and  is  as  it 
Horn,     were  more  than  enough  disheartened,  there  is  shewn  to  it 

XV.  ... 

the  defence  of  humility  against  the  arts  of  its  enemy,  and 
from  the  very  occasion,  whence  it  fears  to  sink  powerless,  it 
receives  strength  to  stand  firm.  But  the  person  tempted  not 
only  learns  from  Whom  he  has  his  strength,  but  is  made  to 
understand  with  what  great  watchfulness  he  must  preserve  it. 
For  oftentimes  one,  whom  the  conflict  of  temptation  had  not 
force  to  overcome,  has  been  brought  down  in  a  worse  way 
by  his  own  self-security.  For  when  any  one  awearied  relaxes 
himself  at  his  ease,  he  abandons  his  mind  without  restraint 


Rending  the  mantle^  chastening  our  actions.         1*23 

to  the  corrupter.      But  if,   by  the  dispensations   of  mercy  Book 
from  above,  the  stroke  of  temptation  falls  upon  him,  not  so 


as  to  overwhelm  him  with  a  sudden  violence,  but  to  instruct 
him  by  a  measured  approach,  then  he  is  awakened  to  foresee 
the  snares,  so  that  with  a  cautious  mind  he  girds  himself  to 
face  the  enemy  in  fight.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  subjoined, 
Ver.  20.   Then  Job  arose. 

80.  For  sitting  betokens  one  at  ease,  but  rising,  one  in  a  con-      1. 
flict.  His  rising,  then,  when  he  heard  the  evil  tidings,  is  setting 
the  mind  more  resolutely  for  conflicts,  after  the  experience  of 
temptations,  by  which  very  temptations  even  the  power  of 
discernment  is  the  gainer,  in  that  it  learns  the  more  perfectly 

to  distinguish  good  from  evil.  And  therefore  it  is  well  added, 
A?icl  rent  his  mantle. 

81.  We  *  rend  our  mantle,'   whenever  we  review   wiih   a    li. 
discriminating  eye  our  past  deeds;  for  unless  with  God  our 
deeds  were  as  a  cloak  that  covered  us,  it  would  never  have 
been  declared  by  the  voice  of  an  Angel,  Blessed  is  he  that  Her. 16, 
watcheth,  and  kcepeth  his  garments^  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  ^' 
they  see  his  shame;  for  '  our  shame'  is  then  '  seen,'  when  our 

life,  a])pearing  worthy  of  condemnation  in  the  eyes  of  the 
righteous  in  judgment,  has  not  the  covering  of  after  good 
practice.  But  because,  as  often  as  we  are  tempted  with 
guilt,  we  are  prompted  to  mourning,  and  being  stirred  by 
our  own  lamentations,  open  the  eyes  of  the  mind  to  the  more 
perfect  perception  of  the  light  of  righteousness,  we  as  it  were 
rend  our  mantle  in  grief,  in  that  in  consequence  of  our 
weeping  discretion  being  strengthened,  we  chastise'  all  that 
we  do  with  greater  strictness,  and  with  wrathful  hand.  Then 
all  our  high-mindedness  comes  down,  then  allour  overcunning- 
ness  is  dropped  from  our  thoughts ;  and  hence  it  is  added. 

And  shaved  his  head,  and /ell  down  upon  the  ground,  and 
worshipped. 

8'i.  For  what  do  we  understand  in  a  moral  sense  by  hair,     lii. 
but  the  wandering  thoughts  of  the   mind  ?  and  hence  it  is 
elsewhere  said  to  the  Church,  Thij  lijjs  are  like  a  thread  of  Cant.  4, 
scarlet,  and  thy  speech  is  comely ;  fur  a  thread '  binds  the  hairs  i  \.-^^^^ 

Vulg. 
'  vindicamus.'  so  some  Msp.  ap.Ben.     camtiH,  *  we  judge,'  which  hardly  suits 
M  well  as  A.D.C.D.H.  Ben.  has  judi-     '  irata  inanu.' 


124         Shaving  the  head,  cutting  off  self-assurance. 

Job  1,  of  the  head.      So  the  lips  of  the  Spouse  are  like  a  thread, 

^^'     in  that  by  the  exhortations  of  Holy   Church  all  dissipated 

°"^^'  thoughts  in  the  minds  of  her  hearers  are  put  in  bands,  that 
they  may  not  roam  at  large,  and  be  spread  abroad  amongst 
forbidden  objects,  and  thus  spread  abroad,  lie  heavy  on  the 
eyes  of  the  mind,  but  may  as  it  were  gather  themselves  to 
one  direction,  in  that  the  thread  of  holy  preaching  binds 
them.  Which  also  is  well  represented  to  be  of  scarlet; 
for  the  preaching  of  the  Saints  glows  only  with  charity. 
And  what  is  signified  by  the  head,  but  that  very  mind, 
which  is  principal  in  every  action  ?  Whence  it  is  else- 
Eccl.  9,  where  said.  And  let  thy  head  lack  no  ointment;  for  oint- 
^*  ment  upon  the  head  is  charity  in  the  heart ;  and  there   is 

lack  of  ointment  upon  the  head,  when  there  is  a  with- 
drawal of  charity  from  the  heart.  The  shaving  of  the  head 
then  is  the  cutting  off  all  superfluous  thoughts  from  the 
mind.  And  he  shaveth  his  head  and  falls  upon  the  earth, 
who,  restraining  thoughts  of  self-presumption,,  humbly  ac- 
knowledges how  weak  he  is  in  himself. 

83.  For  it  is  hard  for  a  man  to  do  great  things,  and  not  to 
harbour  confident  thoughts  in  his  own  mind  on  the  score  of 
his  great  doings.  For  from  this  very  fact,  that  we  are  living  in 
strenuous  opposition  to  our  vices,  presumptuous  imaginations 
are  engendered  in  the  heart;  and  while  the  mind  valorously 
beats  down  the  evil  habits  without  her,  she  is  very  often 
inwardly  swoln  within  herself;  and  now  she  accounts  herself 
to  have  some  special  merits,  nor  ever  imagines  that  she  sins  in 
the  conceits  of  self-esteem.  But  in  the  eyes  of  the  severe  Judge 
she  is  so  much  the  worse  delinquent,  as  the  sin  committed, 
in  proportion  as  it  is  the  more  concealed,  is  well  nigh 
incorrigible ;  and  the  pit  is  opened  the  wider  to  devour,  the 
more  proudly  the  life  we  lead  glories  in  itself.  Hence,  as 
we  have  often  said  before,  it  is  brought  to  pass  by  the 
merciful  dispensations  of  our  Creator,  that  the  soul  that 
places  confidence  in  itself  is  struck  down  by  a  providential 
temptation;  that  being  brought  low  it  may  find  out  what 
it  is,  and  may  lay  aside  the  haughtiness  of  self-presumption. 
For  as  soon  as  the  mind  feels  the  blow  of  temptation,  all  the 
presumption  and  swelling  of  our  thoughts  abates. 


Grace  kept  by  confessing  our  own  ?iakedness.        125 

84.  For  when  the  mind  is  lifted  up  in  pride,  it  breaks  out  Book 
as  it  were  into  usurpation'.     And  it  has  for  the  attendants '— 


of  its  tyrannical  power,  its  own  imaginations  that  flatter 
it.  But  if  an  enemy  assaults  the  tyrant,  the  favour  of 
those  attendants  is  speedily  at  an  end.  For  when  the 
adversary  finds  entrance  the  attendants  fly,  and  fall  away 
from  him  in  fear,  whom  in  time  of  peace  they  extolled  with 
cunning  flattery.  But,  when  the  attendants  are  withdrawn, 
he  remains  alone  in  the  face  of  the  enemy ;  for  when  high 
thoughts  are  gone,  the  troubled  mind  sees  itself  only  and  the 
temptation,  and  thus  upon  hearing  of  evil  tidings,  the  head  is 
shaved,  whensoever  under  the  violent  assault  of  temptation 
the  mind  is  bared  of  the  thoughts  of  self-assurance.  For 
what  does  it  mean  that  the  Nazarites  let  their  hair  grow  long, 
saving  that  by  a  life  of  special  continency  proud  thoughts 
gain  gi'ound  ?  And  what  docs  it  signify,  that,  the  act  of 
devotion  over,  the  Nazarite  is  commanded  to  shave  his  Numb. 
head,  and  cast  the  hair  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  but  that  we^'°' 
then  reach  the  height  of  perfection,  when  we  so  overcome 
our  external  evil  habits,  as  to  discard  from  the  mind  even 
thoughts  that  are  superfluous .''  To  consume  these  in  the 
sacrificial  fire  is,  plainly,  to  set  them  on  fire  with  the  flame 
of  divine  love ;  that  the  whole  heart  should  glow  with  the 
love  of  God,  and  burning  up  every  superfluous  thought, 
should  as  it  were  consume  the  hair  of  the  Nazarite  in  com- 
pleting his  devotion.  And  observe  that  he  Jell  upon  the  earth 
and  worshipped ;  lor  he  sets  forth  to  God  the  true  worship, 
who  in  humility  sees  that  he  is  dust,  who  attributes  no 
goodness  to  himself,  who  owns  that  the  good  that  he  does  is 
from  the  mercy  of  the  Creator;  and  hence  he  says  well  and 
fitly, 

Ver.  21.  Naked  caiiie  I  out  of  my  motheis  womb,  and 
naked  shall  I  return  thither. 

85.  As  if  the  mind  when  tempted  and  taken  in  the  power-    liii. 
lessness  of  its  weak  condition  were  to  say,  *  Naked  I  was  by 
grace  first  begotten  in  the  faith,  and  naked  I  shall  be  saved 

by  the  same  grace  in  being  taken  up  into  heaven  ^'     For  it  is'  >n  as- 

surap- 

•  *  Tyranniclprn.'  The  natural  ex-  the  Emperors.  St.  Chrysostoiu  calU 
pression  for  a  rebellion  that  would  set  Absalom's  rebellion  bv  this  name,  on 
up  a  new  king,  such  as  were  all  under     Stat.  Horn.  xiv.  Tr.  p.  244, 


126  We  7nay  take  all  of  extraordinary  Gifts. 

Job  1,  a  great  consolation  to  a  troubled  mind,  when,  smitten  with 
- — -^  the  assaults  of  sin,  it  sees  itself  as  it  were  stripped  of  all 
virtue,  to  fly  to  the  hope  of  Mercy  alone,  and  prevent  itself 
/  being  stripped  naked  in  proportion  as  it  humbly  thinks  itself 

i  to  be  naked  and  bare  of  virtue,  and  though  it  be  perchance 

bereaved  of  some  virtue  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  yet 
acknowledging  its  own  weakness,  it  is  the  better  clad  with 
humility  itself,  and  is  stronger  as  it  is  laid  low  than  as  it  was 
standing,  in  that  it  ceases  to  ascribe  to  itself  without  the  aid 
of  God  whatever  it  has.  And  hence  it  also  at  once  owns  with 
humility  the  hand  of  Him  Who  is  both  Giver  and  Judge, 
saying, 
'^  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away. 

liv.  86.  Observe  how  he  grew  great  by  the  discipline  of  tempta- 
tions, who  both  in  the  possession  of  the  virtue  acknowledges  the 
bounty  of  the  Giver,  and  in  the  disorderment  of  his  fortitude, 
the  power  of  the  Withdrawer:  which  fortitude  nevertheless  is 
not  withdrawn,  but  is  confounded  and  loses  heart,  that  the 
assaulted  mind,  while  it  dreads  every  instant  to  lose  the 
quality  as  it  seems,  being  alway  made  humble,  may  never 
lose  it. 

As  it  hath  pleased  the  Lord,  so  is  it  done ;  Blessed  be  the 
Name  of  the  Lord. 
Iv.  87.  In  this  circumstance,  viz.  that  we  are  assaulted  with 
inward  trouble,  it  is  meet  that  we  refer  the  thing  to  the 
judgment  of  our  Creator,  that  our  heart  may  resound  the 
louder  the  praises  of  its  Maker,  from  the  very  cause  that 
makes  it,  on  being  smitten,  the  more  thoroughly  to  consider 
the  impotency  of  its  frail  condition.     Now  it  is  justly  said, 

Ver.  22.  Ln  all  this  Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  God 
foolishly : 
Ivi.  88.  In  that  the  mind  in  grief  ought  to  watch  with  wari- 
ness and  diligence,  lest,  when  the  temptation  prompts  it 
within,  it  break  forth  inwardly  into  the  utterance  of 
forbidden  words,  and  murmur  at  the  trial;  and  lest  the  fire, 
which  burns  it  like  gold,  by  the  excesses  of  a  lawless  tongue, 
may  tura  it  to  the  ashes  of  mere  chaff. 

89.  Now  nothing  hinders  that  all  that  we  have  said  concern- 

ingvirtues,be  understood  of  those  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spiritwhich 

>  vid.     are  vouchsafed  in^  manifestation  of  virtue,  for  to  one  is  given 

chap.9l. 


The  Spirit  tiluays fully  in  Christ  alone.  127 

the  gift  of  Prophecy,  to  another  different  khids  of  tongues,  to  Book 
another  the  gifts  of  heahng.     I>ut  forasniucli  as  these  gifts 


are  not  always  present  in  the  mind  in  the  same  degree,  it  is 
clearly  shewn  that  it  is  for  our  good  that  they  are  sometimes 
withdrawn,  lest  the  mind  should  be  lifted  up  in  pride.     For 
if  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  had  always  been  with  the  Prophets, 
plainly  the  Prophet  Elisha  would  never  have  said,  Let  >^^/"  2  Kings 
alo)ie,/or  her  soul  is  vexed  within  /ler,  and  the  Lord  hath  ^^  ^^' 
hid  it  from  me^  and  hath  not  told  me.      If  the  Spirit  of 
Prophecy  had  been    always   present  to    the   Prophets,   the 
Prophet  Amos  when  asked   would  never  have  said,  /  am  ^  Amos  7, 
no  Prophet;  where  he  also  adds,  neither  a  Prophefs  son,  i  so 
but  I  am  an  hersdman  and  a  gatherer  of  sycamore  fruit,  ^"^^g- 
How  then  was  he  no  Prophet,  who  foretold  so  many  true 
things  concerning  the  future  ?    or  in  what   way   was  he    a 
Prophet,  if  he  at   the  time   disowned   the  truth  concerning 
himself?  Why,  because,  at  the  moment  that  he  was  called  in 
question'^,  he  felt  that  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  was  not  with  him,  2  requi- 
he  bore  true  testimony  concerning  himself,  in  saying ;  /  am  ^^^^ 
not  a  Prophet.    Yet  he  added  afterwards.  Now  therefore  hear  ^er.  16, 
thou  the  word  of  the  Lord.   Therefore  thus  said  the  Lord,  Thy   " 
wife  shall  be  an  harlot  in  the  city,  and  thy  sons  and  thy 
daughters  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  and  thy  land  shall  be  divided 
by  line ;    and  thou  shall  die  in  a  polluted  land.     By  these 
words  of  the  Prophet  it  is  plainly  shewn,  that  while  he  was 
bearing  that  testimony  about  himself  he  was  filled,  and  on 
the  instant  rewarded  witli  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy,  because  he 
humbly  acknowledged  himself  to  be  no  Pro})het.     And  if  the 
Spirit  of  Prophecy  had  always  continued  with  the  Prophets, 
the  Prophet  Nathan  would  never  have  allowed  King  David, 
when  he  consulted  him  about  the  building  of  the  Temple, 
what  a  little  while  after  he  was  to  refuse  him. 

90.  And  hence,  how  justly  is   it   written   in   the  Gospel, 
Upon  Whom  thou  shall  see  the  Spirit  descending,  and  re- John  \, 
maiuing  on  Him,  the  same  is  He  Which  baptizeth  with  ihe^^' 
Holy  Ghost.     For  the  Spirit  descends  into  all  the  faithful, 
but  remains  in  the  Mediator  alone,  in  a  special  manner.    For     \ 
He  has  never  left  the  Human  Nature  of  Him,  from  Whose 
Divine  Nature  He    proceedeth.     He   remains    therefore    in 
Him,  Who  only  can   both  do  all  things   and  at  all   times. 


12SGi/ts  of  Virtue  necessary^  of  Power  sometimes  withdrawn. 

Job  1,  Now  the  faithful,  who  receive  Him,  since  they  cannot  always 
'- — retain  the  gifts  of  miracles,  as  they  desire,  testify  that  they 


have  received  Hira  as  it  were  in  a  passing  manifestation. 
But  whereas  on  the  other  hand  it  is  said  by  the  mouth  of 
JohnU,  Truth  concerning  the  same  Spirit  to  the  Disciples,  For  He 
dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you,  how  is  it,  that  this 
same  abiding  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  by  the  voice  of  God 
declared  to  be  the  sign  of  the  Mediator,  where  it  is  said, 
Upon  Whom  thou  shall  see  the  Spirit  descending,  and 
abiding  on  Him?  If  then  according  to  the  words  of  the 
Master  He  abideth  in  the  disciples  also,  how  will  it  be  any 
longer  a  special  sign,  that  He  abides  in  the  Mediator?  Now 
this  we  shall  learn  the  sooner,  if  we  discriminate  between 
the  gifts  of  the  same  Spirit. 

91.  Now  there  are  some  of  His  gifts,  without  which  life  is 
never  attained;  and  there  are  others  whereby  holiness  of  life 
is  made  known  for  the  good  of  other  men.     For  meekness, 

I  humility,   faith,   hope,   charity,    are    gifts    that    come    from 

Him,  and  they  are  such  as  man  can  never  reach  to  life  with- 
out. And  the  gift  of  Prophecy,  healing,  different  kinds 
1  sermo-  of  tongues,  the  interpretation  of  tongues  ^,  are  His  gifts  ;  yet 
such  as  shew  forth  the  presence  of  His  power  for  the  im- 
provement of  all  beholders.  In  the  case  of  these  gifts  then, 
without  which  we  can  never  attain  to  life,  the  Holy  Spirit  for 
ever  abides,  whether  in  His  preachers,  or  in  all  the  Elect;  but 
in  those  gifts  whereof  the  object  is  not  the  preservation  of  our 
own  life,  but  of  the  lives  of  others  through  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Him,  He  by  no  means  always  abides  in  the  Preachers. 
For  He  is  iudeed  always  ruling  their  hearts  to  the  end  of 
good  living,  yet  does  not  always  exhibit  the  signs  of  miracu- 
lous powers  by  them,  but  sometimes,  for  all  manifestation  of 
miracles,  He  withdraws  Himself  from  them,  in  order  that 
those  powers,  which  belong  to  Him,  may  be  had  with  greater 
humility,  in  the  same  degree  that  being  in  possession  they 
cannot  be  retained. 

92.  But  the  Mediator  of  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus,  in  all  things  hath  Him  both  always  and  continually 
present.  For  the  same  Spirit  even  in  Substance  proceeds 
from  Him.  And  thus,  though  He  abides  in  the  holy 
Preachers,  He  is  justly  said  to  abide  in  the  Mediator  in  a 


num 


External  gifts  may  be  withdrawn  to  aid  huynility*     129 

special  manner,  for  that  in  them  He  abides  of  grace  for  a  Boo 

particular  object,  but  in  Him  He  abides  substantially  for  all '■ 

ends.  For  as  our  body  is  cognizant  of  the  sense  of  touch 
only,  but  the  head  of  the  body  has  the  use  of  all  the  five 
senses  at  once,  so  that  it  sees,  hears,  tastes,  smells,  and 
touches;  so  the  members  of  the  Supreme  Head  shine  forth 
in  some  of  the  powers,  but  the  Head  Itself  blazes  forth  in  all 
of  them.  The  Spirit  then  abides  in  Him  in  another  sort, 
from  Whom  He  never  departs  by  reason  of  His  Nature. 
Now  those  of  His  gifts,  by  which  life  is  attained,  can  never 
without  danger  be  lost,  but  the  gifts,  whereby  holiness  of 
life  is  made  evident,  are  very  often  withdrawn,  as  we  have 
said,  without  detriment.  So  then  the  first  are  to  be  kept  for 
our  own  edification,  the  latter  to  be  sought  for  the  improve- 
ment of  others.  In  the  case  of  the  one  let  the  fear  alann 
us,  lest  they  perish,  but  in  the  other,  when  they  are  with- 
drawn for  a  season,  let  humility  be  our  consolation,  for  that 
they  may  chance  to  lift  up  the  mind  to  entertain  pride. 
Accordingly  when  the  power  of  miracles  which  had  been 
vouchsafed  is  withdrawn,  let  us  exclaim  as  is  right,  Tlie  Lord 
gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  Xame 
of  the  Lard.  For  then,  and  only  then,  we  really  shew  that 
we  have  held  in  a  right  spirit  all  that  we  had  given  us,  when 
we  bear  with  patience  the  momentary  withdrawal  thereof 


BOOK  III. 

The  vrliole  of  the  second  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job  is  explained  after  the 
manner  of  the  former  Books,  historically,  allegorically,  and  morally. 

i.  1.  Blessed  Job,  though  aimed  at  for  death  in  his  tempta- 

^^®^*  tion,  gained  growth  unto  life  by  the  stroke.  And  our  old 
enemy  grieved  to  find  that  he  had  only  multiplied  his 
excellences  by  the  very  means,  by  which  he  had  thought  to 
do  away  with  them,  but  whereas  he  sees  that  he  has  been 
worsted  in  the  first  struggle,  he  prepares  himself  for  fix'sh 
assaults  of  temptations,  and  still  has  the  boldness  to  augur 
evil  of  that  holy  man ;  for  one  that  is  evil  can  never  believe 
goodness  to  exist,  though  proved  by  his  experience.  Now 
those  circumstances,  which  were  premised  in  the  first  in- 
fliction, are  again  subjoined,  when  it  is  said, 

Ver.  1,  2,  3.  Again  there  was  a  day  when  the  sotis  of 
God  came  to  present  themselves  before  the  Lord^  and  Sata?i 
came  also  among  them  to  present  himself  before  the  Lord. 
And  the  Lord,  said  unto  Satan,  Whence  comest  thou  f  And 
Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said,  From  going  to  and  fro 
in  the  earth,  and  from,  walking  up  and  down  in  it.  And 
the  Ljord  said  unto  Satan,  ILast  thou  considered  My  servaiit 
Job,  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect  and 
an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil? 

Because  we  have  discussed  these  particulars  very  fully 
above,  w^e  the  rather  pass  them  over  in  silence,  lest,  whilst 
we  often  repeat  points  once  gone  into,  we  delay  too  long  in 
coming  to  such  as  are  untouched;  although  w^hat  is  said  to 
Satan  by  the  Lord's  voice,  Whence  comest  thou  ?  I  cannot 
consider  to  be  addressed  to  him  just  as  it  was  before; 
for  whereas  he  returns  defeated  from  that  contest  upon  which 
he  had  been  let  loose,  and  yet  is  asked  ^  whence  he  comes,* 


Job  smitten  tmthout  cause,  yet  with  cause.  131 

when  it  is  kno^NTi  from  whence  he  comes,  what  else  is  this  Book 

but  that  the  impoteucy  of  his  pride  is  chidden  ?    As  though  — 

the  voice  of  God  openly  said,  '  See,  thou  art  overcome  by  a 
single  man,  and  him  too  beset  with  the  infirmities  of  the 
flesh ;  thou,  that  strivest  to  set  thyself  up  against  Me,  the 
Maker  of  all  things !'  Hence  when  the  Lord  immediately 
went  on  to  declare  the  excellences  of  Job,  as  He  did  before, 
it  is  together  with  the  triumphs  of  his  victory  that  He  enu- 
merates this,  and  adds, 

And  still  he  holdeth  fast  his  integrity, 

2.  As  if  He  said  explicitly,  '  Thou  indeed  hast  wrought  ii. 
thy  malice,  but  he  has  not  lost  his  innocence ;  and  thou  art 
forced  to  serve  to  his  advancement  by  the  very  means  whence 
thou  thoughtest  to  lessen  his  advancement.  For  that  in- 
ward innocency,  which  he  lionourably  maintained  when  at 
rest,  he  has  more  honourably  preserved  under  the  rod.  It 
follows ; 

Although  thou  movedst  Me  against  him,  to  destroy  him 
without  cause. 

3.  TMiereas  God  is  a  just  and  a  true  God,  it  is  important     iii. 
to  enquire  how  and  in  what  sense  He  shews  that  He  had 
afilicted  Job  without  cause.     For  because  He  is  just,  He 
could  not  afflict  him  without  cause,  and  again,  because  He 

is  tnie.  He  could  not  have  spoken  other  than  what  He  did. 
So  then  that  both  particulars  may  concur  in  Him  that  is  just 
and  true,  so  that  He  should  both  speak  truth,  and  not  act 
unjustly,  let  us  know,  that  blessed  Job  was  both  in  one  sense 
smitten  without  cause,  and  again  in  another  sense,  that  he 
was  smitten  not  without  cause.  For  as  He  that  is  just  and 
true,  says  the  thing  of  Himself,  let  us  prove  both  that  what 
He  said  was  true,  and  that  what  He  did  was  righteous.  For 
it  was  necessary  that  the  holy  man,  who  was  known  to  God 
alone  and  to  his  own  conscience,  should  make  known  to  all 
as  a  pattern  for  their  imitation  with  what  preeminent  virtue 
he  was  enriched.  For  he  could  not  visibly  give  to  otliers 
examples  of  virtue,  if  he  remained  himself  without  tempta- 
tion. Accordingly  it  was  brought  to  pass,  both  that  the 
very  force  of  the  infliction  should  exhibit  his  stores  of  virtue 
for  the  imitation  of  all  men,  and  that  the  strokes  inflicted 
upon  him  should  bring  to  light  what  in  time  of  tranquillity 

K  2 


\ 


132  God  not  so  moved  as  to  change  in  Himself. 

Job  2,  lay  hidden.  Now  by  means  of  the  same  blows  the  virtue  of 
■TT  patience  gained  increase,  and  the  gloriousness  of  his  reward 
was  augmented  by  the  pains  of  the  scourge.  Thus,  that  we 
may  uphold  the  truth  of  God  in  word,  and  His  equity  in 
deed,  the  blessed  Job  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  not 
afflicted  without  cause,  seeing  that  his  merits  are  increased, 
and  yet  he  is  afflicted  without  cause,  in  that  he  is  not 
punished  for  any  offence  committed  by  him.  For  that  man 
is  stricken  without  cause,  who  has  no  fault  to  be  cut  away ; 
and  he  is  not  stricken  without  cause,  the  merit  of  whose 
virtue  is  made  to  accumulate. 

4.  But  what  is  meant  when  it  is  said.  Thou  movedst  Me 
against  him  ?  Is  '  the  Truth'  then  inflamed  by  the  words  of 
Satan,  so  that  at  his  instigation  He  falls  to  torturing  His 
servants?  Who  could  imagine  those  things  of  God  which 
he  even  accounts  unw^orthy  of  a  good  man }  But  because 
we  ourselves  never  strike  unless  when  moved,  the  stroke  of 
God  itself  is  called  the  '  moving'  Him.  And  the  voice  of 
God  condescends  to  our  speech,  that  His  doings  may  in  one 
way  or  another  be  reached  by  man's  understanding.  For 
that  Power  which  without  compulsion  created  aU  things,  and 
which  without  oversight  rules  all  things,  and  without  labour 
sustains  all,  and  governs  without  being  busied,  corrects  also 
without  emotion.  And  by  stripes  He  forms  the  minds  of 
men  to  whatsoever  He  will,  in  such  sort  still  that  He  never 
passeth  into  the  darkness  of  change  from  the  light  of  His 
Unchangeable  Being.    It  follows ; 

Ver.  4,  5.  And  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said,  Skin 

for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life. 

But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  touch  his  hone  and  his 

jiesh,  and  he  will  curse  Tliee  to  Thy  face, 

iv.         5.  The  old  enemy  derives  from  outward  things  the  charge 

which   he  urges  against  the   blessed  man's    soul.     For  he 

affirms  that  '  skin  is  given  for  skin ;'  as  it  often  happens  that 

when  we  see  a  blow  directed  against  the  face,  we  put  our 

hands  before  our  eyelids  to  guard  the  eyes  from  the  stroke, 

and   we  present  our  bodies  to   be   wounded,   lest   they  be 

wounded  in  a  tenderer  part.     Satan  then,  who  knew  that  such 

things  arc  customarily  done,  exclaims,  Skin  for  skin,  and 

all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  in  exchange  for  his  life. 


Joh^  in  Satan's  hand,  still  in  the  Hand  qf  God.       133 

As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  tt  is  for  this  reason  that  Job   Book 
bears  with  comj30sure   so  many  strokes  falling  without,  be- . 
cause  he  fears  lest  he  should  be  smitten  himself,  and  so  it  is 
care  of  the  flesh   that  makes  him  unmoved  by    hurt  done 
to  the  feelings  of  the  flesh ;  for  while  he  fears  for  his  own 
person,  he  feels  the  less  the  hurt  of  what  belongs  to  him. 

And  hence  he  immediately  requires  his  flesh  to  be  smitten, 
in  these  words ; 

But  put  forth    Thine  hand  now,  and  touch  his  hone  and 
hisJiesJi,  and  he  will  curse  Thee  to  TJiy  face. 

He  had  said  above.  Touch  all  that  he  hath,  and  he  will  jo\yi 
curse  Thee  to  Thy  face.     Now,  as  if  forgetting  his  former  ^^• 
proposal,  being  beaten  upon  one  point,  he  demands  another. 
And  this  is  justly  allowed  him  by  God's  dispensation,  that 
the  audacious  disputer,  by  being  over  and  over  again  over- 
come, may  be  made  to  keep  silence.     It  proceeds ; 

Ver.  6.   And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Behold,  he  is  in 
thine  hand;  but  save  his  li/'e. 

6.  Here  again,  the  safeguard  of  protection  goes  along  vri\h  y 
the  permission  to  smite,  and  the  dispensation  of  God  both 
while  guarding,  forsakes  his  elect  servant,  and  while  for- 
saking, guards  him.  A  portion  of  him  He  gives  over,  a 
portion  He  protects.  For  if  he  had  left  Job  wholly  in  the 
hand  of  so  dire  a  foe,  what  could  have  become  of  a  mere 
man  ?  And  so  with  the  very  justice  of  the  permission  there 
is  mixed  a  certain  measure  of  pity,  that  in  one  and  the  same 
contest,  both  His  lowly  sen^ant  might  rise  by  oppression, 
and  the  towering  enemy  be  brought  down  by  the  permission. 
Thus  the  holy  man  is  given  over  to  the  adversary's  hand, 
but  yet  in  his  inmost  soul  he  is  held  fast  by  the  hand  of  his 
Helper.  For  he  was  of  the  number  of  those  sheep,  concern- 
ing whom  Truth  itself  said  in  the  Gospel,  Neither  shall  any  / 
man  pluck  them  out  of  My  hand.  And  yet  it  is  said  to  the  28. 
enemy,  when  he  demands  him.  Behold,  he  is  in  thine  hand. 
The  same  man  then  is  at  the  same  time  in  the  hand  of  God, 
and  in  the  hand  of  the  devil.  For  by  saying,  he  is  in  thine 
hand,  and  straightway  adding,  but  save  his  life,  the  pitiful 
Helper  openly  shewed  that  His  hand  was  upon  him  whom 
He  yielded  up,  and  that  in  giving  He  did  not  give  him. 


134  Satan  forced  to  save  life.     Strokes  many  and  sore. 

Job  2,  whom,  while  He  cast  him  forth,  He  at  the  same  time  hid  from 
the  darts  of  his  adversary. 


\  ani-         7.  But  how  is  that  it  is  said  to  Satan,  hut  save  his  life'^? 


mam 


For  how  does  he  keep  safe,  who  is  ever  longing  to  break  in 
upon  things  under  safe  keeping?  But  Satan's  saving  is 
spoken  of  his  not  daring  to  break  in,  just  as,  conversely,  we 
Matt.  6,  petition  The  Father  in  prayer,  saying,  Lead  us  not  into 
temptation ;  for  neither  does  The  Lord  lead  us  into 
temptation,  Who  is  ever  mercifully  shielding  His  servants 
therefrom.  Yet  it  is  as  it  were  for  Him  '  to  lead  us  into 
temptation,'  not  to  protect  us  from  the  allurements  of  tempt- 
ation. And  He  then  as  it  were  *  leads  us  not  into  the  snare 
of  temptation,'  when  He  does  not  let  us  be  tempted  beyond 
what  we  are  able  to  bear.  In  like  manner  then  as  God  is  said 
to '  lead  us  into  temptation,'  if  He  suffers  our  adversary  to  lead 

2  ani-     ug  thereinto,  so  our  adversary  is  said  to  '  save  our  souP,' 

mam,  as.  ...,. 

above,    when  he  is  stayed  irom  overcommg  it  by  his  temptations. 

Ver.  7.  So  Satan  went  forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 
How  '  Satan  goes  forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,' 

3  some    is  shewn  by  the  remarks  which  have  been  already  ^  made 

Mss.add    ,  f. 

i  often.'  above.     It  goes  on  ; 

A?id  smote  Job  with  sore  boils,  from  the  sole  of  his  foot 
unto  his  crown. 
vi-  8.  Strokes  are  to  be  estimated  in  two  ways,  viz.  to  consider 
either  of  what  kind,  or  how  great.  For  being  many  they  are 
often  made  right  by  their  quality,  and  being  heavy  by  their 
quantity,  i.  e.  when,  if  they  be  many,  they  be  not  heavy,  and 
if  they  be  heavy,  they  be  not  many ;  in  order  to  shew,  then, 
how  by  the  sharpness  of  the  stroke  the  adversary  flamed 
against  the  holy  man,  not  only  in  the  badness  of  the  kind, 
but  also  in  the  heaviness  of  the  amount:  to  prove  the 
quality,  it  is  said.  And  sniote  Job  with  sore  boils;  and  to 
teach  the  quantity,  from  the  sole  of  his  foot  unto  his  crown* 
Plainly,  that  nothing  might  be  void  of  glory  in  his  soul, 
in  whose  body  there  is  no  part  void  of  pain.     It  goes  on  ; 

Ver.  8.    And  he  took  him  a  potsherd  to  scrape  himself 
withal ;  and  he  sat  down  among  the  ashes. 
vii-        9.  What  is  a  potsherd  made  from,  excepting  mud  ?    and 
what  is  the  humour  of  the  body,  but  mud .''    Accordingly  he 


Job  humbles  hiiftself  by  the  dutighill  and  potsJierd.    135 

is  said  '  to  scrape  the  humour  with  a  potsherd,'  as  if  it  were  Book 
plainly  said,  '  he  wiped  away  mud  with  mud.'     For  the  holy 


man  reflected,  whence  that  which  he  earned  about  him  had 
been  taken,  and  with  the  broken  piece  of  a  vessel  of  clay  he 
scraped  his  broken  vessel  of  clay.  By  which  act  we  have  it 
openly  shewn  us,  in  what  manner  he  subdued  under  him 
that  body  of  his  when  sound,  which  even  when  stricken  he 
tended  with  such  slight  regard ;  how  softly  he  dealt  with  his 
flesh  in  its  sound  state,  who  applied  neither  clothing,  nor 
fingers,  but  only  a  potsherd  to  its  very  wounds.  And  thus 
he  scraped  the  humour  with  a  potsherd,  that  seeing  himself 
in  the  very  broken  piece,  he  might  even  by  the  cleansing  of 
the  wound  be  taking  a  remedy  for  his  soul. 

10.  But  because  it  often  happens  that  the  mind  is  swelled 
by  the  circumstances  that  suiTound  the  body,  and  by  the 
way  men  behave  toward  us  the  frailty  of  the  body  is  removed 
from  before  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  (as  there  are  some  of  those 
that  are  of  the  world,  who  while  they  are  buoyed  up  with 
temporal  honours,  whilst  they  rule  in  elevated  stations,  whilst 
they  see  the  obedience  of  multitudes  yielded  to  them  at  will, 
neglect  to  consider  their  own  frailt}',  and  altogether  forget, 
nor  ever  take  heed,  how  speedily  that  vessel  of  clay  which 
they  bear,  is  liable  to  be  shattered,)  so  blessed  Job,  that  he 
might  take  thought  of  his  own  frailty  from  the  •things  about 
him,  and  increase  the  intensity  of  his  self-contempt  in  his 
own  eyes,  is  described  to  have  seated  himself  not  any  where 
on  the  earth,  which  at  most  in  every  place  is  found  clean, 
but  upon  a  dunghill.  He  set  his  body  on  a  dunijhUl^  that 
the  mind  might  to  its  great  profit  consider  tiioroughly  what 
was  that  substance  of  the  flesh,  which  was  taken  from  the  Gea.  3, 

go 

ground.      He  set  his  body  on  a  dunghill,  that  even  from  the     * 
stench  of  the   place   he  might  apprehend  how  rapidly  the 
body  retunicth  to  stench. 

11.  But  see,  while  blessed  Job  is  undergoing  such  losses 
in  his  substance,  and  giieving  over  the  death  of  so  many 
children  whereby  he  is  smitten,  while  he  is  suffering  such 
numberless  wounds,  while  he  scraj)es  the  running  humour 
with  a  potsherd,  whilst,  running  down  in  a  state  of  corruption, 
he  sat  himself  upon  a  dunghill,  it  is  good  to  consider  how 
it  is  that  Almighty  God,  as  though  in  unconcern,  afllicts  so 


136        If  Saints  suffer  thus,  how  shall  the  ungodly? 

Job  2,  grievously  those,  whom  He  looks  upon  as  so  dear  to  Him  for 
—^'    all  eternity.      But,  now,  while  I  view  the  wounds   and  the 
torments  of  blessed  Job,   I  suddenly  call  back  my  mind's 
eye  to  John,  and  I  reflect  not  without  the  greatest  astonish- 
ment,   that   he,   being    filled    with   the    spirit    of   prophecy 
within  his  mother's  womb,  and  who,  if  1  may  say  so,  before 
Johns,  ijig  birtli,  was  born   again,  he  that   was  the  friend  of  the 
Matt.     Bridegroom^  he  than  whom  none  hath  arisen  greater  among 
^^^  ^^'  those  born  of  women,  he  that  was  so  great  a  Prophet,  that  he 
was  even  more  than  a  Prophet,  he  is  cast  into  prison  by 
wicked  men,  and  beheaded,  for  the  dancing  of  a  damsel,  and 
a  man  of  such  severe  virtue  dies  for  the  merriment  of  the 
vile !     Do  w^e  imagine  there  was  aught  in  his  life  which  that 
most  contemptible  death  was  to  wipe  off?     When,  then,  did 
he  sin  even  in  meat,  whose  food  was  but  locusts  and  wild 
honey  ?    How  did  he    offend  even    by    the    quality   of  his 
clothing,  the  covering  of  whose  body  was  of  camel's  hair.'' 
How  could  he  transgress  in  his  behaviour,  who  never  went 
out  from  the  desert  ?    How  did  the  guilt  of  a  talkative  tongue 
defile  him,  who  was  parted  far  from  mankind  ?     When  did 
even   a  fault  of  silence  attach  to  him,  who  so  vehemently 
Matt. 3, charged  those  that  came  to  him?     O  generation  of  vipers, 
who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  comef    How 
is  it  then,  that  Job  is  distinguished  above  other  men  by  the 
testimony  of  God,  and  yet  by  his  plagues  is  brought  down 
even  to  a  dunghill  ?     How  is  it  that  John  is  commended  by 
the  voice   of  God,   and   yet   for   the  words   of  a  drunkard 
suffers   death    as   the   prize   of   dancing  ?     How    is   it,   that 
^  Almighty  God  so  utterly  disregards  in  this  present  state  of 

being  those  whom  He  chose  so  exaltedly  before  the  worlds, 
saving  this,  which  is  plain  to  the  religious  sense  of  the  faith- 
ful, that  it  is  for  this  reason  He  thus  presses  them  below, 
because  He  sees  how  to  recompense  them  on  high  ?  And 
He  casts  them  down  without  to  the  level  of  things  con- 
temptible, because  He  leads  them  on  within  to  the  height  of 
things  incomprehensible.  From  hence  then  let  every  one 
collect  what  those  will  have  to  suffer  There,  that  arc  con- 
dgumed  by  Him,  il  here  He  thus  torments  those  whom  He 
loves,  or  how  they  shall  be  smitten,  who  are  destined  to  be 
convicted  at  the  Judgment,  if  their  life  is  sunk  so  low,  who 


Sataji  useth  to  tempt  hy  tcom a n\s  persuasion.        137 
are  commended  bv  witness  of  the  Judge  Himself.     It  pro-  Book 

,  •  or  jjj 

ceeds ;  

Ver.  9.    TJien    said   his    wife    unto   him.  Dost    thou   still 
retain  thine  integrity?  curse  God,  and  die. 

12.  The  old  adversary  is  wont  to  tempt  mankind  in  two    viii. 
ways  ;  viz.  so  as  either  to  break  the  hearts  of  the  stedfast  by 
tribulation,  or  to  melt  them  by  persuasion.     Against  blessed 
Job  then  he  strenuously  exerted  himself  in  both;  for  first 
upon  the  householder  he  brought  loss  of  substance ;  the  father 
he  bereaved  by  the  death  of  his  children  ;  the  man  that  was 
in  health  he  smote   with  putrid   sores.     But   forasmuch   as 
him,  that    was    outwardly   corrupt,  he  saw  still  to  hold  on 
sound  within,  and  because  he  grudged  him,  whom  he  had 
stripped  naked  outwardly,  to  be  inwardly  enriched   by  the 
setting  forth  of  his  Maker's  praise,  in  his  cunning  he  reflects 
and  considers,  that  the  champion  of  God  is  only  raised  up 
against  him  by  the  very  means  whereby  he  is  pressed  down, 
and  being  defeated  he  betakes  himself  to  subtle  appliances 
of  temptations.     For  he  has  recourse   again   to  his  arts  of 
ancient  contrivance,  and  because  he  knows  by  what  means 
Adam  is  prone  to  be  deceived,  he  has  recourse  to  Eve.     For 
be  saw   that  blessed   Job   amidst   the  repeated  loss    of  his 
goods,   the    countless   wounds    of    his    strokes,    stood    un- 
conquered,   as   it   were,    in    a    kind    of  fortress   of   virtues. 
For   he    had    set    his    mind    on    high,    and    therefore    the 
machinations   of  the   enemy   were  unable  to    force   an  en- 
trance on  it.     The  adversary  then  seeks  by  what  steps  he 
may  mount  up  to  this  well-fenced  fortress.     Now  the  woman 
is   close   to   the    man    and  joined    to    him.      Therefore    he 
fixed  his  hold  on  the  heart  of  the   woman,  and  as  it  were 
found  in  it  a  ladder  whereby  he  might  be  able  to  mount  up 
to  the  heart  of  the  man.     He  seized  the  mind  of  the  wife, 
which  was   the  ladder  to   the  husband.     But   he  could   do 
nothing  by  this  artifice.     For  the  holy  man  minded  that  the 
woman  was  set  under  and  not  over  him,  and  by   speaking 
aright,  he  instructed  her,  whom  the  serpent  set  on  to  speak 
wrongly.       For    it    was    meet    that    manly    reproof    should 
hold  in  that  looser  mind  ;    since   indeed  he  knew  even  by 
the  first  fall  of  man,  that  the  woman  was  unskilled  to  teach 

aright.     And  hence  it  is  well  said  by  Paul,  /  permit  not  a  iTim.2, 

1? 


i38     Joh  teavheth  Iter  by  ivhotn  Saian  tvotdd  mislead. 

Job  2,  woman  to  teach.     Doubtless  for  that,  when  she  once  taught, 
she  cast  us  off  from  an  eternity  of  wisdom.     And  so  the  old 


Hist. 
iperdi-  enemy  was  beaten  by'  Adam  on  a  dunghill,  he  that  con- 

dit  ab     qQei'gci   Adam  in  Paradise;    and  whereas   he   inflamed   the 

wife,  whom  he  took  to  his  aid,  to  utter  words  of  mispersua- 

sion,  he  sent  her  to  the  school  of  holy  instruction ;  and  she 

that  had  been  set  on  that  she  might  destroy,  was  instructed 

that   she    should  not   ruin  herself     Yes,  the   enemy  is  so 

stricken  by  those  resolute  men  of  our  part,  that  his  very  own 

weapons  are  seized  out  of  his  hand.    For  by  the  same  means, 

whereby  he  reckons  to  increase  the  pain  of  the  wound,  he  is 

helping  them  to  arms  of  virtue  to  use  against  himself. 

13.  Now  from  the  w^ords  of  his  wife,  thus  persuading  him 
amiss,  we  ought  to  mark  with  attention,  that  the  old  enemy 
goes  about  to  bend  the  upright  state  of  our  mind,  not  only 
by  means  of  himself,  but  by  means  of  those  that  are  attached 
to  us.  For  when  he  cannot  undermine  our  heart  by  his  own 
persuading,  then  indeed  he  creeps  to  the  thing  by  the 
tongues  of  those  that  belong  to  us.     For  hence  it  is  written  ; 

Ecclus.  Beware  of  thine  own  childre?i,and  take  heed  to  thy  self frovfi 
Vulff     ^^^y  s^f'^f^^^^^'     Hence  it  is  said   by  the  Prophet;    Take  ye 
Jer.9,4.  Ji(.ed  every  one  of  his  neiyhbour,  and  trust  ye  not  in  any 
Matt,     brother.     Hence  it  is  again  written  ;  And  a  mail's  foes  shall 
10,  36.   j^  ^^^^y  ^j'  j^^g  ^^^^^  household.     For  when  the  crafty  adver- 
sary sees  himself  driven  back  from  the  hearts  of  the  good,  he 
seeks  out  those  that  they  very  much  love,  and  he  speaks 
sweetly  to   them  by  the  words   of  such  as  are  beloved  by 
them  above  others,  that  whilst  the  force  of  love  penetrates 
the  heart,  the  sword  of  his  persuading  may  easily  force  a 
way  in  to   the  defences  of  inward  uprightness.     Thus  after 
the  losses  of  his  goods,  after  the  death  of  his  children,  after 
the  wounding  and  rending  of  his  limbs,  the  old  foe  put  in 
motion  the  tongue  of  his  wife. 

14.  And  observe  the  time  when  he  aimed  to  corrupt  the 
mind  of  the  man  with  poisoned  talk.  For  it  was  after  the 
wounds  that  the  words  were  brought  in  by  him  ;  doubtless 
that,  as  the  force  of  the  pain  waxed  greater,  the  fro  ward 
dictates  of  his  persuasions  might  easily  prevail.  But  if  we 
minutely  consider  the  order  itself  of  his  temptation,  we  see 
with  what  craft  he  worketh  his  cruelty.    For  he  first  directed 


Earthen  vessel  broken,  Treasure  within  safe.  139 

against  him  the  losses  of  his  goods,  which  should  be  at  oncCj  Book 
as  they  were,  out  of  the  province  of  nature,  and  without  the — 


body.  He  withdrew  from  him  his  children,  a  tiling  now  no 
longer  indeed  without  the  province  of  nature,  but  still  in 
some  degree  beyond  his  own  body.  Lastly,  he  smote  even 
his  body.  But  because,  by  these  wounds  of  the  flesh, 
he  could  not  attain  to  wound  the  soul,  he  sought  out  the 
tongue  of  the  woman  that  was  joined  to  him.  For  because 
it  sorely  grieved  him  to  be  overcome  in  open  fight,  he  flung 
a  javelin  from  the  mouth  of  the  wife,  as  if  from  a  place  of 
ambush  :  as  she  said,  Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  inte(/ritf/? 
Bless  God  and  die.  Mark  how  in  trying  him,  he  took  away 
every  thing,  and  again  in  trying  him,  left  him  his  wife,  and 
shewed  craftiness  in  stripping  him  of  every  thing,  but  in- 
finitely greater  cunning,  in  keeping  the  woman  as  his  abettor, 
to  say,  Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  integrity  ?  Eve  repeats 
her  own  words.  For  what  is  it  to  say,  *  give  over  thine 
integrity,'  but  *  disregard  obedience  by  eating  the  forbidden 
thing?'  And  what  is  it  to  say.  Bless ^  God  and  die,  but '  live  '  see  p. 
by  mounting  above  the  commandment,  above  what  thou 
wast  created  to  be  V  But  our  Adam  lay  low  upon  a  dunghill 
in  strength,  who  once  stood  up  in  Paradise  in  weakness. 
For  thereupon  he  replied  to  the  words  of  his  evil  counsellor, 
saying, 

Ver.  10.  Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  women 
speaketh.  IVtiat?  shall  ice  receive  good  at  the  hand  of 
God,  and  shall  ice  not  receive  evil  / 

15.  See  the   enemy  is  every  where  broken,  every  where     ix. 
overcome,  in  all  his  a])pliances  of  temptation  he  has  been 
brought  to  the  ground,  in  that  he  has   even    lost  that  ac- 
customed  consolation   which    he  derived   from   the   woman. 
Amid  these   circumstances  it  is   good    to    contemplate    the 
holy  man,  without,  void  of  goods,  witliin,  filled  with  God. 
When  Paul  viewed  in  himself  the  riches  of  internal  wisdom, 
yet  saw  himself  outwardly  a  corruptible  body,  he  says,  /f'(e2Cor. 
hare  this  treasure  in  earthen  ressels.      You  see,  the  eartlien    ' 
vessel  in  blessed  Job  felt  those   gaping   sores   without,  but 
this  treasure  remained  entire  within.     For  without  he  cracked 
in  his  wounds,  but  the  treasure  of  Avisdom  unfailingly  spring- 
ing  up    within    issued   forth    in   words    of  holy  instruction. 


J 


140  In  what  sense  God  sends  us  Evil. 

Job  2,  saying,  If  we  have  received  good  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord, 
-r^ —  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  meaning  by  the  good,  either  the 
temporal  or  the  eternal  gifts  of  God,  and  by  the  evil,  denoting 
the  strokes  of  the  present  time,  of  which  the  Lord  saith  by 
Is.  45,  ^}jQ  Prophet,  /  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else.  I 
form  the  light,  and  create  darkness;  I  make  peace,  and 
create  evil.  Not  that  evil,  which  does  not  subsist  by  its 
own  nature,  is  created  by  the  Lord,  but  the  Lord  shews 
Himself  as  creating  evil,  when  He  turns  into  a  scourge  the 
things  that  have  been  created  good  for  us,  upon  our  doing 
evil,  that  the  very  same  things  should  at  the  same  time  both 
by  the  pain  which  they  inflict  be  to  transgressors  evil,  and 
yet  good  by  the  nature  whereby  they  have  their  being.  And 
hence  poison  is  to  man  indeed  death,  but  life  to  the  serpent. 
For  we  by  the  love  of  things  present  have  been  led  away 
from  the  love  of  our  Creator ;  and  whereas  the  froward  mind 
submitted  itself  to  fondness  for  the  creature,  it  parted  from 
the  Creator's  communion,  and  so  it  was  to  be  smitten  by  its 
Maker  by  means  of  the  things  which  it  had  erringly  preferred 
to  its  Maker,  that  by  the  same  means  whereby  man  in  his 
pride  was  not  afraid  to  commit  sin,  he  might  find  a  punish- 
ment to  his  correction,  and  might  the  sooner  recover  himself 
to  all  that  he  had  lost,  the  more  he  perceived  that  the  things 
which  he  aimed  at  were  full  of  pain.  And  hence  it  is  rightly 
said,  I  form  the  light,  and  create  darkness.  For  when  the 
darkness  of  pain  is  created  by  strokes  without,  the  light  of 
the  mind  is  kindled  by  instruction  within.  I  make  peace, 
and  create  evil.  For  peace  with  God  is  restored  to  us  then, 
when  the  things  which,  though  rightly  created,  are  not 
rightly  coveted,  are  turned  into  such  sort  of  scourges  as  are 
evil  to  us.  For  we  are  become  at  variance  with  God  by  sin. 
Therefore  it  is  meet  that  we  should  be  brought  back  to 
peace  with  Him  by  the  scourge,  that  whereas  every  being 
created  good  turns  to  pain  for  us,  the  mind  of  the  chastened 
man  may  be  renewed  in  a  humbled  state  to  peace  with  the 
Creator.  These  scourges,  then,  blessed  Job  names  evil, 
because  he  considers  with  what  violence  they  smite  the  good 
estate  of  health  and  tranquillity. 

16.  But  this  we  ought  especially  to  regard  in  his  words, 
viz.  with  what  a  skilful  turn  of  reflection  he  gathers  himself 


His  gifts  a  coii\fort  in  sorrow.    WomaiCs  ?iature  not  eml.  141 

up  to  meet  the  persuading  of  his  wife,  saying,  If  we  have  Book 

received  good  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  shall  we  not  receive '— 

evil?  For  it  is  a  mighty  solace  of  our  tribulation,  if,  when 
we  suffer  afflictions,  we  recall  to  remembrance  our  Maker's 
gifts  to  us.  Nor  does  that  break  down  our  force,  which  falls 
upon  us  in  the  smart,  if  that  quickly  comes  to  mind,  which 
lifts  us  up  in  the  gift.  For  it  is  hence  written,  In  the  day  qfY.cc\\x9, 
prosperity  he  not  unmindful  of  affliction,  and  in  the  day  of^^^  ^' 
affliction  be  not  unmindful  of  prosperity.  For  whosoever 
receives  God's  gifts,  but  in  the  season  of  gifts  has  no  fear  of 
strokes,  is  brought  to  a  fall  by  joy  in  his  elation  of  mind. 
And  whoever  is  bruised  with  scourges,  yet,  in  the  season  of 
the  scourges,  neglects  to  take  comfort  to  himself  from  the 
gifts,  which  it  has  been  his  lot  to  receive,  is  thrown  down 
from  the  stedfastness  of  his  mind  by  despair  on  every  hand. 
Thus  then  both  must  be  united,  that  each  may  always  have 
the  other's  support,  so  that  both  remembrance  of  the  gift 
may  moderate  the  pain  of  the  stroke,  and  misgiving  and 
dread  of  the  stroke  may  bite  down  the  joyousness  of  the  gift. 
And  thus  the  holy  man,  to  soothe  the  depression  of  his  mind 
amidst  his  wounds,  in  the  pains  of  the  strokes  weighs  the 
sweetness  of  the  gifts,  saying,  If  ue  have  received  good  at 
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  And  he 
does  well  in  saying  first,  Thou  hast  spoken  like  one  of  the 
foolish  women.  For  because  it  is  the  sense  of  a  bad  woman, 
and  not  her  sex,  that  is  in  fault,  he  never  says,  *  Thou  hast 
spoken  like  one  of  the  women,'  but  *  of  the  foolish  women,' 
clearly  that  it  might  be  shewn,  that  whatsoever  is  of  ill 
sense  cometh  of  superadded  folly,  and  not  of  nature  so 
formed.     The  account  goes  on  ; 

In  all  this  did  not  Job  sin  with  his  lips. 

17.  We  sin  with  our  lips  in  two  ways;  either  when  we  say     x. 
unjust  things,  or  withhold  the  just.     For  if  it  were  not  some- 
times a  sin  also  to  be  silent,  the  Prophet  would  never  say, 
JVoe  is  me,  that  I  held  my  peace.     Blessed  Job,  then,  in  all  Is.  6,  5. 
that  he  did,  sinned  no  wise  with  his  lips;  in  that  he  neither ^"'^* 
spake  proudly  against   the    smiter,  nor   withheld  the   right 
answer  to  the  adviser.     Neither  by  speech,  therefore,  nor  by 
silence  did  he  offend,  who  both  gave  thanks  to  the  Father 
that  smote  him,  and  administered  wisdom  of  instruction  to 


14*2  Satf/fi's  last  7'esoiirce  Jo b\<ijr tends,  tJioiajh  good  me)}. 

the  ill-advising  wife.  For  because  he  knew  what  he  owed 
to  God,  what  to  his  neighbour,  viz.  resignation  to  his  Creator, 
wisdom  to  his  wife,  therefore  he  both  instructed  her  by  his 
uttering  reproof,  and  magnified  Him  by  giving  thanks.  But 
which  is  there  of  us,  who,  if  he  were  to  receive  any  single 
wound  of  such  severe  infliction,  would  not  at  once  be  laid  low 
in  the  interior?  See,  that  when  outwardly  prostrated  by  the 
wounds  of  the  flesh,  he  abides  inwardly  erect  in  the  fences 
of  the  mind,  and  beneath  him  he  sees  every  dart  fly  past 
wherewith  the  raging  enemy  transfixes  him  outwardly  with 
unsparing  hand;  watchfully  he  catches  the  javelins,  now 
cast,  in  wounds,  against  him  in  front,  and  now,  in  words,  as 
it  were  from  the  side.  And  our  champion  encompassed  with 
the  rage  of  the  besetting  fight,  at  all  points  presents  his 
shield  of  patience,  meets  the  darts  coming  in  on  every  hand, 
and  on  all  virtue's  sides  wheels  round  the  guarded  mind  to 
front  the  assailing  blows. 

18.  But  the  more  valiantly  our  old  enemy  is  overcome,  the 
more  hotly  is  he  provoked  to  further  arts  of  malice.  For 
whereas  the  wife  when  chidden  was  silent,  he  forthwith  set 
on  others  to  rise  up  in  insults  till  they  must  be  chidden  "*. 
For  as  he  essayed  to  make  his  blows  felt,  by  the  often 
repeated  tidings  of  the  losses  of  his  substance,  so  he  now 
busies  himself  to  penetrate  that  firm  heart  by  dealing  reiterated 
strokes  with  the  insults  of  the  lips.     It  proceeds  ; 

Ver.  1 1 .  Now  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  of  all  this 
evil  that  was  come  upon  him,  they  came  every  one  from  his 
own  place;  Eliphaz  the  Temanite,  and  Bildad  the  Shuhite, 
and  Zophar  the  Naamathite:  for  they  had  made  an  appoint- 
ment together  to  come  to  mourn  with  him  and  to  comfort 
him, 
xi.  19.  We  have  it  proved  to  us  how  great  a  love  they  enter- 
tained both  for  each  other,  and  for  the  smitten  man,  in  that 
they  came  by  agreement  to  administer  consolation  to  him 
when  afilicted.  Though  even  by  this  circumstance,  viz.  that 
Scripture  bears  witness  they  were  the  friends  of  so  great 
a  man,  it  is  made  appear  that  they  were  men  of  a  good 
spirit  and  right  intention ;    though   this   very   intention    of 

*  Ben.   increpandi.  Some  Mss.  '  in-     in  their  chiding  should  rise  even  to  in- 
crepando,'  which  gives  the  sense,  *  who     suits.' 


They  make  themselves  like  hun  in  sympaihij.         14o 

mind,  when  they  break  forth  into  words,  upon  indiscretion   Book 

111 

arising,  becomes  clouded  in  the  sight  of  the  strict  Judge.     It '— 


goes  on ; 

Ver.  12.  And  when  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off,  and 
knew  him  not,  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept;  and  they 
rent  every  one  his  mantle,  and  sprinkled  dust  upon  their 
heads  toward  heaven. 

20.  Because   the  scourge  had  altered  the  appearance  of  xii. 
the  stricken  man,  his  friends  *  lift  up  their  voice  and  weep,' 
*  rend  their  garments,'  *  sprinkle  dust  upon  their  heads ;'  that 
seeing  him  altered  to  whom  they  had  come,  their  voluntary 
grief  might  likewise  alter  the  very  appearance  even  of  the 
comforters  also.     For  the  order  in  consolation  is,  that  when 
we  would  stay  one  that  is  afflicted  from  his  grief,  we  first 
essay  to  accord  with  his  soriow  by  grieving.     For  he  can 
never  comfort  the  mourner  who  does  not  suit  himself  to  his 
grief,  since  from  the  very  circumstance  that  his  own  feelings 
are  at  variance  with  the  mourner's  distress,  he  is  rendered  the 
less  welcome  to  him,  from  whom  he  is  parted  by  the  character 
of  his  feelings;  the   mind   therefore   must  first  be  softened 
down,  that  it  may  accord  with  the  distressed,  and  by  accord- 
ing attach   itself,  and   by  attaching  itself  draw  him.       For 
iron  is  not  joined   to    iron,  if  both  be  not  melted  by  the 
burning  efl'ect  of  fire,  and  a  hard  substance  does  not  adhere 
to  a  soft,  unless  its  hardness  be  first  made  soft  by  tempering, 
so  as  in  a  manner  to  become  the  very  thing,  to  which  our 
object  is  that  it  should  hold.     Thus  we  neither  lift  up  the 
fallen,  if  we  do  not  bend  from  the  straightness  of  our  standing 
posture.     For,  whereas  the  uprightness  of  him  that  standeth 
disagreeth  with  the  posture  of  one  lying,  he  nevet  can  lift 
him    to  whom  he  cares  not  to  lower   himself;   and  so  the 
friends   of  blessed   Job,    that    they    might  stay   him   under 
affliction  from  his  grief,  were  of  necessity  solicitous  to  grieve 
with  him,  and  when  they  beheld  his  wounded  body,  they  set 
themselves  to  rend  their  own  ganuents,  and  when  they  saw 
him  altered,  they  betook  themselves  to  defiling  their  heads 
with  dust,  that  the  afflicted  man  might  the  more  readily  give 
ear  to  their  words,  that  he  recognised  in  them  somewhat  of 
his  own  in  the  way  of  affliction. 

21.   lUit  herein  be  it  known,  that  lie  who  desires  to  comfort 


144         Job' s  friends  even  too  much  grieved  for  him. 

Job  2,  the  afl9icted,  must  needs  set  a  measure  to  the  grief,  to  which 
^^•^  he  submits,  lest  he  should  not  only  fail  of  soothing  the 
mourner,  but,  by  the  intemperance  of  his  grief,  should 
sink  the  mind  of  the  afflicted  to  the  heaviness  of  despair. 
For  our  grief  ought  to  be  so  blended  with  the  grief  of  the 
distressed,  that  by  quaUfying  it  may  lighten  it,  and  not  by 
increasing  weigh  it  down.  And  hence  perhaps  we  ought 
to  gather,  that  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  in  administering 
consolation  gave  themselves  up  to  grief  more  than  was 
needed,  in  that  while  they  mark  the  stroke,  but  are  strangers 
to  the  mind  of  him  that  was  smitten,  they  betake  themselves 
to  unmeasured  lamentation,  as  if  the  smitten  man  who  was 
of  such  high  fortitude,  under  the  scourge  of  his  body,  had 
fallen  in  mind  too.     It  proceeds ; 

Ver.  13.   So  Ihey  mi  down   with   him    upon  the  ground 

seven  days  and  seven  flights,  and  none  spake  a  word  unto 

him  ;  for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  great. 

xiii.        22.  Whether  they  sat  with  the  afflicted  Job  for  seven  days 

and  seven  nights  together,  or  possibly  for  seven  days  and  as 

many  nights  kept  by  him  in  assiduous  and  frequent  visiting, 

we  cannot  teU.     For  we  are  often  said  to  be  doing  any  thing 

for  so  many  days,  though  we  may  not  be  continually  busied 

therein  all  those  days.     And  often  holy  Scripture  is  wont  to 

%  put  the  whole  for  a  part,  in  like  manner  as  it  does  a  part  for 

i  the  whole.     Thus  it  speaks  of  a  part  for  the  whole,  as  where, 

Gen.46,  in  describing  Jacob's  household,  it  says,  All  the  souls  of  the 

^''         house  of  Jacob  which  came  into  Egypt  were  threescore  and 

ten.     Where  indeed,   while   it  makes  mention   of  souls,  it 

clearly  takes  in  the  bodies  also   of  the   comers.     Again  it 

puts  in  the  whole  for  a  part,  as  where  at  the  tomb  Mary 

John 20  complains,  saying,   They  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I 

2-  know  not  where  they  have  laid  Him.     For  it  was  the  Body 

of  the  Lord  only  that  she  had  come  to  seek,  and  yet  she 

bewails  the  Lord  as  though  His  whole  Person    had   been 

» tultum  altogether   taken   away';    and   so    in   this  place  too   it   is 

doubtful  whether  the  whole  is  put  for  a  part. 

23.  Yet  this  circumstance,  viz.  that  they  were  a  long 
while  silent,  and  yet  in  speaking  after  all  were  condemned, 
must  not  be  passed  over  carelessly.  For  there  are  some 
men  who  both  begin  to  speak  with  precipitation,  and  follow 


Job^s Jrie/ids  sinned  by  dolmj  a  good  work  ill,        145 

out  that  unchecked  beginning  with  still  less  check.     While  Book 
there  are  some  who  are  indeed  backward  to  begin  to  speak, 


but  having  once  begun  know  not  how  to  set  limits  to  their 
words.  Accordingly  the  fiiends  of  blessed  Job,  upon  seeing 
his  grief,  were  for  long  silent,  yet,  whilst  slow  to  begin,  they 
spoke  with  indiscretion,  because  they  would  not  spare  him 
in  his  grief.  They  held  their  tongue  that  it  might  not  begin 
over-hastily,  but  once  begun  they  never  ruled  it,  that  it  might 
not  let  itself  out  from  imparting  consolation  so  far  as  to  offer 
insults.  And  they  indeed  had  come  with  a  good  intention 
to  give  comfort;  yet  that  which  the  pious  mind  offered  to 
God  pure,  their  hasty  speech  defded.  For  it  is  written,  J/ thou  Gen.  4, 
offerest  righlbj,  but  dividest  not  rightly,  thou  hast  sinned. 
For  it  is  rightly  offered,  when  the  thing  that  is  done  is  done 
with  a  right  intention.  But  it  is  not  *  rightly  divided,'  unless 
that  which  is  done  with  a  pious  mind  be  made  out  with 
exact  discrimination.  For  to  "  divide  the  offering  aright'  is 
to  weigh  all  our  good  aims,  carefully  discriminating  them ; 
and  whoso  puts  by  doing  this,  even  when  w^e  offer  aright,  is 
guilty  of  sin. 

24.  And  so  it  often  happens,  that  in  what  we  do  with  a 
good  aim,  by  not  exercising  careful  discrimination  therein, 
we  know  nothing  what  end  it  will  be  judged  withaP,  and\quoju- 
sometinies  that  becomes  ground  of  accusation,  which  is  fine 
accounted  an  occasion  of  virtue.  But  whoever  considers  the 
doings  of  blessed  Job's  friends,  cannot  but  see  with  what  a 
pious  intention  they  came  to  him.  For  let  us  consider,  what 
great  love  it  shewed  to  have  come  together  by  agreement  to 
the  stricken  man;  what  a  preeminent  degree  of  longsuffering 
it  proved  to  be  with  the  afflicted,  without  speaking,  seven 
days  and  nights  ;  what  humility,  to  sit  upon  the  earth  so 
many  days  and  nights ;  what  compassion,  to  sprinkle  their 
heads  with  dust !  But  yet  when  they  began  to  speak,  by  the 
same  means,  whereby  they  reckoned  to  win  the  price  of  a 
reward,  it  was  their  lot  to  meet  with  the  arraignment  of 
rebuke;  for  to  the  unwary  even  that  which  is  begun  for  the 
object  of  recompense  alone,  oftentimes  turns  to  an  issue  in 
sin.  Observe  !  by  hasty  speech  they  lost  that  good  which  it 
cost  them  so  much  labour  to  purchase.  And  unless  the 
grace  of  God  had  bidden  them  to  offer  sacrifice  for  their 

I 


146        Ood  judges  good  works,  much  more  evil  ones. 

Job  2,  guilt,  they  might  have  been  justl}'  punished  by  the  Lord,  on 
the  very  grounds  whereon  they  reckoned  themselves  exceed- 


Hist. 

ing  well-pleasing  to  Him.      By  the  same  proceeding  they 

displease  the  Judge,  whereby,  as  if  in  that  Judge's  defence, 
they  please  themselves  through  want  of  self-control.     Now 
it  is  for  this  reason  that  we  speak  thus,  that  we  may  recall  to 
the   recollection    of  our  readers,  for  each  one  to  consider 
heedfully  with  himself,  with  what  dread  visitations  the  Lord 
punishes  the  actions  which  are  done  with  an  evil  design,  if 
those  which  are  begun  with  a  good  aim,  but  mixed  with  the 
heedlessness  of  indiscretion,  are  chastised  with  such  severe 
rebuke.     For  who  would  not  believe  that  he  had  secured 
himself  ground  of  recompense,  either  if  in  God's  defence  he 
had  said  aught  against  his  neighbour,  or  at  all  events  if  in 
sorrow  for  a  neighbour  he  had  kept  silence  seven  days  and 
nights?  And  yet  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  by  doing  this  were 
brought  into  sin  for  their  pains,  because  while  the  good  aim  of 
comforting  which  they  were  about  was  known  to  them,  yet 
they  did  not  know  with  what  a  balance  of  discretion  it  was 
to  be    done.     Whence   it  appears  that  we  must   not  only 
regard  what  it  is  that  we  do,  but  also  with  what  discretion 
we  put  it  in  execution.     First  indeed,  that  we  may  never  do 
evil  in  any  manner,  and  next,  that  we  may  not  do  our  good 
deeds  without  caution ;    and  it  is  in  fact  to  perform  these 
good  deeds  with  carefulness,  that  the  Prophet  admonishes 
Jer.  48,  us  when  he  says,  Cursed  be  he  that  doeth  the  work  of  the 
y^i       Lord  negligently.     But  let  these  things  stand  us  in  stead  to 
this  end,  that  before  the  exact  and  incomprehensible  scru- 
tiny of  the  Awful  Judge  shall  be,  w^e  may  not  only  fear  for 
all  that  we  have  done  amiss,  but  if  there  be  in  us  aught  of 
the  kind,  for  the  very  things  that  we  have  done  well;  for 
oftentimes  that  is  found  out  to  be  sin  at  His  Judgment, 
which  before  the  Judgment  passes  for  virtue,  and  from  the 
same  source,  whence  we  look  for  the  merciful  recompense 
of  our  works,   there   comes   upon    us   the  chastisement   of 
righteous  vengeance. 
Alleg.      25.  We   have   run  through  these  particulars  thus  briefly 
considered  according  to  the  letter  of  the  history,  now  let  us 
turn  our  discourse  to  the  mystical  sense  of  the  allegory. 
But   as,    when,   at   the    beginning   of  this    work,   we  were 


Sufferings  of  the  Body  typified  with  those  qf  the  Head.   147 
treating  of  the  union  betwixt  the  Head  and  the  Body,  we  Book 

TTT 

premised  with  earnest  emphasis  how  close  the  bond  of  love 

was  between  them,  forasmuch  as  both  the  Lord  in  fact  still 
suffers  many  things  by  His  Body,  which  is  all  of  us,  and  His 
Body,  i.  e.  the  Church,  already  glories  in  its  Head,  viz.  the 
Lord,  in  heaven ;    so  now  we  ought  in  such  sort  to  set  forth 
the  sufferings  of  that  Head,  that  it  may  be  made  appear  how 
much  He  undergoes  in  His  Body  also.     For  if  the  torments 
that  we  endure  did  not  reach  our  Head,  He  would  never  cry 
out  to   His  persecutor  even  from  heaven  in  behalf  of  His 
afflicted  Members,  Haul^  Saul^  why  persecutest  thou  Me  '^  Acta  9, 
If  our  agony  were  not  His  pain,  Paul,  when  afflicted  after  ^* 
his  conversion,  would  never  have  said,  I  Jill  up  that  which^^^- 1> 
is  behitid  q/'  the  ajfiictions  of  Christ  in  my  Jiesh.     And  yet 
being  already  elevated  by  the  resurrection  of  his  Head,  he 
says.  And   hath    raised   us   up   together ,  and   made   us  svVEph.  2, 
together  in  heavenly  places ;    in  this  way,  namely,  that  the   ' 
tonnents  of  persecution   had   enchained  him  on  earth,  yet 
while  sunk  down  with  the  weight  of  his  pains,  lo,  he  was 
already  seated  in  heaven,  through  the  glory   of  his  Head. 
Therefore  because  we  know  that  in  all  things  the  Head  and 
the  Body  are  one,  we  in  such  wise  begin  with  the  smiting  of 
the  Head  that  we  may  afterwards  come  to  the  strokes  of  the 
Body.     But  this,  viz.  that  it  is   said, "  that  on  a  day  Satan 
came    to    present   himself  before    tlie    Lord ;"     that   he    is 
interrogated  *  whence  he  comes  V    that  the  blessed  Job  is 
distinguished  by  his  Creator's  high  proclaim;  forasmuch  as 
we  have  already  made  it  out  more  than  once,  we  forbear  to 
explain  again.     For  if  the  mind  is  a  long  time  involved  in 
points  that  have  been  examined,  it  is  hindered  in  coming  to 
those  which  have  not  been,  and  so  we  now  put  the  beginning 
of  the  allegory  there,  where,  after  often  repeated  words,  we 
find  something  new  added.     So  then  He  says, 

Ver.  3.  Though   thou  moredst  Me  agai)ist  him,  to  destroy 
him  without  cause. 

26.   If  blessed  Job  bears  the  likeness  of  our  Redeemer  in    xiv. 
His  Passion,  how  is  it  that  the  Lord  says  to  Satan,   Thmc 
ftiovedst   Me   against   him?     Truly    the   Mediator  between 
God    and    man,   the   Man   Christ  Jesus,  came  to   bear  the 
scourges  of  our  mortal  nature,  that  He  might  put  away  the 

l2 


148  The  Father  how  ^  movecV  agai/tst  Christ''  without  cause  »^ 

Job  2,  sins  of  our  disobedience ;  but  forasmuch  as  He  is  of  one  and 

' —  the  self-same  nature  with  the  Father,  how  does  the  Father 

*  declare  that  He  was  moved  by  Satan  against  Him,  when  it  is 

acknowledged  that  no  inequality  of  power,  no  diversity  of 

will,  interrupts  the  harmony  between  the  Father  and  the  Son? 

Yet  He,  that  is  equal  to  the  Father  by  the  Divine  Nature, 

came  for  our  sakes  to  be  under  stripes  in  a  fleshly  nature. 

Which  stripes  He  would  never  have  undergone,  if  he  had 

not  taken  the  form   of  accursed  man  in  the  work  of  their 

redemption.     And  unless  the  first  man  had  transgressed,  the 

I    second   would  never  have   come   to  the  ignominies  of  the 

f    Passion.    When  then  the  first  man  was  moved  by  Satan  from 

'  com-    the  Lord,  then  the  Lord  was  moved'  against  the  second  Man. 

motus     ^Yi^  so  Satan  then  moved  the  Lord  to  the  affliction  of  this 

latter,  when  the  sin  of  disobedience  brought  down  the  first 

man  from   the  height  of  uprightness.       For  if  he  had  not 

drawn  the  first  Adam  by  wilful  sin  into  the  death  of  the  soul, 

'-    the  second  Adam,  being  without  sin,  would  never  have  come 

into  the  voluntary  death  of  the  flesh,  and  therefore  it  is  with 

justice  said  to  him  of  our  Redeemer  too.  Thou  movedst  Me 

2  E.  V.  against  him  to  afflict-  him  without  cause.     As  though  it  were 

destroy    g^j^  '^^  plainer  words;  '  Whereas  this  Man  dies  not  on  His  own 

account,  but  on  account  of  that  other,  thou  didst  then  move 

Me  to  the  afflicting  of  This  one,  when  thou  didst  withdraw 

that  other  from  Me  by  thy  cunning  persuasions.'     And  of  Him 

it  is  rightly  added,  without  cause.     For  '  he  was  destroyed 

without  cause,"*  who  was  at  once  weighed  to  the  earth  by  the 

avenging  of  sin,   and  not   defiled  by  the   pollution   of  sin. 

He  ^  was  destroyed  without  cause,'  Who,  being  made  incarnate, 

had  no  sins  of  His  own,  and  yet  being  without  offence  took 

upon  Himself  the  punishment  of  the  carnal.     For  it  is  hence 

Pa.  69,  that  speaking  by  the  Prophet  He  says,  Then  I  restored  that 

*'  which  I  took  not  away.     For  that  other  that  was  created  for 

Paradise  would  in  his  pride  have  usurped  the  semblance  of 

the  Divine  power,  yet  the  Mediator,  Who  was  without  guilt, 

discharged  the  guilt  of  that  pride.     It  is  hence  that  a  Wise 

"Wisd.     Man    saith   to   the    Father;    Forasmuch  then   as   Thou  art 

Vulg.     righteous  Thyself,    Thou  order  est   all   things   righteously; 

Thou  condemnest  Him  too  that  deserveth  not  to  be  punished, 

27.  But  we  must  consider  how  He  is  righteous  and  ordereth 


God  Just  ill  affllcliny  Christ.     Satan  misjudtjed  Hitn.  J  4!) 
all  things  righteously,  if  He  condemns  Him  that  deserveth  Book 

•  TTT 

not  to  be  punished.     For  our  Mediator  deserved  not  to  be '— 

punished  for  Himself,  because  He  never  was  guilty  of  any 
defilement  of  sin.  But  if  He  had  not  Himself  undertaken 
a  death  not  due  to  Him,  He  would  never  have  freed  us  from 
one  that  was  justly  due  to  us.  And  so  whereas  *  The  Father 
is  righteous,'  in  punishing  a  righteous  man,  '  He  ordereth  all 
things  righteously,'  in  that  by  these  means  He  justifies  all 
things,  viz.  that  for  the  sake  of  sinners  He  condemns  Him  Who 
is  without  sin  ;  that  all  the  Elect'  might  rise  up  to  the  height i  electa 
of  righteousness,  in  proportion  as  He  Who  is  above  all°"^°'* 
underwent  the  penalties  of  our  unrighteousness.  What  then 
is  in  that  place  called  '  being  condemned  without  deserving,' 
is  here  spoken  of  as  being  ^  afilicted  without  cause.'  Yet 
though  in  respect  of  Himself  He  was  '  afilicted  without 
cause,'  in  respect  of  our  deeds  it  was  not  '  without  cause.' 
For  the  rust  of  sin  could  not  be  cleared  away,  but  by  the 
fire  of  torment.  He  then  came  without  sin.  Who  should 
submit  Himself  voluntarily  to  torment,  that  the  chastisements 
due  to  our  wickedness  might  justly  loose  the  parties  thereto 
obnoxious,  in  that  they  had  unjustly  kept  Him,  Who  was 
free  of  them.  Thus  it  was  both  without  cause,  and  not 
without  cause,  that  He  was  afflicted,  Who  had  indeed  no 
crimes  in  Himself,  but  Who  cleansed  with  His  blood  the 
stain  of  our  guilt. 

Ver.  4,  5.  And  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  and  said,  Skin 
for  skin;  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life. 
But  put  forth  Thine  hand  now,  and  touch  his  bone  and  his 
flesh,  and  he  will  curse  Thee  to  Thy  face. 

28.  When  the  evil  spirit  sees  our  Redeemer  shine  forth  by    xv. 
miracles,  he  cries  out,  We  know  Who  Thou  art,  the  Holy  Luke  4, 
One  of  God.     And  in  saying  this,  he  dreads,  whilst  he  owns,^^* 
the  Son  of  God.     Yet   being   a  stranger  to   the  power  of 
heavenly  pity,  there  are  seasons  when,  beholding  Him  subject 
to  suffering,  he  supposes  Him  to  be  mere  man.     Now  he 
had    learnt   that   there   were  many   in   the   pastoral  station, 
cloked  under  the   guise  of  sanctity,    who,  being    very    far 
removed  from  the  bowels  of  charity,  held  for  very  little  other 
men's  ills.      And  thus  as  though  judging  of  Him  by  other 
men,  because  after  much  had  been  taken  from  Him,  he  did 


150  Satan  how  let  loose  against  the  Flesh  of  our  Lord, 

Job  2,  not  see  him  subdued,  he  so  flamed  against  Him  even  to 
■j^ —  His  very  flesh,  in  applying  the  touch  of  suff^ering,  as  to  say, 
Skin  for  skin;  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his 
life.  But  put  forth  Thine  hand  now,  and  touch  his  bone 
and  his  flesh,  and  he  ivill  curse  Thee  to  Thy  face.  As 
though  he  said  in  plain  terms, '  He  does  not  care  to  be  moved 
by  the  things  that  are  without  Him,  but  it  will  then  be  really 
known  what  He  is,  if  He  shall  experience  in  Himself  what 
may  make  Him  grieve.'  This  Satan  expressed  in  his  own 
person  not  by  words,  but  by  wishes,  when  he  desired  to  have  it 
brought  to  pass  ;  in  his  members  he  brought  it  on  both  by 
words  and  wishes  at  once.  For  it  is  himself  that  speaks, 
when,  according  to  the  words  of  the  Prophet,  his  followers 
Jer.  11,  say.  Let  its  pict  the  wood  in  his  bread^,  and  let  us  raze  him 
l^'  out  from  the  land  of  the  living.  For  '  to  put  the  wood  into 
the  bread,'  is  to  apply  the  trunk  of  the  cross  to  His  body  in 
affixing  Him  thereto;  and  they  think  themselves  able  to 
*  raze  out'  His  life  from  the  land  of  the  living.  Whom  vv^hile 
they  perceive  Him  to  be  mortal  mould,  they  imagine  to  be 
put  an  end  to  by  death. 

Ver.  6.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Behold,  he  is  in 
thine  hand,  but  save  his  life. 
xvi.  29.  What  fool  even  would  believe  that  the  Creator  of  all  things 
w^as  given  up  into  *  the  hands  of  Satan  ?'  Yet  who  that  is 
instructed  by  the  Truth  can  be  ignorant  that  of  that  very 
Satan  all  they  are  members  who  are  joined  unto  him  by  living 
frowardly  ?  Thus  Pilate  shewed  himself  a  member  of  him, 
who,  even  to  the  extremity  of  putting  Him  to  death,  knew 
not  the  Lord  when  He  came  for  our  Redemption.  The 
chief  priests  proved  themselves  to  be  his  body,  who  strove 
to  drive  the  world's  Redeemer  from  the  world,  by  persecuting 
Him  even  to  the  cross.  When  then  the  Lord  for  our  salva- 
tion gave  Himself  up  to  the  hands  of  Satan's  members,  what 
else  did  He,  but  let  loose  that  Satan's  hand  to  rage  against 
Himself,  that  by  the  veiy  act  whereby  He  Himself  outwardly 
fell  low,  He  might  set  us  free  both  outwardly  and  inwardly. 
If  therefore  the  hand  of  Satan  is  taken  for  his  power,  He 
after  the  flesh  bore  the  hand  of  him,  whose  power  over  the 
body  He  endured  even  to  the  spitting,  the  buffetting,  the 
''  E.  V.  Let  us  destroy  the  tree  with  the  fruit  thereof. 


Our  Lord  permitted  as  God  ivhat  He  bore  as  Ma?i.   151 
stripes,  the  cross,  the  lance;  and  hence  when  He  cometh  to  Book 

•  •  •  TTT 

His  Passion  He  saith  to  Pilate,  i.  e.  to  the  body  of  Satan, 


Thou  couldest  have  no  power  at  all  against  Me  except  itu,  * 
were  given  thee  from  above  ;  and  yet  this  power,  which  He 
had  given  to  him  against  Himself  without,  He  compelled  to 
serve  the  end  of  His  own  interest  within.  For  Pilate,  or 
Satan  who  was  that  Pilate's  head,  was  held  under  the  power  of 
that  One  over  Whom  he  had  received  power ;  in  that  being 
far  above  He  had  Himself  ordained  that  which  now  con- 
descending to  an  inferior  condition  He  was  undergoing  from 
the  persecutor,  that  though  it  ai*ose  from  the  evil  mind  of 
unbelievers,  yet  that  very  cruelty  itself  might  also  serve  to 
the  weal  of  all  the  Elect,  and  therefore  He  pitifully  ordained 
all  that  within,  which  He  suffered  Himself  to  undergo  thus 
foully  without.  And  it  is  hence  that  it  is  said  of  Him  at  the 
supper,  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all  thitigs  Johni3, 
into  His  hands,  and  that  He  ivas  come  from  God,  and  went^' 
to  God :  He  risethfrom  supper,  and  laid  aside  His  garments. 
Behold  how,  when  He  was  about  to  come  into  the  hands  of 
those  that  persecuted  Him,  He  knew  that  those  very  perse- 
cutors even  had  been  given  into  His  own  hand.  For  He, 
Who  knew  that  He  had  received  all  things,  plainly  held  those 
very  persons  by  whom  He  was  held,  that  He  should  Himself 
inflict  on  Himself,  for  the  purposes  of  mercy,  whatsoever  their 
permitted  wickedness  should  cruelly  devise  against  Him. 
Let  it  then  be  said  to  him,  Behold,  he  is  in  thine  hand,  in 
that  when  ravening  thereafter  he  received  penuission  to  smite 
His  flesh,  yet  unwittingly  he  rendered  service  to  the  Power 
of  that  Being. 

30.  Now  he  is  ordered  to  *  save  the  life  of  the  soul",'  not 
that  he  is  forbidden  to  tempt  it,  but  that  he  is  convicted  of 
being  unable  to  overcome  it.  For  never,  as  we  that  are  mere 
men  are  oftentimes  shaken  by  the  assault  of  temptation, 
was  the  soul  of  your  Redeemer  disordered  by  its  urgency. 
For  though  our  enemy,  being  pennilted,  took  Him  up  into 
an  high  mountain,  though  he  promised  that  he  would  give 
Him  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  though  he  shewed  Him 

•  The  word  is  *  anima,'  which  sig-     tained  in  us:  *  the  life  of  the  soul'  may 
nifiea  the  soul  a^i  well  as  that  union     serve  to  include  both  those  senses. 
with  the  body,  by  which  life  is  main- 


152    Satan  forced  to  spare  Christ'' s  Elect,  as  JoVs  life. 

Job  2,  stones  as  to  be  turned  into  bread,  yet  he  had  no  power  to 

7. 

Alleg 


7 

shake  by  temptation  the  mind  of  the  Mediator  betwixt  God 


and  man.  For  He  so  condescended  to  take  all  this  upon 
Himself  externally,  that  His  mind,  being  still  inwardly 
established  in  His  Divine  Nature,  should  remain  unshaken. 
John  11,  And  if  He  is  at  any  time  said  to  be  troubled  and  to  have 
38'  groaned  i?i  the  spirit^  He  did  Himself  in  His  Divine  nature 
ordain  how  much  He  should  in  His  Human  nature  be 
troubled,  unchangeably  ruling  over  all  things,  yet  shewing 
Himself  subject  to  change  in  the  satisfying  of  human  frailty; 
and  thus  remaining  at  rest  in  Himself,  He  ordained  what- 
soever He  did  even  with  a  troubled  spirit  for  the  setting 
forth  of  that  human  nature  which  He  had  taken  upon 
Himself. 

31.  But  as,  when  we  love  aright,  there  is  nothing  among 

created  things  that  we  love  better  than  the  life  of  our  soul, 

and  like  as  we  say  that  we  love   those  as  our  soul  toward 

whom  we  strive  to  express  the  weight  of  our  love,  it  may  be 

1  per      that  by  the  life  of  His  SouP,  is  represented  the  life^  of  the 

aniraam  Elect.    And  while  Satan  is  let  loose  to  smite  the  Redeemer's 

«  vita 

flesh,  he  is  debarred  the  soul,  forasmuch  as  at  the  same 
time  that  he  obtains  His  Body  to  inflict  upon  it  the  Passion, 
he  loses  the  Elect  from  the  claims  of  his  power.  And  while 
That  One's  flesh  suffers  death  by  the  Cross,  the  mind  of  these 
is  stablished  against  assaults.  Let  it  then  be  said.  Behold, 
he  is  in  thine  hand;  hut  sat^  his  life.  As  if  he  had  heard 
in  plain  words,  *  Take  permission  against  His  Body,  and 
lose  thy  right  of  wicked  dominion  over  His  Elect,  whom 
foreknovdng  in  Himself  before  the  w^orld  began  He  hcldeth 
for  His  own.' 

Ver.  7.  So  went  Satan  forth  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord,  and  smote  Joh  ivith  sore  boils,  from  the  sole  of  his 
foot  unto  his  crown. 
xvii.  .32.  No  one  entereth  into  this  life  of  the  Elect,  that  has 
not  undergone  the  contradictions  of  this  enemy.  And  they 
all  have  proved  themselves  the  members  of  our  Redeemer, 
who,  from  the  first  beginning  of  the  w-orld,  whilst  living 
righteously,  have  suffered  wrongs.  Did  not  Abel  prove 
himself  His  member,  who  not  only  in  propitiating  God  by 
his  sacrifice,  but  also  by  dying  without  a  word,  was  a  figure 


Christ  cleanses  away  sin  by  Fleshy  as  with  Job's  potsherd.  153 

of  Him,  of  whom  it  is  written,  He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  Book 
the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  -Ull^ 
so  He  openeth  not  His  mouth.     Thus  from   tlie  very  begin- 7/     ' 
ning  of  the  world  he  strove  to  vanquish  the  Body  of  our 
Redeemer ;  and  thus  He  inflicted  wounds  '  from  the  sole  of 
the  foot  to  His  crown,'  in  that  beginning  with  mere  ^  men,  he 
came  to  the  very  Head  of  the  Church  in  his  raging  efforts. 
And  it  is  well  said; 

Ver.  8.  And  he  took  him  a  potsherd  to  scrape  the  humour 
tcithal. 

33.  For  what  is  the  potsherd  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  but  xviii. 
the  flesli  which  He  took  of  the  clay  of  our  nature  ?    For  the 
potsherd  receives  firmness  by  fire.     And  the  Flesh   of  our 
Lord  was  rendered  stronger  by   His  Passion,  in  so  far  as 
dying  by  infirmity,  He  arose  from  death  void  of  infirmity. 
And  hence  too  it  is  ri^^htly  delivered  by  the  Prophet,  My  Ps.  22, 
strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd.     For  His  '  strength  ^^' 
was  dried   up  like  a  potsherd,'  Who   strengthened  the  in- 
firmity of  the  flesh  which  He  took  upon  Him  by  the  fire  of 
His  Passion.     But  what  is   to  be  understood  b}^  humour  ^  ^  saniem 
saving  sin  ?    For  it  is  the  custom  to  denote  the  sins  of  the 
flesh   by  flesh   and    blood.     And   hence   it  is   said   by   the 
Psalmist,    Deliver    me  from    blood.     Humour    then    is  theps.  51, 
corruption  of  the  blood.     And  so  what  do  we  understand  by  ^^' 
humour  but  the  sins  of  the  flesh,  rendered  worse  by  length 
of  time  }     Thus  the  wound  turns  to  humour  when  sin,  being 
neglected  %  is  aggravated  by  habit.     And  so  the  Mediator 
between  God  and    man,   the   Man   Christ  Jesus,  in  giving 
up  His  Body  into  the  hands  of  those  that  persecuted  Him, 
scraped  the  humour  with  a  potsherd,  forasmuch  as  He  put 
away  sin  by  the  flesh  ;  for  He  came,  as  it  is  \^Titten,  in  theK.nm.8y 
likeness  of  sinful  Jlexh^  that  He  might  condemn  sin  of  sin.^^     ^^' 
And  whilst  He  presented  the  purity  of  His  own  Flesh  to  the 
enemy,  He  cleansed  away  the  defilements  of  ours.     And  by 
means  of  that  flesh  whereby  the  enemy  held  us  captive,  He 
made  atonement  for  us  whom  He  set  free.     For  that  which 

<•  '  Puris,'  which  St.  Gr.  u'^es  iu  this         •  The  Translator  suggests  neglecta 
nense.     Some  Mks.  read  '  Primis,'  *■  the     for  neglect&,  which  seems  better, 
first  men.' 


154  Christ  rents  on  the  dunghill  by  coming  to  the  Penitent. 

Job  3,  was  made  an  instrument  of  sin  by  us,  was  by  our  Mediator 

- — '- —  converted  for  us  into  the  instrument^  of  righteousness.     And 
Alleg.  .  J       ij 

so   '  the  humour  is   scraped  with  a  potsherd/  when   sin   is 

overcome  by  the  flesh.     It  is  rightly  subjoined ; 

And  he  sat  down  upon  a  dunghill. 

xix.        34.  Not  in  the  court  in  which  the  law  resounds,  not  in 

the  building  which  lifts  its  top  on  high,  but  on  a  dunghill  he 

takes  his  seat,  which  is  because  the  Redeemer  of  man  on 

1  Cor.    coming  to  take  the  flesh,  as  Paul  testifies,  hath  chosen  the 
1,27.  ° 

weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  mightg.     Does  not 

He,  as  it  were,  sit  down  upon  a  dunghill,  the  buildings  being 

ruined.  Who,  the  Jews  in   their   pride   being  left  desolate, 

rests  in  that  Gentile  world,  which  He  had  for  so  long  time 

rejected  ?     He  is  found  outside  the  dwelling  all  in  His  sores, 

Who  herein,  that  He  bore  with  Judaea,  which  set  itself  against 

Him,  suffered  the  pain  of  His  Passion  amid  the  scorn  of 

John  I,  His  own  people;  as  John  bears  witness,  who  says,  He  came 
unto  His  own,  but  His  own  received  Him  not.  And  how 
He  rests  Himself  upon  a  dunghill,  let  this  same  Truth  say 

Luke     for  Himself;    for  He  declares.    Likewise  I  say   unto  you, 

and  Vo  ^^*^^^  ^'^  j^y  ^^  ^^^^  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one 
sinner  that  repenteth,  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine  just 
persons  which  need  no  repentance.  See,  He  sits  upon  a 
dunghill  in  grief.  Who,  after  sins  have  been  committed,  is 
willing  to  take  possession  of  penitent  hearts.  Are  not  the 
hearts  of  penitent  sinners  like  a  kind  of  dunghill,  in  that 
while  they  review  their  misdoings  with  bewailing,  they  are, 
as  it  were,  heaping  dung  before  their  eyes  in  abusing  them- 
selves ?  So  when  Job  was  smitten  he  did  not  seek  a  moun- 
tain, but  sat  down  upon  a  dunghill,  in  that  when  our 
Redeemer  came  to  His  Passion,  He  left  the  high  minds  of 
the  proud,  and  rested  in  the  lowliness  of  the  heavy  laden. 
And  this,  while  yet  before  His  Incarnation,  He  indicated, 

Is.  66,2.  when  He  said  by  the  Prophet,  But  to  this  man  will  I  look, 
even  to  him  that  is  poor,  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and 
trembleth  at  My  word. 

35.   But   who    can    think  what  numberless   outrages   He 
underwent  at  the  hands  of  men,  Who  shewed  to  men  such 

^  anna  J  Gr.  either  anus  or  instruments. 


Job'a  Wife  a  type  of  the  Carnal  in  the  Church,       155 

unnumbered  mercies  ?    Who  can  think  how  ereat  those  are  Book 

III 
which  He  even  yet  undergoes,  yea  now  that  He  reigns  from - 

above  over  the   hearts  of  the   faithful  ?     For  it  is  He  that 

endures  daily  all  wherein  His  Elect  are  racked  and  rent  by  the 

hands  of  the  reprobate.     And  though  the  Head  of  this  Body, 

which  same  are  we,  already  lifts  itself  free  above  all  things, 

yet  He  still  feels  in  His  Body,  which  He  keeps  here  below, 

the  wounds  dealt  it  by  reprobate  sinners.     But  why  do  we 

speak  thus  of  unbelievers,   when   within  the   very   Church 

itself  we  see  multitudes  of  carnal  men,  who  fight  against  the 

life  of  our  Redeemer  by  their  wicked  ways.     For  there  are 

some,  who  set  upon   Him  with    evil   deeds,   because   they 

cannot  with  swords,  forasmuch  as  when  they  see  that  what 

they  go  after  is  lacking  to  them  in  the  Church,  they  become 

enemies  to   the  just,  and    not    only   settle   themselves  into 

wicked  practices,  but  are  also  busy  to  bend  the  uprightness 

of  good  men  to  a  crooked  "course.     For  they  neglect  to  lift 

their  eyes  to  the  things  of  eternity,  and  in  littleness  of  mind 

they  yield  themselves  up  to  the  lust  of  temporal  things,  and 

they  fall  the  deeper  from  eternal  blessings,  in  proportion  as 

they  look  upon  temporal  blessings  as  the  only  ones.     The 

simplicity  of  the  righteous  is  displeasing  to  these,  and  when 

they  find  opportunity  for  disturbing  them,  ihey  press  them 

to  lay  hold  of  their  own  duplicity.    Hence  also  this  is  in  just 

accordance,  which  is  added, 

Ver.   9.    Tlien    said   his   wife  unto  him,  Dost  thou   still 
retain  thine  integrity?    Curse  God,  and  die. 

36.  For  of  what  did  that  mispersuading  woman  bear  the  xx. 
likeness,  but  of  all  the  carnal  that  are  settled  in  the  bosom 
of  Holy  Church,  who  in  proportion  as  by  the  words  of  the  Faith 
they  profess  they  are  within  the  pale,  press  harder  on  all  the 
good  by  their  ill-regulated  conduct.  For  they  would  per- 
chance have  done  less  mischief,  if  Holy  Church  had  not 
admitted  in  and  welcomed  to  the  bed  of  faith  those,  whom, 
by  receiving  in  a  profession  of  faith,  she  doubtless  puts  it 
almost  out  of  her  power  to  eschew.  It  is  hence  that  in  the 
press  of  the  crowd  one  woman  touched  our  Redeemer,  where- 
upon tlie  same  our  Redeemer  at  once  saith.  Mho  touched 
Me?  And  when  the  disciples  answered  Him,  The  multitude 
throng  Thee  and  press  Thee,  and  sayest  Thou,  Ji'ho  touched 


1 56  The  carnalpressy  but  touch  nol  Christ*  Motivesfor  ill  advice. 

Job  2,  Me?  He  therefore  subjoined,  Somebody  hath  touched  Me, 
- — '■ — /or  I  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of  Me. 

37.  Thus  many  press  the  Lord,  but  one  alone  touches 
Him ;  in  that  all  carnal  men  in  the  Church  press  Him,  from 
Whom  they  are  far  removed,  while  they  alone  touch  Him, 
who  are  really  united  to  Him  in  humility.  Therefore  the 
crowd  presses  Him,  in  that  the  multitude  of  the  carnally 
minded,  as  it  is  within  the  pale,  so  is  it  the  more  hardly 
borne  with.  It  '  presses,'  but  it  does  not  '  touch,'  in  that 
it  is  at  once  troublesome  by  its  presence,  and  absent  by  its 
way  of  life.  For  sometimes  they  pursue  us  with  bad  dis- 
course, and  sometimes  with  evil  practices  alone,  for  so  at 
one  time  they  persuade  to  what  they  practise,  and  at  another, 
though  they  use  no  persuasions,  yet  they  cease  not  to  afford 
examples  of  wickedness.  They,  then,  that  entice  us  to  do 
evil  either  by  word  or  by  example,  are  surely  our  persecutors, 
to  whom  we  owe  the  conflicts  of  temptation,  which  we  have 
to  conquer  at  least  in  the  heart. 

38.  But  we  should  know  that  carnal  men  in  the  Church 
set  themselves  to  prompt  wickedness  at  one  time  from  a 
principle  of  fear,  and  at  another  of  audacity,  and  when  they 
themselves  go  wrong  either  from  littleness  of  mind  or  pride 
of  heart,  they  study  to  infuse  these  qualities,  as  if  out  of 
love,  into  the  hearts  of  the  righteous.  So  Peter,  before  the 
Death  and  Resurrection  of  our  Lord,  retained  a  carnal  mind. 
It  was  with  a  carnal  mind  that  the  son  of  Zeruiah  held  to 
his  leader  David,  whom  he  was  joined  to.  Yet  the  one  was 
led  into  sin  by  fear,  the  other  by  pride.     For  the  first,  when 

Matt,     he  heard  of  his  Master's  Death,  said.  Be  it  far  from  Thee, 

16    22  ' 

'  '  Lord;  this  shall  not  he  unto  Thee.  But  the  latter,  not  en- 
2  Sam.  during   the  wrongs  offered  to    his  leader,   says.  Shall   not 

'  *  Shimei  be  put  to  death  for  this,  because  he  cursed  the  Lord's 
Matt,    anointed  '^     But  to   the  first  it  is  immediately  replied.  Get 

'  '  thee  behind  Me,  Satan.  And  the  other  with  his  brother 
2  Sam.  immediately  heard  the  words  ;    What  have  I  to  do  with  you, 

'     '  ye  sons  of  Zeruiah,  that   ye  are  this  day  turned  into  a 

'So       Satan^    unto   me?     So   that   evil   prompters  are   taken   for 

E.  V.    apostate  angels  in  express  designation,  who,  as  if  in  lore, 

Adver-  j^.^^^,  ^^^^^^^  ^^  unlawful  deeds  by  their  enticing  words.     But 

they  are  much  the  worse,  who  give  into  this   sin  not  from 


The  Elect  resist  foes  by  patience^  sustain  friends  by  counsel.  1 57 

fear  but  I'lom  pride,  of  whom  the  wife  of  blessed  Job  bore  ''^'<^k 

the  figure  in  a  special  uiaiiner,  in  that  she  sought  to  prompt 

high  thoughts  to  her  husband,  saying.  Dost  thou  still  retain 
thine    i)ite(jrHy?     Curse    Cod,  ana    die.      She    blames    the 
simplicity  in   her  husband,  that  in  contempt   of  all  things 
transitory,  with  a  pure  heart,  he  longs  after  the  eternal  only. 
As  though  she  said,  '  Why  dost  thou   in  thy  simplicity  seek 
after  the  things  of  eternity,  and  in  resignation  groan  under 
the   weight   of    present   ills  ?      Transgress ',    and    contemn  >  Exce- 
eternity,   and    even    by   dying    escape    from    present   woes.' 
But  when  any  of  the  Elect  encounter  evil   within   coming 
from  carnal  men,  what  a  modeP  of  uprightness  they  exhibit- foi- 
in  themselves,  let  us  learn  from  the  words  of  him,  wounded" 
and  yet  whole,  seated  yet  erect,  who  says, 

Ver.  10.  77/0//  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish  icomen 
spcaketh.  What?  shall  we  receive  yood  at  the  hand  qf  the 
Lord,  and  shall  ue  not  receive  evil? 

39.  Holy  men,  when  fastened  upon  by  the  war  of  afflic-    xxi. 
tions,  when  at  one  and  the  same  moment  they  are  exposed 

to  this  party  dealing  them  blows  and  to  that  urging  per- 
suasions, present  to  the  one  sort  the  shield  of  patience,  at 
the  other  they  launch  the  darts  of  instruction,  and  lift  them- 
selves up  to  either  mode  of  warfare  with  a  wonderful  skill  in 
virtue,  so  that  they  should  at  the  same  time  both  instruct 
with  wisdom  the  froward  counsels  within,  and  contemn  with 
courage  the  adverse  events  without ;  that  by  their  instructions 
they  may  amend  the  one  sort,  and  by  their  endurance  put 
down  the  other.  For  the  assailing  foes  they  contemn  by 
bearing  them,  and  the  crippled  citizens  they  recover  to  a 
state  of  soundness,  by  sympathizing  with  them.  Those  they 
resist,  that  they  may  not  draw  off  others  also  ;  they  alann 
themselves  for  these,  lest  they  should  wholly  lose  tlie  life  of 
righteousness. 

40.  Let  us  view  the  soldier  of  God's  camp  fighting  against 
either  sort.      He  says.  Without  were  Jiyhtinys,  within  were 2  Cot. 

fears.     He  reckons   up  the   wars,  which  he  under\\'ent  ex- "» ^* 
ternally,  in  these  words,  In  perils  of  waters^   in   perils  of 2  Cor. 
robbers,  in  perils  by  mine  own  countrymen,  in  perils  by  ///e^''^*' 
heathen,  in  perils  in  the  city,  in  perils  in  the  wilderness,  in 
perils  in  the  sea,  in  perils  amonj  false  brethren.     Now  in 
this   war,   what  were    those   darts   which    he    sent   against 


158       St.  Paul,  himself'  suffering,  careful  for  others. 
Job  2,  the  foe,  let  him  add,  In  weariness  and paitifulness,  in  watch- 

10. 

.      ' — ings  often,  in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in  cold 

ib.  27.  and  nakedness.  And  let  him  say,  when  caught  amidst  such 
numerous  assaults,  with  what  a  watchful  defence  he  at  the 
same  time   guarded  the   camp  too.     For  he  forthwith  pro- 

ib.  28.  ceeds,  Beside  those  things  that  are  without,  that  which 
cometh  upon  me  daily,  the  care  of  all  the  churches.  See 
how  bravely  he  takes  upon  himself  those  fights,  how  merci- 
fully he  spends  himself  in  defending  his  neighbours.  He 
describes  the  ills  which  he  suffers,  he  subjoins  the  good  that 
he  imparts.  So  let  us  consider  how  toilsome  it  must  be,  at 
one  and  the  same  time  to  undergo  troubles  without,  and  to 
defend  the  weak  within.  Without,  fightings  are  his  lot,  in 
that  he  is  torn  with  stripes  and  bound  with  chains;  within  he 
suffers  alarm,  in  that  he  dreads  lest  his  sufferings  do  a 
mischief,  not  to  himself  but  to  his   disciples.     And  hence 

1  Thess.  he  writes  to  those  same  disciples,  saying.  That  no  man  should 
'  *  be  moved  by  these  ajfiictions;  for  yourselves  know  that  we 
are  appointed  thereunto.  For  in  suffering  himself  he 
feared  for  the  fate  of  others,  lest  while  the  disciples  perceive 
him  to  be  afflicted  for  the  faith  with  stripes,  they  be  back- 
ward to  confess  themselves  to  be  of  the  faithful.  Oh!  bowels 
of  boundless  love !  All  that  he  suffers  himself,  he  dis- 
regards, and  is  concerned  lest  the  disciples  should  suffer 
ought  of  evil  prompting  within  the  heart.  He  slights  the 
wounds  of  the  body  in  himself,  and  heals  the  wounds  of  the 
soul  in  others.  For  the  righteous  have  this  proper  to  them- 
selves, that  in  the  midst  of  the  pain  of  their  own  woe,  they 
never  give  over  the  care  of  others'  weal,  and  when  in  suffisring 
afflictions  they  grieve  for  themselves,  still  by  giving  needful 
instruction  they  provide  for  others,  and  are  like  some  great 
physicians,  that  being  smitten  are  brought  into  a  state  of 
sickness.  They  themselves  suffer  from  the  lacerations  of  the 
wound,  yet  they  proffer  the  salves  of  saving  health  to  others. 
But  it  is  very  far  less  toilsome,  either  to  instruct  when  you 
are  not  suffering,  or  to  suffer  when  you  are  not  giving  in- 
struction. Hence  holy  men  skilfully  apply  their  energies  to 
both  objects,  and  when  they  chance  to  be  stricken  with 
afflictions,  they  so  meet  the  wars  from  without,  that  they  take 
anxious  thought  that  their  neighbour's  interior  be  not  rent 
and  torn.    Thus  holy  men  stand  up  courageously  in  the  line, 


Holy  Church,  looking  above,  reviles  not  when  wronged.  15Ji 

and  on  the   one    band    bmite   with    the    iaveUn   the    breasts  Book 

.  III. 

advanced   against   them,  and   on  the  other  cover  with  the 


shield  their  feeble  comrades  in  the  rear.  And  thns  with  a 
rapid  glance  they  look  out  on  either  side,  that  they  may  at 
the  same  time  pierce  their  daring  foes  in  front,  and  shield 
from  wounds  their  trembling  friends  behind.  Therefore, 
because  holy  men  then  are  skilled  so  to  meet  adversities 
without,  that  they  are  at  the  same  time  able  to  correct  fro- 
ward  counsels  within,  it  may  be  well  said.  Thou  speakest  as 
one  of  (lie  foolish  women  speakelh.  For  as  it  is  said  to  the 
Elect,  Act  like  men,  and  He  shall  comfort  your  heart;  so  Pg.  31, 
the  minds  of  caraal  men,  which  serve  God  with  a  yielding  Vuig. 
purpose,  are  not  undeservedly  called  '  women.' 

4 1 .  What  ?  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and 
shall  we  not  receive  evil  f  As  though  he  said,  *  If  we  are 
bent  upon  eternal  blessings,  what  wonder  if  we  meet  with 
temporal  evils?'  Now  these  blessings  Paul  had  his  eye  fixed 
on  with  earnest  interest,  when  he  submitted  with  a  com- 
posed mind  to  the  ills  that  fell  upon  him,  saying.  For  /Rom.  8, 
reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  )wt  worthy  ^^' 

to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us. 

In  all  this  did  not  Job  sin  icith  his  lips.    When  holy  men 
undergo  persecution  both  within  and  without,  tliey  not  only 
never  transgress  in  injurious  expressions  against  God,  but 
they    never   launch    words   of  reviling   against    their    very 
adversaries  themselves;  which  Peter,  the  leader  of  the  good, 
rightly  warns   us  of   when    he  says,  But  let  tiane  of  you  ^  Pet.  4, 
suffer  as  a  murderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as  an^  evil  speaker.  \  g^ 
For  the  evil  speaker's  way  of  suffering  is,  in  the  season  of  his  ^"^g* 
suffering,  to  break  loose  in  abuse  at  least  of  his  persecutor. 
But  forasmuch   as    the  Body  of  our   Redeemer,  viz.   Holy 
Church,  so  bears  the  burthen  of  her  sorrows,  that  she  never 
transgresses  the  bounds  of  humility  by  words,  it  is  rightly 
said  of  this  sorrower ; 

In  all  this  did  not  Job  sin  with  his  lips. 

Ver.  11.  Now  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  of  all  this 
ev^il  that  was  come  upon  him,  they  came  every  one  from 
his  own  place;  Elijjhaz  the  Temanite^  and  Bildad  the 
Shuhite,  and  Zophar  the  Naainathite. 

42.  In  the  Preface  to  this  work  we  said  that  the  friends  xxii. 


160    Heretics  comefroyn  '  iheir  oioi  placed  i.  e,  pride. 

Job  2,  of  blessed  Job,  though  tliey  come  together  to  hhn  with  a 
good  purpose,  yet  do  for  this  reason  bear  the  likeness  of 


Alleg. 

heretics,  in  that  they  fall  away  into  sin  by  speaking  without 

discretion ;    and  hence  it  is   said  to   them  by  blessed  Job, 

Job  13,  Surely  1  icould  speak  to  the  Almighty,  I  desire  to  reason 

with  God  ;  but  ye  are  forgers  of  lies,  and  followers  of  corrupt 

doctrines.     Thus  Holy  Church,  which  is  set  in  the  midst  of 

tribulation  all  this  time  of  her  pilgrimage,  whilst  she  suffers 

wounds,   and   mourns   over  the   downfall  of  her  members, 

has    other   enemies    of  Christ  besides   to  bear  with,  under 

I    Christ's  name.     For  to  the  increasing  of  her  grief,  heretics 

also  meet  together  in  dispute  and  strife,  and  they  pierce  her 

with  unreasonable  words  like  as  with  a  kind  of  dart. 

43.  And  it  is  well  said,  they  came  every  one  from  his  own 
place.  For  '  the  place'  of  heretics  is  very  pride  itself  For 
except  they  first  swelled  with  pride  in  their  hearts,  they 
would  never  enter  the  lists  of  false  assertion.  For  the  place 
of  the   wicked  is  pride,  just  as  reversely  humility  is  '  the 

Eccles.  place'  of  the  good.  Whereof  Solomon  saith,  If  the  spirit  of 
'  '  the  ruler  rise  up  against  thee,  leave  not  thy  place.  As  though 
he  said  in  plain  words,  '  If  thou  perceivest  the  spirit  of  the 
Tempter  to  prevail  against  thee  in  aught,  quit  not  the  lowli- 
ness of  penitence ;'  and  that  it  was  the  abasement  of  penitence 
that  he  called  ^  our  place,'  he  shews  by  the  words  that  follow, 

Mb.  fidiym^,  for  healing^  pacifieth  great  offences.  For  what  else 
"  ^*  is  the  humility  of  mourning,  save  the  remedy  of  sin.  Heretics 
therefore  '  come  each  from  his  place,'  in  that  it  is  from  pride 
tliat  they  are  urged  to  attack  Holy  Church. 

44.  And  their  froward  conduct,  moreover,  is  collected 
from  an  interpretation  of  their  names.  For  they  are  named 
'  Eliphaz,'  '  Baldad,'  '  Sophar;'  and  as  we  have  said  above, 
Eliphaz  is,  by  interpretation,  rendered,  '  contempt  of  God.' 
For  if  they  did  not  condemn  God,  they  would  never  entertain 
wrong  notions  concerning  Him.  And  Baldad  is  rendered 
*  oldness  alone.'  For  while  they  shrink  from  being  fairly 
defeated,  and  seek  to  be  victorious  with  froward  purpose, 
they  pay  no  regard  to  the  conversation  of  the  new  life,  and 
all  that  they  give  heed  to  is  '  of  oldness  alone.'  And 
Sophar,  'dissipating  prospect;'  for  they  that  are  set  in 
Holy  Church  humbly  contemplate  with  true  faith  the  mysteries 


Meaning  of  the  several  habitations  of  Job* s  friends.     161 

of  their  Redeemer,  but  when  heretics   come  to  them   with    Book 
false  statements,  they  *  dissipate  the  prospect,'  in  that  they 


turn  aside  from  the  aim  of  right  contemplation  the  minds  of 
those,  whom  they  draw  over  to  themselves. 

45.  Now  the  places  from  whence  the\'  come  are  described 
in   fitting  accordance   with   the  practices  of  heretics.     For 
there  is  aThemanite,  and  a  Suhitc,  and  a  Naamathite  named. 
Now  Theina  is  by  interpretation  *  the  south ;'  Suhi^ '  speaking;' 
Nomina,  *  comeliness.'    But  who  does  not  know  tliat  the  south 
is  a  hot  wind ;  so  heretics,  as  they  are  over  ardent   to  be 
wise,  studv  to  have  heated  wits  bevond  what  needs.     For 
sloth  goes  with  the  torpor  of  cold,  whilst  reversely  the  rest- 
lessness   of  unrestrained    curiosity    accords   with    unabated 
teeming  heat,  and  so  because  they  long  to  feel  the  heat  of 
wisdom  beyond    what   they   ought,   they  are  said   to   come 
from  *  the  south.'     Paul  busied  himself  to  cool  the  minds  of 
the  faithful  to  this  heat  of  unrestrained  wiseness,  when  he 
said,  Not  to  be  overwise  beyond  what  he  ought  to  be  wise,  Rom. 
but  to  be  wise  nnto  sobriety.     It  is  hence  that  David  smites  Vuig. 
at  the   valleys  of  salt,  viz.   in   that   our  Redeemer,  by   the  2  5am. 
piercing  of  His  severity,  extinguishes  the  foolishness  of  unre-   ' 
strained  wit  in  all    that  entertain  wrong  notions  regarding 
Him.     And  Suhi  is  rendered  '  talking,'  for  they  desire  to  be 
warm-witted,  not  that  they  may  live  well,  but  that  they  may 
talk  high;  thus  they  are  said  to  come  from  Theina  and  Suhi, 
i.  e.  fi'om  *  heat,'  and  *  talkativeness,'  for  herein,  viz.  that  thev 
shew  themselves  as  studious  of  Scripture,  they   teem   with 
words  of  talkativeness,  but  not  with  bowels  of  love.     And 
Naama  is  interpreted  *  comeliness,'  for  because    they  aim 
not  to  be,  but  to  appear  learned,  by  words  of  deep  learning 
ihey  put  on  the  guise  of  well  living,  and  by  their  teeming 
wit  in  talk,  exhibit  in  themselves  a  form  of  *  comeliness,' 
that  by   the  comeliness   of  the  lips  they  may   more   easily 
recommend  evil  counsels,  in  proportion  as  they  commonlv 
hide  from  our  senses*  the  foulness  of  their  lives,     liut  neither 
are  the  very  names  of  the  j)laces  set  down  in  undistinguished 
order  in  the  relation.     For  Thema  is  set  first,  then  Suhi,  and 
next  Naama,   in  that  first  an  excessive  warmtli  of  wit  sets 
them  on  fire,  next  smartness  of  speech  lifts  them   up,  and 

I  al.  u  ther  hide  by  the  running  of  their  thought. 
M 


162  Heretics  kindly  called  friends.  They  know  not  the  Church, 

Job  2,  then,  finally,  dissimulation  presents  them  comely  to  the  eyes 
of  men. 


ALLECt.  t^  7  7  ,  T  •  7  1 

For  they  had  made  an  appointment  together  to  come  ana 
mourn  with  him  and  to  comfort  him, 
xxiii.      46.  Heretics  *  make  an  appointment  together,'  when  they 
hold  in  common  certain  false  opinions  contrary  to  the  Church, 
and  in  the  points  wherein  they  are  at  variance  with  the  truth 
agree   together  in   falsehood.     But   all   they   that   give    us 
instruction  concerning  eternity,  what  else  are  they  doing,  save 
amid  the  tribulations  of  our  pilgrimage  administering  con- 
solation to  us  ?     And  forasmuch  as  heretics  desire  to  impart 
to  Holy  Church  their  own  opinions,  they  come  to  her  as 
though  to  comfort  her.     Nor  is  it  strange  if  they  who  set 
forth  a  figure  of  enemies,  are  called  friends,  when  it  is  said 
Mat.26,to  the  very  traitor.  Friend^  wherefore  art  thou  corned  and  the 
Lukeie  "^^^^  ™^^^  *^^^  ^^  consumed  in  the  fire  of  hell,  is  called  son 
25-        by  Abraham.     For  though  the  wicked  refuse  to  be  amended 
by  us,  yet  it  is  meet  that  we  style  them  friends,  not  of  their 
wickedness,  but  by  virtue  of  our  own  lovingkindness. 

Ver.  1 2.  And  when  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off,  and 
knew  him  not,  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept. 
xxiv.  47.  All  heretics,  in  contemplating  the  deeds  of  Holy 
Church,  lift  up  their  eyes,  in  that  they  are  themselves  down 
below,  and  when  they  look  at  her  works,  the  objects,  which 
they  are  gazing  at,  are  set  high  above  them.  Yet  they  do  not 
know  her  in  her  sorrow,  for  she  herself  covets  to  *  receive 
evil  things'  here,  that  so  being  purified  she  may  attain  to  the 
reward  of  an  eternal  recompence,  and  for  the  most  part  she 
dreads  prosperity,  and  joys  in  the  hard  lessons  of  her  training. 
I  Therefore  heretics,  who  aim  at  present  things  as  something 
great,  know  her  not  amidst  her  wounds.  For  that,  which 
they  see  in  her,  they  recognise  not  in  the  reading  of  their 
own  hearts.  While  she  then  is  gaining  ground  even  by  her 
adversities,  they  themselves  stick  fast  in  their  stupefaction, 
because  they  know  not  by  experiment  the  things  they  see. 

And  they  rent  every  one  his  mantle,  and  sprinkled  dust 

upon  their  heads  toward  heaven. 

XXV.       48.  Like  as  we  take  the  garments  of  the  Church  for  the 

whole  number  of  the   faithful ;    (and  it  is   hence   that  the 

Is.  49,    Prophet  saith,  Thou  shall  clothe  thee  with  them  all  as  with 

18. 


They  rend  those  Ihey  put  on.      Their  thouyJits  like  dust.  163 

an  ornament ;)    so  the  garments  of  heretics  are  all  they  that   Book 
attaching  themselves  with  one  accord  to  them  are  implicated 


in  their  errors.       But  heretics  have    this   point   proper    to 
I  themselves,  that  they  cannot  remain  stationary  for  long  in 
that  stage  wherein  they  leave  the  Church,  but  they  are  day 
by  day  precipitated  into  further  extremes,  and  by  hatching 
worse  opinions  they  split  into  manifold  divisions,  and  are  in 
most  cases  parted  the  wider  from  one  another  by  their  con- 
tention and  disordcrment.     Thus  because  all  those,  whom 
they  attach  to  their  ill  faith',  are  further  torn  by  them  in '  perfi- 
endless  splitting,  it  may  well  be  said  that  the  friends  who  come 
rend  theii*  garments',  but  when  the  garments  are  rent,  the  body  '  rum- 
is  shewn  through;   for  it  oftentimes  happens,  that  when  the^"° 
followers  are  rent  and  torn,  the  wickedness  of  their  imaginings 
is  disclosed,  for  discord  to  lay  open  the  artifices,  which  their 
great  guilt  in  agreeing  together  had  heretofore  kept  close. 

49.  But  now,  they  '  sprinkle  dust  upon  their  heads  to 
heaven.'  What  is  represented  by  c^W5/, saving  earthly  senses; 
what  by  the  head,  saving  that  which  is  our  leading  principle, 
viz.  the  mind  \  What  is  set  forth  by  '  heaven,'  but  the  law 
of  heavenly  revelation }  So,  to  '  sprinkle  dust  upon  the  head 
to  heaven,'  is  to  con'upt  the  mind  with  an  earthly  perception, 
and  to  put  earthly  senses  upon  heavenly  words.  Now  they 
generally  canvas  the  words  of  God  more  than  they  take 
them  in,  and  for  this  reason  they  sprinkle  dust  upon  their 
heads,  forasmuch  as  they  strain  themselves  in  the  precepts 
of  God,  following  an  earthly  sense,  beyond  the  powers  of 
their  mind. 

Ver.  13.   So  they  sat  down  with  him  vpon  the  yroityid  seven 
days  and  seven  nights. 

50.  In  the  day  we  make  out  the  objects  that  we  look  at,  xxvi. 
but  in  the  night,  either  from  the  blindness  we  discern  nothing, 

or  from  the  uncertainty  we  are  bewildered.     Accordingly  by 

*  day'  we  have  *  understanding'  represented,  and  by  *  night,' 

*  ignorance.'  And  by  the  number  seven  the  sum  of  com- 
pleteness is  ex})ressed;  and  hence  in  seven  days,  and  no  more, 
the  whole  of  this  transitory  period  is  accomplished.  How 
then  is  it  that  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  are  said  to  sit  with 
him  seven  days  and  seven  nights,  saving  that  heretics, 
whether  in  those  things  wherein  they  admit  the  true  light, 

.M  2 


164  Sitting  with  Job  is  a  partial  right  belief. 

Job  2,  or  in  those  wherein  they  are  under  the  darkness  of  ignorance, 
— ^^'  as  it  were  feign  to  let  themselves  down  to  Holy  Church  in 
'  her  weakness,  while  under  colour  of  caresses,  they  are  pre- 
paring their  snares  to  catch  her  withal  ?  and  though,  whether 
in  the  things  which  they  do  understand,  or  in  those  which 
they  are  unable  to  understand,  through  the  swelling^  of  a 
bloated  self-elation,  they  account  themselves  great  in  their 
own  eyes,  yet  sometimes  in  semblance  they  bend  to  Holy 
Church,  and  while  they  make  soft  their  words,  they  insinuate 
their  venom.  '  To  sit  upon  the  earth,'  then,  is  to  exhibit 
somewhat  of  the  figure  of  humility,  that  whilst  their  exterior 
appears  humble,  they  may  recommend  the  proud  doctrines 
which  they  teach. 

51.  But  it  is  possible  that  by  *  the  earth'  may  be  also 
represented  the  Incarnation  of  our  Mediator.     And  hence  it 

Exod  ^^  ^^^^  ^^  Israel,  An  altar  of  earth  shall  thou  then  make  unto 
20,  24.  Me.  For  to  make  an  altar  of  earth  for  the  Lord  is  to  trust 
in  the  Incarnation  of  our  Mediator.  For  then  our  gift  is 
received  by  God,  when  our  humility  has  placed  upon  His 
Altar,  i.  e.  upon  the  belief  of  our  Lord's  Incarnation,  all  the 
works  that  it  performs.  Thus  we  place  our  offered  gift  upon 
an  altar  of  earth,  if  our  actions  be  firmly  based  upon  faith 
in  the  Lord's  Incarnation.  But  there  are  some  heretics, 
who  do  not  deny  that  the  Incarnation  of  the  Mediator  took 
place,  but  either  think  otherwise  concerning  His  Divinity 
than  is  true,  or  in  the  character  of  the  Incarnation  itself  are 
at  variance  with  us.  They  then  that  with  us  declare  the  true 
Incarnation  of  our  Redeemer,  as  it  were  sit  alike  with  Job 
upon  the  earth,  and  they  are  described  as  sitting  upon  the 
ground  seven  days  and  seven  nights ;  forasmuch  as  w  hether 
in  this  very  thing  that  they  understand  somewhat  of  the  fulness 
of  truth,  or  in  this  that  they  are  thoroughly  blinded  by  the 
darkness  of  their  foolish  minds,  they  cannot  yet  deny  the 
mystery  of  the  Incarnation.  And  so  to  sit  upon  the  earth 
with  blessed  Job,  is  to  believe  in  the  true  Flesh  of  our 
Redeemer  in  unison  with  Holy  Church. 

52.  Now  sometimes  heretics  WTeak  their  animosity  against 
us  in  punishments  as  well,  sometimes  they  pursue  us  with 
words  only.     Sometimes  they  provoke  us  when   quiet,   but 

h  typo.    There  can  be  no  doubt  that  '  typho'  is  meant. 


Heretics  keep  silence  till  opportunity.  165 

sometimes,  seeing  us  hold  our  peace,  they  remain  quiet,  and  Book 

they  are  friendly  to  the  dumb,  but  hostile  to  them  that  open '— 

their  lips,  and  hence  forasmuch  as  blessed  Job  had  not  as 
yet  said  aught  to  them  in  converse,  it  is  rightly  added.  And 
none  spake  a  word  unto  him.  For  we  find  our  adversaries 
bold  their  peace,  so  long  as  we  forbear  by  preaching  to  beget 
sons  of  the  true  faith.  But  if  we  begin  to  speak  aright,  we 
immediately  feel  the  weight  of  their  reviling  by  their  reply  ; 
forthwith  they  start  into  hostility,  and  burst  out  into  a  voice 
of  bitterness  against  us,  doubtless  because  they  fear  lest  the 
hearts,  which  the  weight  of  folly  presses  down  beneath, 
should  be  drawn  up  on  high  by  the  voice  of  him  that 
speaketh  aright.  Therefore,  as  we  have  said,  because  our 
enemies  love  us  when  mute,  and  hate  us  when  we  speak,  it  is 
rightly  said  in  the  case  of  Job  keeping  silence, 
Aiid  none  spake  a  word  unto  him. 

53.  Yet  sometimes  when  they  see  the  hearts  of  believers  xxvii. 
vacant  through  sloth,  they  do  not  cease  to  scatter  the  seeds 

of  error  by  speech.  But  when  they  see  the  minds  of  the 
good  busied  on  high,  seeking  the  way  back  to  their  country, 
earnestly  sorrowing  over  the  toils  of  this  place  of  exile,  they 
rein  in  their  tongues  with  anxious  heed ;  in  that  they  see 
that  whilst  they  assail  those  sorrowing  hearts  with  fruitless 
words,  they  are  speedily  made  to  hold  their  peace.  And 
hence  whereas  it  is  well  said,  none  spake  a  word  unto  him, 
the  cause  of  their  silence  is  immediately  brought  in  by  im- 
plication, when  it  is  said, 

For  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  great. 

54.  For  when  our  hearts  are  pierced  with  violent  griefxxviii. 
from  the  love  of  God,  the  adversary  fears  to  speak  frowardly 

at  random,  for  he  sees  that  by  provoking  the  fixed  mind,  he 
not  only  has  no  power  to  draw  it  to  untoward  ways,  but  that 
by  its  being  stirred  up,  he  may  chance  to  lose  even  those 
whom  he  held  bound. 

55.  Perhaps  it  may  influence  some  that  we  have  so  made 
out  these  particulars,  that  what  was  well  done  by  the  friends 
should  denote  that  which  was  to  be  ill  done  by  heretics. 
Yet  in  this  way  it  very  often  happens  that  a  circumstance  is 
virtue  in  the  historical  fact,  evil  in  its  meaning  and  import,  just 
as  an  action  is  sometimes  in  the  doing  ground  of  condemn- 


Alleg 


166  Da  old  in  Iris  sin  a  type  of  Christ, 

Job  3,  ation,  but  in  the  writing,  a  prophecy  of  merit,  which  we  shall 
the  sooner  shew,  if  we  shall  bring  forward  one  testimony  of 
Holy  Writ  to  prove  both  points.  For  who,  that  hears  of  it, 
not  only  among  believers  but  of  unbelievers  themselves  also, 
does  not  utterly  loathe  this,  that  David  walking  upon  his 
solar'  lusteth  after  Beershebah  the  wife  of  Uriah  ?  Yet  when 
he  returns  back  from  the  battle,  he  bids  him  go  home  to 

2  Sam.  wash  his  feet.  Whereupon  he  ansvvered  at  once,  The  Ark 
of  the  Lord  ahideth  in  tents,  shall  I  then  take  rest  in  my 
house f  David  received^  him  to  his  own  board,  and  delivers 
to  him  letters,  through  which  he  must  die.  But  of  whom 
does  David  walking  upon  his  solar  bear  a  figure,  saving  of 

Ps.  19,  Him,  concerning  Whom  it  is  written.  He  hath  set  his  taher- 
' tiacle  in  the  sun?  And  what  else  is  it  to  draw  Beersheba  to 
himself,  but  to  join  to  Himself  by  a  spiritual  meaning  the 
Law  of  the  formal  letter,  which  was  united  to  a  carnal 
people  ?  For  Beersheba  is  rendered  '  the  seventh  well,' 
assuredly,  in  that  through  the  knowledge  of  the  Law,  with 
spiritual  grace  infused,  perfect  wisdom  is  ministered  unto  us. 
And  whom  does  Uriah  denote,  but  the  Jewish  people,  whose 
name  is  rendered  by  interpretation,  *  My  light  from  God  ?' 
Now  forasmuch  as  the  Jewish  people  is  raised  high  by 
receiving  the  knowledge  of  the  Law,  it  as  it  were  glories  '  in 
the  light  of  God.'  But  David  took  from  this  Uriah  his  wife, 
and  united  her  to  himself,  surely  in  that  the  strong-handed 
One,  which  is  the  rendering  of  '  David,'  our  Redeemer, 
shewed  Himself  in  the  flesh,  whilst  He  made  known  that  the 
Law  spake  in  a  spiritual  sense  concerning  Himself.  Here- 
by, that  it  was  held  by  them  after  the  letter,  He  proved  it  to 
be  alienated  from  the  Jewish  people,  and  joined  it  to  Himself, 
in  that  He  declared  Himself  to  be  proclaimed  by  it.  Yet 
David  bids  Uriah  '  go  home  to  wash  his  feet,'  in  that  when 
the  Lord  came  Incarnate,  He  bade  the  Jewish  people  turn 
back  to  the  home  of  the  conscience,  and  wipe  off  with  their 
tears  the  defilements  of  their  doings,  that  it  should  under- 

>  Vulg.    solarium,   which   S.    Greg.  1.  xxii.  c.  87.  Corn,  a  Lapide  ad  loc. 

derives  from  '  sol,'  though  perhaps  it  quotes  also  St.  Ambrose,  but  says  the 

is  rather  to  be  deduced  from 'solum,'  allegory  is  of  the  less  perfect  kind.    St. 

like   'terrace'  from  *  terra,'    Still   the  Ephraim,  in  Sam.  t.  i.p.  409.  c.  speaks 

event   seems    typical.     St.    Augustine  of  Uriah  in  a  similar  way.    See  also  p. 

has  a  similar  interpretation,  with  some  443.  A. 
difference  in  particulars,  Contr.  Faust.         •«  Several  Mss.  '  suscipit.' 


Uriah,  in  well  doing,  a  type  of  erring  Jews.  167 

stand  the  precepts  of  the  Law  in  a  spiritual  sense,  and  find-   Book 
ing  the  fount  of  Baptism  after  the  grievous  hardness  of  the_JiI:^ 
commandments,  have  recourse  to  water  after  toil. 

But  Uriah,  who  recalled  to  mind  that  the  ark  of  the  Lord 
was  under  tents,  answered,  that  he  could  not  enter  into  his 
house.  As  if  the  Jewish  people  said,  I  view  the  precepts  of 
God  in  carnal  sacrifices,  and  1  need  not  to  go  back  to  the 
conscience  in  following  a  spiritual  meaning.  For  he,  as  it 
were,  declares  '  the  ark  of  the  Lord  to  be  under  tents,'  who 
views  the  precepts  of  God  as  designed  for  no  other  end  than 
to  shew  forth  a  service  of  carnal  sacrifice.  Yet  when  he 
would  not  return  home,  David  even  bids  him  to  his  table,  in 
that  though  the  Jewish  people  disdain  to  retura  home  into 
the  conscience,  yet  the  Redeemer  at  His  coming  avouches 
the  commandments  to  be  spiritual,  saying.  For  had  ye  be-  John  5, 
lieved  Moses,  ye  would  ^  have  believed  Me :  for  he  wrote  o/fy  , 
Me,  And  thus  the  Jewish  peo])le  holds  that  Law,  which  uw/W 
tells  of  His  Divinity,  whereunto  that  people  deigns  not  to^^^"^^^ 
give  credence.  And  hence  Uriah  is  sent  to  Joab  wnth  letters, 
according  to  which  he  is  to  be  put  to  death,  in  that  the 
Jewish  people  bears  itself  the  Law,  by  whose  convicting 
testimony  it  is  to  die.  For  whereas  holding  fast  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Law  it  strives  hard  to  fulfil  them,  clearly 
it  does  itself  deliver  the  judgment  whereupon  it  is  condemned. 
^Vhat,  then,  in  respect  of  the  fact,  is  more  foul  than  David  ? 
What  can  be  named  purer  than  L^riah  ?  What  again  in 
respect  of  the  mystery  can  be  discovered  holier  than  David, 
what  more  faithless  than  Uriah  ?  Since  the  one  by  guiltiness 
of  life  prophetically  betokens  innocency,  and  the  other  by 
innocency  of  life  ])rophctically  represents  guilt.  Wherefore 
it  is  with  no  inaptitude  that  by  the  things  that  are  well  done 
by  the  friends  of  Job  we  have  represented  to  us  those  to  be 
done  amiss  by  heretics,  in  that  it  is  the  excellency  of  Holy 
Writ  so  to  relate  the  past  as  to  set  forth  the  future ;  in  such 
wise  to  vindicate  the  case  in  the  fact,  that  it  is  against  it  in 
the  mystery;  so  to  condemn  the  things  done,  that  they  are 
commended  to  us  as  fit  to  be  done  in  the  way  of  mystery. 

56.  So  then  as  we  have  completed  the   allegorical   mys-Mop^^L. 
teries,  unravelling  them  piece  by  piece,  let  us  now  proceed 
to  follow  out  the  sense  of  tlie  moral  truth,  hastily  touching 


168   Job's  sorea  like  inioluniary  ill  Ihoughls  from  Satan. 

Job  2,  thereupon,  for  the   mind  hastens  forward  to  make  out  the 

— -   parts  of  greater  difficulty,  and  if  it  is  for  long  wrapped  up  in 

the  plain  parts,  it  is  hindered  from  knocking  as  it  were  fit  at 

those  which  are  closed.     Oftentimes  our  old  enemy,  after  he 

has  brought  down  upon  oiu*  mind  the  conflict  of  temptation, 

retires  for  a  time  from  his  own  contest,  not  to  put  an  end  to 

his  wickedness,  but  that  upon  those  hearts,  which  he  has 

rendered  secure  by  a  respite,  returning  of  a  sudden,  he  may 

make  his  inroad  the  more   easily  and   unexpectedly.     It  is 

hence  that  he  returns  again  to   try   the   blessed  man,  and 

demands  pains  on  the  head  of  him,  whom  nevertheless  the 

Supreme  Mercy  while  keeping  fast  yields  up  to  him,  saying, 

\  er.  6.  Behold^  he  is  in  tJdne  hand:   hut  save  his  life. 

xxix.       57.  For  He  so  forsakes  us  that  He  guards  us,  and  so 

guards  us  that  by  the  permitted  case  of  temptation.  He  shews 

us  our  state  of  weakness.     And  he  immediately  icent  forth 

from  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  by  smiting  him  whom 

He  had  thus  gotten  he  wounded  him  from  the  sole  of  his 

foot  even  to  his  crown.     Thus,  viz.  in  that  when  he  receives 

permission,  beginning  with  the  least,  and  reaching  even  to 

the  greater  points,  he  as  it  were  rends  and  pierces   all   the 

» corpus  body  of  the   mind  ^  with  the  temptations  which  he  brings 

2  ani-     upon  it,  yet  he  does  not  attain  to  the  smiting  of  the  souP,  in 


mam 


that  deep  at  the  bottom  of  all  the  thoughts  of  the  heart,  the 
interior  purpose  of  our  secret  resolution  holds  out,  in  the 
i  midst  of  the  very  wounds  of  gratification  which  it  receives, 
so  that  although  the  enjoyment  may  eat  into  the  mind,  yet 
it  does  not  so  bend  the  set  intent  of  holy  uprightness  as  to 
bring  it  to  the  very  softness  of  consenting.  Yet  it  is  our 
duty  to  cleanse  the  mere  wounds  of  enjoyment  themselves 
by  tlie  sharp  treatment  of  penance,  and  if  aught  that  is 
dissolute  springs  up  in  the  heart  to  refine  it  with  the 
chastening  hand  of  rigorous  severity.  And  hence  it  is  rightly 
added  immediately, 

Ver.  8.  And  he  look  him  a  potsherd  to  scrape  the  humour 
withal. 
XXX.  58.  For  what  do  we  understand  by  the  '  potsherd,'  saving 
forcibleness  of  severity,  and  what  by  the  '  humour,'  save 
laxity  of  unlawful  imaginations  ?  And  thus  we  are  smitten, 
and  *  scrape  off  the   humour  with   a  potsherd,'   when  after 


Ill  thouyhts  to  he  cleansed  off  by  self-chastisement.  169 

the  defilements  of  unlawful  thoughts,  we  cleanse  ourselves  Book 

III 
by  a  sharp  judgment.     By  the  potsherd  too  we  may  under- 


stand the  frailness  of  mortality.  And  then  to  *  scrape  the 
humour  with  a  potsherd,'  is  to  ponder  on  the  course  and 
frailty  of  our  mortal  state,  and  to  wipe  off  the  rottenness  of 
a  wi'etched  self-gratification.  For  when  a  man  bethinks 
himself  how  soon  the  flesh  returns  to  dust,  he  readily 
gets  the  better  of  that  which  originating  in  the  flesh 
foully  assails  him  in  the  interior.  So,  when  bad  thoughts 
arising  from  temptation  flow  into  the  mind,  it  is  as  if  humour 
kept  running  from  a  wound.  But  the  humour  is  soon 
cleansed  away,  if  the  frailty  of  our  nature  be  taken  up  in  the 
thought,  like  a  potsherd  in  the  hand. 

59.    For    neither    are    these    suggestions    to    be    lightly 
esteemed,  which  though  they  may  not  draw  us  on  so  far  as 
to  the  act,  yet  work  in  the  mind  in  an  unlawful  way.     It  is 
hence  that  our  Redeemer  was  come,  as  it  were,  '  to  scrape 
the  humour  from  our  wounds,'  when  He  said,  Ye  have  heard  Matt.  5, 
that  it  was  said  by  them  of  old  time,  Thou  shall  not  commit     ' 
adultery.     But  I  say  unto  you,  that  whosoever  looketh  on  a 
woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her 
already  in  his  heart.     '  The  humour,'  therefore,  *  is  wiped 
ofi','  when  sin  is  not  only  severed  from  the  deed,  but  also 
from  the  thought.     It  is  hence  that  Jerubbaal  saw^  the  Angel  judg.  e, 
when   he   was   winnowing    com   from    the    chaff,    at   whose  ^^*  ^'''* 
bidding  he  forthwith   dressed  a  kid  and  set  it  upon  a  rock, 
and  poured  over  it  the  broth  of  the  flesh,  which  the  Angel 
touched  with  a  rod,  and  thereupon  fire  coming  out  of  the 
rock  consumed  it.     For  what  else  is  it  to  beat  corn  with  a 
rod,  but  to  separate  the  grains  of  virtues  from  the  chaff  of 
vices,  with  an  upright  judgment?    But  to  those  that  are  thus 
employed   the  Angel  presents  himself,  in  that  the  Lord  is 
more  ready  to  communicate  interior  truths  in  proportion  as 
men   are    more    earnest   in  ridding   themselves   of  external 
things.      And   he    orders    a   kid    to    be    killed,   i.   e.    every 
appetite  of  the  flesh  to  be  sacrificed,  and  the  flesh  to  be  set 
upon  a  rock,  and  the   broth  thereof  to  be  poured  upon  it. 
Whom  else  does  the  '  rock'  represent,  saving  Him,  of  Whom 
it  is  said  by  Paul,  And  that  rock  was  Christ  /    We  *  set  flesh  i  Cor. 
then  upon  the  rock,'  when  in  imitation  of  Christ  we  crucify  ^^' **' 


170       Care  of  thoughts  to  be  practised  with  humility. 

Job  2,  our  body.     He  too  pours  the  juice  of  the  flesh  over  it,  who, 

— — '- —  in  following  the  conversation  of  Christ,  empties  himself  even 
of  the  mere  thoughts  of  the  flesh  themselves.  For  '  the 
broth'  of  the  dissolved  flesh  is  in  a  manner  '  poured  upon  the 
rock,'  when  the  mind  is  emptied  of  the  flow  of  carnal 
thoughts  too.  Yet  the  Angel  directly  touches  it  with  a  rod, 
in  that  the  might  of  God's  succour  nev^er  leaves  our  striving 
forsaken.  And  fire  issues  from  the  rock,  and  consumes  the 
broth  and  the  flesh,  in  that  the  Spirit,  breathed  upon  us  by 
the  Redeemer,  lights  up  the  heart  with  so  fierce  a  flame  of 
compunction,  that  it  consumes  every  thing  in  it  that  is 
unlawful  either  in  deed  or  in  thought.  And  therefore  it  is 
the  same  thing  here  '  to  scrape  the  humour  with  a  potsherd,' 
that  it  is  there  to  '  pour  the  broth  upon  the  rock.'  For  the 
perfect  mind  is  ever  eagerly  on  the  watch,  not  only  that  it 
may  refuse  to  do  bad  acts,  but  that  it  may  even  wipe  off"  all 
that  is  become  foul  and  soft  in  it,  in  the  workings  of  imagin- 
ation. But  it  often  happens  that  war  springs  up  from  the 
very  victory,  so  that  when  the  impure  thought  is  vanquished, 
the  mind  of  the  victor  is  struck  by  self-elation.  Therefore 
it  follows  that  the  mind  must  be  no  otherwise  elevated  in 
purity,  than  that  it  should  be  heedfully  brought  under  in 
humility.  And  hence,  whereas  it  was  said  of  the  holy  man. 
And  he  took  a  potsherd,  and  scraped  the  humour  withal, 
it  is  forthwith  fitly  added. 

And  he  sat  down  upon  a  dunghill. 

xxxi.  60.  For  *  to  sit  down  upon  a  dunghill'  is  for  a  man  to 
entertain  mean  and  abject  notions  of  himself  For  us  to  '  sit 
upon  a  dunghill,'  is  to  carry  back  the  eye  of  the  mind,  in  a 
spirit  of  repentance,  to  those  things  which  we  have  unlaw- 
fully committed,  that  when  we  see  the  dung  of  our  sins 
before  our  eyes,  we  may  bend  low  all  that  rises  up  in  the 
mind  of  pride.  He  sits  upon  a  dunghill,  who  regards  his 
own  weakness  with  earnest  attention,  and  never  lifts  himself 
up  for  those  good  qualities,  which  he  has  received  through 
grace.     Did  not  Abraham  sit  by  himself  upon  a  dunghill, 

Gen.  18,  when  he  said.  Behold,  now,  I  have  taken  upon  me  to  speak 
unto  the  Lord,  which  am  hut  dust  and  ashes  ?  For  it  is 
plain  to  see  in  what  place  he  had  sot  himself,  who,  at  the 
very  moment  that  he  was  speaking  with  God,  reckoned  him- 


Humility  aided  by  close  examination.  171 

self  to  be  *  dust  and  ashes.'     If  he  then  thus  despises  him-  Book 

•        III 
self  who  is  raised  to  the  honour  of  converse  with  the  Deity 


even,  we  should  consider  with  earnest  thoughts  of  heart 
with  what  woes  they  are  destined  to  be  stricken,  who,  while 
they  never  advance  a  step  towards  the  highest  things,  are 
yet  lifted  up  on  the  score  of  the  least  and  lowest  attainments. 
For  there  are  some,  who,  when  they  do  but  little  things, 
think  great  things  of  themselves.  They  lift  their  minds  on 
high,  and  account  themselves  to  excel  other  men  in  the 
deserts  of  virtue.  For  surely,  these  inwardly  quit  the  dung- 
bill  of  humility  within  themselves,  and  scale  the  heights  of 
pride ;  herein  following  the  steps  of  him,  the  first  that 
elevated  himself  in  his  own  eyes,  and  in  elevating  brought 
himself  to  the  ground,  following  the  steps  of  him,  who  was 
not  content  with  that  dignity  of  a  created  being,  which  he 
had  received,  saying,  /  will  ascend  intoJteaven;  I  will  exalt  I'^- 1^> 
my  throne  above  the  stars  of  God.  And  it  is  hence  that  she, 
which  is  united  to  him  by  an  evil  alliance,  even  Babylon, 
i.e.  *  the  confused  multitude  of  sinners,'  says,  /  am,  andls.47y 
none  else  beside  me,  I  shall  ?iot  sit  as  a  widow.  Wliosoever 
then  swells  within  him,  has  set  himself  on  high  by  himself. 
Yet  doth  he  sink  himself  so  much  the  deeper  below,  in 
proportion  as  he  scorns  to  think  the  lowest  things  of  himself 
according  to  the  truth.  There  are  some  too  that  labour  not 
to  do  aught  that  is  virtuous,  yet  when  they  see  others 
commit  sin,  they  fancy  themselves  righteous  by  comparison 
with  them.  For  all  hearts  are  not  wounded  by  the  same  or 
a  similar  offence.  For  this  one  is  entrapped  by  pride,  while 
that  perchance  is  overthrown  by  anger,  and  avarice  is  the 
sting  of  one,  while  luxury  fires  another.  And  it  very  often 
chances  that  he,  who  is  brought  down  by  pride,  sees  how 
another  is  inflamed  with  anger ;  and  because  auger  does  not 
speedily  influence  himself,  he  now  reckons  that  he  is  better 
than  his  passionate  neighbour,  and  is  as  it  were  lifted  up  on 
the  score  of  his  righteousness  in  his  own  eyes,  in  that  he 
forgets  to  take  account  of  the  fault,  by  which  he  is  more 
grievously  enchained  And  it  very  often  happens  that  he 
who  is  mangled  by  avarice,  beholds  another  plunged  in  the 
whirlpool  of  luxury,  and  because;  he  sees  himself  to  be  a 
stranger  to  carnal  ])ollution,  he  never  heeds  by  what  defile- 


17*2     Affliction  does  not  always  keep  out  bad  thouyhts. 

Job  2,  ments  of  the  spiritual  life  he  is  himself  inwardly  polluted ; 
and  while  he  considers  well  the  evil  in  another,  which  he  is 


himself  without,  he  forgets  to  take  account  in  his  own  case 
of  that  which  he  has ;  and  so  it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  when 
the  mind  to  be  pronounced  upon  goes  off  to  the  cases  of 
other  men,  it  is  deprived  of  the  light  of  its  own  judgment, 
and  so  much  the  more  cruelly  vaunts  itself  against  others' 
failings,  in  proportion  as  it  is  from  negligence  in  ignorance 
of  its  own. 

61.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  that  really  desire  to  rise 
to  the  heights  of  virtue,  whenever  they  hear  of  the  faults  of 
others,  immediately  recall  the  mind  to  their  own;  and  the 
more  they  really  bewail  these  last,  so  much  the  more  rightly  do 
they  pronounce  judgment  on  those  others.  Therefore,  foras- 
much as  every  elect  person  restrains  himself  in  the  con- 
sideration of  his  own  frailty,  it  may  be  well  said  that  the 
holy  man  in  his  sorrow  sits  down  upon  a  dunghill.  For  he 
that  really  humbles  himself  as  he  goes  on  his  way,  marks 
with  the  eye  of  continued  observation  all  the  filth  of  sin 
wherewith  he  is  beset.  But  we  must  know  that  it  is  in  pros- 
perity that  the  mind  is  oftenest  touched  with  urgent  tempt- 
ations, yet  that  it  sometimes  happens  that  we  at  the  same 
time  undergo  crosses  without,  and  are  wearied  with  the 
urgency  of  temptation  within,  so  that  both  the  scourge 
tortures  the  flesh,  and  yet  suggestion  of  the  flesh  pours  in  upon 
the  mind.  And  hence  it  is  well,  that  after  the  many  wounds 
that  blessed  Job  received,  we  have  yet  further  the  words  of 
his  illadvising  wife  subjoined  also,  who  says, 

Ver.  9.  Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  integrity?  Curse  God, 
and  die. 

xxxii.  6--  For  the  illadvising  wife  is  the  carnal  thought  goading 
the  mind,  since  it  often  happens,  as  has  been  said  above, 
that  we  are  both  harrassed  with  strokes  without,  and  wearied 
with  carnal  promptings  within.    For  it  is  hence  that  Jeremiah 

Lam.  1  bewails,  saying,  Abroad  the  sword  bereaveth ;  at  home  there 

2®*  is  as  death.  Since  *  the  sword  bereaveth,'  when  vengeance 
outwardly  smites  and  pierces  us,  and  *  at  home  there  is  as 
death,'  in  that  indeed  he  both  undergoes  the  lash,  and  yet 
the  conscience  is  not  clear  of  the  stains  of  temptation  within. 

P8.36,5.  Hence  David  says,  Let  them  be  a^  chaff  before  the  wind, 


Tlte  Elect  treat  ill  suggestions  as  Job  his  wife.        17:3 

and  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  persecnte  them.     For  he  that  is   Book 

caught  by  the  blast  of  temptation  in  the  heart,  is  lifted  up '— 

like  dust  before  the  face  of  the  wind;  and  when  in  the  midst 
of  these  strokes  the  rigour  of  God  smites  them,  what  else  is 
it,  but  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  that  persecutes  them  ? 

63.  But  these  trials  are  carried  on  in  the  case  of  the 
reprobate  in  one  way,  and  of  the  Elect  in  another.  The 
hearts  of  the  first  sort  are  so  tempted  that  they  yield  consent, 
and  those  of  the  last  undergo  temptations  indeed,  but  offer 
resistance.  The  mind  of  the  one  is  taken  captive  with  a 
feeling  of  delight,  and  if  at  the  moment  that  which  is 
prompted  amiss  is  displeasing,  yet  afterwards  by  deliberation 
it  gives  pleasure.  But  these  so  receive  the  darts  of  tempta- 
tion, that  they  wear}'  themselves  in  unceasing  resistance, 
and  if  at  any  time  the  mind  under  temptation  is  hurried 
away  to  entertain  a  feeling  of  delight,  yet  they  quickly  blush 
at  the  very  circumstance  of  their  delight  stealing  upon  them, 
and  blame  with  unsparing  censure  all  that  they  detect 
springing  u]^  in  themselves  of  a  carnal  nature.  Hence  it  is 
rightly  added  immediately, 

Ver.   10.    Thou   speakest   as    one   of   the  foolish    women 
speaketh.      M'hat  ?    shall  ire  receive  good  at   the  hand  of 
God,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil  ^ 

64.  For  it  is  meet  that  the  holy  mind  restrain  by  spiritual  xxxiii 
correction  whatever  of  a  carnal  nature  within  it  utters  re- 
bellious muttering,  that  the  flesh  whether  by  speaking  severe 
things  may  not  draw  it  into  impatience,  nor  yet  by  speaking 
smooth  ones  melt  it  to  the  looseness  of  lust.  Therefore  let 
manly  censure,  reproving  the  dictates  of  unlawful  imagin- 
ations, hold  hard  the  dissolute  softness  of  what  is  base 
in  us,  by  saying,  Thou  speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish 
women  speaketh.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  let  the  consider- 
atioD  of  the  gifts  repress  the  discontent  of  bitter  thought, 
saying,  Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall 
we  not  receive  evil  f  And  whoever  desires  to  get  the  mastery 
of  his  vices,  and  goes  forward  to  the  eternal  heights  of 
inward  recompense  '  with  the  steps  of  a  true  purpose,  the  'retribu- 
morc  he  sees  himself  to  be  on  every  hand  beset  with  the^'°"" 
war  of  the  vices,  the  more  resolutely  he  arrays  himself  with 
the  armour  of  the  virtues,  and  fears  the   darts  the  less,  in 


174       Disguised  temptations  come  like  Job's  friends. 

Job  2,  proportion   as   he   defends  his   breast  bravely  against  their 
T—^ — -  assault. 

MoilAL.  ^r  '  /»  1  IT. 

65.  Yet  it  very  often  happens,  that  whilst  we  are  striving 
to  stay  ourselves  in  this  fight  of  temptation  by  exalted 
virtues,  certain  vices  cloak  themselves  to  our  eyes  under  the 
garb  of  virtues,  and  come  to  us  as  it  were  with  a  smooth  face, 
but  how  adverse  to  us  they  are  we  perceive  upon  examination. 
And  hence  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  as  it  were  come  together 
for  the  purpose  of  giving  comfort,  but  they  burst  out  into 
reviling,  in  that  vices  that  plot  our  ruin  assume  the  look  of 
virtues,  but  strike  us  with  hostile  assault.  For  often  im- 
moderate anger  desires  to  appear  justice,  and  often  dissolute 
remissness,  mercy;  often  fear  without  precaution  would 
seem  humility,  often  unbridled  pride,  liberty.  Thus  the 
friends  come  to  give  consolation,  but  fall  off  into  words  of 
reproach,  in  that  vices,  cloaked  under  the  guise  of  virtues,  set 
out  indeed  with  a  smooth  outside,  but  confound  us  by  a 
bitter  hostility.     And  it  is  rightly  said, 

Ver.  11.  For  they  had  made  an  appointment  together  to 
come  to  mourn  with  him  and  to  comfort  him. 
xxxiv.  QQ.  For  vices  make  an  appointment  together  under  the 
cloak  of  virtues;  in  that  there  are  certain  ones,  which  are 
banded  together  against  us  by  a  kind  of  agreement,  such  as 
pride  and  anger,  remissness  and  fear.  For  anger  is  neigh- 
I  bour  to  pride,  and  remissness  to  cowardice.  Those  then 
come  together  by  agreement,  which  are  allied  to  one  another 
in  opposition  to  us,  by  a  kind  of  kinship  in  iniquity ;  but  if 
we  acknowledge  the  toilsomeness  of  our  captivity,  if  we  grieve 
in  our  inmost  soul  from  love  of  our  eternal  home,  the  sins  that 
steal  upon  the  inopportunely  joyful,  will  not  be  able  to  prevail 
against  the  opportunely  sad.     Hence  it  is  well  added, 

Ver.  12.  And  when  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off,  and 
knew  him  not,  they  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept. 
xxxv.  67.  For  the  vices  do  not  know  us  in  our  afflictions,  in  that 
so  soon  as  they  have  knocked  at  the  dejected  heart,  being 
reproved  they  start  back,  and  they,  which  as  it  were  knew 
us  in  our  joy,  because  they  made  their  way  in,  cannot  know 
us  in  our  sadness,  in  that  they  break  their  edge  on  our 
very  rigidity  itself.  But  our  old  enemy,  the  more  he  sees 
that  he  is  himself  caught  out  in  them,  and  that  with  a  good 


Spiriliial  compunction  detects  their  falsehood.        175 

courage,    cloaks    them    with   so   much    the   clee])er   disguise    Book 
under  the  image  of  virtues  ;   and  hence  it  is  added, 


They  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  wept ;  and  they  rent  every 
one  his  mantle,  and  sprinkled  dust  upon  their  heads  toward 
heaven. 

Ver.  \Z.  So  they  sat  down  with  him  upon  the  ground  seven 
days  and  seven  nights. 

68.  For  by  the  weeping  pity  is  betokened,  discretion  byxxxvi. 
the  cutting  of  the  garments,  the  affecting'  of  good  works  by '  al. 

*  effect" 

the  dust  upon  the  head,  humility  by  the  sitting.     For  some-  jng.' 
times  the  enemy  in  plotting  against  us  feigns  somewhat  that 
is  full  of  pity,  that  he  may  bring  us  down  to  an  end  of  cruelty. 
As  is  the  case,  when  he  prevents  a  fault  being  corrected  by 
chastisement,  that  that,  which  is  not  suppressed  in  this  life, 
may  be  stricken  with  the  fire  of  hell.     Sometimes  he  presents 
the  form  of  discretion  to  the  eyes,  and  draws  us  on  to  snares 
of  indiscretion,  which  happens,  when  at  his  instigation  wc 
as  it  were  from  prudence  allow  ourselves  too  much  nourish- 
ment on  account  of  our  weakness,  while  we  are  imprudently 
raising  against  ourselves  assaults  of  the  flesh.     Sometimes  he 
counterfeits  the  affecting  of  good  works,  yet  hereby  entails 
upon  us  restlessness  in  labours,  as  it  happens,  when  a  man 
cannot  remain  quiet,  and,  as  it  were,  fears  to  be  judged  for 
idleness.     Sometimes  he  exhibits  the  form  of  humility,  that 
he  may  steal  away  our  affecting  of  the  useful,  as  is  the  case 
when  he  declares  to  some  that  they  are  weaker  and  more 
useless  than  indeed  they  are,  that  whereas  they  look  upon  them- 
selves as  too  unworthy,  they  may  fear  to  administer  the  things 
wherein  they  might  be  able  to  benefit  their  neighbours. 

69.  But  these  vices  which  the  old  enemy  hides  under  the 
semblance  of  virtues,  are  very  minutely  examined  by  the  hand 
of  compunction.  For  he  that  really  grieves  within,  resolutely 
foredeterniines  what  things  are  to  be  done  outwardly,  and 
what  are  not.  For  if  the  virtue  of  compunction  moves  us  in 
our  inward  parts,  all  the  clamouring  of  evil  dictates  is  made 
mute  ;  and  hence  it  follows. 

And  none  spake  a  word  unto  him;  for  they  satv  that  his 
griff  was  very  great. 

70.  For  if  the  heart  feels  true  sorrow,  the  vices  have  no  xxxvii. 
tongue  against    it.       And  when    the    life    of  uprightness  is 


176       Thoughts  that  tempt  may  yet  he  turned  to  good. 

Job  2,  sought  witli  an  entire  aim,  the  fruitless  prompting  of  evil 
j^l^^is  closed  up.      But  oftentimes   if  we  brace  ourselves  with 
strong   energy  against   the    incitements   of  evil   habits,  we 
turn  even  those  very  evil  habits  to  the  account  of  virtue. 
For  some  are  possessed  by  anger,  but  while  they  submit 
this  to  reason,  they  convert  it  into  service  rendered  to  holy 
zeal.    Some  are  lifted  up  by  pride.    But  whilst  they  bow  down 
the  mind  to  the  fear  of  God,  they  change  this  into  the  fi-ee 
tone  of  unrestrained  authority  in  defence  of  justice.    Strength 
of  the  flesh  is  a  snare  to  some;  but  whilst  they  bring  under 
the  body   by   practising    works    of  mercy,   from    the    same 
quarter,  whence  they  were  exposed  to  the  goading  of  wicked- 
ness, they  purchase  the  gains  of  pitifulness.     And  hence  it 
is  well  that  this  blessed  Job,  after  a  multitude  of  conflicts, 
sacrifices  a  victim  for  his  friends.     For  those  whom  he  has 
for  long  borne  as  enemies  by  their  strife,  he  one  day  makes 
fellow-countrymen  by  his  sacrifice,  in  that  whilst  we  turn  all 
evil  thoughts  into  virtues,  bringing  them  into  subjection,  by 
the  offering  of  the  intention,  we  as  it  were  change  the  hostile 
aims  of  temptation  into  friendly  dispositions. 

Let  it  suffice  for  us  to  have  gone  through  these  things 
in  three  volumes  in  a  threefold  method.  For  in  the  very 
beginning  of  this  work  we  set  firm  the  root  of  the  tongue, 
as  a  provision  against  the  bulk  of  the  tree  that  should  spring 
up,  that  we  might  afterwards  produce  the  boughs  of  exposi- 
tion according  as  the  several  places  require. 


BOOK    IV. 

Wherein  Gregory,  having  in  the  Preface  set  forth  in  few  words  that  the 
letter  of  Scripture  is  at  times  at  variance  with  itself,  and  that  the  im- 
precations of  Job,  as  of  Jeremiah  and  David,  cannot  he  understood 
without  absurdity  according  to  the  sound  which  they  convey,  explains 
the  words  of  Job  in  historical,  mystical,  and  moral  sense,  from  the 
eommenc€ment  of  the  third  chapter  to  the  twentieth  verse  of  the  same. 


THE  PREFACE. 

He  who  looks  to  the  text  and  does  not  acquaint  himself 
with  the  sense  of  the  holy  Word,  is  not  so  much  furnishing 
himself  with  instruction  as  bewildering  himself  in  uncertainty, 
in  that  the  literal  words  sometimes  contradict  themselves ; 
!  but  whilst  by  their  oppositeness  they  stand  at  variance  with 
themselves,  they  direct  the  reader  to  a  truth  that  is  to  be 
understood.     Thus,  how  is  it  that  Solomon  says.  There  isT.cc.  2, 

24 

nothing  better  for  a  man  than  that  he  should  eat  and  drink; 
and  adds  not  long  after,  It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  Tec.  7, 
mourning  than  to  the  house  of  feasting?     Wherefore  did  he   * 
prefer  mourning   to   feasting,   who   had   before   commended 
eating  and  drinking  ?  for  if  by  preference  it  be  good  *  to  eat 
and  drink,'  undoubtedly  it  should  be  a  much   better  thing 
to   hasten    to    the    house    of  mirth    than    to    the    house    of 
mouniing.     Hence  it  is  that  he  says  again,  Rejoice,  O  young  EccAi, 
man,  in  thy  youth;    yet  adds  a  little  after,yor  youth  and^'^^  j^ 
pleasure  are  vanity.     WTiat  does  this  mean,  that  he  should  Vulg. 
either  first  enjoin  practices  that  are  reprehensible,  or  after- 
wards reprehend  practices  that  he  has  enjoined,  but  that  by 
the  literal  words  themselves  he  implies  that  he,  who  finds 
difficulty  in  the  outward  form,  should  consider  the  truth  to  be 
understood,  which  same  import  of  truth,  while  it  is  sought 
with    humility   of  heart,    is   penetrated    by   continuance    in 
reading.     For  as   we  see   the   face   of  strange  persons,  and 
know  nothing  of  their   hearts,  but  if  we  are  joined  to  them 

N 


178  Some  things  in  Holy  Writ  cannot  he  taken  literally. 

Pref.  in  familiar  communication,  by  frequency  of  conversation  we 
/  even  trace  their  very  thoughts;  so  when  in  Holy  Writ  the 
,  historical  narration  alone  is  regarded,  nothing  more  than  the 
face  is  seen.     But  if  we  unite  ourselves  to  it  with  frequent 
assiduity,  then  indeed  we  penetrate  its  meaning,  as  if  by  the 
effect  of  a  familiar  intercourse.     For  whilst  we  gather  various 
truths  from  various  parts,  we  easily  see  in  the  words  thereof 
that  what  they  import  is  one  thing,  what  they  sound  hke  is 
another.     But  every  one  proves  a  stranger  to  the  knowledge 
1   of  it,  in  proportion  as  he  is  tied  down  to  its  mere  outside. 
ii.         See  here,  for  instance,  in  that  blessed  Job  is  described  as 
3       '    having    cursed    his    day,    and    said.   Let    the    day   perish 
wherein  I  was  horn,  and  the  night  in  which  it  was  said, 
TJiere  is  a  man  child  conceived;  if  we  look  no  further  than 
the  surface,  what  can  we  find  more  reprehensible  than  these 
words  ?    But  who  does  not  know  that  the  day,  in  which  he 
^  was  born,  could  not  at  that  time  be  in  existence,  for  it  is  the 
\  condition    of  time   to   have   no    stay   of  continuance.     For 
f  whereas  by  way  of  the  future  it  is  ever  tending  to  be,  so 
in  going  out  by   the  past,  it  is  ever  hastening  not  to  be. 
Wherefore    then  should  one  so  great  curse  that,  which   he 
is    not    ignorant    hath    no    existence }      But    perchance    it 
may   be   said,   that   the   magnitude    of   his   virtue   is    seen 
from   hence,  that   he,   being   disturbed   by   tribulation,  im- 
precates a  curse  upon  that,  which  it  is  evident  has  no  exist- 
ence at  all.     But  this  notion  is  set  aside  the  moment  the 
reasonableness  of  the   thing  is  regarded,  for  if  the  object 
existed,  which  he  cursed,  it  was  a  mischievous  curse ;  but 
if  it  had  no  being,  it  was  an  idle  one :  but  whoso  is  filled 
Mat.  12,  with  His  Spirit,  Who  declareth,  that  every  idle  word  that 

Oft 

men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the 
Day  of  Judgment;  fears  to  be  guilty  of  what  is  idle, 
even  as  of  what  is  mischievous.  To  this  sentence  it  is 
further  added,  Let  that  day  he  turned  into  darkness;  let  not 
God  regard  it  from  ahove,  neither  let  the  light  shine  iqjon 
it.  Let  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death  stain  it;  let  a 
cloud  dwell  upon  it;  let  it  he  enfolded  in  hitterness.  As  for 
that  night,  let  darkness  seize  upon  it.  Lo,  let  that  night  he 
solitary,  let  no  joyful  voice  come  therein :  let  it  look  for  light, 
and  have  none;  neither  let  it  see  the  datcning  of  the  day. 


JoWs  curse,  and  wish,  if  literal,  were  impious  or  utimeaning.  179 
How  is  it  that  that  day,  which  he  knows  to  have  gone  by  Book 

•  .  "  TV 

With  the  flight  of  time,  is  said  *  to  be  turned  into  darkness  ?' '— 

And  whereas  it  is  plain  that  it  has  no  existence,  wherefore  is 
it  wished  for  that  *  the  shadow  of  death  might  stain  it  ?'  or 
what  cloud  dwells  upon  it,  what  envelopement  of  bitterness 
enfolds  it?  or  what  darkness  seizes  upon  that  night,  which 
no  stay  holds  in  being  ?  Or  how  is  it  desired  that  that  may 
be  solitary,  which  in  passing  away  had  already  become 
nought?  Or  how  does  that  look  for  the  light,  which  both 
lacks  perception,  and  doth  not  continue  in  any  stay  of  its 
own  self?    To  these  words  he  yet  further  adds. 

Why  died  I  not  from  the  womb  ?    why  did  I  not  give  up  Job  3, 
the  ghost  when  I  came  out  of  the  belly?    Why  did  the  knees     ~~ 
prevent  me?  or  uhy  the  breasts  that  1  should  suck ?    For 
now  1  should  have  lain  still  and  have  been  quiet,  I  should 
have  slept,  and  been  at  rest. 

If  he  had  died  at  once  from  the  womb,  would  he  have  got     ^*^- 
by  this  very  destruction  a  title  to  a  reward  ?    Do  abortive 
children   enjoy  eternal    rest  ?    For   every   man    that   is    not 
absolved  by  the  water  of  regeneration,  is  tied  and  bound  by 
the  guilt  of  the  original  bond.     But  that  which  the  water  of 
Baptism  avails  for  with  us,  this  either  faith  alone  did  of  old  see 
in  behalf  of  infants,  or,  for  those  of  riper  years,  the  virtue  of  ,5,  (j^. 
sacrifice,  or,  for  all  that  came  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  the 
mystery  of  circumcision.     For   that  every  living  being  is 
I  conceived   in    the    guilt   of    our    first    parent    the    Prophet 
witnesses,  saying.  And  in  sin  hath  my  mother  conceived  vie.  P.*.  5], 
And  that  he  who  is  not  washed  in  the  water  of  salvation,  °* 
I    does  not  lose  the  punishment  of  original  sin.  Truth  plainly 
J    declares  by  Itself  in  these  words,  Except  a  man  be  born  o/'john  3, 
water  and  of  the  Spirit,  lie  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of^' 
God.     How  is  it  then,  that  he  wishes  that  he  had  *  died  in 
the  womb,'  and  that  he  believes  that  he  might  have  had 
rest  by  the  boon  of  that  death,  whereas  it  is  clear  that  *  the 
rest  of  life  could  in  no  wise  be  for  him,  if  the  Sacraments  of 
Divine  knowledge '  had  in  no  wise  set  him  free  from  the  guilt 

*  St.Grepory,b.  ix.  c.20,21.  speaks  *  Now'  (§.  34.)  '  the   Mediator,  «    •  j 

of  some  suftering  eternal  torii)eDt«(  with-  manifested,  would  have  the  Sacrau.^   a 

out  actual  sin.    St.  Aug.  ad  Dardanum,  of  our  Regeneration  manifest.     But  for 

Ep.  187.  pays  that  an  actual  incorpora-  the  righteous  of  old  there  was  somewhat 

tion    into    the   kingdom  of  God,  after  hidden,  while  still  they  too  were  sa^ed 

birtbjWas always necessar}' to salv:ition.  by  the  same   faith,  which   was  to  be 

N  2 


180       Death  in  original  sin  could  not  be  wished  /or. 


Pref. 

Job  3, 

14. 

1  Vulg. 

solitu- 

dines 


Wisd. 
6,  6. 

Luke 
12,  48. 


of  original  sin  t  He  yet  further  adds  with  whom  he  might 
hare  rested,  saying,  With  kings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth 
uhich  built  desolate^  places  for  themselves.  Who  does  not 
know  that  the  kings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth  are  herein 
far  removed  from  '  solitude,'  that  they  are  close  pressed  with 
innumerable  throngs  of  followers?  and  with  what  difficulty  do 
they  advance  to  rest,  who  are  bound  in  with  the  tightened 
knots  of  such  multifarious  concerns  !  As  Scripture  witnesses, 
where  it  savs,  But  mighty  men  shall  be  mightily  tormented. 
Hence  Truth  utters  these  words  in  the  Gospel ;  unto  whom- 
soever much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required.  He 
implies  besides,  whom  he  would  have  had  as  fellows  in  that 


made  known  in  its  own  time.  For  we 
dare  not  prefer  the  Taelievers  of  our 
own  day  to  che  friends  of  G-od,  through 
whom  those  things  were  prophesied  to 
us,  when  God  so  calls  Himself  the  God 
of  Ahrahani^  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and 
the  God  of  Jacob,  as  to  say  that  this  is 
His  name  for  ever.  But  if  circumcision 
is  believed  to  have  been  to  the  ancient 
Saints  instead  of  Baptism,  what  is  to  be 
said  of  those  who  pleased  God  before 
this  was  enioined,  not  however  without 
faith  P'  &c.  De  C/D.xvi.27.  He  proves 
original  sin  by  Gen.  xvii.  14.  where 
LXX  add  the  eighth  day.  Vasq.  also 
cites  De  Pec.  Or.'Contr.  Pel.  et  Ccel.  ii. 
SO.Cont.  Jul.iii.  18.Dt  Nupt.  etConc. 
ii.  10.  (which  last  St.  Greg,  seems  to 
have  had  in  mind  here,  as  there  is  the 
like  mention  of  Faith,  which  St.  A.  says 
'  saved  those  ofoldj^pifsiUoscum  major i- 
bus,  thus  including  infants.)  also  S.  Fulg. 
de  Inc.  c.  15.  The  Fathers  in  general 
deny  this  power  to  circumcision.  See 
Vasquez  in  1,  2^36.  Disp.  130.  c.  2. 
who  cites  Tertul.  adv.  Jud.  2  and  3. 
S.  Cvpr.  contr.  Jud.  i.  8.  (Tr.  p.  28.) 
S.  Ambr.  Ep.  72,  De  Abr.  1.  i.  e.  4, 
De  Sacr.  i.  4  and  5,  De  iis  qui  initi- 
antur  (De  Myst.)  c.  8,  and  9.  (in  c. 
iv.  ad  Rom.  is  not  genuine.)  S.  Jer.  on 
Gal.  (iii,  5.  and  v,  5.)  S.  Just.  Mart.  D. 
cum  Tryph.  c.  23.  S.  Iren.  iv.  30.  Orig. 
cent.  Cels.  1.  ii.  (v.  28  ?)  in  Gen.  Hom. 
iii.  (see  also  on  Ep.  to  Rom.  1.  iv.) 
Euseb.  Dem.  i.  10.  Hist.  i.  1.  (c.  2. 
§.  29?)  S.  Ath.  on  Matt.  xi.  22.  (He 
means  De  Sab.  et  Circ.  §.  6.  Ben.  t.  2. 
p.  59.  where  he  says  it  was  that  men 
might  not  be  under  the  curse  Dust  thou 
art,  <fec.  but  adds  that  it  was  done  '  in 
part  and  as  in  a  shadow.')  S.  Epiph.  c. 
Hser.  viii.  (I.  i.  c.  6.  he  calls  circumcision 


"  carnal,'  and  opposes  it  to  Baptism 
which  cuts  us  off  from  sin.)  S.  Chrys. 
Horn  xxvii.  in  Gen.  Ben.  t.  iv.  p.  258. 
and  Homs.  xxxix.  xl.  and  de  Prod, 
Judae,  (?)  and  on  Rom.  Hom.  vii.  (vi. 
Ben.  t.  ix.  p.  474.  Tr.  p.  7Q.  where  the 
words  should  be  stronger,  '  and  from 
many  other  things  one  may  see  that  it 
was  not  very  necessary.')  and  on  Heb. 
Hum.  xiv.  (?)  S.  Cyr.  Al.  against  Jul. 
1.  X.  (t.  V.  p.  352  sqq.  Theod.  q.  Q7.  in 
Gen.  and  1.  vii.  ad  Gr.  Damasc.  1.  iv.  de 
Fide  10.  14.  and  26.  (25.)  Theophyl. 
on  Rom.  ii.  El.  Cret.  on  S.  Greg.  Naz. 
Or.  1.  (see  also  Or.  xl.  c.  28.)  And 
one  can  hardly  suppose  that  St.  Gregory 
meant  to  speak  of  it  as  having  any  such 
direct  and  covenanted  efficacy.  It  is 
allowed  to  be  a  prophetic  sign  or  type  of 
Regeneration,  (see  S.  Aug.  Ep.  Ixxxii.) 
and  of  course  obedience  to  the  Law  was 
required  in  order  to  the  acceptance  of 
those  under  the  Law.  Again,  as  theFaith 
bespeaks  of  as  availing  for  infants  must 
be  that  of  the  Parents,  (Justinian  on 
Rom.  iv.  11.  takes  the  punishment  of 
neglect  to  be  theirs,  and  St.  Aug.  thinks 
it  may,  q.  xi.  on  Exod.)  he  may  consider 
circumcision  as  the  act  embodying  such 
faith.  And  if  he  means  it  also  of  adults, 
the  same  may  be  said  of  willingly 
choosing  the  state  of  obedience  to  the 
Law.  If  St.  Aug.  is  wrong  in  taking 
eternal  punishment  to  be  threatened  to 
infants  uncircumcised,  his  argument 
still  holds  as  analogical,  and  perhaps 
in  that  circumcision  was  even  a  direct 
acknowledgment  of  original,  as  sacrifice 
by  bloodshedding  of  actual,  sin.  On  the 
whole  subject  of  original  sin,  see  Bull's 
discourse  on  the  state  of  man  before 
the  Fall ;  Taylor  on  Repentance,  capp. 
vi.  vii;   Wall  on  Inf.  Bapt.  c.  xix. 


/ 


Some  imprecatiotis  in  Holy  Writ  Jig  uralive.  181 

rest,  in  the  words,  Or  with  princes  that  had  gold,  that  Jilted  Pook 

their  houses  uith  silver.     It  is  a  rare  thing  for  them  that '— 

have  gold  to  advance  to  rest,  seeing  that  Truth  saith  by  Itself, 
TJtey  that  hare  riches  shall  hardUj  enter  into  the  kingdom  Matt. 
of  heaven.     For  what  joys  in  the  other  life  can  they  look  i^j^^^j?* 
for,  who  here  pant  after  increase  of  riches  ?     Yet  that  our  I'N  23. 
Redeemer  might  further   shew  this  event  to  be   most  rare, 
and  only  possible  by  the  supernatural  agency  o^  God,  He 
saith.  With  men  this  is  impossible  ;  but  icith  God  all  t Ai n gs  ^iatt, 
are  possible.     Therefore  because  these  words  are,  on  the  sur-     ' 
face,  at  variance  with  reason,  the  letter  itself  thereby  points  out, 
that  in  those  words  the  Saint  delivers  nothing  after  the  letter. 

But  if  we  shall  first  examine  the  nature  of  other  curses  in    iv. 
Holy  Writ,  we  may  the  more  perfectly  trace  out  the  import  of 
this  one,  which  was  uttered  by  the  mouth  of  blessed  Job. 
For  how  is  it  that  David,  who  to  those  that  rewaided  him 
evil,  returned  it  not  again,  upon  Saul  and  Jonathan  falling 
in  war,  curses   the    mountains   of  Gilboa  in  the   following 
words.  Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa,  let  there  be  no  dew,  neither 2  Sam. 
let  there  be  rain  \ipon  you,  nor  fields  of  offerings;  for  there  '  ^'' 
the  shield  of  Saul  is  vilely  cast  away,  as  though  he  had  not 
been  anointed  with  oil  ^  How  is  it  that  Jeremiah,  seeing  that 
his  preaching  was  hindered  by  the  hardness  of  his  hearers, 
utters   a   curse,  saying,   Cursed  be   the  man,  who   brought  S^r.  20, 
tidings  to  my  father,  saying,  A  man  child  is  born  unto  thee?  ^^' 
What  then  did  the  mountains  of  Gilboa  offend  when  Saul 
died,  that  neither  dew  nor  rain  should  fall  on  them,  and  that 
the  words  of  his  sentence  against  them  should  make  them 
barren  of  all  produce  of  verdure?  Why,  forasmuch  as  Gilboa 
is  by  inteqnetation  '  running  down,'  while  by  Saul's  anointing 
and  dying,  the  death  of  our  Mediator  is  set  forth,  by  the 
mountains  of  CJilboa  we  have  no  unfit  representation  of  the 
uplifted  hearts  of  the  Jews,  who,  while  they  let  themselves 
run  down  in  the  pursuit  of  the  desires  of  this  world,  were 
mingled  together  in  the  death  of  Christ,  i.e.  of*  the  Anointed.' 
And  because  in  them  the  anointed  King  dies  the  death  of 
the  body,  they  too  are  left  dry  of  all  the  dew  of  grace;  of 
whom  also  it  is  well  said,  that  ihey  cannot  be  fields  if  first 
fruits.     Because  the  high   minds  of  the  Hebrews  bear  no 
*  first  fruits;'  in  that  at  the  coming  of  our  Redeemer,  pereistinp^ 


22 


182      Our  sirniing  is  a  birth  of  children  to  the  world. 

Pref.  for  the  most  part  in  unfaithfulness,  they  would  not  follow 
the  first  beginnings  of  the  faith;  for  Holy  Church,  which  for 
her  first  fruits  was  enriched  with  the  multitude  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, scarcely  at  the  end  of  the  world  will  receive  into  her 
bosom  the  Jews,  whom  she  may  find,  and  gathering  none 
but    the  last,  will  put  them   as   the  remnant  of  her  fruits. 
Is.  10,   Of  which  very  remnant  Isaiah  hath  these  words,  For  though 
thy  people  Israel  shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  yet  a 
remnant  of  them  shall  return.     However,  the  mountains  of 
Gilboa   may  for   this  reason   be    cursed   by  the    Prophet's 
mouth,   that  whilst,   the   land  being  dried  up,  no    fruit   is 
produced,  the  possessors  of  the  land  might  be  stricken  with 
the  woe  of  that  banenness,  so  that  they  might  themselves 
receive  the  sentence  of  the  curse,  who  had  obtained  as  the 
just  reward  of  their  iniquities  to  have  the  death  of  the  King 
take  place  among  them.     But  how  is  it  that,  from  the  lips  of 
the  Prophet,  that  man  received  the  sentence  of  cursing,  who 
brought  to  his  father  the  tidings  of  his  birth?    Doubtless  this 
is  so  much  the  more  full  of  deeper  mystery  within,  as  it  lacks 
human  reason  without.     For  perchance,  if  it  had  sounded  at 
all  reasonable  without,  we  should  never  have  been  kindled 
to  the  pursuit  of  the  interior  meaning;  and  thus  he  the  more 
fully  implies  something  within,  that  he  shews  nothing  that 
is  reasonable  without.     For  though  the  Prophet  had  come 
into  this  world  from  his  mother's  womb  to  be  the  subject  of 
affliction,  in  what  did  the  messenger  of  his  birth  do  wrong? 
But  what  does  the  person  of  the  Prophet  represent  '  carried 
»  fluctu-  hither  and  thither^,'  except  the  mutability  of  man,  which  came 
antis      ^^  ^^  ^wQ^  of  punishment,  is  thereby  signified?  and  what  is 
expressed  by  his  '  father'  but  this  world  whereof  we  are  born  ? 
And  who  is  that  man,  who  '  brings  tidings  of  our  birth  to  our 
father,'  saving  owx  old  enemy,  who,  when  he  views  us  fluctu- 
ating in  our  thoughts,  prompts  the  evihninded,  who  by  virtue 
of  this  world's  authority  have  the  preeminence,  to  persuading 
us  to  our  undoing,  and  who,  when  he  has  beheld  us  doing 
2favoii-acts  of  weakness,  commends  these  with  applause^  as  brave, 
^"*        and  tells  as  it  were  of  male  children  being  born,  when  he  gives 
joy  that  vve  have  turned  out  corrupters  of  the  truth  by  lying? 
He  gives  tidings  to  the  father  that  a  man  child  is  bom,  when 
he  shews  the  world  him,  whom  he  has  prevailed  with,  tm'ned 


Job's  ^opening  his  mouth  ^    He  cursed  not  from  passion.  183 

into  a  corrupter  of  innocence.     For  when  it  is  said  to  any  Book 

one  committing  a  sin  or  acting  proudly,  *  Thou  hast  acted — 

like  a  man,'  what  else  is  this  than  that  a  man  child  is  told 
of  in  the  world?  Justly  then  is  the  man  cursed,  who  brings 
tidings  of  the  birth  of  a  man  child;  because  his  tidings 
betoken  the  damnable  joy  of  our  corrupter.  Thus  by  these 
[  imprecations  of  Holy  Scripture  we  learn  what,  in  the  case  of 
blessed  Job,  we  are  to  look  for  in  his  words  of  imprecation, 
lest  he,  whom  God  rewards  after  these  wounds  and  these 
words,  should  be  presumptuously  condemned  by  the  mistaken 
reader,  for  his  words.  As  then  we  have  in  some  sort  cleared 
the  points,  which  were  to  be  the  objects  of  our  enquiry  in 
the  preface,  let  us  now  proceed  to  discuss  and  to  follow  on 
the  words  of  the  historical  form. 

Ver.  1,  2,  3.  After  this  Job  opened  his  mouth,  and  cursed 
his  day.  And  Job  spake,  and  said,  Let  the  day  perish 
icherein  I  was  born. 

1.  That  which  is  here  said.  He  opened  his  mouth,  must  not  i. 
be  gone  into  negligently.  For  by  the  things  which  Holy 
Scripture  premises  but  slighdy,  we  are  apprised  that  what 
comes  after  is  to  be  expected  with  reverence.  For  as  we 
know  notliing  what  vessels  that  are  closed  contain  inside,  but 
when  the  mouth  of  the  vessels  is  opened,  we  discover  what 
is  contained  within;  so  the  hearts  of  the  Saints,  which 
so  long  as  their  mouth  is  closed  are  hidden,  when  their 
mouth  is  opened,  are  disclosed  to  view.  And  when  they 
disclose  their  thoughts,  they  are  said  to  open  their  mouth, 
that  with  the  lull  bent  of  our  mind  we  may  hasten  to  find  out, 
as  in  vessels  that  are  set  open,  what  it  is  that  they  contain, 
and  to  refresh  ourselves  with  their  inmost  iVagrance.  And 
hence  when  the  Lord  was  about  to  utter'  His  sublime 
precepts  on  the  Mount,  the  words  precede.  And  He  opened  ^isiiub, 
His  mouth,  and  taught  them;  though  in  that  place  this  too 
should  be  taken  as  the  meaning,  that  He  then  opened  His 
ou;n  mouth  in  delivering  precepts,  wherein  He  had  long 
while  opened  the  mouths  of  the  Prophets.  But  it  requires  very 
great  nicety  in  considering  the  expression,  After  this,  namely, 
in  order  that  the  excellence  of  all  that  is  done  may  be  per- 
ceived in  its  tiTic  light  by  the  time.     For  fu*st  we  have  de- 

•  Dicturo,  al.  '  daturo,' '  to  give,'  as  vrhora  St.  Greg,  seem^  here  to  follovr. 
St.  Aug.  1.  i.  on  Serm.  on  the  Mount,     (Ben.) 


184  Cursing  is  either  malicious  or  judicial. 

Job  3,  scribed  the  wasting  of  his  substance,  the  destruction  of  his 
-— — '-  children,  the  pain  of  his  wounds,  the  persuasions  of  his  wife, 
the  coming  of  his  friends,  who  are  related  to  have  rent  their 
garments,  to  have  shed  tears  with  loud  cries,  to  have  sprin- 
kled their  heads  with  dust,  and  to  have  sat  upon  the  ground 
for  long  in  silence,  and  afterwards  it  is  added,  After  this  Job 
opened  his  mouthy  and  cursed  his  day  ;  clearly  that  from  the 
very  order  of  the  account,  duly  weighed,  it  might  be  con- 
cluded that  he  could  never  have  uttered  a  curse  in  a  spirit  of 
impatience,  who  broke  forth  into  a  voice  of  cursing  whilst 
his  friends  were  as  yet  silent.     For  if  he  had  cursed  under 
the  influence    of  passion,   doubtless    upon   hearing   of  the 
loss  of  his  substance,  and  upon   hearing  the  death  of  his 
sons,  his  grief  would  have  prompted  him  to  curse.    But  what 
Job  I,    he  then  said,  we  have  heard  before.     For  he  said,  Tlie  Lord 
gave,  and  the  Lord  hath   taken  away.     Again,  if  he  had 
cursed  under  the  impulse  of  passion,  he  might  well  have 
uttered  a  curse  when  he  was  stricken  in  his  body,  or  when 
he  was  mischievously  advised  by  his  wife.     But  what  answer 
Job  2     he  then  gave  we  have  already  learnt ;    for  he  says,   Tliou 
^^-        speakest  as  one  of  the  foolish   ivomen  speaketh.      What  ? 
shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not 
receive  evil?    But  after  this  it  is  set  forth  that  his  friends 
arrive,  shed  tears,  seat  themselves,  keep  silence,  whereupon 
this  is  immediately  subjoined,  that  he  is  said  to  have  cursed 
his  day.     It  is,  then,  too  great  an  inconsistency  to  imagine 
that  it  was  from  impatience  that  he  broke  out  into  a  voice  of 
cursing,  no  man  setting  him  on,  no  man  driving  him  thereto, 
when  we  know  that  amidst  the  loss  of  all  his  goods,  and  the 
death    of  his   children,   amidst   bodily    afflictions,    the   evil 
counsels  of  his  wife,  he  only  gave  great  acknowledgments  to 
his  Creator  with  a  humble   mind.     It  is  plain,  then,  with 
what  feelings  he  spoke  this  when  he  was  at  rest,  who  even 
when  stricken  uttered  such  a  strain  of  praise  to  God.     For 
afterwards,  when  no  longer  stricken,  he  could  not  be  guilty  of 
pride,  whom  even  his  pain  under  the  rod  only  shewed  to  be 
full   of  humility.     But  as   we   know    for  certain  that  holy 
Scripture  forbids  cursing,  how  can  we  say  that  that  is  some- 
times done  aright,  which  yet  we  know  to  be  forbidden  ^  by 
the  same  Holy  Writ  ? 

b  Ben.  as  most  Mss.  '  vitari,'  '  shunned,'  old  Edd.  as  A.  '  vetari,'  '  forbidden.' 


«S^/.  Peter's  and  Elijah's  curse  proved  right  by  the  event.   185 

2.   But  be  it  known   that  Holy  Writ   makes  mention  of  Book 

.                    .        .       IV. 
cursing  in  two  ways,  namely,  of  one  sort  of  curse  which  it 

commands,  another  sort  which  it  condemns.  For  a  curse  is 
uttered  one  way  by  the  decision  of  justice,  in  another  way 
by  the  malice  of  revenge.  Thus  a  curse  was  pronounced  by 
the  decree  of  justice  upon  the  first  man  himself,  when  he  fell 
into  sin,  and  heard  ihe  words,  Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  Gen.  3, 
sake.  A  curse  is  pronounced  by  decree  of  justice,  when  it 
is  said  to  Abraham,  /  will  curse  them  that  curse  thee. 
Again,  forasmuch  as  a  curse  may  be  uttered,  not  by  award 
of  justice,  but  by  the  malice  of  revenge,  we  have  this  admo- 
nition from  the  voice  of  Paul  the  Apostle  in  his  preaching, 
where  he  says,  Bless,  and  curse  not ;  and  again,  nor  revilers  Rom. 
shall  inherit  (he  kingdom  of  God.  So  then  God  is  said  to  J^^q/' 
curse,  and  yet  man  is  forbidden  to  curse,  because  what  man  G,  lo. 
does  from  the  malice  of  revenge,  God  only  does  in  the 
exactn(;ss  and  perfection  of  justice.  But  when  holy  men 
deliver  a  sentence  of  cursing,  they  do  not  break  forth  therein 
from  the  wish  of  revenge,  but  in  the  strictness  of  justice,  for 
they  behold  God's  exact  judgment  within,  and  they  perceive 
that  they  are  bound  to  smite  evils  arising  without  with  a 
curse;  and  are  guilty  of  no  sin  in  cursing,  in  the  same  degree 
that  they  are  not  at  variance  with  the  interior  judgment. 

It  is  hence  that  Peter  flung  back  the  sentence  of  a  curse 
upon  Simon  when  he  offered  him  money,  in  the  words,  May  Acts  8, 
thy  money  perish  with  thee;  for  he  who  said,  not  does,  but 
may,  shewed  that  he  spoke  this,  not  in  the  indicative,  but  in 
the  optative  mood.     Hence  Elias  said  to  the  two  captains  of 
fifty  that  came  to  him,  1/  I  be  a  man  of  God,  then  let  Jire^  Kings 
come  down  from  heaven,  and  consutne  thee.    And  upon  what 
reasonable  grounds  of  truth  the  sentences  of  either  of  the  two 
were  esUiblishcd,  the  issue  of  the  case  demonstrated.     For 
both  Simon   perished   in  eternal  ruin,  and  lire   descending 
from  above  consumed  the  two  ca))tains  of  fifty.     Thus  the 
subse(|uent  miracle'  testifies  with  what  mind  the  sentence  ofi  virtus 
the  curse  is  pronounced.     For  when  both  the  innocence  of 
him  that  curseth  remains,  and  be  that  is  cursed  is  by  that 
curse  swallowed  up  to  the  extent  of  utter  destruction,  from 
the  end  of  either  side  we  collect,  that  the  sentence  is  taken 
up  and  launched  against  the  offender  from  the  sole  Judge  of 
what  is  within. 


1 86  The  ^daifJoh  cursed  is  th  is  mortal  life,which  hisfrietids  loved. 

Job  3,       3.  Therefore  if  we    weigh    with   exactness  the  words  of 
. — - —  blessed  Job,  his  cursins:  cometh  not  of  the  malice  of  one 

Hist 

guilty  of  sin,  but  of  the  integrity  of  a  judge,  not   of  one 

agitated  by  passion,  but  of  one  sober  in  instruction ;  for  he, 

who  in  cursing  pronounced  such  righteous  sentence,  did  not 

give  way  to  the  evil  of  perturbation  of  mind,  but  dispensed 

the  dictates  of  wisdom.     For,  in  fact,  he  saw  his  friends 

weeping  and  wailing,  he  saw  them  rending  their  garments, 

he  saw  how  they  had  sprinkled  their  heads  with  dust,  he  saw 

them  struck  dumb  at  the  thought  of  his  aflfliction ;  and  the 

Saint  perceived  that  those  whose  hearts  were  set  upon  temporal 

prosperity,  took  him,  by  a  comparison  with  their  own  feelings, 

for   one    brokenhearted   with   his   temporal   adversity.     He 

considered  that  they  would  never   be  weeping  for   him  in 

despair,  who  was  stricken  with  a  transient  ill,  except  they 

had  themselves  withdrawn  their  soul  in  despair  from  the  hope 

of  inward  soundness ;  and  while  he  outwardly  burst  forth  into 

the  voice  of  grief,  he  shewed  to  persons  inwardly  wounded 

the  virtue  of  a  healing  medicine,  saying, 

Ver.  3.  Let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  horn, 

4.  For  what  is  to  be  understood  by  '  the  day  of  our  birth,' 
save  the  whole  period  of  our  mortal  state  ?  So  long  as  this 
keeps  us  fast  in  the  corruptions  of  this  our  mutable  state  of 
being,  the  unchangeableness  of  eternity  does  not  appear  to 
us.  He,  then,  who  already  beholds  the  day  of  eternity, 
endures  with  difficulty  the  day  of  his  mortal  being.  And 
observe,  he  saith  not,  '  Let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was 
created,'  but,  let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  born.  For 
man  was  created  in  a  day  of  righteousness,  but  now  he  is 
born  in  a  time  of  guilt ;  for  Adam  was  created,  but  Cain  was 
the  first  man  that  was  born.  What  then  is  it  to  curse  the  day 
of  his  birth,  but  to  say  plainly,  '  May  the  day  of  change 
perish,  and  the  light  of  eternity  burst  forth  ?' 

5.  But  inasmuch  as  we  are  used  to  bid  perish  in  two  ways, 
(for  it  is  in  one  way  that  we  bid  perish,  when  we  desire  to 
any  thing  that  it  should  no  longer  be,  and  in  another  way 
that  we  bid  it  perish,  when  we  desire  that  it  should  be  ill 
therewith,)   the  words  that  are  added  concerning  this  day, 

'  Vulg.  Let  a  cloud  dwell  upon  it:  let  it  he  enveloped  in  hitterness\- 
clearly  shew,  that  he  wishes  not  this  day  to  perish  in  such 
sort  as  not  to  be,  but  so  that  it  may  go  ill  with  it ;  for  that 


Satan  is  day  in  shew,  night  in  result.  187 

can  never  be  *  enveloped  in  bitterness/  which  is  so  wholly  Book 
destroyed    as   not   to  be  at  all.       Now  this  period    of  our 


mutable  condition  is  not  one  day  to  perish,  (i.  e.  to  pass 

away,)  in  such  a  way,  as  to  be  in  an  evil  plight,  but  so  as  to 

cease  to  be  altogether,  as  the  Angel  bears  witness  in  Holy 

Writ,  saying,  By  Him  that  livelh  for  ever  and  ever,  tJtat  there  Rev.io, 

should  he  time  no  longer.     For  though  the  Prophet  hath  it, 

Their  time  shall  endure  for  ever,  yet  because  time  comes  Ps.  81,    j 

to  an  end  with  every  moment,  he  designated  their  coming  to 

an  end  by  the  name  of  '  time,'  shewing  that  without  every 

way  ending"  they  come  to  an  end,  that  are  severed  from  the 

joys  of  the  inward  Vision.     Therefore  because  this  period 

of   our  mortal   condition   does    not   so  perish   as   to   be   in 

evil  plight,  but  so  as  not  to  be  at  all,  we  must  enquire  what 

it  means  that  he  desires  it  may  perish,  not  so  that  it  may  not 

be,  but   that  it  may  be   in   ill    condition.     Now   a   human 

soul,  or  an  Angelic  spirit,  is  in  such  sort  immortal,  that  it 

is  capable  of  dying,  in  such  sort  mortal,  that  it  can  never  die. 

For  of  living  happily,  it  is  deprived  whether  by  sin  or  by 

punishment ;  but  its  essential  living  it  never  loses,  either  by 

sin    or    punishment :    it  ceases  from  a  mode  of  living,  but 

it  is   not   even  by  dying   susceptible    of  an  end   to    every 

mode  of  being.     So  that  I  might  say  in  a  word,  that  it  is 

both  immortally  mortal,  and  mortally  immortal.     Whereas 

then  he  wishes  that  the  day  may  perish,  and  soon  after  it  is 

said  that  it  is  ^  to  be  enveloped  in  bitterness,'  whom  should  we 

think  the  holy  man  woidd  express  by  the  name  of  '  day,' 

except  the  Apostate  Spirit,  who  in  dying  subsists  in  the  life  of 

essential  being .''     Whom  destruction  does  not  withdraw  from 

life,  in  that  in  the  midst  of  pains  eternal  an  immortal  death 

kills,  while  it  preserves,  him  whose  perishing,  fallen  as  he  is 

already  from  the  glory  of  his  state  of  bliss,  is  still  longed  for 

no  othenvise  than  that  being  held  back  by  the  punishments, 

which  he  deserves,  he  may  lose  even  the  liberty  of  temj)ting. 

6.  Yea,  he  presents  himself  as  the  day,  in  that  he  allures 

by  prosperity ;  and  his  end  is  in  the  blackness  of  night,  for 

that  he  leads  to  adversity ;  thus  he  displayed  day  when  he 

^aid.  In    the   day  ye   eat    thereof,  then  your   eyes  shall  be  Gen.  3, 

6. 

«  i.  e.  •  witliout   a  total  ctMation  of    '  that  without  end  they  come  to  an  end 
being.'    Some   Mas.  have  '  sine    fine,'     by  an  utter  fini:«hing.' 


188         False  day  darkened  wJien  Satan  is  detected. 

Jobs,  opened,  and  ye  shall  he  as  Gods;  but  he  brought  on  night, 
— —^ — when  he  led  to  the  blackness  of  mortality;  the  day,  therefore, 
is   the   proffered   promise    of  better   things,  but  the   night 
is  the  very  manifested  experience  of  evils.     The  old  enemy 
is  the  day,  as  by  nature  created  good,  but  he  is  the  night,  as 
by  his  own  deserts  sunk  down  into  darkness.     He  is  day, 
when  by  promising  good  things  he  disguises  himself  as  an 
Angel  of  hght  to  the  eyes  of  men,  as  Paul  witnesses,  saying, 
2  Cor.    For  Saia7i  Idmself  is  transformed  as  an  angel  of  liyht ;  but 
'     *  he  is  night,  when  he  obscures  the  minds  of  those  that  consent 
to  him  with  the  darkness  of  error.     Well  then  may  the  holy 
man,  who  in  his  own  sorrows  bewailed  the  case  of  the  whole 
human  race,  and  who  viewed  nothing  in  any  wise  special  to 
himself  in  his  own  special  affliction,  well  may  he  recal  to 
mind  the  original  cause  of  sin,  and  soften  the  pain  of  the 
infliction  by  considering  its  justice.    Let  him  look  at  man,  and 
see  whence  and  whither  he  has  fallen,  and  exclaim.  Let  the  day 
perish  n  herein  I  was  horn,  and  the  niglit  in  which  it  was 
said,   There  is  a  man  child  conceived.      As  if  he  said  in 
plain  words,  '  Let  the  hope  perish,  which  the  apostate  Angel 
held  forth,  who,  disguising  himself  as  day,  shone  forth  with 
the  promise  of  a  di\dne  nature,  but  yet  again  shewing  him- 
self as  night,  brought  a  cloud  over  the  light  of  our  immortal 
nature.     Let  our  old  enemy  perish,  who  displayed  the  light 
of  promises,  and  bestowed  the  darkness  of  sin;  who  as  it  were 
presented  himself  as  day  by  his  flattery,  but  led  us  to  a  night 
of  utter  darkness  by  sealing  our  hearts  with  blindness.'     It 
proceeds ; 

Ver.  4.  Let  that  day  he  turned  into  darkness. 
ii.  7.  This  day  shines  as  it  were  in  the  hearts  of  men,  when 

the  persuasions  of  his  wickedness  are  thought  to  be  for  our 
good,  and  what  they  are  within  is  never  seen;  but  when  his 
wickedness  is  seen  as  it  is,  the  day  of  false  promises  is  as 
it  were  dimmed  by  a  kind  of  darkness  spread  before  the  eyes 
of  our  judgment,  in  this  respect,  that  such  as  he  is  in  intrinsic 
worth,  such  he  is  perceived  to  be  in  his  beguilement,  and  so 
'  the  day  becomes  darkness,'  when  we  take  as  adverse  even 
the  very  tilings,  which  he  holds  out  as  advantageous  wliilst 
persuading  them.  '  The  day  becomes  darkness,'  when  our  old 
enemy,  even  when  lurking  under  the  cloak  of  his  blandish- 


Tlte  shadow  of  death  on  it  in  Satati*sjitial  perdition.   189 

nients,  is  perceived  by  us  to  be  such  as  he  is  when  ravening  Book 
after  us,  that  he  may  never  mock  us  with  feigned  prosperity, 


as  though  by  the  hght  of  day,  dragging  us  by  real  misery  to 
the  darkness  of  sin.     It  proceeds; 

Let  not   God  regard  it  from  above,  neither  let  the  light 
shine  upon  if. 

8.  As  Almighty  God  was  able  to  create  good  things  out  of    iii. 
nothing,   so,  when   He   would,  He   also   restored  the   good 
things  that  were  lost,  by  the  mystery  of  His   Incarnation. 
Now  he  had  made  two  creations  to  contemplate  Himself,  viz. 
the  Angelic  and  the  human,  but  pride  smote  both,  and  dashed 
them  from  the  erect  station  of  native  uprightness.     But  one 
had  the  clothing  of  the  flesh,  the  other  bore   no  infirmity 
derived  from   the   flesh.     For  an   angelical    being  is    spirit  Comp. 
alone,  but  man  is  both  spirit  and  flesh.     Therefore  when  the  ^* 
Creator  took  compassion  to  work  redemption,  it  was  meet  that 
He  should  bring  back  to  Himself  that  creature,  which,  in  the         I 
commission  of  sin,  plainly  had  something  of  infinnity ;  and  it         / 
was  also  meet  that  the  apostate  Angel    should   be    driven 
down  to  a  farther  depth,  in  ])ropoition  as  he,  when  he  fell  from 
resoluteness  in  standing  fast,  earned  about  him  no  infinnity 
of   the    flesh.      And   hence    the    Psalmist,    when    he    was 
telling  of  the  Redeemer's  compassionating  mankind,  at  the 
same  time  justly  set  forth  the  cause  itself  of  His  mercy,  in 
these  words.  And  he  remembei'ed  that  they  were  bnt  Jlesh.Ps.  78y 
As  if  he  said,  '  Whereas  He  beheld  their  infinnities,  so  He     ' 
would  not  punish  their  offences  with  severity.'     There  is  yet 
another  respect  wherein  it  was  both  fitting  that  man  when 
lost  should  be  recovered,  and  impossible  for  the  s})irit  that  set 
himself  up  to  be  recovered,  namely,  in  that  the  Angel  fell  by 
his  own  wickedness,  but  the  wickedness  of  another  brought 
man  down.     Forasnmch  then  as  mankind  is  brought  to  the 
light  of  repentance  by  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer,  but  the 
apostate  Angel  is  not  recalled  by  any  hope  of  pardon,  or 
with  any  amendment  of  conversion,  to  the  light  of  a  restored 
estate,  it   may  well  be  said,  Let    not  God  regard  if  from 
above,  neither  let  the  light  shine  upon  it.     As  though  it  were 
plainly  expressed,  '  For  that  he  hath  himself  brought  on  the 
darkness,  let  him  bear  without  end  what  himself  has  made, 
nor  let  him  ever  recover  the  light  of  his  former  condition, 


190  Eternal  bitierness  of  Judgment.     The  dark  ivliirlwind. 

Job  3,  since  he  parted  mth  it  even  without  being  persuaded  thereto.' 

-— -^ —  It  goes  on  ; 
Hist.        ^ 

Let  darkness  and  the  sliadow  of  death  stain  it. 
iv.         9.  *  By  the  shadow  of  death,'  w^e  must  understand  *  oblivion,' 
for  as  death  ends  life,  so  oblivion  puts  an  end  to  memoiy. 
As  therefore  the  apostate  Angel  is  delivered  over  to  eternal 
oblivion,   he   is    overclouded   with    the    shadow    of    death. 
Therefore  let  him  say,  Let  darkness  and  the  shadou)  of  death 
stain  it;  i.  e.  '  So  let  him  be  ovei*whehiied  with  the  blindness 
of  error,  that  he  never  more  rise  up  again  to  the  light  of 
repentance   by   recollection    of  God's   regard.     The   words 
follow ; 
'  ^ulg.       j^qi  d  cloud  dwell  upon  it^:  and  let  it  be  enveloped  in 
bitterness. 
V.  10.  It  is  one  thing  that  our  old  enemy  suffers  now,  bound 

by  the  chains  of  his  own  wickedness,  and  another  that  he 
will  have  to  suffer  at  the  end.  For  in  that  he  is  fallen  from 
the  rank  of  the  interior  light,  he  now  confounds  himself 
within  with  the  darkness  of  error;  and  hereafter  he  is 
involved  in  bitterness^  in  that  by  desert  of  a  voluntary  bhnd- 
ness,  he  is  tortured  with  the  eternal  torments  of  hell.  Let  it 
be  said  then,  *  What  is  it  that  he,  who  has  lost  the  calm  of  the 
light  interior,  now  endures  as  the  foretaste  of  his  final  punish- 
ment }  Let  a  cloud  dwell  upon  it.  Moreover  let  that 
subsequent  doom  be  added  also,  wliich  preys  upon  him 
without  end.'  Lei  him  be  folded  up  in  bitterness  ;  for  every 
thing  folded  up,  shews,  as  it  were,  no  end  any  where,  for  as 
it  shews  not  where  it  begins,  so  neither  does  it  discover  where 
it  leaves  off.  The  old  enemy  then  is  said  to  be  folded  up  in 
bitterness,  in  that  not  only  every  kind  of  punishment,  but 
punishment  too  without  end  or  limit  awaits  his  pride;  which 
same  doom  then  receives  its  beginning  when  the  righteous 
Judge  cometh  at  the  last  Judgment ;  and  hence  it  is  well 
added, 

Ver.  6.  As  for  that  night,  let  a  dark  whirlwind  seize  upon  it. 

vi.  11.  For  it  is  written.  Our  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not 

P9.50,3.  ^^^^  silence;  a  fire  shall  devour  before  Him,  and  it  shall  be 

2  Vulg.  ^eru  tempestuous  round  about  Him.    Thus^  a  dark  whirlwind 

sus turbo  seizes  upon  that  night,  in  that  the  apostate  Angel  is  by  that 

fearful  tempest  carried  off  from  before  the  strict  Judge  to 


Year  of  grace,  and  montlts,  wherein  Satatt  is  not  counted.  191 

suffer  eternal  woe  ;   thus  this  night  is  seized  by  a  whirlwind,  Book 
in  that  his  blind  pride  is  smitten  with  a  strict  Wsitation.     It — 


goes  on ; 

Let  it  not  he  joined  unto  the  days  of  the  year ;   let  it  not 
come  into  the  nuniher  of  the  months. 

1'2.  By  year  we  understand  not  inapplicably  the  preaching    vii. 
of  supreme  grace.     For  as  in  a  year  the  period  is  completed 
by  a  connected  series  of  days,  so  in  heavenly  grace  is  a 
complex  life  of  virtue  made  complete.     By  a  year  too  we 
may  understand  the  multitude  of  the  redeemed.     For  as  the 
year  is  produced  by  a  number  of  days,  so  by  the  assemblage 
of  all  the  righteous  there  results  that  countless  sum  of  the 
Elect.     Now  Isaiah  foretells  this  year  of  a  completed  multi- 
tude, in  these  words;   Tlie  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  il/p,  Is.Gi,i. 
because  the  L^rd  haih  anointed  Me  to  preach  good  tidings 
unto  the  meek :   He  hath  sent  Me  to  hind  up  the  broken- 
hearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening 
of  the  prison   to   them  that  are  bound ;     To  proclaim  the 
acceptable  year  qf  the  Lord.    For  *  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord  is  proclaimed,'  in  that  the  future  multitude  of  the  faith- 
ful is  foretold  as  destined  to  be  illumined  with  the  light  of 
truth.     Now  what  is  meant  by  *  the  days,'  but  the  several 
minds  of  the  Elect  ?     What  by  the  months,  but  their  several    I 
Churches,  which  constitute  one  Catholic  Church  ?    So  then 
let  not  that  night  he  joined  unto  the  days  of  the  year,  neither 
let  it  come  into  the  number  of  the  months.     For  our  old 
enemy,  hemmed  in  with  the  darkness  of  his  pride,  sees  indeed 
the   coming  of  the  Redeemer,  but  never  returns  to  pardon 
with  the  Elect.     And  hence  it  is  written.  For  verily  He  tookHeh.2, 
not  on  Him  the  nature  qf  Angels,  but  He  took  on  Him  the^^' 
seed  of  Abraham.     For   it  was   on    this    account  that    our 
Redeemer  was  made  not  Angel,  but  Man,  because  He  must  I 
needs  be  made   of  the  same  nature  as  that  which  He  re-  » 
deemed,  that  He  might  at  once  let  go  the  lost  angel,  by  not 
taking  his  nature,  and  restore  man,  by  taking  his  nature  in 
Himself.    These  days,  which  abide  in  the  interior  light,  may 
also  be  taken  for  the  angelic  spirits,  and  the  months,  fur  their 
orders  and  dignities.    For  everj'  single  spirit,  in  that  he  shines, 
is  a  *  day,'   but   as   they   are    distinguished  by   certain  set 
dignities,  so  that   there   are  some  that  are    Thrones,  some 


19-2  Satan  loseth  praise, — is  cursed  hoik  as  night  and  as  day. 
Job  3,  Dominions,  some  Principalities,  and  some  Powers,  according 

no  .... 

J"  '-  to  this  distribution  of  ranks,  they  are  entitled  *  months.' 
But  forasmuch  as  our  old  enemy  is  never  brought  back  to 
merit  light,  and  is  never  restored  to  the  order  of  the  ranks 
above,  he  is  neither  reckoned  in  the  days  of  the  year,  nor  in 
the  months.  For  the  blindness  of  the  pride  that  he  has  been 
guilty  of  is  so  settled  upon  him,  that  he  no  more  returns  to 
those  heavenly  ranks  of  interior  brightness.  He  no  longer 
now  mixes  with  the  ranks  of  light  that  stand  firm  and  erect, 
for  that,  in  due  of  his  own  darkness,  he  is  ever  borne  down- 
wards to  the  depth.  And  for  that  he  remains  for  ever  an 
alien  to  the  company  of  that  heavenly  land,  it  is  yet  further 
justly  added, 

Ver.  7.  Zo,  let  that  night  be  solitary^  let  it  he  ttorthy  of 
no  praise. 
viii.        13.  That  night  is  made  solitary,  in  that  it  is  divided  by  an 
eternal   separation  from  the   company   of  the    land    above. 
Yet  this  may  be  also  taken  in  another  sense,  viz.  that  he 
loses  man,  whom  he  had  made  his  fellow  in  ruin,  and  that 
M.e.thethe    enemy  perishes    alone  together  with  his  body*,  while 
^^°  ^  '  many  that  he  had  destroyed  are  restored  by  the  Kedeemer's 
grace.     The  night  then  is  made   solitary,  when   they  that 
are    Elect   being   raised  up,   our  old  enemy  is  made   over 
alone  to  the   eternal  flames   of  hell.     And   it  is   well  said. 
Let  it  be  worthy  of  no  praise.     For  when  mankind,  encom- 
passed with  the  darkness  of  error,  took  stones  for  gods,  in 
this,   that   they  worshipped  idols,  what  else    did  they  but 
praise   the    deeds    of  their   seducer?     Hence    Paul   rightly 
1  Cor.    remarks,  JVe  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing.     But  I  say  that 
?'p'      the  things  which    the   Gentiles   sacrifice,   they  sacrifice    to 
10,  20.  devils.     How  else  then  is  it  with  those  that  have  bowed 
themselves    to   the   worship    of  idols,   but   that   they   have 
'  praised  the  darkness  of  night  V    But,  lo  !  we  see  now  that 
that  night  is  known  to  be  unworthy  '  of  any  praise,'  since 
now  the  worship  of  idols  is  condemned  by  the  human  race 
redeemed;  and  that  '  night  is  left  solitary,'  in  that  there  is 
none  that  goeth  with  the   damned  apostate  spirit  to  suffer 
torments.     It  proceeds ; 

Ver.  8.  Let  them  curse  it   that  curse  the  day,  that  are 
ready  to  rouse  up  Leviathan. 


Salaiis  false  liyJit  cursed  of  God  and  good  Angela.    19*3 

14.  Ill   the  oldtranslation  it  is   not  so  written,  but,  ^  Let  Book 
him  curse  it  that  hath  cursed  the  dai/,  even  liini  who  shall  lake 


IX. 

the  great  whale,    ^y  which  words  it  is  clearly  shewn,  that  the  ,  ^q 
destruction  of  Antichrist,  to  be  at  the   end  of  the  world,  is  LXX. 
foreseen  by  the  holy  man.     For  the  eWl  spirit,  who  by  rights 
is  night,  at  the  end  of  the  world  passes  himself  for  the  day, 
in  that  he  shews  himself  to  men  as  God,  while  he  takes  to 
'himself  deceitfully  the  brio-htness  of  the  Deitv,  aud  ed,alteth'2-T\iess. 

.2   4. 

himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped. 
The  same  therefore  that  curseth  the  day,  curseth  the  night ; 
in  that  He  at  this  present  time  destroys  his  wickedness, 
Who  will  then  by  the  light  of  His  coming  also  extinguish 
the  power  of  his  strength.  And  hence  it  is  well  subjoined, 
Who  will  take  the  great  whale.  For  the  strength  of  this 
whale  is  taken  as  a  prey  in  the  water,  in  that  the  wili- 
ness  of  our  old  enemy  is  overcome  by  the  Sacrament  of 
Baptism. 

15.  But  that  which  in  the  Old  Translation  is  spoken  of 
the  Author  of  all  things,  in  this  translation,  which  we  get 
from  the  Hebrew  and  ^  Arabian  tongues,  is  related  of  His 
elect  Angels.  For  it  is  of  them  that  it  is  said.  Let  them 
curse  it  that  curse  the  day.  For  that  spirit  in  his  pride 
desired  to  pass  himself  for  day  even  with  the  Angelic  Powers, 
at  that  time  when  as  though  in  the  power  of  the  Deity  he 
exalted  himself  above  the  rest,  and  drew  after  him  such 
countless  legions  to  destruction.  But  they,  truly,  who  with 
humble  spirits  stood  firm  in  the  Author  of  their  being,  when 
they  saw  there  was  night  in  his  perverse  ways,  trod  under 
foot  the  day  of  his  brightness  by  thinking  humbly  of  them- 
selves, who  do  now  point  out  to  us  the  darkness  of  his  dis- 
guise, and  shew  us  how  we  should  contemn  his  false  glare. 
So  let  it  be  said  of  the  night  of  darkness,  which  blinds  the 
eyes  of  human  frailty;  Let  them  curse  it  that  curse  the  day; 
i.  e.  *  Let  those  elect  Spirits  by  condemning  denounce  the 
darkness  of  his  erring  ways,  who  see  the  grandeur  of  his 
shining  already  from  the  first  a  deceit.'    And  it  is  well  added, 

«•  "  Jerome  ttrofesses  in  the  Pref.  to  Pref.  to  the   Book  nf  Daniel,  he  says 

the  Book  of  Job  to  have  translated   it  that  Job  has  a  moHt  close  connection 

*  from   the    Hebrew   and    Arabic,   and  with  the  Arabic  tongue."     Note  Ed. 

sometimes  from  the   Syriac'     In  the  Ben.  1.  xxxv.  §.  43. 

O 


tern  vec- 
tern 


194  Leviathan  cruel  ijei  flatter ing .     At  that  time  bound. 

Job  3,  Who  are  ready  to  rouse  up^  Leviathan.     For  '  Leviathan'  is 

-=7-^ —  interpreted  to  be  *  their  addition.'     Whose  '  addition,'  then, 

1  Vulg.  but  the  '  addition'  of  men  ?     And  it  is  properly  styled  *  their 

^  "^       addition ;'  for  since  by  his  evil  suggestion  he  brought  into 

the  world  the  first  sin,  he  never  ceases  to  add  to  it  day  by 

day  by  prompting  to  worse  things. 

Or  indeed  it  is  in  reproach  that  he  is  called  Leviathan,  i.  e. 

styled  *  the  addition  of  men.'     For  he  found  them  immortal 

in  Pai'adise,  but  by  promising  the  Divine  nature  to  immortal 

beings,  he  as  it  were  pledged  himself  to  add  somewhat  to 

them  beyond  wiiat  they   were.     But   whilst  with  flattering 

lips  he  declared  that  he  would  give  what  they  had  not,  he 

robbed  them  cunningly  even  of  what  they  had.     And  hence 

saLThe  the  ^  Prophet  describes  this  same  Leviathan  in  these  words, 

t\ie^.    Leviathan,  the  bar-serpent^ :  even  Leviathan  that  crooked 

Y^l,^- serpent.     For  this  Leviathan  in  the  thing,  which  he  engaged 

serpoi    to  add  to  man,  crept  nigh  to  him  with  tortuous  windings ; 

for  while  he  falsely  promised   things   impossible,  he  really 

stole  away  even  those  which  were  possible.     But  we  must 

enquhe  why  he  that  had  spoken  of  a  serpent,'  subjoining  in 

that  very  place  the  epithet  '  crooked,'  inserted  the  word  '  bar,' 

except  perhaps  that  in  the  flexibility  of  the  serpent  we  have 

a  yielding  softness,  and  in  *  the  bar,    the  hardness  of  an 

obstinate  nature.     In  order  then  to  mark  him  to  be  both 

hard  and  soft,  he  both  calls  him  '  a  bar'  and  *  a  serpent.' 

For  by  his  malicious  nature  he  is  hard,  and  by  his  flatteries 

*  E.  V.  lie  is  soft ;  so  he  is  called  '  a  bar  V  in  that  he  strikes  even  to 

i,ig        death;  and  '  a  serpent,'  in  that  he  insinuates  himself  softly 

by  deceitful  acts. 

16.  Now  this  Leviathan  at  this  present  time  elect  Spirits 
of  the  Angelic  host  imprison  close  in  the  bottomless  pit. 
Rev. 20,  Whence  it  is  written.  And  I  saw  an  Angel  come  down  front 
heaven,  having  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and  a  great 
chain  in  his  hand;  and  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  old 
serpent,  which  is  the  Devil  and  Satan,  and  bound  him  a 
thousand  years;  and  cast  him  into  the  bottomless  pit.  Yet 
at  the  end  of  the  world  they  call  him  back  to  more  open 
conflicts,  and  let  him  loose  against  us  in  all  his  power.  And 
hence  it  is  written  again  in  the  same  place;   Till  the  thousand 


To  be  loosed  by  AiiyeU  at  last  J  or  metia  trial.         195 

years  should  be  fulfilled,  and  aftei'  that  he  must  be  loosed.  Book 

For  that  apostate  Angel,  whereas  •  he  was  created  so  that '-^ 

he  shoue  preeminent  among  all  the  other  legions  of  the 
Angels,  fell  so  low  by  setting  himself  up,  that  he  is  now 
prostrated  beneath  the  rule  of  the  orders  of  Angels  that 
stand  erect,  whether  that  being  put  in  chains  by  them,  as 
they  minister  to  our  welfare,  he  should  now  lie  buried  from 
sight,  or  that  they  at  that  lime  setting  him  free  for  our  pro- 
bation, he  should  be  let  loose  to  put  forth  all  his  power 
against  us.  Therefore,  because  the  proud  apostate  Spirit  is 
restrained  by  those  elect  Spirits,  who  being  humble  would 
not  follow  him,  and,  they  being  the  executioners,  it  is  ordered, 
that  he  shall  one  day  be  recalled  for  the  purpose  of  an  open 
conflict,  that  he  may  be  utterly  destroyed,  let  it  be  well  said, 
who  are  ready  to  rouse  up  Leviathan ;  but  forasmuch  as  the 
artful  adversary  is  not  yet  raised  to  wage  open  war,  let  him 
shew  how  that  night  now  by  hidden  influences  overshadows 
the  minds  of  some  men.     It  follows; 

Ver.  9.  Let  the  stars  be  darkened  with  the  shadow  thereof. 
17.  In  Holy  Scripture  by  the  title  of  stars  we  have  set     x. 
forth    sometimes    the   righteousness   of   the    Saints   which 
shineth  in  the  darkness  of  this  life,  and  sometimes  the  false 
pretence  of  hypocrites,  who  display  all  the  good  that  they 
do,   that    they  may  win    the    praise    of  men ;     for   if  well 
doers  were  not  stars,  Paul  would  never  say  to  his  disciples, 
In  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation,  among  whom  P^il*  2, 
ye  shi)ie  like  lights  in  the  world.     Again,  if  among  those  that 
seem  to  act  aright,  there  were  not  some  that  sought  by  their 
conduct  to  win  the  reward  of  man's  esteem,  John  would  never 
have  seen  stars  falling  fiom  heaven,  where  he  says,  The  dragon  Kev.  12, 
put  forth  h  is  tail,  and  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars  oflieaven. 
Now  a  portion  of  the  stars  is  drawn  by  the  dragon's  tail,  in 
that,  in  the  last  efforts  of  Antichrist  to  win  men,  some  that 
appear  to  shine  will  be*  carried  off.     For  to  draw  the  stars  of 
heaven  to  the  earth  is  by  tlie  love  of  earth  to  involve  those 
in  the  froward  ways  of  open  error,  who  seem  to  be  devoted  to 
tlie  pursuit  of  the  heavenly  life.    For  there  are  that  as  it  were 

'  Ben.  Quia,  but  there  is  good  Ms.     years  means  the  times  of  the  Church  of 
authority  for  qui.  whatever  duration. 

•  Book  xxxii.  §.22.  he  says  the  1000 

O  2 


196         Secret  sinners  justly  let  fall  into  open  guilt. 

Jobs,  shine  before  the  eyes  of  men  by  extraordinary  deeds;  but 
pjjg^  forasmuch  as  these  very  deeds  are  not  the  offspring  of  a  pm*e 
heart,  being  ^struck  blind  in  their  secret  thoughts,  they  are 
clouded  with  the  darkness  of  this  night,  and  these  often  lose 
the  more  outward  deeds,  tvhich  they  do  not  practise  with  any 
purity  of  heart.  x4nd  so  because  the  night  is  permitted  to 
prevail,  whenever  even  amidst  good  works  the  purpose  of  the 
heart  is  not  cleansed,  let  it  be  said  with  justice.  Let  the  stars 
be  dark  with  the  shadow  thereof;  i.  e.  '  let  the  dark  malice  of 
our  old  enemy  prevail  against  those  who  in  the  sight  of  men 
shew  as  bright  by  good  works,  and  that  light  of  praise,  which 
in  th'j  eye  of  man's  judgment  they  had  taken,  let  them  lay 
aside;'  for  they  are  '  overshadowed  with  the  darkness  of  night,' 
when  their  life  is  brought  to  shame  by  open  error,  so  that 
verily  they  may  also  appear  outwardly  such  in  practice,  as 
they  do  not  shrink  from  appearing  to  the  Divine  eye  in  their 
secret  hearts.     It  proceeds; 

Ver.  9.  Let  it  look  for  lights  but  have  none;  neither  let  it 
see  the  dawning  of  the  day. 
xi.  18.  In  the  Gospel  Truth  declares,  1  am  the  light  of  the 

John  8,  q^Qyid^     Now  as  this  same  Saviour  of  us  men  is  one  Person 

1  a. 

with  the  assembly  of  the  good,  for  He  is  Himself  the  Head 
of  the  Body,  and  we  all  are  the  Body  of  this  Head,  so  oiu*  old 
enemy  is  one  person  with  the  whole  company  of  the  damned; 
in  that  he  as  a  head  out-tops  them  all  in  iniquity,  and  they, 
whilst  they  minister  in  the  things  he  prompts,  hold  fast  to 
him  like  a  body  joined  below  to  the  head.  And  so  it  is 
meet  that  all  that  is  said  of  this  night,  i.  e.  of  our  old  enemy, 
should  be  applied  to  his  body,  i.  e.  to  all  wicked  persons. 
Wherefore  because  our  Redeemer  is  the  light  of  mankind, 
how  is  it  that  it  is  said  of  this  night.  Let  it  look  for  light,  a?id 
have  none;  but  that  there  are  some,  who  exhibit  themselves 
as  maintaining  by  words  that  faith,  which  they  undo  by 
Tit.  1  works }  Of  whom  Paul  saith.  They  prcfess  that  they  know 
^^'  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  Him  ;  with  these,  indeed,  either 
the  things  which  they  do  are  bad,  or  they  follow  after  good 
deeds  with  no  good  heart.  For  they  do  not  seek  everlasting 
rewards  as  the  fruit  of  their  actions,  but  transitory  partiality. 
And  yet,  because  they  hear  themselves  praised  as  Saints,  they 

^  Of  perhaps  '  caught,'  '  capt.' 


Satan  and  his  body  see  none  of  the  light  of  Christ.    197 

believe  themselves  lo  be  really  Saints,  and  in  proportion  as  Book 

they  account  themselves  unblameable  according  to  the  esteem '— 

they  are  in  with  numbers,  they  await  in  gieater  security  the 
Day  of  strict  account.     Of  whom  the  Prophet  well  says.  Woe  Amos 
unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of  the  Lord.     To  these  blessed   ' 
Job  utters  the  sentence  due  to  them,  saving  in  the  temper 
of  one  foretelling  the  thing,  and  not  as  the  wish  of  one  that 
desired  it,  Let  it  look  for  light,  hut  hare  none.     For  that 
night,  I   mean  the  adversaiy  of  darkness,  in  his  members 
doth  look  for  the  light,  but  seeth  none ;  in  that  whether  it  be 
they  who  retain  tlie  faith  without  works,  these,  tiiisting  that 
they  maybe  saved  at  the  final  Judgment  by  right  of  the  same 
faith,  will  find  their  hope  prove  vain,  because  by  their  life  S.  Aug. 
they  have  undone  the  faith,  which  in  the  confession  of  the  ^j^^  ^^ 
lips  they  have  maintained;  or  they,  who  for  the  sake  of  human  «^ort'<- 
applause  make  a  display  of  themselves  in  doing  well,  they 
vainly  look  for  a  reward  of  their  good  deeds  at  the  hand  of  the 
Judge,  when  He  cometh;  for  that  whereas  they  do  them  out 
of  regard  to  the  notoriety  of  praise,  they  have  already  had 
their  reward  from  the  lips  of  men.     As  the  Truth  testifies, 
Whichsaith,  ]'erily  I  say  untoyou,tJieyhare^  their  reward;  and  Matt. 6, 
here  it  is  jastly  added,  Xeither  let  it  see  thedaaning  of  the  day. " 

19.  For  the  dawn  is  the  title  of  the  Churcli,  which  is 
changed  from  the  darkness  of  its  sins  into  the  light  of 
righteousness.  And  hence  the  Spouse,  admiring  her  in  the 
Song  of  Solomon,  saith^,  JVho  is  she  that  goeth  forth  rt^Cant.e, 
the  moriiing  arising  ^  for  like  the  dawn  doth  the  Chmch  of  ^'^' 
the  Elect  arise,  in  that  she  quits  the  diukness  of  her  fonner 
iniquity,  and  converts  herself  into  the  radiance  of  new 
light.  Tlicrefore  in  tliat  light,  which  is  manifested  at  the 
coming  of  the  strict  Judge,  the  body  of  our  enemy  when 
condeumed  seeth  no  dayspring  of  the  rising  dawn,  in  that 
when  the  strict  Judge  shall  come,  every  sinner,  being  overlaid 
with  the  blackness  of  his  own  deserts,  knows  not  witli  what 
wondrous  sj)lendour  Holy  Church  rises  into  the  interior 
light  of  the  heart.  For  then  the  mind  of  the  Klect  is  trans- 
ported on  high,  to  be  illuminated  witli  the  rays  of  the  Divine 
Nature,  and  in  the  degree  that  it  is  penetrated  with  the  light  of 
that  Countenance,  it  is  lilted  above  itself  in  the  refulgence 

*  Volg.  *■  ReceperuDt/  *  have  received,'  which  is  borne  out  by  the  Greek, 


198    The  Righteous  now  not  understood  by  the  wicked. 

Job  3,  of  gi'ace.     Then   doth   Holy  Church  become  a  full  dawn, 
when  she  parts  wholly  and  for  ever  with  the  darkness  of  her 


Hist.  />  t  i 

state  of  mortality  and  ignorance.     Thus  at  the  Judgment  she 

is  still  the  dawn,  but  in  the  Kingdom  she  is  become  the  day. 
For  though  together  with  the  renewal  of  our  bodies  she  already 
begins  to  behold  the  light  at  the  Judgment,  yet  her  vision 
thereof  is  more  fully  consummated  in  the  Kingdom.     Thus 
the  rising  of  the  dawn  is  the  commencement  of  the  Church 
in  light,  which  the  reprobate  can  never  see,  because  they 
are    closed  in    upon  and  forced  dowm   to    darkness   by  the 
weight  of  their  evil  deeds  from  the  sight  of  the  Righteous 
Is.  26,    Judge.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  Prophet,  Let  the 
LXX.   wicked  he  taken  out  of  the  way.,  that  he  see  not  the  glory  of 
God.     It  is  hence  that  these  words  are  uttered  by  the  Psalmist 
Ps.  31,  concerning  this  dawn.  Thou  shalt  hide  them  in  the  secret  of 
Thy  Presence  from  the  pride  of  men.     For  every  Elect  one  at 
the  Judgment  is  hid  in  the  countenance  of  the  Godhead  in 
interior  vision,  whereas  the  blindness  of  the  reprobate  without 
is   banished    and    confounded    by    the    strict    visitation    of 
justice. 

20.  And  this  too  w^e  not  irrelevantly  interpret  with  reference 
to  the  present  time  likewise,  if  we  minutely  search  the  hearts 
of  dissemblers.  For  the  proud  and  hypocritical  look  on  the 
deeds  of  the  good  on  the  outside,  and  they  find  that  such  are 
commended  by  men  for  their  doings,  and  they  admire  their 
high  repute,  and  they  see  that  these  receive  praises  for 
their  good  deeds,  but  they  do  not  see  how  studiously  they 
eschew  such  praises;  they  regard  the  overt  acts,  but  are 
Ignorant  that  these  proceed  from  the  principle  of  the  interior 
hope  alone.  For  all  that  shine  with  the  tnie  light  of  righte- 
ousness are  first  changed  from  the  darkness  of  the  inward 
puqjose  of  the  heart,  so  that  they  wholly  forsake  the  interior 
dimness  of  earthly  coveting,  and  entirely  turn  their  hearts 
to  the  desire  of  the  light  above,  lest  while  they  seem  to  be 
full  of  light  to  others,  they  be  in  darkness  to  themselves; 
thus  persons  that  assume,  because  they  regard  the  deeds  of 
the  righteous,  but  do  not  survey  their  hearts,  imitate  them  in 
the  things  from  whence  they  may  obtain  applause  without, 
but  not  in  the  things  w  hereby  they  may  inwardly  arise  to 
the  light  of  righteousness;  and  they  as  it  were  are  blind  to 


Blindness  of  the  Jews.     First  birth  of  sin.  199 

see  the  day  spring  of  the  rising  dawn,  because  they  do  not  Book 
think  it  worth  their  while  to  regard  the  rehgious  mind's  intent. 

21.  The  holy  man,  who  was  filled  with  the  virtue  of  the  Alleo. 
prophetic  Spirit,  may  also  have  his  eye  fixed  upon  the  faith- 
lessness of  Juda?a  at  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer,  and  in 
these  words  he  may  be  s})eaking  prophetically  of  the  mis- 
chievous effects  of  her  blindness,  as  though  in  the  character 

of  one  expressing  a  wish,  so  as  to  say.  Let  it  look  for  light, 
hut  have  none;  neither  let  it  see  the  dawning  of  the  day. 
For  Judaea  *  looked  for  the  light  but  had  none;'  since  by  pro- 
phecy she  waited  indeed  for  the  Redeemer  of  Man  that  should 
come,  but  never  knew  Him  when  He  came;  and  the  eyes  of  the 
mind,  which  she  opened  wide  to  the  expectation,  she  closed 
to  the  presence  of  the  Light;  neither  did  she  see  the  dayspring 
of  the  rising  dawn,  in  that  she  scorned  to  pay  homage  to 
those  first  beginnings  of  Holy  Church,  and  while  she  sup- 
posed her  to  be  undone  by  the  deaths  of  her  members,  was 
ignorant  to  what  strength  she  was  attaining.  But  as,  when 
speaking  of  the  faithless,  he  signified  the  members  of  the 
wicked  head,  he  again  turns  his  discourse  to  the  head  of  the 
wicked  itself,  saying, 

Ver.  10.  Because  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  of  my  mother'' s 
womb,  nor  hid  soi' row  from  mine  eyes. 

22.  What  the  womb  of  his  mother  is  to  each  individual    xii. 
man,  that  the  primary  abode   in  Paradise  became    to  the 
whole  human  race.     For  from   it  came   forth  the  family  of 
man  as  it  were  from  the  womb,  and  tending  to  the  increase 

of  the  race,  as  if  to  the  growth  of  the  body,  it  issued  forth 
without.  There  oiu*  conception  was  cemented,  where  the 
Man,  the  origin  of  mankind,  had  his  abode,  but  the  serpent 
opened  the  mouth  of  this  womb,  in  that  by  his  cmniing 
j)ei-suading  he  broke  asunder  the  decree  of  heaven  in  man's 
heart.  The  seq)ent  opened  the  mouth  of  this  womb,  in  that 
he  biu"st  the  barriers  of  the  mind  which  were  fortified  with 
admonitions  from  above.  Let  the  holy  man  then  in  the 
punishment  which  he  suffers,  cast  the  eyes  of  his  mind  far 
back  to  the  sin.  Let  him  mourn  for  this,  which  the  neglect 
of  darkness,  that  is,  the  dark  suggestions  of  our  old  enemy 
lodged  in  man's  mind;  for  this,  that  man's  mind  consented 
to  his  cunning  suggestions  to  his  own  betrayal,  and  let  him 


200  Day  of  earthly  prosperily  accursed. 

«^0B  3,  say,  Because  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  of  my  mother'' s  womb, 
j~^  nor  hid  sorrow  from  mine  eyes.  Nor  let  this  disturb  us,  that 
he  complains  that  he  only  did  not  shut  up,  whom  he  abhors 
for  having  opened  the  gate  of  Paradise.  For  '  he  opened,' 
he  calls  shut  not  up;  and  '  he  entailed  it,'  nor  hid  sorrow 
from  me.  For  he  would  as  it  were  have  '  hid  soitow,'  if  he 
had  kept  quiet,  and  have  '  shut  up,'  if  he  had  forborne  from 
bursting  in.  For  he  is  weighing  well  who  it  is  he  speaks  of, 
and  he  reckons  that  it  would  have  been  as  if  the  evil  spirit 
had  bestowed  gains  upon  us  if  he  had  only  not  entailed 
losses  upon  our  heads.  Thus  we  say  of  robbers  that  they 
give  their  prisoners  their  lives,  if  they  do  not  take  them. 
MoiiAL.  23.  It  is  well  to  go  over  these  points  again  from  the  begin- 
ning, and  according  to  what  we  remark  in  practice  in  the  pre- 
sent life,  to  review  it  in  a  moral  sense.  Blessed  Job,  observing 
how  presumptuously  mankind,  after  his  soul  fell  from  its 
original  state'',  was  lifted  up  in  prosperity,  and  with  what 
dismay  it  was  dashed  by  adverse  fortune,  falls  back  in 
imagination  to  that  unalterable  state  which  he  might  have 
kept  in  Paradise,  and  in  what  a  miserable  light  he  beheld 
the  fallen  condition  of  our  mortal  state  of  being,  so  chequered 
with  adversity  and  prosperity,  he  shewed  by  cursing  the 
same  in  these  words; 

Ver.  3.  Let  the  day  perish  ivherein  I  was  horn;  and  the 
night  wherein  it  was  said.  There  is  a  man  child  conceived. 

24.  It  seems  as  it  were  like  day,  when  the  good  fortune  of 

this  world  smiles  upon  us,  but  it  is   a   day  that   ends   in 

night,  for  temporal  prosperity  often  leads  to  the  darkness  of 

affliction.     This  day  of  good  fortune  the  Prophet  had  con- 

Jer.  17  demned,  when  he  said.  Neither  have  I  desired  man's  day\ 

^^'  .      Thou   knowest  it.     And  this  night  our  Lord  declared  He 

^owi/iw'was  to  suffer  at  the  final  close  of  His  Incarnation,  when 

Ps^Yg    ^^   declared  by  the   Psalmist    as    if  in   the   past.  My  reins 

7.       '  also  instructed  me  in  the  night  season.     But  by  '  the  day' 

may  be  understood  the  pleasures  of  sin,  and  by  '  the  night' 

the  inward  blindness,  whereby  man   suffers  himself  to  be 

brought  down  to  the  ground  in  the  commission  of  sin.     And 

therefore  he  wishes  the  day  may  perish,  that  all  the  flattering 

arts  which  are  seen  in  sin,  by  the    strong  hand   of  justice 

h  Several  Mss.  have  '  Patrice  mentis  statu.' 


Man  conceived  to  sin  in  darkness,  born  in  false  liyhl.  201 
intemosing,   may  be   brought  to   nought.     He  wishes  also   Book 

TV 

tliat  the  *  night  may  perish,'  that  what  the    bhnded   mind 1- 


executes  even  in  yielding  consent,  she  may  put  away  by  the 
castigation  of  penance. 

25.  But  we  must  enquire  why  man  is  said  to  be  bom  in 
*  the  day'  and  conceived  in  'the  night?'  Holy  Scriptiu'e 
uses  the  title  *  man'  in  three  ways,  viz.  sometimes  in  respect 
of  nature,  sometimes  of  sin,  sometimes  of  frailness.  Now 
man  is  so  called  in  respect  of  nature,  as  where  it  is  written. 

Let    Us  make  man  after  Our  image  and  likeness.     He  is  Gen.  i, 

26. 

called  man  in  respect  of  sin,  as  where   it  is  written,  1  have  pjj*.  82 
said,  Ye  are  all  gods,  and  all  of  you  are  children  of  the  Most  ^'  7- 
High:  hut  ye  shall  die  like  men.     As  though  he   had  ex- 
pressed it  plainly,  *  ye  shall  perish  like  transgressors.'     And 
hence  Paul  saith,  For  whereas  there  is  among  yon  envying  i  Cor. 
and  strife  and  divisions,  are  ye   not   carnal,  and  icalk   as'' 
men?    As  though  he  had  said,  '  Ye  that  carry  about  minds 
at  variance,  do  ye  not  still  sin,  in  the  spirit  of  faulty  human 
nature?'    He  is  called  ma)t  in  relation  to  his  weakness,  as 
where  it  is  written,  Cursed  he  the  man  that  irusteth  in  man.  Jcr.  17, 
As  if  he  had  said  in  plain  words,  '  in  weakness.'     Thus  man  ^' 
is  born  in  the  day,  but  he  is  conceived  in  the  night,  in  that 
he  is  never  caught  away  by  the   delightfulness  of  sin,  until 
he  is  first  made  weak  by  the  voluntary  darkness  of  his  mind. 
For  he  first  becomes  blind  in  the  understanding,  and  then 
he  enslaves  himself  to  damnable  delight.    Let  it  be  said  then. 
Let  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  bor?i,  and  the  night  trhere- 
in  it  was  said,  There  is  a  man  child  conceived:  i.  e.  *  Let  the 
delight  perish,  which  has    hurried   man  into    sin,   and  the 
unguarded  frailness  of  his  mind,  whereby  he  was  blinded  even 
to  the  very  darkness  of  consenting  to  evil.     For  while  man 
does  not  heedfully  mark  the  allurements  of  pleasure,  he  is 
even  carried  headlong  into  the  night  of  the  foulest  practices. 
We  must  watch  then  with  minds  alive,  that  when  sin  begins 
to  caress,  the  mind  may  perceive  to  what  ruin  she  is  being 
dragged.     And  hence  the  words  are  fitly  added, 
Ver.  4.   Let  that  day  he  darkness. 

26.  For  '  the  day  becomes  darkness,'  when  in   the   very    xiv. 
commencement  of  the  enjoyment,  we  see  to  what  an  end  of 
ruin  sin  is  hurrying  us.     We  *  turn  tlie  day  into  darkness/ 


202      Swfiil  pleasure  to  be  chastised  lest  it  he  judged. 

Job  3,  whenever  by  severely  chastising  ourselves,  we  turn  to  bitter 
'- — the  very  sweets  of  evil  enioyment  by  the  keen  laments  of 

Moral.  -^  ,         ^  '^....,  .  ,         . 

penance,  and,  when  we  visit  it  with  weeping,  whereinso- 
ever we  sin  in  gratification  in  our  secret  hearts.  For  be- 
cause no  believer  is  ignorant  that  the  thoughts  of  the  heart 
wdll  be  minutely  examined  at  the  Judgment,  as  Paul  testifieth, 

Rom.  2,  saying,  Their  thoughts  the  meanwhile  accusing  or  else  ex- 
cusing one  another;  searching  himself  within,  he  examines 
his  own  conscience  without  sparing  before  the  Judgment, 
that  the  strict  Judge  may  come  now  the  more  placably 
disposed,  in  that  He  sees  his  guilt',  which  He  is  minded  to 
examine,  already  chastised  according  to  the  sin.  And  hence 
it  is  well  added. 

Let  not  God  require  it  from  above. 
XV.  27.  God  requires  the  things,  which  He  searches  out  in 
executing  judgment  upon  them.  He  does  not  require  those, 
which  He  so  pardons  as  to  let  them  be  unpunished  henceforth 
in  His  own  Judgment.  And  so  '  this  day,'  i.  e.  this  enjoy- 
ment of  sin,  will  not  be  required  by  the  Lord,  if  it  be  visited 
\vith  self-punishment  of  our  own  accord,  as  Paul  testifies, 

1  Cor.  when  he  says,  i^or  if  we  icould  judge  ourselves^  we  should  not 
'  *  be  judged  of  the  Lord.  '  God's  requiring  our  day,'  then,  is 
His  proceeding  against  our  souls  at  the  Judgment  by  a  strict 
examination  of  every  instance  of  taking  pleasure  in  sin,  in 
which  same  *  requiring'  He  then  smites  him  the  harder,  whom 
He  finds  to  have  been  most  soft  in  sparing  himself.  And  it 
follows  well.  Neither  let  the  light  shine  upon  it.  For  the 
Lord,  appearing  at  the  Judgment,  illumines  with  His  light  all 
that  He  then  convicts  of  sin.  For  what  is  not  then  brought 
to  remembrance  of  the  Judge,  is  as  it  were  veiled  under  a 

Eph.  5,  kind  of  obscurity.  So  it  is  written.  But  all  things  that  are 
reproved  are  made  manifest  by  the  light.  It  is  as  though  a 
certain    darkness    hid    the   sins  of  penitents,   of  whom  the 

Ps.32  1.  Prophet  saith.  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven^ 
whose  sin  is  covered.  Therefore,  as  every  thing  that  is  veiled 
is  as  it  were  hidden  in  darkness,  that  which  is  not  searched 
out  in  vengeance,  is  not  illumined  with  light  at  the  Day  of 
final  account.  For  all  those  actions  of  ours,  which  He  would 
not  then  visit  with  justice,  the  mercy  of  God  in  wotting  of 

'  Severnl  Mss.  '  reum,'  'His  culprit.* 


God  hides  from  light  by  twt  bringing  to  Judgment.     203 

them  still  hideth  in  some  sort  from  itself,  but  all  is  displayed  Book 
in  light,  that  is  at  that  time  manifest  in  the  sight  of  all  men. — 


Let,  then,  this  day  be  darkness,  in  this  way,  viz.  that  by 
penance  we  may  smite  the  evil  that  we  do.  Let  not  the 
Lord  require  this  day,  neither  let  the  light  shine  upon  it,  in 
this  way,  viz.  that  while  we  smite  our  own  sin,  He  may  not 
Himself  fall  thereupon  with  the  visitations  of  the  Final 
Judgment. 

28.  But  the  Judge  will  come  Himself  to  pierce  all  things, 
and  strike  all  things  to  the  core.  And  because  He  is  every 
where  present,  there  is  no  place  to  flee  to,  where  He  is  not 
found.  But  forasmuch  as  He  is  appeased  by  the  tears  of 
self-correction,  he  alone  obtains  a  hiding-place  from  His 
face,  who  after  the  commission  of  a  sin  hides  himself  from 
Him  now  in  penance.  And  hence  it  is  with  propriety  yet 
further  added  of  this  day  of  enjoyment, 

Ver.  7.   Let  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death  stain  it. 

29.  Then  indeed  darkness  stains  the  day,  when  the  delight    xvi. 
of  our  inclinations  is  smitten  through  with  the  inflictions  of 
penance.     By  darkness  moreover  may  be    signified  secret 
decisions.     For  what  we  see  in  the  light  we  know,  but  in 

the  dark  we  either  discern  nothing  at  all,  or  our  eyes  are 
bewildered  with  an  uncertain  sight.  Secret  decrees  then  are 
like  a  certain  kind  of  darkness  before  our  eyes,  being  utterly 
inscrutable  to  us.  And  hence  it  is  written  of  God,  He  made  Ps.  18, 
darkness  His  secret  place;  and  we  know  well  that  we  do^^* 
not  deserve  pardon,  but,  by  the  grace  of  God  preventing  us, 
we  are  freed  from  our  sins  by  His  secret  counsels.  Dark- 
ness, therefore,  stains  the  day,  when  the  joy  of  gratification, 
which  is  a  proper  subject  of  tears,  is  in  merc}*  hidden  from 
that  ray  of  just  wrath  by  His  secret  determinations.  And 
here  the  words  aptly  follow,  and  the  shadow  of  death. 

30.  For  in  Holy  Scripture,  the  shadow  of  death  is  some- 
times understood  of  oblivion  of  mind,  sometimes  of  imitation 
of  the  devil,  sometimes  of  the  dissolution  of  the  flesh.  For 
the  shadow  of  death  is  understood  of  the  oblivion  of  the  mind, 
in  that,  as  has  been  said  above,  as  death  causes  that  that 
which  it  kills  should  no  longer  remain  in  life,  so  obliWon 
causes  that  whatsoever  it  si'izes  should  no  longer  abide  in  the 
memory.     And  hence  too,  because  John  was  coming  to  pro- 


204  Temporal,  the  shadoiv  of  Ete^'nal  Death. 

Job  3,  claim  to  the  Hebrew  people  That  God,  Whom  they  had  fov- 

— — '- — gotten,  he  is  iustly  said  by  Zacharias,  to  qive  light  to  them 
Moral.*  •     .       ,      ,     "^  "  i  i  c  • 

that  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death  ;  lor    to  sit 

in  the  shadow  of  death,'  is  to  turn  lifeless  to  the  knowledge 

of  the  love  of  God  in  a  state  of  oblivion.      The  shadoiv  of 

death  is  taken  to  mean  the  imitating  our  old  enemy.     For, 

since   he  brought  in  death,  he  is  himself  called  death,  as 

Rev.  6,  John  is  witness,  saying,  and  his  name  is  death.  And  so  by 
the  shadow  of  death  is  signified  the  imitating  of  him.  For 
as  the  shadow  is  shaped  according  to  the  chai'acter  of  the 
body,  so  the  actions  of  the  wicked  are  cast  in  a  figure  of 
conformity  to  him.  Hence  when  Isaiah  saw  that  the  Gentiles 
had  fallen  away  after  the  likeness  of  our  old  enemy,  and  that 
they  rose  up  again  at  the  rising  of  the  true  Sun,  he  justly 
records,  as  though  in  the  past,  what  his  eyes  beheld  as  certain 

Is.  9,  2.  in  the  future,  saying.  They  that  dwell  in  the  la?id  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  ■  ypon  them  a  great  light  hath  shined. 
Moreover,  the  shadow  of  death  is  taken  for  the  dissolution 
of  the  flesh,  in  that,  as  that  is  the  true  death  whereby  the 
soul  is  sej^arated  from  God,  so  the  shadow  of  death  is  that 
whereby  the  flesh  is  separated  from  the  soul.  And  hence  it 
is  rightly  said  by  the  Prophet  in  the  words  of  the  Martyrs, 

Ps.  44,  Though  Thou  hast  sore  broken  us  in  the  place  of  dragons, 
and  covered  us  with  the  shadoiv  of  death.  For  those,  who, 
we  know,  die  not  in  the  spirit,  but  only  in  the  flesh,  can  in 
no  wise  say  that  they  are  *  covered  with  the  true  death,'  but 
with  the  shadow  of  death. 

31.  How  is  it  then  that  blessed  Job  demands  the  shadow 
of  death,  for  putting  out  the  day  of  evil  enjoyment,  but  that 
for  the  obliterating  of  our  sins  in  God's  sight  he  calls  for  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  who  should  undertake  for 
us  the  death  of  the  flesh  alone,  and  Who  by  the  shadow  of 
His  own  death,  should  do  away  the  true  death  of  transgres- 
sors ?  For  He  comes  to  us,  who  were  held  in  the  bands  of 
death,  both  of  the  spirit  and  of  the  flesh,  and  His  own  single 
Death  He  reckoned  to  our  account,  and  our  two  deaths, 
which  He  found.  He  dissolved.  For  if  He  had  Himself 
undertaken  both.  He  would  never  have  set  us  free  from 
either.  But  He  took  one  sort  in  mercy,  and  condennied 
them  both  with  justice.     He  joined  His  own  single  Death  to 


Chrisl^hy  Deaths  shadow,  rescued  penitents  from  Death.  205 

our  twofold  death,  and  by  dying  He  vanquished  that  double  Book 
death  of  ours.     And  hence  it  was  not  without  reason  that '— 


He  lay  in  the  grave  for  one  day  and  two  nights,  namely,  in 
that  He  added  the  light  of  His  own  single  Death  to  the  dark- 
ness of  our  double  death.  He,  then,  that  took  for  our  sakes 
the  death  of  the  flesh  alone,  underwent  the  shadow  of  death, 
and  buried  from  the  eyes  of  God  the  sin  that  we  have  done. 
Therefore  let  it  be  truly  said,  Let  darkness  and  the  shadow 
of  death  stai?i  it.  As  though  it  were  said  in  plain  words; 
*  Let  Him  come.  Who,  that  He  may  snatch  from  the  death 
of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit,  us,  that  are  debtors  thereto, 
may,  though  no  debtor,  discharge  the  death  of  the  flesh.' 
But  since  the  Lord  lets  no  sin  go  unpunished,  for  either  we 
visit  it  ourselves  by  lamenting  it,  or  God  by  judging  it,  it 
remains  that  the  mind  should  ever  have  a  watchful  eye  to 
the  amendment  of  itself.  Therefore,  in  whatever  particular 
each  person  sees  that  he  is  succoured  by  mercy,  he  must 
needs  wipe  out  the  stains  thereof  in  the  confession  of  it. 
And  hence  it  is  fitly  added. 

Let  a  shade  dwell  upon  it, 

32.  For  because  the  eye  is  perplexed  in  the  shade,  there-   xvii. 
fore  the  perplexity  of  our  mind  in  penitence  is  itself  called 
shade,  for  as  the  shade  obscures  the  light  of  day  with  a  mass 
of  clouds,  so  confusion  overclouds  the  mind  with  troubled 
thoughts.     Of  which  it  is  said   by  one,    There  is  a  shame  Ecclui^. 
which  is  glory  and  grace.     For  when  in  repenting  we  recall^'  ^'* 
our  misdoings  to  remembrance,  we  are  at  once  confounded 
with  heaviness  and  soitow,  the  throng  of  thoughts  clamours 
vociferously  in  our  breast,  sorrow  wears,  anxiety  wastes  us, 
the   soul  is  turned  to  woe,  and,  as  it  were,  darkened  with 
the  shade  of  a  kind  of  cloud.     Now  this  shade  of  confusion 
had  oppressed  the  minds   of  those  to  their  good,  to  whom 
Paul  said,  What  fruit  had  ye  then   in  those  things  whereof  ^om.  a, 
ye  are  now  ashamed?    Let  shade,  then,  seize  this  day  of  sin, 
i.  c.  *  Let  the  chastening  of  penance  with  befitting  sorrow 
discompose  the  flattery  of  sin.'     And  hence  it  is  added  with 
fitness. 

Let  it  be  enfolded  in  bitterness. 

83.  For  the  day  is  enfolded  in  bitterness,  when,  upon  the  xviii. 
soul  returning  to  knowledge,  the  inflictions  of  penance  follow 


206  Consent  needs  more  penance  than  unwilling gratijication. 

Job  3,  upon  the  caresses  of  sin.  We  *  enfold  the  day  in  bitterness,' 
^  '^^  when  we  regard  the  punishments  that  follow  the  joys  of  for- 
bidden gratification,  and  pour  tears  of  bitter  lamenting 
around  them.  For  whereas  what  is  folded  up  is  covered  on 
every  side,  we  wish  '  the  day  to  be  folded  in  bitterness,'  that 
each  man  may  mark  on  every  side  the  ills  that  threaten 
crooked  courses,  and  may  cleanse  the  wantonness  of  self- 
gratification  by  the  tears  of  bitter  sorrow. 

34.  But  if  we  hear  that  daij,  w^hich  we  have  rendered  the 
*  gratification  of  sin,'  assailed  with  so  many  imprecations, 
that,  surely,  our  tears  poured  around  it  may  expiate  whatso- 
ever sin  the  soul  is  become  guilty  of  by  being  touched  with 
gratification  through  negligence,  w^ith  what  visitings  of 
penitence  is  the  night  of  that  day  to  be  stricken,  i.  e.  the 
actual  consent  to  sin  ?  For  as  it  is  a  less  fault  when  the 
mind  is  carried  away  in  delight  by  the  influence  of  the  flesh, 
yet  by  the  resistance  of  the  Spirit  offers  violence  to  its  sense 
of  delight;  so  it  is  a  more  heinous  and  complete  wickedness 
not  only  to  be  attracted  to  the  fascination  of  sin  by  the 
feeling  of  delight,  but  to  pander  to  it  by  yielding  consent. 
Therefore  the  mind  must  be  cleansed  from  defilement  by 
being  wrung  harder  with  the  hand  of  penitence,  in  proportion 
as  it  sees  itself  to  be  more  foully  stained  by  the  yielding  of 
the  consent.     And  hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined, 

Ver.  6.  As  for  thai  night,  let  a  black  tempest  seize  it. 

35.  For  the  awakened  spirit  of  sorrow  is  like  a  kind  of 
tempestuous  whirlwind.  For  when  a  man  understands  what 
sin  he  has  committed,  when  he  minutely  considers  the 
wickedness  of  his  evil  doings,  he  clouds  the  mind  with  son-ow, 
and  the  air  of  quiet  joy  being  agitated,  as  it  were,  he  sweeps 
away  all  the  inward  tranquillity  of  his  breast,  by  the  whirl- 
wind of  penitence.  For  unless  the  heart,  returning  to  the 
knowledge  of  itself,  were  broken  by  such  a  whirlwind,  the 

Ps.48,7.  Prophet  would  never  have  said,  Thou  hreakest  the  ships  of 
Tarshish  ivith  a  strong  tcind.  For  Tarshish  is  rendered, 
'  the  exploring  of  joy.'  But  when  the  strong  blast  of  peni- 
tence seizes  the  mind,  it  disturbs  therein  all  the  *  explorings' 
after  a  censurable  joy,  that  it  now  takes  pleasure  in  nought 
but  to  weep,  minds  nought  but  what  may  fill  it  with 
affright.     For  it  sets  before  the  eyes,  on  the  one  hand,  the 


Sin  to  be  seized  by  penance  as  by  a  whirlwind.      207 

strictness  of  justice,  on  the  other  the  deserts  of  sin,  it  sees   Rook 

what  punishment  it  deserves,  if  the  pitifulness  of  the  sparing '-^ 

Hand  be  wanting,  which  is  wont  by  present  soiTowing  to 
rescue  from  eternal  woe.  Therefore,  *  a  strong  wind  breaks 
the  ships  of  Tarsliish,'  when  a  mighty  force  of  compunction 
confounds,  with  wholesome  terrors,  our  minds  which  have 
abandoned  themselves  to  this  world,  like  as  to  the  sea.  Let 
him  say  then,  As  for  that  night,  let  a  black  tempest  seize 
it,  i.  e.  let  not  the  softness  of  secure  ease  cherish  the 
commission  of  sin,  but  the  bitterness  of  repentance  burst  on 
it  in  pious  fury. 

36.  But  we  are  to  bear  in  mind,  that  when  we  leave  sins 
unpunished,  we  are  *  taken  possession  of  by  the  night,' 
but  when  we  correct  those  with  the  visitation  of  penitence, 
then  we  ourselves  *  take  possession  of  the  night,'  that  we 
have  made.  And  the  sin  of  the  heart  is  then  brought  into 
our  right  of  possession,  if  it  is  repressed  in  its  beginning. 
And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  God  to  Cain,  harbouring 

evil  thoughts,  Thy  sin  will  lie  at  the  door.  But  under  thee  Gen.  4, 
shall  be  his  desire,  and  thou  shall  rule  over  him.  For  *  sin 
lieth  at  the  door,'  when  it  is  knocking  in  the  thoughts,  and 
*  the  desire  thereof  is  under,'  and  man  '  ruleth  over  it,'  if  the 
wickedness  of  the  heart,  being  looked  to,  be  quickly  put 
down,  and  before  it  gi'ows  to  a  state  of  hardness,  be  subdued 
by  a  strenuous  opposition  of  the  mind.  Therefore  that  the 
mind  may  be  quickly  made  sensible  of  its  offence  by  repent- 
ing, and  hold  in  under  its  authority  the  usui'])ing  power  of 
sin,  let  it  be  rightly  said,  As  far  that  night  let  a  black 
tempest  seize  it ;  as  though  it  were  said  in  plain  words,  *  Lest 
the  mind  be  the  captive  of  sin,  let  it  never  leave  a  sin  free 
from  penance.'  And  because  we  liave  a  sure  hope  that  wliat 
we  prosecute  with  weeping,  will  never  be  urged  against  us 
by  the  Judge  to  come,  it  is  rightly  added, 

I^t  it  not  be  joined  unto  the  days  of  the  year ;  let  it  not 
come  into  the  number  qf  the  months. 

37.  The  year   of  our  illumination  is  then  accomplished,    xx. 
when  at  the  ai)i)earing  of  the  Eternal  Judge  of  Holy  Church, 

the  life  of  her  ])ilgrimage  is  completed.  She  tlien  receives 
the  recompense  of  her  labours,  when,  having  finished  this 
season  of  her  warfare,  she   returns  to  her  native  country. 


208   We  pray  that  The  Judge  may  not  regard  our  ^  night.'' 

Job  3,  Hence  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  Thou  shalt  bless  the  crown 
- — '- —  of  the  year  with  Thy  goodness.  For  the  crown  of  the  year 
Ps.  Qb^  is  as  it  were  *  blessed,'  when,  the  season  of  toil  at  an  end, 
the  reward  of  virtues  is  bestowed.  But  the  days  of  this  year 
are  the  several  virtues,  and  its  months  the  manifold  deeds 
of  those  virtues.  But  observe,  when  the  mind  is  erected  in 
confidence,  to  have  a  good  hope  thai,  when  the  Judge  comes, 
she  will  receive  the  reward  of  her  virtues,  all  the  evil  things 
that  she  has  done  are  also  brought  before  the  memoiy,  and 
she  greatly  fears  lest  the  strict  Judge,  Who  comes  to  reward 
virtues,  should  also  examine  and  weigh  exactly  those  things, 
which  have  been  unlawfully  committed,  and  lest,  when  '  the 
year'  is  completed,  the  '  night'  also  be  reckoned  in.  Let  him 
then  say  of  this  night.  Let  it  not  he  joined  unto  the  days  of 
the  year^  let  it  not  come  into  the  number  of  the  months.  As 
though  he  implored  that  strict  Judge  in  such  words  as  these; 
'  When,  the  time  of  Holy  Church  being  completed.  Thou 
shalt  manifest  Thyself  for  the  final  scrutiny,  do  Thou 
so  recompense  the  gifts  Thou  hast  vouchsafed,  that  Thou 
require  not  the  evil  we  have  committed.  For  if  that  '  night 
be  joined  unto  the  days  of  the  year,'  all  that  we  have  done  is 
brought  to  nought,  by  the  accounting  of  our  iniquity.  And 
the  days  of  our  virtues  no  longer  shine,  if  they  be  overclouded 
in  Thine  eyes  by  the  dark  confusion  of  our  night  being 
added  to  the  reckoning.' 

38.  But  if  we  would  not  then  have  inquest  made  on  our 
night,  we  must  take  especial  care  now  to  exercise  a  watchful 
eye  in  examining  it,  that  no  sin  whatever  may  remain  un- 
punished by  us,  that  the  froward  mind  be  not  bold  to 
vindicate  what  it  has  done,  and  by  that  vindication  add 
iniquity  to  iniquity.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  added, 

Ver.  7.   Lo,  let  that  flight  be  solitary,  and  worthy  of  no 

praise. 

xxi.       39.  There  are  some  men  that  not  only  never  bewail  what 

they  do,  but  who  do  not  cease  to  uphold  and  applaud  it, 

and  verily  a  sin  that  is  upheld,  is  doubled.     And  against  this 

Ecclus.  j^  is  rightly  said  by  one.  My  son,  hast  thou  sinned?  add  not 

'   '     again   thereto.      For  he  *  adds  sin   to  sin,'  who   over   and 

above  maintains  what  he  has  done  amiss;  and  he  does  not 

'  leave  the  night  alone,'  who  adds  the  support  of  vindication 


Night  of  sin  best  left  solitary.      IVho  curse  it.       209 

also  to  the  darkness  of  his  fault.     It  is  hence  that  the  first  Book 

man,  when   called  in  question  concerning  the  *  night'  of  his — 

error,  would  not  have  the  same  *  night'  to  be  *  solitarj^,'  in 
that  while  by  that  questioning  he  was  called  to  repentance, 
he  added  the  props  of  self-exculpation,  saying.  The  icoynan 
whom  Thou  gavest  to  be  with  me^  she  gave  me  of  the  tree., 
and  I  did  eat;  i.  e.  covertly  turning  the  fault  of  his  trans- 
gression upon  his  Maker ;  as  if  he  said,  '  Thou  gavest  me 
occasion  of  transgressing,  Who  gavest  me  the  woman.'  It  is 
hence  that  in  the  human  race  the  branch  of  this  sin  is 
drawn  out  from  that  root  so  far  as  to  this  present  time,  that 
what  is  done  amiss  should  be  yet  further  maintained.  Let 
him  say  then.  Let  that  night  be  solitary^  and  not  worthy  of 
any  praise.  As  though  he  besought  in  plain  words,  *  Let 
the  fault  that  we  have  done  remain  alone,  lest  while  it  is 
praised  and  upheld,  it  bind  us  a  hundredfold  more  in  the 
sight  of  our  Judge.  We  ought  not  indeed  to  have  sinned, 
but  would  that,  by  not  adding  others,  we  would  even  leave 
those  by  themselves,  Avhich  we  have  committed.' 

40.  But  here  it  is  to  be  impressed  upon  our  minds,  that  he 
in  a  true  sense  bears  hard  upon  his  sin,  whose  heart  is  no 
longer  set  to  the  love  of  the  present  state  of  being  by  any 
longing  for  prosperity,  who  sees  how  deceitful  are  the  caresses 
of  this  world,  and  reckons  its  smiles  as  a  kind  of  persecution ; 
and  hence  it  is  well  added, 

Ver.  8.  Let  them  curse  it  that  curse  the  day. 

4L  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words;  *  Let  them  strike  the 
darkness  of  this  night  by  truly  repenting,  who  henceforth 
despise  and  tread  u})on  the  light  of  worldly  prosperity.'  For 
if  we  take  *  the  day,'  for   the  gladness  of  delight,  of  this 

*  night'  it  is  rightly  said.  Let  them  curse  it  that  curse  the 
day.  In  that,  indeed,  they  do  truly  chastise  the  misdeeds 
committed  with  the  visitations  of  j)enancp,  who  are  hence- 
forth earned  away  by  no  sense  of  delight  after  deceitful 
goods.  For  of  those  whom  other  mischievous  practices  still 
delight,  it  is  all  false  whereinsoever  they  are  seen  to  bewail 
one  set  they  have  been  guilty  of.  But  if,  as  we  have  said  above, 
we  understand  thereby  the  crafty  suggestion  of  our  old  enemy, 
those  are  to  be  understood  to  curse  the  *  night,' that  curse  the 

*  day,'  in  that  surely  they  all  really  punish  their  past  sins, 


xxii. 


210  Casting  off  sin  rouses  Leviathan^ s  rage* 

Job  8,  who  in  the  mere  flattering  suggestion  itself  detect  the  snares 
of  the  malicious  deceiver.     But  it  is  well  added; 


IMouAt.  _       . 

Who  are  ready  to  rouse  up  Leviatlian. 
xxiii.       42.  For  all  they  that  with  the  spirit  tread  under  foot  the 
things  which  are  of  the  world,  and  with  a  perfect  bent  of  the 
mind  desire  the  things  that  belong  to  God,  rouse  up  Leviathan 
against  themselves,  in  that  they  inflame  his  malice,  by  the 
incitements  of  their  life  and  conduct.     For  those  that  are 
subject  to  his  will,  are  as  it  were  held  in  possession  by  him 
with  an  undisturbed  right,  and  their  tyrannizing  king,  as  it 
were,  enjoys  a  kind  of  security,  while  he  rules  their  hearts 
with  a  power  unshaken.     But  when  the  spirit  of  each  man  is 
quickened  again  to  the  longing  after  his  Creator;  when  he 
gives  over    the    sloth  of  negligence,   and  kindles  the   frost 
of  former  insensibility   with   the  fire   of  holy  love ;    when 
he  calls  to  mind  his  innate  freedom,  and  blushes  that  his 
enemy  should  keep  him  as  his  slave;  because  that  enemy 
marks  that  he  is  himself  contemned,  and  sees  that  the  ways 
of  God  are  laid  hold  of,  he  is  stung  that  his  captive  struggles 
against  him,  and  is  at  once  fired  with  jealousy,   at   once 
pressed  to  the  conflict,  at  once  raises  himself  to  urge  count- 
less temptations  against  the  soul  that  withstands  him,  and 
stimulates  himself  in  all  the  arts  of  mangling,  that  launching 
the  darts  of  temptation  he  may  pierce  the  heart,  which  he 
has  long  held  with  an  undisputed  title.     For  he  slept,  as  it 
were,  whilst  he  reposed  at  rest  in  the  corrupt  heart.    But  he  is 
*  roused,'  in  challenging  the  fight,  when  he  loses  the  right  of 
wicked  dominion.     Let  those  then  curse  this  light,  that  are 
ready  to  rouse   up  Leviathan,  i.   e.  *  let   all   those    gather 
themselves   resolutely   to    encounter  sin  with  the    stroke  of 
severe  judgment,  who  are  no  wise  afraid  to  rouse  up  Leviathan 
Ecclus.  in  his  tempting  of  them.'     For  so  it  is  written.  My  son,  if 
Vule     thou  come  to  serve  the  Lord,  stand  in  righteousness  and  in 
fear,  a?id  prepare  thy  soul  for  temptation.     For  whosoever 
hastes  to  gird  himself  in  the  service  of  God,  what  else  does 
he  than  prepare  against  the  encounter  of  the  old  adversary, 
that  the  same  man  set  at  liberty  may  take  blows  in  the  strife, 
who,  when  slaving  in  captivity  under  tyrannizing  power,  was 
left  at  rest  ?     But  in  this  very  circumstance  that  the  mind  is 
braced  to  meet  the  enemy,  that  some  vices  it  has  under  its 


Infirmities  left  in  good  men  to  hinder  pride.  211 

feet,  and  is  striving  against  others,  it  sometimes  happens  Hook 

that  somewhat  of  sin  is  permitted  to  remain,  nevertheless  not  — 

so  as  to  do  any  great  injury. 

43.  And  often  the  mind,  which  overcomes  many  and 
forcible  oppositions,  is  unable  to  master  one  within  itself,  and 
that  perchance  a  very  little  one,  though  it  be  most  earnestly 
on  the  watch  against  it.  Which  doubtless  is  the  effect  of 
God's  dispensation,  lest  being  resplendent  with  virtue  on  all 
points,  it  be  lifted  up  in  self-elation,  that  while  it  sees  in 
itself  some  trifling  thing  to  be  blamed,  and  yet  has  no  power 
to  subdue  the  same,  it  may  never  attribute  the  victory  to 
itself,  but  to  the  Creator  only,  whereinsoever  it  has  power  to 
subdue  with  resolution ;  and  hence  it  is  well  added, 

Ver.9.  Let  the  stars  thereof  be  overshadowed  with  darkness. 

44.  For  the  stars  oj  this  night  are  overshadoiced  uith  dark-  xxiv. 
nesSy  when  even  they  that  already  shine  with  great  virtues,  still 
bear  something  of  the  dimness  of  sin,  while  they  struggle 
against  it,  so  that  they  even  shine  with  great  lustre  of  life, 

and  yet  still  draw  along  with  unwillingness  some  remains  of 
the  night.  Which  as  we  have  said  is  done  with  this  view, 
that  the  mind  in  advancing  to  the  eminence  of  its  righteous- 
ness, may  through  weakness  be  the  better  strengthened,  and 
may  in  a  more  genuine  manner  shine  in  goodness  by  the 
same  cause,  whereby,  to  the  humbling  of  it,  little  defects 
overcloud  it  even  against  its  will.  And  hence  when  the 
land  of  promise  now  won  was  to  be  divided  to  the  people  of 
Israel,  the  Gentile  people  of  Canaan  are  not  said  to  be  slain, 
but  to  be  made  tributaiy  to  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  ;  as  it  is 
written.  The  Canaanites  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  Ephraim  Jos.  16, 
under  tribute.  For  what  does  the  Canaan ite,  a  Gentile 
people,  denote  saving  a  fault  ?  And  oftentimes  we  enter  the 
land  of  promise  with  great  virtues,  because  we  are  strengthened 
by  the  inward  hope  that  regards  eternity.  Hut  while,  amidst 
lofty  deeds,  we  retain  certain  small  faults,  we  as  it  were  permit 
the  Canaanite  to  dwell  in  our  land.  Yet  he  is  made  tributary, 
in  that  this  same  fault,  which  we  cannot  bring  under,  we  force 
back  by  humility  to  answer  the  end  of  our  wellbeing,  that  the 
mind  may  think  meanly  of  itself  even  in  itsliighesl  excellencies, 
in  proportion  as  it  fails  to  master  by  its  own  strength  even 
ihe  small  things  that  it  aims  at.     Hence  it  is  well  written 

p2 


2\'2  Mati's  light  overclouded  through  night  of  consent  to  sin. 

Job  3,  again,   Noiv  these  are  the  nations  which  the  Lord  left^  to 
•-_  prove  Israel  by  them.     For  it  is  for  this  that  some  of  our 

Moral.-*  "^  . 

Jud.  3,  least  faults  are  retained,  that  our  fixed  mind  may  ever  be 
practising  itself  heedfully  to  the  conflict,  and  not  presume 
upon  victory,  forasmuch  as  it  sees  enemies  yet  alive  within  it, 
by  whom  it  still  dreads  to  be  overcome.  Thus  Israel  is 
trained  by  the  Gentile  people  being  reserved,  in  that  the 
uplifting  of  our  goodness  meets  with  a  check  in  some  very 
little  faults,  and  learns,  in  the  little  things  that  withstand  it, 
that  it  does  not  subdue  the  greater  ones  by  itself. 

45.  Yet  this  that  is  said.  Let  the  stars  thereof  he  over- 
shadowed with  darkness,  may  also  be  understood  in  another 
sense  ;  for  that  nigltt,  viz.  consent  to  the  sin,  which  was 
derived  to  us  by  the  transgression  of  our  first  parent,  has 
smitten  our  mind's  eye  with  such  a  dimness,  that  in  this 
life's  exile,  beset  by  the  darkness  of  its  blinded  state,  with 
whatever  force  it  strain  after  the  light  of  eternity,  it  is  unable 
to  pierce  through  ;  for  we  are  born  condemned  sinners  after 
post  punishment  has  begun  \  and  we  come  into  this  life  together  with 
the  desert  of  our  death,  and  when  we  lift  up  the  eye  of  the 
mind  to  that  beam  of  light  above,  we  grow  dark  with  the 
mere  dimness  of  our  natural  infirmity.  And  indeed  many  in 
this  feeble  condition  of  the  flesh  have  been  made  strong  by 
so  great  a  force  of  virtue,  that  they  could  shine  like  stars  in 
the  world.  Many  in  the  darkness  of  this  present  life,  while 
they  shew  forth  in  themselves  examples  above  our  reach, 
shine  upon  us  from  on  high  after  the  manner  of  stars ;  but 
with  whatsoever  brilliancy  of  practice  they  shine,  with  what- 
ever fire  of  compunction  they  enkindle  their  hearts,  it  is 
plain  that  while  they  still  bear  the  load  of  this  corruptible  flesh, 
they  are  unable  to  behold  the  liglit  of  eternity  such  as  it  is. 
So  then  let  him  say.  Let  the  stars  thereof  be  overshadowed 
with  darkness ;  i.  e.  *  let  even  those  in  their  contemplations 
still  feel  the  darkness  of  the  old  night,  of  whom  it  appears 
that  they  already  spread  the  rays  of  their  virtues  over  the 
human  race  in  the  darkness  of  this  life,  seeing  that,  though 
they  already  spring  to  the  topmost  height  in  thought,  they 
arc  yet  pressed  down  below  by  the  weight  of  the  first  offence. 
And  hence  it  comes  to  pass  that  at  the  same  time  that 
without  they  give  specimens  of  light,  like  the  stars,  yet  within, 


pcenam 


Dawn  of  true  Light  hidden  from  sinful  eyes.        213 

being  closely  encompassed  by  the  darkness  of  night,  they   Book 
fail    to   mount    up    to    the    assuredness    of  an    immoveable — 


vision.  Now  the  mind  is  often  so  kindled  and  inflamed,  that, 
though  it  be  still  set  in  the  flesh,  it  is  transported  into 
God,  and  every  caraal  imagination  brought  under ;  and 
yet  not  so  that  it  beholds  God  as  He  is,  in  that,  as  we 
have  said,  the  weight  of  the  original  condemnation  presses 
upon  it  in  corruptible  flesh.  Oftentimes  it  longs  to  be 
swallowed  up,  just  as  it  is,  that  if  it  might  be  so,  it  might 
attain  the  eternal  life  without  the  intervention  of  the  bodily 
death.  Hence  Paul,  when  he  ardently  sought  for  the  inward 
light,  yet  in  some  sort  dreaded  the  evils'  of  the  outward  •  damna 
death,  said,  For  tee  that  are^  in  this  tabernacle  do  (/roan ,2 Cot. 5 j 
being  burtliened,  for  that  we  would  not  be  unclothed,  but  '  ^^' 
clothed  upon,  that  niortalifg  might  be  sivallowed  up  of  life. 
Therefore  holy  men  long  to  see  the  true  dawn,  and,  if  it  were 
vouchsafed,  they  would  even  along  with  the  body  attain  that 
deep  of  inmost  light.  But  with  whatever  ardour  of  purpose 
they  may  spring  forth,  the  old  night  still  weighs  upon  them, 
and  those  eyes  of  our  corruptible  flesh,  which  the  crafty  enemy 
has  opened  to  concu])iscence,  the  just  Judge  holds  back 
from  the  view  of  His  inward  radiance.  And  hence  it  is  well 
added, 

f.et  it  look  for  light  and  have  none,  neither  let  it  see  the 
dawning  of  the  day. 

46.  For  with  whatever  strength  of  purj^ose  the  mind,  while  xxv. 
yet  in  this  pilgrimage,  labours  to  see  the  Light  as  It  is,  the 
])Ower  is  withheld,  in  that  this  is  hidden  from  it  by  the 
blindness  of  its  state  under  the  curse.  ['Now  the  *  rising 
of  the  dautV  is  the  brightness  (jf  inward  truth,  which  ought 
to  be  ever  new  to  us.  And  this  the  night  assuredly  seeth  not, 
because  our  infirmity,  blind  by  reason  of  sin,  and  still  jdaced 
in  the  corruptible  flesh,  mounts  not  up  to  that  light  wherewith 
our  fellowcitizens  above  are  already  irradiated.  For  the 
rising  of  this  dawn  is  in  the  interior,  where  the  brightness  of 
the  Divine  Nature  is  manifested  ever  new  to  the  spirits 
of  the  Angels,  and  where  that  bliss  of  light  is  as  it  were  ever 

••  al.  $0  long  as  we  are — tr^.  and  there  without  any  notice  to  shew 

'  The  passage  in  brackets  is  found     where  it  comes  from.    (Ben.)    It  is  not 
only    in    the    Edition   of   Gussanville,     in  the  Oxford  Mss. 


214    Sin  conceived  through  lust,  born  through  consent. 
Job  9,  dawning,  which  is  never  brought  to  an  end.]     But  the  risi?ig 


Moral 


of  the  dawfi,  is  that  new  birth  of  the  Resurrection,  whereby 
Holy  Church,  with  the  flesh  too  raised  up,  rises  to  contem- 
plate the  sight  of  Eternity ;  for  if  the  very  Resurrection  of  our 
flesh  were  not  as  it  were  a  kind  of  birth,  Truth  would  never 

Matt,  have  said  of  it,  In  the  Regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  Man 
'  shall  sit  upon  the  throne  of  His  glory.  This  then,  which 
He  called  a  rege?ieratio?i,  He  beheld  as  a  rising.  But  with 
whatever  virtue  the  Elect  now  shine  forth,  they'  cannot 
pierce  to  see  what  will  be  that  glory  of  the  new  birth, 
wherewith  they  will  then  mount  up  together  with  the  flesh  to 

1  Cor.  contemplate  the  sight  of  Eternity.  Hence  Paul  says.  Eye 
'  *  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them 
that  love  Him.  Let  him  say  then.  Let  it  look  for  light  and 
have  none,  7ieither  let  it  see  the  dawning  of  the  day.  For 
our  frail  nature,  darkened  by  its  spontaneous  fault,  penetrates 
not  the  brightness  of  inward  light,  unless  it  first  discharge 
its  debt  of  punishment  by  death.     It  goes  on; 

Ver.  10.  Because  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  of  my  mother'' s 
womb,  nor  took  away  sorrow  from  mine  eyes. 

xxvi.  47.  As  has  been  likewise  remarked  above,  the  words,  it 
shut  not  lip,  are  *  it  opened,'  and  it  took  not  away,  '  it 
brought  upon  me.'  So  that  this  night,  i.  e.  sin,  opened  the 
door  of  the  womb,  in  that  to  man,  conceived  unto  sin, 
it  unsealed  the  lust  of  concupiscence"",  w^hereof  the  Prophet 

Isaiali  says.  Enter  thou  into  thy  chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors. 
For  we  '  enter  our  chambers,'  when  we  go  into  the  recesses 
of  our  own  hearts.  And  we  '  shut  the  doors,'  when  we 
restrain  forbidden  lusts;  and  so  whereas  our  consent  set  open 
these  doors  of  carnal  concupiscence,  it  forced  us  to  the 
countless  evils  of  our  corrupt  state.  And  so  now  we  hence- 
forth groan  under  the  weight  of  mortality,  though  we  came" 
thereunto  by  our  own  free  will,  in  that  the  justice  of  the 
sentence  against  us  requires  thus  much,  that  what  we  have  done 
willingly,  we  should  bear  with  against  our  will.    It  proceeds ; 

"  One  Ms.  ap.  Ben.  '  in  that  lust  reading.  See  p.  217. 
opened  the  desires  that  were  conceived         "    Al.  *  came   not/   which  reading 
in  men  toward  sin.'     This  rending  is  of  2  Mss.  Hen.  seems  right  in  reject- 
not  ill  suited  to  the  sequel  and  to§.  49.  ing.     He  is  speaking  of  habitual  sin, 
but  it  looks  like  an  explanation,  (and  and  of  a  figurative  conception, 
is  the  true  explanation,)  of  the  common 


26,  20. 


Conception,  hirth,  nursing^  and  sucklijig  of  nn,       215 

Ver.  11,  1*2.    Why  died  I  not  from  the  womb?    II  hy  did  I  Book 
7iot  give  up  the  ghost  when  I  came  out  of  the  belly?     Why 


did  the  knees  prevent  me?  or  why  the  breasts  that  J  should 
stick '^ 

48.  Be  the  thought  far  from  us,  that  blessed  Job,  who  wasxxvii. 
endued  with   such  high   spiritual  knowledge,  and  who  had 
such  a  witness  of  praise  from  the  Judge  within,  should  wish 

that  he  had  perished  in  abortive  birth  !  But  seeing,  what 
we  also  learn  by  the  reward  which  he  received,  that  he  has 
within  the  witness  of  his  fortitude,  the  weight  of  his  words 
is  to  be  reckoned  within. 

49.  Now  sin  is  committed  in  the  heart  in  four  ways,  and 
in  four  ways  it  is  consummated  in  act.  For  in  the  heart  it  is 
committed  by  the  suggestion,  the  pleasure,  the  consent,  and 
the  boldness  to  defend.  For  the  suggestion  comes  of  the 
enemy;  the  pleasure,  of  the  flesh;  the  consent,  of  the  spirit; 
and  boldness  to  uphold,  of  pride.  For  the  sin,  which  ought 
to  fill  the  mind  with  apprehension,  only  exalts  it,  and  in 
throwing  down  uplifts,  while  by  uplifting  it  causes  its  more 
grievous  overthrow;  and  hence  that  upright  frame,  wherein 
the  first  man  was  created,  was  by  our  old  foe  dashed  down 
by  these  four  strokes.  For  the  serpent  tempted,  Eve  was 
pleased,  Adam  yielded  consent,  and  even  when  called  in 
question  he  refused  in  effrontery  to  confess  his  sin.  The 
serpent  tempted,  in  that  the  secret  enemy  silently  suggests 
evil  to  man's  heart.  Eve  was  pleased,  because  the  sense  of 
the  flesh,  at  the  voice  of  the  serpent,  presently  gives  itself  up 
to  pleasure.  And  Adam,  who  was  set  above  the  woman, 
yielded  consent,  in  that  whilst  the  flesh  is  carried  away  in 
enjoyment,  the  spirit  also  being  deprived  of  its  strength 
gives  in  from  its  uprightness.  And  Adam  when  called  in 
question  would  not  confess  his  sin,  in  that,  in  proportion  as 
the  spirit  is  by  committing  sin  severed  from  the  Truth,  it 
becomes  worse  hardened  in  shamelessness  at  its  downfall. 
Sin  is  likewise  completed  in  act  by  the  self-same  four 
methods;  for  first  the  fault  is  done  in  secret,  but  afterwards 
it  is  done  openly  before  men's  eyes  without  the  blush  of  guilt, 
and  next  it  is  formed  into  a  habit,  finally,  whether  by  the 
cheats  of  false  hope,  or  the  stubbornness  of  reckless  despair, 
it  is  brought  to  full  growth. 


216  Fear^  without  haired  of  sin,  humbles  not. 

Job  3,       50.   These  four  modes   of  sin  then,  which   either  go   on 
secretly  in  the  heart,  or  which  are  executed  in  act,  blessed 


Job  views,  and  bewails  the  many  stages  of  sin  wherein  the 
human  race  was  fallen,  saying,  Why  died  I  not  from  the 
womb  ?  Why  did  I  not  gii^e  np  the  yhost  when  I  came  out 
of  the  belly?  Why  did  the  knees  prevent  me?  or  why  the 
breasts  that  I  should  suck  '^  For  ^  the  womb  of  conception' 
at  the  first  was  the  tongue  of  the  evil  suggestion.  Now  the 
sinner  would  '  perish  in  the  womb,'  if  only  man  knew  in  the 
very  suggestion  itself  that  he  would  bring  death  upon  himself. 
Yet  '  he  came  forth  from  the  belly,'  in  that,  as  soon  as  the 
tongue  had  conceived  him  in  sin  by  its  suggestions,  the 
pleasure  likewise  innnediately  hurried  him  forth  ;  and  after 
his  coming  forth,  '  the  knees  prevented  him,'  in  that  having 
issued  forth  in  the  carnal  gratification,  he  then  completed 
the  sin  by  the  consent  of  the  spirit,  all  the  senses  being  made 
subservient  like  knees  underneath.  And  *  the  knees  prevent- 
ing him,  the  breasts  did  also  give  him  suck.'  For  whereas, 
in  the  spirit's  consenting  to  the  sin,  the  senses  were  drawn 
into  the  service,  the  many  reasonings  of  vain  confidence 
followed,  which  nourished  the  soul  thus  born  in  sin  with 
poisoned  milk,  and  lulled  it  with  soothing  excuses,  that  it 
should  not  fear  the  bitter  punishment  of  death.     And  hence 

Gen.  3,  the  first  man  waxed  bolder  alter  his  sin,  saying,  The  woman 
whom  tJtou  gavest  to  he  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and 
I  did  eat.  And  truly,  he  had  fled  to  hide  himself  out  of 
fear,  yet  when  he  was  called  in  question,  he  made  it  appear 
how  swoln  he  was  with  pride  while  he  feared ;  for  when 
punishment  is  feared  as  the  present  consequence  of  sin,  and 
the  face  of  God  being  lost  is  not  loved,  the  fear  is  one  that 

» timor   proceeds  from  a  high  stomach  ^,  and  not  from  a  lowly  spirit. 

more  ^^"^  ^^  is  full  of  pride  who  does  not  give  over  his  sin,  if  he 
may  go  unpunished. 

51.  But,  as  we  have  said,  sin  is  committed  in  these  four 
ways,  as  in  the  heart,  so  also  in  the  deed;  for  he  saith.  Why 
died  I  not  in  the  womb  ?  For  the  womb  to  the  sinner  is  the 
secret  fault  in  man,  which  conceives  the  sinner  under  cover, 
and  as  yet  hides  its  guilt  in  the  dark.  Why  did  I  not  give 
lip  the  ghost,  when  I  came  out  of  the  belly?  For  there  is  *  a 
coming  out  of  the  \a  omb  from  tlie  belly,'  when  the  sinner 


Man  should  kill  his  sinful  life  in  its  beginnings.      217 

does  not  blush  to  do  openly  as  well  the  things,  which  he  has  Book 

been  guilty  of  in  secret.     Thus  they  had  as  it  were  come 1_ 

out  of  the  womb  of  their  hiding  place,  of  whom  the  Prophet 
spake  it ;  And  tltey  declare  Iheir  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide  it  I?.  3,  9. 
not.      Why  did  the  knees  prevent  me  ?     In  that  the  sinner, 
when  he  is  not  confounded  at  his  wickedness,  is  strengthened 
in  the  same  by  the  further  stays  of  most  heinous  custom. 
The  sinner  is  as  it  were  nursed  on  the  knees,  till  he  grow 
bigger,  so  long  as  the  sin  is  confirmed  by  habitual  acts,  till 
it  acquires  strength.    Or  why  the  breasts  that  I  should  suck? 
For  when  the  sin  has  once  begun  to  issue  into  habit,  then, 
alas!  the  sinner  feeds  himself  either  with  the  fallacious  hope 
of  God's  mercy,  or  with  the  open  recklessness  of  despair, 
tliat  he  never  may  return  back  to  self-amendment,  in  so  far 
as  he  either  extravagantly  colours  to    himself  the   pitiful- 
ness  of  his  Maker,  or  is  extravagantly  terrified  at  the  sin  that 
he  has  done.     Let  the   blessed  man,  then,   take  a  view  of 
man's  fall,  and  mark  down  what  precipice  he  has  plunged 
himself  into  the  pit  of  iniquity,  saying,  M'hy  died  1  not  in 
the  womb?  i.  c.  '  Why  would  1  not,  in  the  very  secret  act  of 
sin  in  the  heart,  kill  myself  to  the  life  of  the  flesh  ?'    U  hy  did 
I  not  give  up  the  ghost,  when  I  came  out  of  the  belly ?  i.e. 
*  Why,  when  I  came  forth  in  the  overt  act,  died  I  not,  was  I 
not   then  at  least  instructed    that  I  was  undone  ?'    For  he 
would  have  '  given  up   the  ghost'  in  his  condemnation  of 
himself,  if  he  had  known  that  he  was  lost.      Why  did  the 
knees  prevent  me?   i.e.  *  Even  after   the  open   act  of  sin, 
why,  yet  further,  did  the  custom   too   take   me  up  in  it,  to 
make  me  stronger  to  commit  sin,  and  to  nurse  and  sustain 
me    with   habitual  wicked  acts?'     ^^hy   the  breasts,  that    I 
should  suck?  i.  e.  *  After  I  entered  into  the  habit  of  sin,  why 
did  I  rear  myself  to  a  more  tremendous  j)itch  of  iniquity, 
either  by  reliance  on  false  hope,  or  by  the  milk  of  a  miserable 
despair?'    For  when  the  fault  lias  been  brought  into  a  habit, 
the  mind,  even  if  it  be  inclined,  by  this  time  resists   more 
feebly:   for  it  becomes  bound  upon  the  mind  by  as  many 
chains,  as  there  are  recurrences  of  the   evil   j)ractice   that 
clench   it  fast.     Whence  it  haj)pcns   that   tlie  mind,   being 
sapped  of  strength,  when  it  has  no  j)o\ver  to  get  free,  turns 
to  some  resource  or  other  of  fallacious  consolation,  so  as  to 


218  Our  Lord  raised  the  dead,  but  not  those  of  the  dead. 
Job  3,  flatter  itself  that  the  Judge,  Who  is  to  come,  is  of  so  great 

11      1  O 

— -^ — ^  mercy,  that  even  those,  whom  He  shall  find  deserving  of 
condemnation.  He  will  never  wholly  destroy.  Whereunto 
there  is  this  worst  addition,  that  the  tongue  of  many  like 
him  abets  him,  since  there  are  many  who  magnify  with  their 
praises  these  very  misdeeds;  whence  it  comes  to  pass  that 
the  fault  is  continually  growing,  nourished  by  applauses. 
Also  then  we  neglect  to  heal  the  wound,  which  is  counted 
worthy  of  the  meed  of  praise.     Hence  Solomon  says  well, 

Ftox.  i,My  so?i,  if  sinners  give  thee  suck,  consent  thou  not.     For 

•     *    the  wicked  *  give  suck,'  whenever  they  either  put  wicked 

acts  in  our  way  to  be  done  by  their  enticements,  or  applaud 

them  with  marks  of  favour  when  done.     Does  not  he  suck 

Ps.io  3.  of  whom  the  Psalmist  says,  For  the  wicked  man    is  com- 

^^^S'^f  mended  in  his  hearfs  desire:    and  he  that  doeth  iniquity 
receives  a  blessing  ? 

52.  We  must  also  know,  that  those  three  modes  of  being 

sinners  are  more  easily  corrected  as  they  come  in  their  order 

downwards ;  but  the  fourth  is  not  corrected  but  with  difii- 

culty.     And   hence   our   Saviour   raises    the    damsel  in   the 

house,  the  young  man  without  the  gate,  while  Lazarus  He 

raises  in  the  grave ;  for  he  that  sins  in  secret  is  as  yet  lying 

dead  in  the  house,  he   is  already  being  carried  without  the 

gate,  whose  iniquity  is  done  openly,  even  to  the  shameless- 

ness  of  commission  in  public ;    but  he  is  pressed  with  the 

sepulchral  mound,  who,  in  the  commission  of  sin,  is  over  and 

above  pressed  and  overlaid  with  the  use  of  habit.     But  all 

these  in  mercy  He  restores  to  life ;  in  that  it  is  often  the  case 

that  Divine  grace  enlighteneth  with  the  light  of  its  regard 

those  that  are  dead  not  only  in  secret  sins,  but  likewise  in 

open  evil  practices,  and  that  are  overlaid  with  the  weight  of 

evil  habit.     But  our  Saviour  knows  indeed  of  a  fourth  being 

dead  from  the  disciple's  lips,  yet  never  raises  him  to  life;  iu 

that  it  is  hard  indeed  for  one,  whom,  after  continuance  in  bad 

habit,  the  tongues  of  flatterers  too  get  hold  of,  to  be  recovered 

from  the  death  of  the  soul;  and  of  such  an  one  it  is  said 

Luke  9,  with  justice.  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead.     For  '  the  dead 

bury  the  dead,'  as  often  as  sinners  load  sinners  with  their  ap- 

Mss.      proval.    For  what  else  is  it  to  '  sin,'  but  to  lie  down  in  death  > 

^^'■y      and  to  *  bury,'  except  it  be  to  hide?   But  they  that  pursue  the 


Recovery  easier  from  an  earlier  stage.  219 

sinner  with  their  applauses,  bury  the  dead  body  under  the   Book 

mound  of  their  words.     Now  Lazarus  too  was  dead,  yet  he '— 

was  never  buried  by  the  dead.  For  the  believing  women, 
who  also  gave  tidings  of  his  death  to  the  Quickener,  had 
laid  him  under  the  ground.  And  hence  he  forthwith  returned 
back  to  the  light;  for  when  the  soul  is  dead  in  sin,  it  is  soon 
brought  back,  if  anxious  thoughts  live  over  it.  But  some- 
times, as  we  have  likewise  said  above,  it  is  not  false  hope 
that  cuts  off  the  mind,  but  a  more  deadly  despair  pierces  it. 
And  whereas  this  totally  cuts  off  all  hope  of  pardon,  it  supplies 
the  soul  with  the  milk  of  error  in  greater  abundance. 

53.  Let  the  holy  man  then  consider,  what  wickedness 
man  has  been  guilty  of,  yet  for  the  worse,  after  the  first  sin, 
and,  after  he  had  lost  paradise,  to  what  broken  steeps  he 
descended  in  this  place  of  exile,  and  let  him  say,  Mhy  died 
I  not  in  the  xcomh  ?  i.  e.  *  When  the  suggestion  of  the 
serpent  conceived  me  a  sinner,  O  that  I  had  then  known 
the  death  that  would  come  upon  me;  lest  the  suggestion 
should  transport  me  to  the  length  of  delight,  and  should 
link  me  more  closely  to  death.'  Why  did  I  not  give  up  the 
ghost  when  T  came  out  of  the  helhj?    As  though  he  said, 

*  O  that  when  1  came  out  to  the  external  gratification,  I  liad 
known  that  I  was  parting  with  the  internal  light ;  so  that  I 

had  at  least  died^  at  the  point  of  this  gratification  only,  thatM.e.died 
death  miffht  not  inflict  a  sharper  stinpr  through  the  consent.'  "^P^. 

°  1  o  o  sinning. 

Why  did  the  knees  prevent  me?  As  though  he  said,  *  O 
that  the  consent  had  never  caught  me,  my  senses  being  made 
to  bear  up  my  frowardness,  that  my  own  consenting  might 
not  hurry  me  yet  for  the  worse  into  shamelessness.'  Or 
why  the  breasts  that  I  should  suck?    As   though  he  said, 

*  O  that  I  had  at  least  refused  to  flatter  myself,  after  ill  acts 
committed,  that  1  might  not  attach  myself  thereby  the  more 
wickedly  to  my  fault,  the  more  softly  I  dealt  with  myself 
therein.'  So  then  in  these  words  of  reproach,  he  charged 
himself  with  having  sinned  in  our  first  j)art  lit.  Hut  had 
man  never  been  brought  down  to  tlie  wretchedness  of  this 
place  of  banishment,  by  committing  sin,  let  liim  say  what 
peace  he  might  have  liad.     It  proceeds  ; 

Ver.  13.  For  now  should  I  have  lain  still  and  been  quiet  ; 
I  should  have  slept ^  then  had  I  been  at  rest. 


220        Inward  strife  the  consequence  of  former  sin. 
Jobs  ,       54.  For  this  was  man  set  in  Paradise,  that,  had  he  attached 

13.  .  . 

himself  by  the  chains  of  love  to  an  obedient  following  of  his 


MoilAL 

xxviii.  Creator,  he  might  one  day  be  transported  to  the  heavenly 
comitry  of  the  Angels,  and  that,  without  the  death  of  the 
flesh.     For  he  was  made  immortal  in  such  sort,  that,  if  he 
sinned,   he    would  yet  be  capable    of  dying,    and  in   such 
wise  mortal,  that,  if  he  sinned  not,  he  should  even  be  capable 
of  never  dying,   and  that,  by  desert    of  a   free  choice,  he 
might  attain  the  blessedness  of  those  realms,  wherein  there 
is  neither  possibility  of  sinning  nor  of  death.     There  then, 
where,  since    the    time  of  the   Redemption,    the  Elect  are 
conveyed,    with    the    death    of    the    flesh    intervening,    to 
the    same   place    our   first  Parents,   if  they    had    remained 
stedfast  in  the   state   of  their  creation,  would  undoubtedly 
have   passed,    and    that,    without   the    death   of   the   body. 
Man  then  would  have  lain  still  and  been  quiet,  he  would 
have  '  slept  and  been   at   rest,'  in    that   being   brought    to 
the  rest  of  his  eternal  country,  he  would  have  found  as  it 
were  a  retreat  from  these  clamours  of  human  frailty.     For 
since  sin,  he,  as  it  were,  is  kept  awake  and  crying  aloud,  who 
bears  with  struggling  opposition  the  strife  of  his  own  flesh. 
This  stillness  of  peace-^man,  when  he  was  created,  enjoyed, 
when  he  received  the  freedom  of  his  will,  to  encounter  his 
enemy  withal.     And  because  he  yielded  himself  up  to  him 
of  his  own  accord,  he  forthwith  found  in  himself  what  was  to 
rise  in  clamours  against  him,  forthwith  met  in  the  conflict 
with  the  riotings  of  his  frail  nature;  and  though  he  had  been 
created  by  his  Maker  in  peaceful  stillness,  yet,  once  of  his 
own   will  laid  low  under  the  enemy,  he  had  to  endure  the 
clamours  of  the  fight.     For  the  very  suggestion  of  the  flesh 
is  a  kind  of  outcry  against  the  mind's  repose,  which  man  was 
not  sensible  of  before  the  transgression,  plainly  because  there 
was  nought  that  he  could  be  exposed  to  undergo  from  infir- 
mity of  his  own.     But  since  he  has  once  voluntarily  subjected 
himself  to  his  enemy,  now  being  bound  with  the  chains  of 
his  sins,  he  serves  him  in  some  tilings  even  against  his  will, 
and   sutt'ers  clamours  in  the   mind,   when  the   flesh  strives 
against  the  Spirit.     Did  not  clamours  within  meet  his  ears, 
who  was  pressed  with  the  words  of  an  evil  law  at  variance 

Rom.  7,  with  himself,  saying,  But  J  see  another  laiv  in  my  members, 


Creatures  mutually  subordinate.     Angelic  Princes.     2Q1 

warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  Book 

captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which   is  in  my  members.     Let '■ — 

then  the  holy  man  reflect  in  vvliat  a  peace  of  mind  he  would 
have  reposed,  if  man  had  refused  to  entertain  the  words  of 
the  serpent,  and  let  him  say,  For  now  should  I  have  lain 
still  and  been  quiet,  I  should  have  .slept,  then  had  I  been  at 
rest;  i.e.  *  I  should  have  withdrawn  into  the  retirement  of 
my  breast  to  contemplate  my  Creator,  had  not  the  fault,  the 
first  sin  of  consent,  betrayed  me  out  of  myself  to  the  riotings 
of  temj)tation;  and  let  him  add  to  the  joys  of  this  state  of 
tranquillity,  whom  he  would  have  had  for  his  fellows  in  the 
enjoyment  thereof,  saying, 

Ver.  14.    il  ith  the  Ixings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth. 

55.  From  things  without  sense  we  learn  what  to  think  of  xxix, 
beings  endowed  with  sense  and  understanding.     Now  the 
earth  is  rendered  fruitful  by  the  air,  while  the  air  is  governed 
by  the  quality  of  the  heaven.     In  like  manner  man  is  over 
the  beasts,  the  Angels  over  man,  and  the  Archangels  are  set 
over  the  Angels.     Now  that  man  has  sovereignty  over  the 
beasts,  we  both  perceive  by  the  common  use,  and  are  in- 
structed by  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  who  says,  Thou  hastPs.s,G. 
put  all  things  under  his  feet  ;  all  sheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and '' 
the  beasts  of  thejield.     And  that  the  Angels  are  placed  over 
man  is  testified  by  the  Prophet,  in  these  words.  But  the  prince  Dan.io, 
of  the  kingdom  of  Persia  withstood  me.    And  that  the  Angels  ' ' 
are  under  the  governance  of  authority  in  suj)erior  Angels, 
the  Prophet  Zechariah  declares  ;  And,  behold,  the  Angel  that  Ztch.  2, 
talked  uitli  me  went  forth,  and  another  Angel  went  out  to^'^' 
meet  him,  and  he  said  unto  him.  Run,  speak  to  this  young 
man,  saying,  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  as  towns  without 
walls.     For  in  the  actual  ministration  of  the  holy  spirits,  if 
the  superior  Powers  did  not  direct  the  inferior,  one  Angel 
would  never  have  learnt  from  the  lij)s  of  another  what  he 
should  say  to  a  man.     Therefore,  ft)rasniuch  as  the  Creator 
of  the  Universe  holdeth  all  things  by  Himself  alone,  and  yet 
for  the  purpose  of  constituting  the  defined  order  character- 
izing a  universe  of  beauty,  He  rules  one  part  by  the  govern- 
ance  of  another ;    we  shall  not  improperly  understand  the 
kings  to  be  the  Angehc  spirits,  who  the  more  devotedly  they 
serve  the  Maker  of  all  beings,  have  things  subject  to  their 


2*22  Present  and  former  real  of  soy  Is  departed. 

Job  3,  rule  the  more.  He  would  then  have  been  '  at  rest  with  kings;' 
in  that,  surely,  man  would  have  already  had  peace  in  com- 
pany with  the  Angels,  if  he  had  refused  to  listen  to  the 
tongue  of  the  Tempter.  These  too  are  rightly  called 
'  counsellors  °,'  for  they  '  consult'  for  the  spiritual  common- 
wealth, while  they  unite  us  to  the  kingdom  as  fellow-heirs 
with  themselves.  They  are  justly  called  *  counsellors ;'  for, 
whereas,  from  their  lips  we  are  made  acquainted  with  the 
will  of  the  Creator,  it  is  in  them  assuredly  that  we  find 
counsel  to  extricate  ourselves  from  the  misery  that  besets  us 
here. 

56.  But  since  blessed  Job  is  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
Eternity,  and  since  Eternity  knows  neither  to  have  been  nor 
to  be  about  to  be,  whereto,  as  we  know,  neither  things  past 
depart,  nor  things  future  approach,  as  seeing  all  things  in 
the  present,  he  may,  in  the  present  inspiration  of  the  Spirit, 
have  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  future  preachers  of  the  Church, 
who,  when  they  leave  the  body,  are  separated  by  no  intervals 
of  delay  from  the  inheritance  of  the  heavenly  country,  as  the 
fathers  of  old  were.  For  as  soon  as  they  are  parted  asunder 
from  the  ties  of  the  flesh,  they  enter  into  rest  in  their  heavenly 

2  Cor.    habitation,  as  Paul  bears  witness,  who  saith.  For  we  know 

5    1. 

'  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved, 

we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  ivith  hands, 
eternal  in  the  heavens.  But  before  our  Redeemer  by  His 
See  B.  own  death  paid  man's  penalty,  those  even  that  followed  the 
Jg'"  ^'  ways  of  the  heavenly  country,  the  bars  of  hell  held  fast  after 
their  departure  out  of  the  flesh,  not  so  that  punishment 
should  light  on  them,  but  that  while  resting  in  regions  apart, 
they  should  find  the  guilt  of  the  first  sin  a  bar  to  their 
entrance  into  the  kingdom,  in  that  the  Intercession  of  the 
Mediator  was  not  yet  come.  Whence,  according  to  the 
testimony  of  the  same  Mediator,  the  rich  man,  that  is 
tormented  in  hell,  beholds  Lazarus  at  rest  in  the  bosom 
of  Abraham.  Now  if  these  had  not  been  in  the  lower 
regions,  he,  in  the  place  of  his  torment,  would  not  have  seen 
them;  and  hence  this  same  Redeemer  of  us  men,  in  dying  to 
pay  the  debt  of  our  sin,  goes  down  into  hell,  that  He  may 
bring  back  to  the  realms  of  heaven  all  His  followers,  who 

"  lit.  consuls.  He  has  Roman  '  consuls'  in  view  in  this  derivation. 


Kings  In  the  Church.      Anarchy  in  the  soul.         223 

had  been  held  in  that  debt.     But  where  man  in  a  state  of  TJook 

I  v. 
redemption  now  ascendeth,  thither,  if  he  had  refused  to  sin, '— 

he  might  have  reached  even  mthout  the  help  of  the  Re- 
demption.    Let  then  the  holy  man  consider  that  if  he  had 
not   sinned,  he    would  have  ascended  to  that  place,  even 
without  redemption,  whereunto  the  holy  Preachers,  since  the 
Redemption,  must  fain  anive  at  the  cost  of  much  labour,  and 
let  him  shew  in  company  with  whom  he  would  now  be  at 
peace,  saying.    With   kings  and  counsellors   of  the   earth. 
For  the  kings  are  the  holy  Preachers  of  the  Church,  who 
know  both  how  to  order  aright  those  that  are  committed  to 
them,  and   to  regulate  their  own  bodies ;    who,  while   they 
check  the  motions    of  lust   in    themselves,  nde    over  their 
thoughts,  kept  in  due  subjection  according  to  the  law  of  virtue. 
These  too  are  rightly  entitled,  counsellors  of  the  earth.     For 
they  are  '  kings'  in  that  they  rule  themselves,  but  counsellors 
of  the  earth,  because   they   yield  lifegiving  counsel  to  the 
lifeless  sinner.     They  are  kings  in  that  they  know  how  to 
govern  themselves,  and  counsellors  of  the  earth,  in  that  they 
lead  earthly  minds  up  to  heavenly  things  by  advice  of  their 
admonitions.     Was  not  he  *  a  counsellor  of  the  earth,^  that 
said,  Now  concerning  virgijis  1  have  no  commandment  of^  Coj-. 

*    7    25. 

the  Lord,  yet  I  give  my  judgment ;    and  again,  6?^^  she  is  ^q, 
happier  if  she  so  abide,  after  my  judgment.     It  is  justly 
added, 

Which  build  desolate  places  for  themselves. 
57.  For  all  that  either  seek  forbidden  things,  or  that  desire  xxx 
to  appear  somewhat  in  this  world,  are  inwardly  beset  with 
a  countless  throng   of  thoughts,  and   while  they  stir  up  in 
their  own  bosom  a  host  of  desires,  their  mind,  being  laid 
prostrate,  is  miserably  trodden  by  the  foot  of  crowded  resort. 
Thus  one  man  has  subjected  himself  to  the  law  of  lust,  and 
he  ])aints  to  his  mind's  eye  rej)resentations  of  impure  acts, 
and  when  the  execution  of  the  deed  is  not  in  his  power,  the 
thing  is  the  more  often  done  in  the  inward  intent;  the  con- 
summating of  pleasure  is  sought,  and  the  mind  being  struck 
j)owerless,   borne    hither    and    thither,    disquieted    at   once 
and   blinded,  looks   out  eagerly  for  an  opportunity  of  the 
foulest  fulfdmcnt  in  practice.     That   mind    then,  which    is 
disordered  by  a  rabble  riot  of  thoughts,  suffers  a.s  it  were  a 


224     Dominion  of  the  rabble  of  unrestrained  thoughts. 

Job  3,  kind  of  crowded  population.     Another  man  has  submitted 
-= — '- —  his  neck  to  the  dominion  of  Anffer,  and  what  does  he  employ 
himself  about   in   imagination   but    quan'els  which    do  not 
even  exist?     Such  a  man  is  often  overlooking  those  that  are 
before  him,  contradicting  the  absent,  giving  and  receiving 
insults  in  imagination,  making  his  reply   severer  than  the 
insult  received,  and  when  there  is  none  there  to  encounter 
him,  he  makes  up  a  quarrel  in  his  own  breast  with  much 
uproar.     He  then  that  is  pressed  down  by  an  intolerable 
weight  of  angry  thoughts,  has  the  misfortune  of  a  rabble  in 
his  own  bosom,     Another  has  delivered  himself  over  to  the 
law  of  avarice,  and,  out  of  conceit  with  his  own  possessions, 
hankers  after  what  belongs  to  another:  it  often  happens  that 
being  unable  to  obtain  what  he  longs  for,  he  spends  the  day 
indeed  in  idleness, but  the  night  in  thought;  he  is  a  sluggard 
in  useful  work,  because  he  is  harassed  with  unlawful  devices; 
he   multiplies   his   schemes,  and   stretches   his    bosom    the 
wider  by  all  the  contrivances  and  expedients  of  his  inven- 
tion; he  is  busy  to  reach  the  desired  objects,  and  in  order 
to  obtain  them  he  casts  about  for  the  most  secret  windings 
to  serve  for  his  occasions,  and  the  moment  that  he  reckons 
himself  to  have    hit   upon    any    crafty    contrivance    on    an 
occasion,  he  is  now  in  high  glee  as  having  obtained  posses- 
sion of  his  object,  and  now  he  is  contriving  what  he  may 
even  add  further  to  the  thing  when  gotten,  and  is  consider- 
ing how  it  ought  to  be  improved  to  a  better  condition ;  and 
whereas    he    is  now   in   possession,    and    is  biinging  it   to 
wear  a  better  appearance,  he  is  next  considering  the  snares 
of  those  that  are  envious  of  him,  and  pondering  what  dispute 
they  may  fasten  upon  hiip,  and  making  out  what  answer  to 
give,  and  at  the  time  he  has  nothing  in  his  hands,  the  empty- 
handed  disputant  is  wearing  himself  out  in  defence  of  the 
thing  which  he   desires.       Thus   although  he  has  not  got 
a  particle  of  the  object  desired,  yet  he  has  already  in  his 
breast  the  fruit  of  his  desire  in  ihe  troublesomeness  of  the 
quarrel;    and    so  he,   that  is   overcome  by   the  tumultuous 
instigations  of  avarice,  has  a  vast  population  besetting  him. 
Another  one  has  subjected  himself  to  the  empire  uf  pride, 
and  while  he  lifts  himself  up  against  his  fellow-creatures,  he 
submits  his  heart  to  the  vice,  to  his  great  misery.     He  covets 


Earthly  denires  croud  us  with  needless  troubles.       2*25 
the  wreaths  of  elevated  honours,  he  aims  to  exalt  himself  by  Book 

IV. 

his  successes,  and  all  that  he  desires  to  be,  he  represents  to '— 

himself  in  the  secret  thoughts  of  his  own  breast.    He  is  already 
asitseems  seated  on  thejudgment-seat,  already  sees  the  services 
of  his  subjects  at  his  command,  already  shines  above  others, 
already  brings  evil  upon  one  party,  or  recompenses  another 
for  having  done  this.     Already  in  his  own  imagination  he 
goes  forth  into  public  surrounded  by  throngs,  already  marks 
with  what  observance  he  is  sustained  in  his  high  position ; 
yet  while  fancying  this,  he  is  creeping  by  himself  alone.    Now 
he  is  treading  one  set  under  his  feet,  now  he  is  elevating 
another,  now  he  is   gratifying  his    dislikes  upon    those  he 
treads  under  foot,  now   he  is  receiving  applause   from  the 
other  whom  he  has  elevated.     What  else  is  that  man  doing, 
who  has  such  a  multitude  of  fanciful  imaginations  pictured 
in  his  heart,  save  gazing  at  a  dream  with  waking  eyes  ?  and 
thus,  since  he  undergoes  the  misery  of  so  many  combinations 
of  cases,  which  he  pictures  to  himself,  he  plainly  carries  about 
within  him  crowds,  that  are  engendered  of  his  desires.    Another 
has  by  this  time  learnt  to  eschew  forbidden  objects,  yet  he 
dreads  lest  he  should  lack  the  good   things  of  this  world, 
he   is  anxious  to  retain   the    goods  vouchsafed  him ;  he  is 
ashamed  to  api)ear  inferior  among  men,  and  he   is  full   of 
concern  lest  he  should  become  either  a  poor  man  at  home, 
or  an  object  of  contempt  in  public.     He  anxiously  inquires 
what  may  suffice  for  himself,  what  the  needs  of  his  depen- 
dants may  require;  and  that  he  may  sufficiently  discharge 
the  rights  of  a  patron  towards  his  dependants,  he  searches 
for  patrons  whom  he  may  himself  wait  upon;  but  whiLst  he 
is  joined  to  tliem  in  a  relation  of  dependence,  he  is  undoubt- 
edly implicated  in  their  concerns,  wherein  he  often  consents 
to  forbidden  acts,  and  the  wickedness,  which  he  has  no  mind 
for  on  his  own  account,  he  commits  for  the  sake  of  other 
objects  which  he  has  not  forsaken.     For  often,  while  dreading 
the  diminution  of  his  reputation  in  the  world,  he  gives  his 
approval   to  those   things  with  his  superiors,  which   in   his 
own  secret  judgment  he  has  now  learnt  to  condemn.     Whilst 
he  anxiously  bethinks  himself  what  he  owes  to  his  patrons, 
what  to  his  dependants,  what  gain  he  may  make  for  himself, 
how  he  may  promote  his  inclinations,  he  is  in  a  manner 

Q 


226       Solitude  of  heart  admits  God,  excludes  vanities. 

Job  3,  overlaid  with  resort  of  crowds,  as  many  in  number  as  the 
— — '■ —  demands  of  the  cases  whereby  he  i^  distracted. 

58.  But  holy  men,  on  the  other  hand,  because  their  hearts 
are  not  set  upon  any  thing  of  this  world,  are  assuredly 
never  subject  to  the  pressvu'e  of  any  tumults  in  their  breast, 
for  they  banish  all  inordinate  stirrings  of  desire  from  the 
heart's  bed,  with  the  hand  of  holy  deliberation.  And  because 
they  contemn  all  transitory  things,  they  do  not  expeiience 
the  licentious  familiarities  of  the  thoughts  springing  therefrom. 
For  their  desires  are  fixed  upon  their  eternal  country  alone, 
and  loving  none  of  the  things  of  this  world,  they  enjoy  a 
perfect  tranquillity  of  mind;  and  hence  it  is  said  with 
justice.  Which  built  desolate  places  fov  themselves.  For  to 
'  build  desolate  places'  is  to  banish  from  the  heart's  interior 
the  stirrings  of  earthly  desires,  and  with  a  single  aim  at  the 
eternal  inheritance  to  pant  in  love  of  inward  peace.  Had  he 
not  banished  from  himself  all  the  risings  of  the  imaginations 

Ps.  27,  of  the  heart,  who  said.  One  thing  have  I  desired  of  the  Lord, 
^'  that  will  I  seek  after  ;  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 

Lord?  For  he  had  betaken  himself  from  the  concourse 
of  earthly  desires  to  no  less  a  solitude  than  his  own  self, 
where  he  would  be  the  more  secure  in  seeing  nought  without, 
in  proportion  as  there  was  no  insufficient  object  that  he 
loved.  For  from  the  tumult  of  earthly  things  he  had  sought 
a  singular  and  perfect  retreat  in  a  quiet  mind,  wherein  he 
would  see  God  the  more  clearly,  in  proportion  as  he  saw 
Him  alone  with  himself  also  alone. 

59.  Now  they,  who  ^  build  for  themselves  solitary  places,' 
are  very  properly  also  called  '  consuls,'  for  they  set  up  the 
mind's  solitude  in  themselves  in  such  wise,  that  whereinsoever 
they  have  the  greater  ability,  they  never  cease  to  consult  for 
the  good  of  others  through  charity.  Accordingly  let  us 
consider  a  little  more  particularly  the  case  of  him,  whom  we 
just  now  noticed  as '  a  consul,'  and  see  in  what  manner  he  casts 
abroad  the  counters''  of  the  virtues,  for  the  setting  forth  exam- 
ples of  a  sublime  life  to  the  lines  of  people  under  him.  Observe, 
in  order  to  inculcate  the  returning  good  for  evil,  he  makes 

•»  Of  the   silver  coins,  or  counters,     Strenarum  Historia.  ap.  Grsev.  Thes. 
which  the  consuls  were  allowed  to  scatter     Ant.  Rom.  t.  xii.  p.  430. 
on  New  Year's  day,  see  Mart.  Lipenii 


Counsellors  may  cultivate  holy  solitude*  227 

confession  on  his  own  person,  saying,  If  I  have  returned  on  Rook 

.  '  '  IV 

them  that  requited  me  evil,  then  should  I  deserve  to  fall 


empty  he/ore    mine  enemies.     To    excite    the   love    of  our    ^'   '  ^' 
Maker,  he  introduces  himself  saying,  But  it  is  good  for  mePs.73f 

•-»-■  •  •  Oft 

to   draw   near  to^    God.     To  work  an   impression  of  holy,y 
humility,  he  shews  the  secrets  of  his  heart,  saying,  Zor^/,  cleave 
mine  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes  lofty.     He  excites  pg,  131 
us  by  his  own  example  to  imitate  his  unswerving  zeal,  saying,  ^• 
Do  not  I  hate  them,  O  Lord,  that  hate  thee,  and  am  ?iot Ps.\39, 
I  grieved  with  them  that  rise  tip  against  thee?    I  hate  them 
with  perfect  hatred,  I  count  them  mine  enemies.     To  light 
up  in   us  the   desire  of  our  eternal   home,  he  laments  the 
length  of  this  present  life,  and  says.    Woe  is  me  that  myVs.iio, 
sojourn  is  prolonged.     Surely  he  shone  forth  in  the  magni-^' 
ficence  of  the  consulship,  who,  by  the  example  of  his  own 
conversation,  casts  before  us  so  many  of  virtue's  counters. 

60.  But   let  this  counsellor  tell  whether  he  too  builds  a 
solitary  place  for  himself.     For  he  says,  Lo,  J  fled  far  off,  Ps.  56, 
and  remained  in  the  wilderness.     Tie  *  flecth  far  off','  in  that        ' 
he  raises  himself  from  the  throng  of  earthly  desires  in  high 
contemplation  of  God;  and  he  '  remains  in  the  wilderness,' 
in   that   he  persists  in   the    retiring  purpose  of  his    mind. 
Of  this  solitude  Jeremiah  saith  well  to  the  Lord,  I  sat  alone  j^.y^  15 
from  the  face  of  Thy  hand,  because  Thou  hast  filled  me  with  ^"• 
threatening.     For  the  *  face  of  God's  hand,'  is  the  stroke  of 
His  righteous  judgment,  whereby  He  cast  man  out  of  Paradise, 
when  he  waxed  proud,  and  shut  him  out  into-  the  darkness  c  cgeci- 
of  his  present  place  of  banishment.     lUit '  I  lis  threatening'  is  *f ^p"!^ 
the  farther  dread  of  a  sub.sequent  punishment.     Accordingly  D.E. 
after  '  the  face  of  His  hand,'  we  are  yet  further  terriiied  with 
*  His   threats,'    because    both    the    penalty    of    our   present 
!>anishment  has  already  fallen  upon  us  in  the  actual  experi- 
ence  of  His  judgment,  and,  if  we    do   not   leave  off  from 
sinning,  He  further  consigns  us  to  everlasting  punishments. 
Let  the  holy  man  then,  here  cast  away,  consider  whence  it 
was  that  man  fell,  and  whither  the  justice  of  the  Judge  yet 
further  hurries  him,  if  he  goes  on  to  sin   afterwards,  and  let 
him  dismiss  from  his  breast  the  countless  hosts  of  temp<»ral 
desires,  and  bury  himself  in  the  deep  solitude  of  the  mind, 
saying,  /  sat  alone  from  the  face  qf  Thy  Hand;  for  Thou 

Q  2 


228  Princes  of  Holy  Church.     Gold  stands  for  wisdonu 

Jobs,  hast  filled  me  with  threatening.     As  though  he  said  in  plain 

-jyj^^^ words,  '  when  J  consider  what  I  already  suffer  in  experience 
of  Thy  judgment,  I  seek  with  trembling  the  withdrawal  of 
my  mind  from  the  tumult  of  temporal  desires ;  for  I  dread 
even  still  worse  those  eternal  punishments,  which  Thou  dost 
threaten.'  Well  then  is  it  said  of  '  kings  and  counsellors,' 
Which  built  desolate  places  for  themselves.  In  that  they, 
who  know  both  how  to  govern  themselves,  and  to  advise  for 
others,  being  unable  as  yet  to  obtain  admission  to  that  interior 
tranquillity,  fashion  a  resemblance  to  it  within  themselves 
by  pursuit  of  a  quiet  mind. 

Ver.  15.   Or  with  "princes  that  have  gold,  who  Jill  their 
houses  with  silver. 

xxxi,  61.  Whom  does  he  call  princes,  hwt  the  rulers  of  holy 
Church,  whom  the  Divine  economy  substitutes  without  in- 
termission in  the   room  of  their  predecessors  ?    Concerning 

Pf.  45,  these  the  Psalmist,  speaking  to  the  same  Church,  says.  In- 
stead of  thy  fathers  thou  hast  children  born  to  thee,  whom 
thou  mayest  make  princes  in  all  lands.     And  what  does  he 

Prov.  call  gold,  saving  wisdom  ;  of  which  Solomon  saith,  A  treasure 
'  '  to  be  desired  lieth  at  rest  in  the  mouth  of  the  wise?  That  is, 
he  saw  wisdom  as  gold,  and  therefore  called  it  a  treasure : 
and  she  is  well  designated  by  the  name  of  gold,'  for  that, 
as  temporal  goods  are  purchased  with  gold,  so  are  eternal 
blessings  with  wisdom.  If  wisdom  had  not  been  gold,  it  would 
never  have  been  said  by  the  Angel  to  the  Church  ^  of  Laodicea, 

Rev.  3,  /  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire.  For  we 
'  bay  ourselves  gold,'  when  we  pay  obedience  first,  to  get 
wisdom  in  exchange,  and  it  is   to  this  very  bargain  that  a 

Ecclus.  certain  wise  man  rightly  stimulates  us,  in  these  words.  If 
thou  desire  wisdom,  keep  the  commandments,  and  the  Lord 
shall  give   her  unto    thee.     And    what  is  signified   by  the 
^  houses,'  but  our  consciences  ?    Hence  it  is  said  to  one  that 

Matt.  9,  was  healed,  Go  unto  thine  house.  As  though  he  had  heard 
in  plain  words,  ^  After  the  outward  miracles,  turn  back  into 
thine  own  conscience,  and  weigh  well  what  kind  of  person 
within  thou  shouldest  shew  thyself  before  God.'  And  what 
too  is  represented   by  silver  but  the  divine  revelations,  of 

P.s.12,6.  which  the  Psalmist  says.  The  words  qf  the  Lord  are  pure 

P  All  Mss.  it  seems  have  '  ab.'     It  shoulrl  be,  '  to  the  Angel  of  the  Church.' 


But  for  sin  the  Elect  only  had  been  born  of  Adam.     229 

words,  as  silver  tried  in  the  Jire  Y    llie  word  of  the  Lord  is  Book 
said  to  be  like  silver  tried  in  the  Jire,  because  God's  word,    ^^' 
when  it  is  fixed  in  the  heart,  is  tried  with  afflictions. 

0*2.  Let  the  holy  man  then,  full  of  the  Spirit  of  Eternity, 
both  sum  up  the  things  that  shall  be,  and  gather  together  in 
the  open  bosom  of  his  mind  all  those,  whom  ages  long  after 
should  give  birth  to,  and  consider  with  wonder  and  astonish- 
ment those  Elect  souls,  with  whom  he  would  be  enjoying 
rest  in  life  eternal  without  the  weariness  of  labour,  had  none 
ever  been  led  into  sin  "by  the  passion  of  pride,  and  let  him 
say,  For  noiv  should  I  luive  lain  still  and  been  quiet ;  I 
should  have  slept ;  then  had  I  been  at  rest  with  kings  and 
counsellors  of  the  earth,  uhich  built  desolate  places  /or  them- 
selves, or  tvith  princes  that  had  gold,  who  Jilted  their  houses 
with  silver.  For  as,  if  no  decay  of  sin  had  ever  ruined  our 
first  parent,  he  would  not  have  begotten  of  himself  children 
of  hell,  but  they  all,  who  must  now  be  saved  by  the  Re- 
demption, would  have  been  born  of  him  Elect  souls,  and  none 
else,  let  him  look  at  these,  and  reflect  how  he  might  have 
been  at  rest  in  their  company.  Let  him  see  the  holy  Apostles 
so  ruling  the  Chmxh  they  had  undertaken,  that  they  never 
ceased  to  give  it  counsel  by  the  word  of  preaching,  and  so 
call  them  kings  and  counsellors.  After  these  let  him  behold 
rulers  arise  in  their  room,  who  by  living  according  to  wisdom 
should  have  gold,  and  by  preaching  right  ways  to  others 
should  shine  with  the  silver  of  sacred  discourse,  and  let  him 
call  them  real  princes,  the  houses  of  whose  conscience  are 
full  of  gold  and  silver.  But  as  it  is  not  enough  sometimes 
for  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  to  foresee  future  events,  unless  at 
the  same  time  it  presents  to  the  view  of  the  prophet  the  past 
and  by-gone,  the  holy  man  opens  his  eyes  below  and  above, 
and  not  only  fixes  them  on  the  future,  but  also  recalls  to 
mind  the  past.     For  he  forthwith  adds, 

Ver.  1().   Or  as  an  hidden  untimely  birth  I  had  not  been  ; 
CL8  infants  which  never  saw  light. 

63.  An  abortive  child,  because  it  is  bom  before  the  full  xxxii. 
period,  being  dead  is  forthwith  put  out  of  sight.    Whom  then 
does  the  holy  man  term  '  abortives,'  with  whom  he  might*  have 
been  at  rest,'  he  reflects,  saving  all  the  Elect,  who  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  livrd  before  the  time  of  the  Redemp- 


230  Tlie  Patriarchal  Saints  untimely  horn. 

Job  3,  tion,  and  yet  studied   to  mortify  themselves  to  this  world. 

— — '- —  Those  who  had  not  the  tables  of  the  Law,  '  died'  as  it  were 
'  from  the  womb,'  in  that  it  was  by  the  natural  law  that  they 
fear  their  Creator,  and  believing  the  Mediator  would  come, 
they  strove  to  the  best  of  their  power,  by  mortifying  their 
pleasures,  to  keep  even  those  very  precepts,  which  they  had 
not  received  in  writing.  And  so  that  period,  which  at  the 
beginning  of  the  world  produced  our  fathers  dead  to  this 
life,  was  in  a  certain  sense  the  '  womb  of  an  abortive  birth.' 
For  there  we  have  Abel,  of  whom  we  read  not  that  he 
resisted  his  brother  when  he  slew  him.  There  Enoch,  who 
approved  himself  such  that  he  was  carried  up  to  walk  with 
the  Lord.  There  Noah,  who  hereby,  that  he  was  acceptable 
to  the  searching  judgment  of  God,  was,  in  the  world,  the 
world's  survivor.  There  Abraham,  who,  while  a  pilgrim  in 
the  world,  became  ihe  friend  of  God.  There  Isaac,  who,  by 
reason  of  his  fleshly  eyes  waxing  dim,  by  his  age  had  no 
sight  of  things  present,  but  by  the  efficacy  of  the  prophetic 
Spirit  lighted  up  future  ages  even  with  his  extraordinary 
luminousness  of  sight.  There  Jacob,  who  in  humility  fled 
his  brother's  indignation,  and  by  kindness  overcame  the 
same ;  who  was  fruitful  indeed  in  his  offspring,  but  yet  being 
more  fruitful  in  richness  of  the  Spirit,  bound  that  offspring 
with  the  chains  of  prophecy.  And  this  untimely  birth  is 
well  described  as  hidden,  in  that  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  while  there  are  some  few,  whom  we  are  informed  of 
by  Moses'  mention  of  them,  by  far  the  largest  portion  of 
mankind  is  hidden  from  our  sight.  For  we  are  not  to  imagine 
that  during  all  the  period  up  to  the  receiving  of  the  Law, 
only  just  so  many  righteous  men  came  forth,  as  Moses  has 
run  through  in  the  most  summar}^  notice.  And  thus,  foras- 
much as  the  multitude  of  the  righteous  born  fi'om  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world  is  in  great  measure  withdrawn  from  our 
knowledge,  this  untimely  birth  is  called  hidden.  And  it  is 
also  said,  not  to  have  been,  because  a  few  only  being  enu- 
merated, the  generality  of  them  are  not  preserved  among  us 
by  any  written  record  for  their  memorial. 

64.  Now  it  is  rightly  added ;  As  infants  which,  never  saw 
tight.  For  they,  who  came  into  this  world  after  the  Law  was 
received,  were  conceived  to  their  Creator,  by  the  instruction 


The  only  Blessedness  is  in  Eternal  BEING.        231 

of  the  same  Law  ;  yet,  though  conceived,  they  never  saw  light,  Book 
in  that  these  never  could  attain  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord's '— 


Incarnation, which  yet  they  stedfastly  believed;  for  the  Lord 
Incarnate  saith,  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world;  and  that  ver^' JohnS, 
Light  declareth,   Mauy  Prophets   and  righteous   men  have ^^'^^^ 
desired  to  see  those  things  ivhich  ye  see,  and  have  not  seen  13,  i". 
them.     Therefore  the  fruit  '  conceived  never  saw  light,'  in 
that,  although  quickened  to  entertain  the  hope  of  a  future 
Mediator  by  the  plain  declarations  of  the  Prophets,  they  were 
never  able  to  behold  His  Incarnation.     In  all  these  then  the 
inward  conception  brought  forth  a  form  of  faith,  but  never 
earned  this  on  so  far  as  to  the  open  vision  of  God's  Presence  ; 
for  that  death  intervening  hurried  them  from  the  world  before 
Truth  made  manifest  had  shed  light  thereon. 

65.  Thus  the  holy  man  then,  full  of  the  Spirit  of  Eternity, 
fixes  to  his  memory  by  the  hand  of  the  heart  all  that  is 
transient;  and  because  every  creature  is  little  in  regard 
to  the  Creator,  by  the  same  Spirit,  Which  hath  nought 
either  in  Itself  or  about  Itself  saving  always  to  be,  he 
views  both  what  shall  be,  and  what  hath  been,  and  directs 
the  eye  of  his  mind  both  below  and  above,  and  regarding 
things  that  are  comin^^  as  past,  he  bums  in  the  core  of  his 
heart  toward  eternal  Being,  and  says.  For  now  1  should  have 
lain  still  and  been  quiet.  For  '  now'  belongs  to  the  present 
time,  and  what  else  is  it  for  one  to  seek  a  rest  always 
placed  in  the  present,  but  to  pant  after  that  bliss  of  eternity, 
whereunto  there  is  nought  in  coming  or  in  going?  Which 
always  Being  The  Truth,  by  the  lips  of  Moses,  shews 
to  be  His  own  attribute,  so  as  to  communicate  it  to  us 
in  some  degree  in  the  words,  /  AM  THAT  I  AM,  and Exod.3, 
He  said.  Thus  shall  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  ^^' 
^  HE  THAT  IS  hath  sent  me  unto  you  ;  and  now,  that  hc'V.QUI 
is  contemplating  things  transient,  and  seeking  an  ever 
present  bliss,  and  making  mention  of  the  light  to  come, 
and  enumerating  and  considering  the  orders  of  the  Elect 
children  thereof,  let  him  now  shew  us  in  a  litlle  plainer 
terms  the  rest  itself  that  appertains  to  this  light,  and  let 
him  shew  in  plainer  words,  what  is  brought  to  pass  tliercin 
every  day  relating  to  the  life  and  conduct  of  the  wicked. 
It  proceeds ; 


23'2     The  wicked,  tvhen  changed,  cease  from  disquietude. 

Jobs,      Ver.  17.   There  the  wicked  cease   from  disturbance,  and 
17  J  ' 

there  the  weary  in  strength  he  at  rest. 


B'loRAL.  ^^       1  1  1  •   1 

xxxiii.  ""•  ^^^  have  already  said  above,  that  herein,  viz.  that  the 
hearts  of  sinners  are  possessed  with  a  tumult  of  desires,  they 
are  grievously  oppressed  by  a  host  of  goading  thoughts,  but 
in  this  light,  which  the  ^  infants  conceived'  never  saw,  the 
wicked  are  said  to  *  cease  from  their  disquietude'  for  this 
reason,  that  the  coming  of  the  Mediator,  which  the  fathers 
under  the  Law  had  long  waited  for,  the  Gentiles  found  to  the 

Eom.ii,  peace  of  their  life,  as  Paul  testifies,  who  saith,  Israel  hath 
not  obtained  that  which  he  seeketh  for,  bat  the  election  hath 
obtained  it.  In  this  light  then  '  the  wicked  cease  from 
disquietude,'  inasmuch  as  the  minds  of  the  untoward,  when 
they  have  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  eschew  the 
wearisome  desires  of  the  world,  and  find  rest  in  the  quiet 
haven  of  interior  love.     Does  not  the  Light  Itself  call  us  to 

Mat.  11,  this  rest  when  It  says,  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and 

28  —SO 

'  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest ;  Take  My  yoke 
upon  you  and,  leatm  of  Me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart :  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls ;  For  My  yoke 
is  easy,  and  My  burthen  is  light.  For  what  heavy  yoke 
does  He  put  upon  our  mind's  neck.  Who  bids  us  shun  every 
desire  that  causes  disquietude  ?  What  heavy  burthen  does 
He  lay  upon  His  followers.  Who  warns  us  to  decline  the 
wearisome  ways  of  the  world  ?  Now,  by  the  testimony  of  the 
Rom.  5,  Apostle  Paul,  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly;  and  it  was  for 
^'  this  reason  that  the  Light  Itself  condescended  to  die  for  the 

ungodly,  that  these  might  not  continue  in  the  disorderment 
of  their  state  of  darkness.  So  let  the  holy  man  consider  with 
himself,  that  by  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation  '  the  Light' 
rescues  the  wicked  fi'om  heavy  toil,  while  It  takes  clean 
away  all  the  aims  of  wickedness  from  their  hearts;  let  him 
reflect  how  every  converted  person  has  already  here  below 
a  taste,  by  inward  tranquillity,  of  that  rest  which  he  desires  to 
have  throughout  eternity,  and  let  him  say.  There  the  wicked 
cease  from  disturbance,  and  the  weary  in  strength  are  at 
rest. 

67.  For  all  they  that  are  strong  in  this  world  are  by  their 
might  in  one  way  strong,  not  wearied  out  in  strength;  but 
they  that  arc  endued  with  might  in  the  love  of  their  Maker,  the 


Strong  Heavenly  affections  weaken  those  of  earth.    233 

more  they  be  strengthened  in  the  love  of  God,  which  is  their  bqok 
object  of  desire,  become  in  the  same  degree  powerless  in    ^^- 
their  own  strength,  and  the  stronger   their  longing  for  the 
things  of  eternity,  the  more  they  are  wearied  as  to  earthly 
objects  by  a  wholesome  failure  of  their  strength.     Hence  the 
Psalmist,  being  wearied  with  the  strength  of  his  love,  said. 
My  soul  hath  fainted  in^  Thy  salvation.     For  his  soul  didpg ug^ 
faint  while  making  way  in  God's  salvation,  in  that  he  panted  ^i- 
with  desire  of  the  light  of  eternity,  broken  of  all  confidence  ward 
in  the  flesh.     Hence  he  says  again,  My  soul  longeth,  yea,^^J^^^ 
even  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord.     Now  when  he  said  2. 
*  longeth,'  he  added  rightly,  and  '  fainteth,'  since  that  longing 
for  the  Divine  Being  is  little  indeed,  which  is  not  likewise 
immediately  followed  by  a  fainting  in  one's  self.     For  it  is  but 
meet  that  he  who  is  inflamed  to  seek  the  courts  of  eternity, 
should  be  enfeebled  in  the  love  of  this  temporal  state.     So 
that  he  should  be  cold  to  the  pursuit  of  this  world,  in  propor- 
tion as  he  rises  with  soul  more  inflamed  to  the  love  of  God. 
Which  love  if  he  completely  giasps,   he  then  at  the  same 
time  completely  quits  the  world,  and  the  more  entirely  dies 
to    temporal  things,    the  higher  he  is  made    to    soar    after 
the  life  to  come  by  the  inspirations  of  Eternity.     Had  not 
that  soul    found   itself  wearied    in  its  own  strength,  which 
exclaimed,  My  soul   ^u:as  melted  nhcn  he  spake?  clearly ^^^^j  - 
in  that  while  the  soul  is  touched  by  the  inspirations  of  the  ^- 
secret  communication,  weakened  in  the  seat  of  its  owu  strength, 
it  is  *  melted'   by  the  desire  wherewith  it  is  swallowed  up, 
and  finds  itself  wearied  in  itself  by  the  same  step  whereby 
it  is  brought  to  see  that  there  is  a  might  without  itself  to 
which  it  soars.     Hence  when  the  Prophet  was  telhng  tliat  he 
had  seen  a  vision  of  God,  he  adds.  And  /,  Danieljainttdand  q^^  g 
was  sick  certain  days;  for  when  the  soul  is  held  fast  to  the 27. 
power  of  God,  the  flesh  waxes  faint  in  res])ect  of  its  own 
strength.     Thus    Jacob,  who    held   an    Angel  in    Iiis    hold, 
immediately   afterwards  halted   upon   one  foot;    for  he   that 
regards  things  on   high   with    a  genuine  love,  already  for- 
swears to  walk  in  this  world  with  a  doubleminded  affection. 
For  he  rests  upon  one  foot,  who  is  strong  in  tlie  love  of  God 
alone ;  and  it  nnist  needs  be  that  the  other  should  wither, 
for  wlien   the  virtue  of  the  s(»ul  gains  increase,  it  behoves 


234     God  the  Dwelling  of  Saints.     This  life  laborious. 

Job  3,  assuredly  that  the  strength  of  the  flesh  wax  dull.  Let 
^^' —  blessed  Job,  then,  review  the  deep  recesses  of  the  hearts  of 
the  faithful,  and  consider  the  haven  of  inward  peace  that 
they  find,  while  in  advancing  unto  God  they  are  enfeebled 
in  their  own  strength,  and  let  him  say.  There  the  weary  in 
strength  be  at  rest.  As  if  he  taught  in  plain  words,  '  there 
the  repose  of  light  is  the  reward  of  those,  whom  the  ad- 
vancement of  inward  restoration  wearies  here.'  Nor  ought 
it  to  influence  us,  that  after  naming  light  he  did  not  subjoin, 
in  this,  but  there,  for  that  which  he  beholds  encompassing 
the  Elect,  he  discovers  to  be  our  place  as  it  were.  Whence 
then  the  Psalmist,  when  contemplating  the  unchangeable- 

Ps.  I02,ness  of  Eternity,  and  saying.  But  Thou  art  the  same^  and 
Thy  years  shall  not  fail;  proclaims  that  this  is  the  place 
of  the  Elect,  by  adding,  But  the  children  of  Thy  servants 
shall  dwell  there.  For  God,  Who  without  position  con- 
taineth  all  things,  remains  a  place  without  locality  to  us  who 
come  to  Him.  And  when  we  reach  this  place,  our  eyes  are 
opened  to  see,  what  infinite  vexation  even  our  very  repose  of 
mind  was  in  this  life,  for  though  the  righteous  by  comparison 
with  the  bad  already  enjoy  rest,  yet  in  estimating  the  inmost 
Rest,  they  are  altogether  not  at  rest.  Hence  it  is  well 
added ; 

Ver.  18.   There  the  former  prisoners  are   alike   without 
vexation. 

xxxiv.  68.  For  though  the  just  are  possessed  by  no  riot  of  carnal 
desires,  yet  the  clog  of  corruption  binds  them  down  in  this 

Wisd.9, life  with  hard  chains;  for  it  is  written.  For  the  corruptible 
body  presseth.  down  the  soul,  and  the  earthly  tabernacle 
weigheth  down  the  mind  that  museth  upon  many  things. 
So  herein  even,  that  they  are  still  mortal  beings,  they  are 
weighed  down  by  the  burthen  of  their  state  of  corruption, 
and  chained  and  bound  by  its  clogs,  in  that  they  are  not  yet 
risen  in  that  liberty  of  an  incorruptible  life.  For  they  meet 
with  one  thing  from  the  mind,  and  another  from  the  body, 
and  they  are  spent  every  day  in  the  inward  conflict  with 
themselves.  Are  they  not  indeed  bound  with  the  hard  chain 
of  vexation,  whose  mind,  without  labour,  is  dissolved  in 
ignorance,  and  is  not  trained  without  the  strivings  of  labour.? 
When  forced  it  stands  erect,  of  itself  it  lies  ])rostrate,  and  yet  as 


Man  enslaved  to  his  body  while  here.  235 

soon  as  raised  up,  it  forthwith  falls,  by  conquering  itself  with  Book 
laborious  effort,  its  eyes  are  opened  to  see  heavenly  things, '— 


but  recoiling,  it  flees  the  light,  which  had  illuminated    it. 
Are   they  not  bound   fast  with  the  hard  chain  of  vexation, 
who  when  their  fired  soul  draws  them  with  a  perfect  desire 
to  the  bosom  of  inward  peace,  suffer  perturbation  from  the 
flesh   in   the   heat  of  the  conflict?     And    though   this  now 
no  longer  encounters  it  face  to  face,  as  though  drawn  up 
with   hostile  front,  yet  it  still  goes  muttering  like  a  captive 
in    the   rear   of  the    mind,  and,  though    with    fears,  it  yet 
defiles  with  vile  clamouring   the  form  of  fair  tranquillity  in 
the  breast.     Therefore,  though  the  Elect  subdue  all  enemies 
with   a    strong   hand,  since    they  long  for   the    security   of 
inward  peace,  it  is  yet  a  giievous  vexation  to  them  to  have 
something  still  to  vanquish.     And  leaving  these  out  of  the 
question,  they  endure  over  and  above  those  chains  too,  which 
a  sore  necessity  outwardly  fastens  upon  them ;  for  to  eat,  to 
drink,  and  to  be  tired,  are  chains  of  corruption,  and  chains 
too,   which  can   never  be   unloosed,  save  when  our  mortal 
nature  is  turned  into  the  glory  of  an  immortal  nature;  for  we 
fill  our  body  with  food  to  sustain  it,  lest  it  fail  from  extenua- 
tion; and  we  thin  it  down  by  abstinence,  lest  it  oppress  by 
repletion.  We  quicken  it  by  motion,  lest  it  be  killed  by  lying 
motionless,  but  by  setting  it  down  we  soon  stop  its  motions, 
that  by  that  very  activity  it  may  not  give  under.     We  clothe 
it  with  garments  as  a  succour  to  it,  lest  the  cold  destroy  it, 
and  cast  off'  these  succours  so  sought  after,  lest  the  heat 
should  parch  it.     Exposed  then  to  so  many  vicissitudes  and 
chances,  what  else  do  we,  but  drudge  to  the  corruptibility  of 
our  state   ot*  being,  that  howsoever  the  multiplicity  of  the 
services  rendered  to  it  may  sustain   that  body,  which  the 
fretting  care  of  a  frail  nature  subject  to  change  weighs  to 
the  ground.     Hence  Paul  says  well.  For  the  creature  was Uom.Sy 
made  suhject  to  vanity,  not  witliti[/ly,  but  by  reason  qf  him 
who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  hope.     Because  the  creature 
itself  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  (f  rorrujition 
into    the  glorious  liberty  (f  the  sons   if  God.     Vox  *  the 
creature  is  made  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly,"  in  that  man, 
who  willingly  left  the  footing  of  inborn  finnness,  being  pressed 
down  by  the  weight  of  a  dcsened  mortality,  is  the  unwilling 


230  Rest  in  prospect  dwelt  on  as  present. 

Job  3,  slave  of  the  corruption  of  his  changeful  condition.     But  this 
---^- — creature  is  then  rescued  from  the  slavery  of  corruption,  when 

Moral.  ..   .  .      .  •'  r  ? 

m  rising  again  it  is  lifted  uncorrupt  to  the  glory  of  the  sons 
of  God.  Here  then  the  Elect  are  bound  with  vexation, 
in  that  they  are  still  pressed  down  by  the  curse  of  their 
corrupt  condition.  But  when  we  are  stripped  of  our 
corruptible  flesh,  we  are  as  it  were  loosened  from  those 
chains  of  vexation,  whereby  we  are  now  held  bound.  For 
we  already  long  to  come  into  the  presence  of  God,  but  we 
are  still  hindered  by  the  clog  of  a  mortal  body.  So  that  we 
are  justly  called  '  prisoners,'  in  that  we  have  not  as  yet  the 
advance  of  our  desire  to  God  free  before  us.  Hence  Paul, 
whose  heart  was  set  upon  the  things  of  eternity,  yet  who  still 
carried  about  him  the  load  of  his  corruption,  being  in  bonds 

Phil.  1,  exclaims,  Having  a  desire  to  be  unloosed  and  to  he  with 
Christ,  For  he  would  not  desire  to  be  '  unloosed,'  unless, 
assuredly,  he  saw  himself  to  be  in  bonds.  Now  because  he 
saw  that  these  bonds  were  most  surely  to  be  burst  at  the 
Resurrection,  the  Prophet  rejoiced  as  if  they  were  already 

Ps.  116,  burst  asunder,  when  he  said.  Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds. 
I  will  offer  to  thee  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving.  Let  the 
holy  man  then  reflect  that  inward  light  is  the  haven  that 
receives  converted  sinners,  and  let  him  say.  There  the  ivicked 
cease  from  trouble.  Let  him  reflect,  that  holy  men,  being 
awearied  with  the  exercising  of  desire,  enjoy  the  deeper 
repose  in  that  inmost  bosom,  and  let  him  say.  And  there  the 
weary  in  strength  are  at  rest.  Let  him  reflect,  that  being 
absolved  from  all  the  bonds  of  corruption  at  once  and  to- 
gether, they  attain  those  uncorrupt  joys  of  liberty.  And  the 
former  prisoners  are  alike  without  vexation.  And  it  is  well 
said,  the  former  prisoners^  for  while  that  ever  present  bliss 

'B.'andis  in   his  view,  all   that  shall   be,  and  is  going  ^,  seems  as 

one'     though  past.     For  whilst  the  end  of  all  things  is  awaited,  all 

that  passes  away  is  accounted  already  to  have  been.     But 

let  him  tell  what  all  they,  for  whom  the  interior  rest  is  there 

in  store,  shall  meanwhile  have  done  here.     It  goes  on  ; 

non  ex-       They  have  not  heard,  the  voice  of  the  exactor. 

runt  09.  Who    else    is   to  be  understood  by   the  title    of  the 

xxxv. '  exactor,'    saving    that    insatiate    prompter,    who    for    once 
bestowed  the  coin   of  deceit  upon  mankind,  and  from  that 


ChrisVs  members  preparing  for  like,  but  different,  lots.  237 

time  ceases  not  daily  to  claim  the  debt   of  death  ?     Who  Book 

IV 
lent   to    man    in    Paradise    the    money   of  sin,  but    by  the '— 


multiplying  of  wickedness  is  daily  exacting  it  with  usury  ? 
Concerning  this  exactor,  Truth  saith  in  the  Gospel,  Afid  the  Liikei2, 
Judge  deliver  thee  to  the   ^officer.     Therefore  the  yoice  ofiy/^^.. 
this  exactor  is  the  tempting  of  persuasion  to  our  hurt.     And'^'^'^"' 
we  hear  the  yoice  of  the  exactor,  \yhen  we  are  smitten  with 
his  temptation,  but  we  do  not  hear  it  effectually^  if  we  re?>\i-,Vexaudi. 
the  hand  that  smites,  for  he  *  hears'  that  feels  the  temptation, 
but  he  hears  effectually  who  yields  to  the  temptation.     So  let 
it  be  said  of  the  righteous.  They  have  not  heard  the  voice  of 
the  exactor ;  for  though  they  hear  his  prompting  in  that  they 
are  tempted,  they  do  not  hear  it  effectually,  for  that  they  take 
shame  to  yield  thereto,  but  because  whatsoeyer  the  mind 
loyes  with  great  affection,  it  is  often  repeating  eyen  in  utter- 
ance of  the  lips ;  blessed  Job,  in  that  he  views  the  crowds  of 
inward  peace  with  fulness  of  affection,  again  employs  himself 
about  the  description^  of  it,  savins,  j.^':  *^® 

Ver.  19.   The  small  and  great  are  there ;  the  servant  wguishing 
free  from  his  master.  of  them. 

70.  Forasmuch  as  there  is  to  us  in  this  life  a  difference  in 
works,  doubtless  there  will  be  in  the  future  life  a  difference 
in  degrees  of  dignity,  that  whereas  here  one  sui^passes  another 
in  desert,  there  one  may  excel  another  in  reward.     Hence 
Truth  says  in  the  Gospel,  In  My  Father's  house  are  majiyjnhniA, 
tnansio7is.    But  in  those  *  many  mansions,'  the  very  diversity  "" 
of  rewards  will  be  in  some  measure  in  hannony.     For  an 
influence  so  mighty  joins   us  together  in  that  peace,   that 
what  any  has  failed  to  receive  in  himself,  he  rejoices  to  have 
received  in   another.     And  thus  they  that  did  not  equally 
labour  in  the  vineyard,  equally  obtain  all  of  them  a  penny. 
And  indeed  with  the  Father  are  '  many  mansions,'  and  yet 
the  unequal  labourers  receive  the   same  penny,  in  that  the 
blessedness  of  joy  will  be  one  and  the  same  to  all,  yet  not 
one  and  the  same  sublimity  of  life  to  all.     lie  had  seen  the 
small  and  great  in  this  light,  who  said  in  the  voice  of  the 
Head;  Thine  eyes  did  see  My  substance,  yet  being  imperfect,  P^.  139, 
and  in  Thy  book  were  all  My  members  written .    He  beheld  ^^' 
*  the  small  and  the  great  together,'  when  he  declared,  //«??«•  nfi, 
will  bless  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  both  small  and  great. 


238         Saints  not  freed  as  yet  from  feaj-s  about  sin. 
Job  3,       71.  And  it  is  well  added,  And  the  servant  is  free  from 

19.  .  ^  «^ 

TiT — '—  his  master.  For  it  is  written,  Every  one  that  sinneth  is  the 
John  8,  servant  of  sin.  For  whosoever  yields  himself  up  to  bad 
^'  desire,  submits  the  neck  of  his  mind,  till  now  free,  to  the 
dominion  of  wickedness.  Now  we  withstand  this  master, 
when  we  struggle  against  the  evil  whereby  we  had  been 
taken  captive,  when  we  forcibly  resist  the  bad  habit,  and 
treading  under  all  froward  desires,  maintain  against  the  same 
the  right  of  inborn  liberty,  when  we  strike  our  sin  by  peni- 
tence, and  cleanse  the  stains  of  pollution  with  our  tears.  But 
it  oftentimes  happens,  that  the  mind  indeed  already  bewails 
what  it  remembers  itself  to  have  done  amiss,  that  already  it 
not  only  forsakes  its  misdeeds,  but  even  chastises  them  with 
the  bitterest  lamentations,  yet  while  it  recalls  to  memory  the 
things  that  it  has  done,  it  is  affrighted  and  sorely  dismayed 
against  the  Judgment.  It  already  turns  itself  with  a  perfect 
intention,  but  does  not  yet  lift  itself  up  in  a  perfect  state  of 
security,  for  while  it  weighs  the  rigid  exactness  of  the  final 
scrutiny,  it  trembles  with  anxiety  between  hope  and  fear,  for 
it  knows  not,  when  the  righteous  Judge  comes,  what  He  will 
reckon,  what  He  will  remit  of  the  deeds  done.  For  it 
^  remembers  what  evil  deeds  it  has  committed,  but  it  cannot 
tell  whether  it  has  worthily  bewailed  the  commission  of 
them,  and  it  dreads  lest  the  vastness  of  the  sin  exceed  the 
measure  of  penance.  And  it  is  very  often  the  case  that 
'  Truth'  already  remits  the  sin,  yet  the  troubled  soul,  whilst 
it  is  full  of  anxiety  for  itself,  still  trembles  for  the  pardon 
thereof.  So  that  in  this  present  life  the  servant  already 
escapes  from  his  master,  yet  he  is  not  free  from  him,  in  that 
by  chastisement  and  penance  man  already  forsakes  his  sin, 
yet  he  still  fears  the  strict  Judge  for  the  recompensing  of  it. 
There  then  ^  the  servant  will  be  free  from  his  master,'  when 
there  will  be  no  longer  misgiving  about  the  pardon  of  sin, 
when  the  recollection  of  its  sin  no  longer  condemns  the  soul, 
now  secured,  where  the  conscience  does  not  tremble  under  a 
sense  of  guilt,  but  exults  in  the  pardon  of  the  same  in  a  state 
of  freedom. 

72.  But  if  man  is  reached  there  by  no  remembrance  of 
his  sin,  how  does  he  congratulate  himself  that  he  has  been 
saved    therefrom  ?     Or  how   does    he  return    thanks  to   his 


Memory  of  sin  in  heaven,  not  poll u fine/,  pains  not.     239 

Benefactor  for  the  pardon,  which  he  has  received,  if  by  an   Book 
intervening  forgetfulness  of  his  past  wickedness,  he  knows 


not  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  suffer  punishment?  For  we  must 
not  pass  over  negligently  that  which  the  Psalmist  says,  /PtJ-SO,! 
will  sing  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  for  ever.  For  how  does 
he  *  sing  of  the  mercies  of  God  for  ever,'  if  he  knows  not  that 
he  has  been  miserable ;  and  if  he  has  no  recollection  of  past 
misery,  whence  does  he  answer  with  praises  the  bestowal  of 
mercy?  And  again,  we  must  enquire  how  the  mind  of  the 
Elect  can  be  in  perfect  bliss,  if  amidst  its  joys  the  memory  of 
its  guilt  reaches  it  ?  Or  how  does  the  glory  of  indefectible 
light  shine  out,  when  it  is  overcast  by  the  sin  that  is  recalled 
to  mind?  But  be  it  known,  that  just  as  oftentimes  now  in  joy 
we  call  to  mind  Stid  things,  so  in  the  future  life,  we  bring 
back  the  memory  of  past  sin  without  any  hurt  to  our  bliss. 
For  it  verj'  often  hap]iens,  that  in  the  season  of  health,  wc 
recall  to  mind  past  pains  without  feeling  pain,  and  in  pro- 
portion as  we  remember  ourselves  sick,  the  more  we  hug 
ourselves  in  health.  And  so  in  that  blissful  estate  there  will 
be  a  remembrance  of  sin,  not  such  as  to  pollute  the  mind, 
but  to  attach  us  the  more  closely  to  our  joy,  that  while 
the  mind  without  pain  remembers  itself  of  its  pain,  it  may 
the  more  clearly  perceive  itself  to  be  a  debtor  to  the 
physician,  and  so  much  the  more  cherish  the  health  it  has 
received,  in  proportion  as  it  remembers  what  it  has  escaped 
of  uneasiness.  And  so  then,  placed  in  that  state  of  bliss,  we 
so  regard  our  evil  deeds  without  loathing,  as  now  being  set 
in  light,  without  any  inward  blindness  of  the  heart,  we  see 
the  darkness  with  our  mind ;  for  though  that  be  dim  which 
wc  perceive  with  the  imagination,  this  comes  from  the 
sentence  of  light,  not  from  the  misfortune  of  blindness.  And 
thus  throughout  eternity  we  render  to  our  Benefactor  the 
praise  of  His  mercy,  yet  are  in  no  degree  o])pressed  with  the 
consciousness  of  wretchedness;  for  whilst  we  review  our 
evils  without  any  evil  betiding  the  mind,  on  the  one  hand 
there  will  never  be  ought  to  defile  the  hearts  that  render  j)raise 
on  the  score  of  past  wickednesses,  and  again  there  will  always 
be  somewhat  to  inflame  them  to  the  praise  of  their  Deliverer. 
Therefore,  because  the  repose  of  inward  light  does  in  such 
sort  transport  the  great  ones  into  itself,  that  yet  it  does  not 


240       The  Converted  hereof ter  free  even  from  past  sin. 

Job  3,  leave  the  little  ones,  let  it  be  rightly  said,  the  small  and  great 

____! are  there.     Now  forasmuch  as  the  mind  of  the  converted 

'sinner  is  there  touched  by  the  recollection  of  his  sin  in  such 
sort  that  he  is  not  overwhelmed  by  any  confusion  at  that 
recollection,  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  And  the  servant  is  free  from 
his  master. 


BOOK  V. 

He  explains  the  remainder  of  chap.  iii.  from  ver.  20.  the  whole  of  chap.  iv. 
and  the  first  two  verses  of  chap.  v. 

1.  Though  the  appointments  of  God  are  very  much  i. 
hidden  from  sight,  why  it  is  that  in  this  life  it  is  sometimes 
ill  with  the  good  and  well  with  the  wicked,  yet  they  are 
then  still  more  mysterious  ■  when  it  both  goes  well  with  the 
good  here  below,  and  ill  with  the  wicked.  For  when  it  goes 
ill  with  the  good,  and  well  with  the  bad,  this  perhaps  is 
found  to  be  for  that  both  the  good,  if  they  have  done  wrong 
in  any  thing,  receive  punishment  here  that  they  may  be  more 
completely''  freed  from  eternal  damnation,  and  the  wicked 
meet  here  with  the  good  things,  which  conduce  to  this  life, 
that  they  may  be  dragged  to  unmitigated  torments  hereafter. 
And  hence  these  words  are  spoken  to  the  rich  man,  when 
burning  in  hell.  Sot?,  remeniher  tltat  Ihou  in  thy  /f/<?/«//?0Luke 
receivedsl  thy  good  things,  and  likewise  Lazarus  evil  things.  *^'  ■^^• 
But  when  it  is  well  with  the  good  here  and  ill  with  the 
wicked,  it  is  very  doubtful,  whether  the  good  for  this  reason 
receive  good  things,  that  they  may  be  set  forward  and 
advance  to  something  better,  or  whether  by  a  just  and  secret 
appointment  they  receive  here  the  reward  of  their  deeds, 
that  they  may  prove  void  of  the  rewards  of  the  life  to  come; 
and  whether  afflictions  for  this  reason'come  upon  the  wicked, 
in  order  that  by  correcting,  they  may  be  the  means  of  pre- 
serving them  from  everlasting  punishments,  or  whether  their 
punishment  only  begins  here,  that,  one  day  to  receive  com- 
pletion, it  should  lead  to  the  final  torments  of  hell.  Tliere- 
fore,  because  in  the  midst  of  the  divine  appointments  the 

■  i.  e.   more  doubtful  in  each  parti-  nity,'   i.   e.    in    the    Future  State.  St. 

cular  case.  Grej?ory  believed  a  Purgatorial    fire, 

''  '  Plenius.'   It  is  difficult   tn  assign  seemingly  a«  a  thing  then  lately  made 

an  exact   meaning  to  the   expression,  known  by  visionH,   <fec.     See  Dial.  ir. 

unlesR  '  eternal'  is  taken  for  *  in  eter-  c.  39  sqq. 

K 


242  Two  reasons  why  good  men  fear  prosperity* 

Job  3,  human  mind  is  closed  in  bv  the  erreat  darkness  of  its  un- 
— ^-^—  certainty,  holy  men,  when  they  see  this  world's  prosperity  to 
be  their  lot,  are   disquieted  yaih.   fearful   misgivings.     For 
they  fear  lest  they  should  receive  here  the  fruits  of  their 
labours.     They  fear  lest  Divine  Justice  should  see  in  them  a 
secret  wound,  and  in  loading  them  with  external  blessings 
should  withhold  them    from   the  interior.     But  when  they 
exactly  consider,  that  they  never  do  good  saving  that  they  may 
please  God  only,  nor  triumph  in  the  veiy  exuberance  of  their 
prosperity,  then  indeed  they  less  fear  hidden  judgments  to 
their  hurt  in  their   good  fortune,  yet   they  ill   endure  that 
\    good  fortune,  in  that  it  impedes  the  interior  purpose  of  the 
heart,  and  they  reluctantly  submit  to  the   caresses   of  this 
present  life,  forasmuch  as  they  are  not  ignorant  that  they  are 
in  some  degree  retarded  thereby  in  their  interior  longing. 
I  For  honour  in  this  world  is  more  engrossing  than  the  con- 
:   tempt  thereof,  and  the  rise  of  prosperity  weighs  upon  them 
\  more  than  the  pressure  of  a  hard  necessity.     For  sometimes 
\  when  a  man  is  outwardly  straitened  by  the  latter,  he  is  the 
'  more  entirely  set  at  liberty  to  fix  his  desire  upon  the  interior 
good ;  but  by  the  other  the  mind,  while  forced  to  yield  to 
the  will  of  many,  is  kept  back  from  the  race  of  its  own 
\  desire.     And  hence  it  is  that  holy  men  are  in  greater  dread 
of  prosperity  in  this  world  than  of  adversity.     For  they  know 
that  while  the  mind  is  under  soft  and  beguiling  impressions, 
it  is  sometimes  apt  to  give  itself  up  to  be  drawn  away  after 
external   objects.     They   know   that    oftentimes   the   secret 
thought  of  the  heart  so  beguiles  it,  that  it  does  not  see  how 
it  is  changed.     And   they  consider   too,  what   the  eternal 
blessings  are  which  they  desire,  and  they  see  what  a  mere 
nothing  all  is  that  courts  and  smiles  upon  us  after  the  manner 
of  things  temporal,  and  their  mind  bears  the  worse  all  the 
prosperity  of  this  world,  in  proportion  as  it  is  pierced  with 
love  of  heavenly  happiness ;  and  it  is  planted  so  much  the 
more  erect  in  contempt  of  the  delightfulness  of  the  present 
life,  the  more  it  perceives  that  this  is  beguiling  it  by  stealth 
in  the  disregard  of  eternal  glory.     Hence  when  blessed  Job, 
having  his  eye  fixed  upon   the  rest  above,  had  said.  The 
small  and  great  are  there;  and  the  servant  is  free  from  his 
master.     He  therefore  adds. 


Holy  sorrow  likes  not  litis  world's  liyht.  243 

Ver.  20.  JVherefore  is  liglil  given  to  one  that  is  in  misery?   Book 

2.  In  holy  Scripture  prosperity  is  sometimes  represented  by  -'-^— 
the  title  of  light,  and  this  world's  adversity  by  the  name  of     ^^* 
night.     Hence   it  is  well   said   by   the   Psalmist,   As  is  its  Ps,  139, 
darkness,  so  also  is  its  light.     For  as  holy  men  thus  trample  Vuig. 
upon  the  prosperity  of  this  state  by  contemning  it,  as  also 

they  sustain  its  adverse  fortune  by  trampling  upon  it,  by  an 
exceeding  highmindedness  laying  under  their  feet  alike  the 
good  and  the  ill  of  the  world,  they  declare,  As  its  darkness, 
so  also  is  its  light.  As  though  they  said  in  plain  words,  *  as 
its  griefs  do  not  force  down  the  resoluteness  of  our  fixed 
mind,  so  neither  can  its  caresses  corrupt  the  same.'  But  since 
these  last,  as  we  have  said  above,  though  they  fail  to  lift  up 
the  mind  of  the  righteous,  do  yet  cause  them  disquietude ; 
holy  men,  who  know  themselves  to  be  in  misery  in  this 
wearisome  exile,  shrink  from  shining  in  its  prosperity. 
Hence  it  is  well  said  at  this  time,  Where/ore  is  light 
given  to  one  that  is  in  miseiy  ?  lor  '  light  is  given  to  those 
in  misery,'  when  they,  who,  by  contemplating  things  above, 
see  themselves  to  be  in  misery  in  this  our  pilgrimage, 
have  the  brightness  of  transitory  prosperity  bestowed  upon 
them;  and  when  they  are  deploring  giievously,  that  they  are 
slow  in  returning  to  their  country,  they  are  over  and  above 
constrained  to  bear  the  burthen  of  honours.  The  love  of 
eternal  things  is  crushing  them,  and  at  the  same  time  the  glory 
of  temporal  things  smiles  upon  them.  When  these  reflect 
what  the  things  are,  which  keep  them  down  below,  and  what 
those  are  that  they  see  not  of  the  things  above,  what  those 
are  that  set  them  up  on  earth,  and  what  they  have  lost  of 
heavenly  blessings,  they  are  stung  with  regret  of  their 
prosperity.  For  though  they  see  that  they  are  never  wholly 
overwhelmed  thereby,  yet  they  anxiously  consider  that  their 
thoughts  are  divided  between  the  love  of  God,  and  the  gifts 
of  His  hand ;  and  hence  when  he  says,  JVherq/bre  is  light 
given  to  him  that  is  in  misery  ?  he  subjoins  forthwith. 
And  life  nntn  the  bitter  in  soul  ? 

3.  For  all  the  Elect  are  bitter  in  soul,  in  that  either  they    iij, 
never  cease  to  punish  themselves  by  weeping  for  the  trans- 
gressions they   have  committed,  or  they  afflict   themselves 
with  regrets,  that  banished   here   far  from  the  face  of  their 

r2 


244  Bad  men  know  not  their  own  misery. 

Job  3,  Creator,  they  are  not  yet  admitted  to  the  bliss  of  the  eternal 
p-^— ^ —  country ;  and  of  their  hearts  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon,  The 
14, 10.  heart  knoweth  its  own  bitterness,  and  a  stranger  shall  not 
intermeddle  xoith  his  joy.  For  the  hearts  of  the  reprobate 
are  likewise  in  bitterness,  for  that  they  are  afflicted  even  by 
their  very  bad  passions  themselves.  Yet  they  know  not  of 
this  very  bitterness,  because  having  voluntarily  blinded  their 
own  eyes,  they  cannot  estimate  what  they  are  undergoing; 
but  on  the  contrary  the  heart  of  a  good  man  knoweth  its 
own  bitterness,  for  it  knows  the  hard  condition  of  this  place 
of  exile,  wherein  it  is  cast  forth  to  be  torn  in  pieces;  and  it 
sees  how  tranquil  is  all  that  it  has  lost,  how  troubled  the  con- 
dition it  has  fallen  into.  Yet  this  embittered  heart  is  one  day 
brought  back  to  its  own  joy,  and  a  stranger  shall  not  inter- 
meddle therewith,  in  that  he,  who  now  casts  himself  forth 
without,  away  from  this  sorrow  of  the  heart,  in  his  aims,  will 
then  remain  shut  out  from,  its  interior  festival. 

4.  They  then  that  are  in  bitterness  of  soul,  long  to  be 
wholly  dead  to  the  world,  that,  as  they  themselves  aim  at 
nothing  in  this  present  world,  so  they  may  not  henceforth 
be  fettered  by  the   world  with  any  ties ;  and  it  very  often 
happens  that  a  person  has  already  ceased  to  retain  the  world 
in  his  affections,  but  the  world  still  ties  down  that  person  by 
its  business,  and  he  indeed  is  already  dead  to  the  world,  but 
the  world  is  not  yet  dead  to  him.     For  in  a  certain  sense  the 
> D/ de- ^^'01'^^)  still  alive,  regards^  him,  so  long  as  it  strives  to  carry 
sires      \^[^^    away  in   its  actions,   when  he  is  bent  another  way. 
below)   Hence,  since  Paul  both  himself  utterly  contemned  the  world, 
and  saw  that  he  was  become  such  an  one  as  this  world  could 
not  possibly  desire,  having  burst  the  bonds  of  this  life,  and 
Gal.  6    being  henceforth  at  liberty,  he  rightly  exclaims.  The  world 
^^-        is  crucified  to  me,  and  I  unto  the  world.     For  ^  the  world 
was  crucified  to  him.,'  because  being  now  dead  to  his  affec- 
tions it  was  no  longer  an  object  of  love  to  him;  and  he  had 
likewise  '  crucified  himself  to  the  world,'  in  that  he  studied 
to  shew  himself  thereto  in  such  a  light,  that,  as  though  dead,  he 
might  never  be  coveted  by  it.     For  if  there  be  a  dead  person, 
and  one  alive  in  the  same  place,  though  the  dead  sees  not 
the   living,  yet  the  living  person  does  see  the  dead,  but  if 
both  are  dead,  neither  can  possibly  see  the  other.      Thus  he, 


\ 


The  world  alive  to  some  that  are  ilead  to  it.  245 

wlio  no  longer  loves  the  world,  but  yet  even  against  his  will  Book 

is  loved  by  the  world,  though  he  himself  being  as  it  were ^- 

dead  sees  nothing  of  the  world,  yet  the  world  not  being  dead 
sees  him;  but  if  he  neither  himself  retains  the  world  in  his 
affections,  nor  again  is  retained  in  the  affections  of  the  world, 
then  both  are  mutually  dead  to  one  another;  in  that  whereas 
neither  sects  the  other,  it  is  as  if  the  dead  heeded  not  the 
dead.     Therefore,  because  Paul  neither  sought  tlie  glory  of 
the  world,  nor  was  himself  sought  out  by  the  same,  he  glories 
both  in  being  himself  crucified  to  the  world,  and  in  the  world 
beingcrucified  to  him.  Now  because  there  are  many  that  desire 
this,  who  yet  do  not  altogether  rise  up  to  the  very  extreme 
point  of  such  a  state  of  deadness,  they  may  well  lament  and 
say ;    Wherefore  is  light  given  to  him  that  is  in  misery,  and 
life  unto  the  bitter  in  soul.     For  '  life  is  given  to  those  in 
bitterness,'  when  the  glory  of  this  world  is  bestowed  upon  the 
sad  and  sorrowful,  in  which  same  life  they  do  not  spare  them- 
selves the  chastening  of  most  urgent  fear ;  for  though  they 
do  not  themselves  hold  to   the   world,  yet  they  still  dread 
being   such  as  the  world  holds  to  ;  and  except   they  were 
living  to  it  in  some  slight  degree,  it  would  never  surely  love 
them  for  their  serviceableness  to  its  interests;  just  as  the  sea 
keeps  living  bodies  in  her  own  bosom,  but  dead  ones  she 
forthwith  casts  out  from  herself     It  proceeds ; 
Ver.  21.    Which  long  for  death,  but  it  cometh  not, 
5.  For  they  desire  to  mortify  themselves  wholly,  and  to  be     iv. 
entirely  extinct  of  the   life  of  temporal  glor}',  but  by  the 
secret  appointments  of  God  they  are  often  forced  either  to 
take    the   lead    in    command,    or   to    busy  themselves    with 
dignities  imposed  on  them,  and  in  these  circumstances  they 
miceasingly  look  for  a  perfect  mortification,  but  this  expected 
death  coraeth  not ;  in  that  the  use  of  them  is  still  alive  to 
temporal  glory  even  against  their  will,  though  they  submit  to 
that  glor)'  from  the  fear  of  God,  and  while   they  inwardly 
retain  their  aim   after  piety,   they  outwardly  discharge  the 
fimctions  of  their  station,  that  they  should  neither  quit  their 
perfection     in    their    inward    pui-})ose,    nor    set    themselves 
against  the  dispensations  of  their  Creator  in  a  spirit  of  pride. 
For  by  a  marvellous  pitifulness  of  the  Divine  Nature  it  comes 
to  pass,  that,  when  he,  who  aims  at  contemplation  with  a 


/      246     Holy  desires  grow  by  the  check  of  labour  for  others. 


Job  3,  perfect  heart,  is  busied  with  human  affairs,  his  perfect  mind 
21 

— 1 — '—  at  once  profits  many  that  are  weaker,  and  in  whatever  degree 


he   sees  himself  to   be  imperfect,  he   rises  therefi'om  more 

perfect  to  the  crowning  point  of  humility.     For  sometimes 

by  the  very  same  means,  whereby  holy  men  suffer  loss  in 

their  own  longings,  they  bear  off  the  larger  profits  by  the 

^         conversion  of  others,  for,  while  it  is  not  permitted  them  to 

give  themselves  thereto  as  they  desire,  it  is  their  grateful 

office  to  carry  off  along  with  themselves  others,  whom  they 

are  associated  with.     And  so  it  is  effected  by  a  wonderful 

\       dispensation  of  pity,  that  by  the  same  means,  whereby  they 

» dd-      seem   to   themselves    to    be    the   more    undone^,    they   rise 

dorrs'     ^^^^^  richer  resources  to  the  building  up^  of  their  heavenly 

2  cori-     Country. 

struC" 

tionem  ^'  Now  sometimes  they  fail  to  attain  the  desires,  that  they 
have  conceived,  for  this  reason,  that  by  the  very  interposing 
of  the  delay,  they  may  be  made  to  expand  to  the  same 
objects  with  an  enlarged  embrace  of  the  mind,  and  by  a 
striking  dispensation  it  is  effected  that  that,  which  if  fulfilled 
might  perhaps  become  thin  and  poor,  being  kept  back,  gains 
grow  til.  For  they  desire  so  to  mortify  themselves  that,  if  it 
may  be  vouchsafed,  they  may  already  perfectly  behold  the 
face  of  their  Creator,  but  their  desire  is  delayed  that  it  may 
gain  increase,  and  it  is  fostered  in  the  bosom  of  its  slow 
advancement  that  it  may  grow  larger.      Hence  the  Bride, 

Cant.  .3,  panting  with  desire  of  her  Bridegroom,  justly  cries  out.  By 
night  on  my  bed  I  sought  hint,  whom  my  soul  loveth :  I  sought 
him,  but  I  found  him  not.  The  Spouse  hides  himself  when  He 
is  sought,  that  not  being  found  He  may  be  sought  for  with  the 
more  ardent  affection,  and  she  in  seeking  is  withheld,  that 
she  cannot  find  Him,  in  order  that  being  rendered  of  larger 
capacity  by  the  delay  she  undergoes,  she  may  one  day  find 
a  thousandfold  what  she  sought.  Hence  when  blessed  Job 
said.  Which  long  for  deaths  but  it  cometh  not ;  that  he  might 
the  more  minutely  particularize  this  very  desire  of  those 
seekers,  he  thereupon  adds ; 

And  dig  for  it  as  for  hid  treasures. 
V.  7.  For  all  men  that  seek  for  a  treasure  by  digging,  the 

deeper  they  have  begun  to  go,  kindle  to  the  work  with  the 
greater  energy;  for  in  the  same  proportion  that  they  reckon 


Death  to  the  World  more  longed  for  the  nearer  gained.  247 

themselves    to    be    now,  at    this    moment,   a])proaching    the  Book 

buried  troasm*e,  they  strive  with  hicreased  efibrts  in  digging '-- 

for  it.  They,  then,  that  perfectly  desire  the  moriilication  of 
themselves,  seek  it  as  they  that  dig  for  hid  treasures,  lor  the 
nearer  they  are  brought  to  their  object,  the  more  ardent  they 
shew  themselves  in  the  work.  Therefore  they  never  Hag  in 
their  labour,  but  increase  the  more  in  the  exercise  thereof; 
for  that  in  the  degree,  that  they  reckon  on  their  reward  as 
now  nearer  at  hand,  they  spend  themselves  the  more  gladly 
in  the  work.  Hence  Paul  says  well  to  some,  that  were  seeking 
the  hid  treasure  of  the  eternal  inheritance,  Not  forsaking neh.io, 
the  assembling  of  ourselves  together  as  the  manner  of  some  is; 
but  consoling^  one  another,  and  so  much  the  more  as  ye  see^^-fon- 
the  day  approaching.  For  to  give  consolation  to  the  labourer, 
is  to  continue  labouring  in  like  manner  to  him,  the  sight  of 
a  fellow  labourer  being  the  alleviation  of  our  own  labour,  as, 
when  a  companion  joins  us  in  a  journey,  the  way  itself  is  not 
shortened,  yet  the  toilsomeness  of  the  way  is  alleviated  by  the 
society  of  a  companion.  Therefore,  whereas  Paul  looked  for 
their  consoling  one  another  in  their  labours,  he  added  these 
words,  and  so  much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  approaching. 
As  though  he  said,  *  let  your  labour  increase  the  more,  that 
now  the  reward  of  your  labour  itself  is  nigh  at  hand.'  As  if 
he  expressed  himself  in  plain  words, '  Do  ye  seek  a  treasure? 
Then  ye  should  dig  for  it  with  the  greater  ardour,  that  ye 
have  by  digging  reached  by  this  time  close  to  the  gold  ye 
were  in  quest  of.' 

8.  Though  this,  that  he  says,  fVhich  long  for  death  attd 
it  Cometh  not ;  and  dig  for  it  as  for  hid  treasures,  may  be 
taken  in  another  sense  also.  For  in  that  we  cannot  perfectly 
die  to  the  world,  unless  we  bury  ourselves  within  the  invisible 
depths  of  our  own  heart  from  all  things  visible,  they  that 
long  for  the  mortifying  of  themselves,  are  well  comi)ared  to 
those  that  dig  for  a  treasure.  For  we  die  to  the  world  by 
means  of  an  unseen  wisdom,  of  which  it  is  said  by  Solomon, 
It'  thou  seckest  her  as  silver,  and  diggest  for  her  as  /or  ///</ Prov. -2, 
treasures.  Since  wisdom  lieth  not  on  the  surface  of  things, 
for  it  is  deep  in  the  unseen.  And  we  tlien  lay  hold  nn  the 
mortification  of  ourselves,  in  attainnig  wisilom,  if,  reliuijuish- 
ing  visible  things,  we  bury  ourselves  in  the  invisible  ;  if  wo 


248         Joy  of  being  hurled  in  divine  Contemplation. 
Job  3,  so  seek  for  her  in  tlie  digging  of  the  heart,  that  every  ima- 

22  ..... 

'- —  gination,  which  the   mind  conceives,  of  an   earthly  nature, 

she  puts  from  her  with  the  hand  of  holy  discernment,  and 
acquaints  herself  with  the  treasure  of  virtue  which  was  hidden 
from  her.  For  she  soon  finds  a  treasure  in  herself,  if  she 
thrust  from  her  that  heap  of  earthly  thoughts,  which  lay  as 
a  wretched  load  upon  her.  Now  because  he  describes  death 
coveted  as  a  treasure,  he  rightly  subjoins; 

Ver.  22.  Which  rejoice  exceedingly  and  are  glady  when 
they  can  Jin d  the  grave. 
vi.  9.  For  as  the  grave  is  that  place  wherein  the  body  is 
buried,  so  heavenly  contemplation  is  a  kind  of  spiritual  grave 
wherein  the  soul  is  buried.  For  in  a  certain  sense  we  still 
live  to  this  world,  when  in  spirit  we  roam  abroad  therein. 
But  we  are  buried  in  the  grave  as  dead,  when  being  morti- 
fied in  things  without,  we  secrete  ourselves  in  the  depths  of 
interior  contemplation.  And  therefore  holy  men  never  cease 
to  mortify  themselves  with  the  sword  of  the  sacred  Word  to 
the  importunate  calls  of  earthly  desires,  to  the  throng  of 
unprofitable  cares,  and  to  the  din  of  obstreperous  tumults, 
and  they  bury  themselves  within  before  God's  presence  in 
the   bosom    of  the    mind.     Hence    it   is  well  said   by   the 

Ps.  SI,   Psalmist,  And  Thou  shall  hide   them  in  the  secret  of  Thy 

20 

presence  from  the  strife  of  tongues.  Which  though  it  be 
not  until  afterwards  fully  brought  to  pass,  is  yet  even  now  in 
a  great  measure  accomplished,  when  with  the  feeling  of 
delight  they  are  caught  away  into  the  inward  parts  from  the 
strife  of  temporal  desires,  so  that,  whilst  their  mind  wholly 
expands  in  every  part  to  the  love  of  God,  it  is  not  rent  and 
torn  by  any  useless  anxiety.  Hence  it  is  that  Paul  had  seen 
those  disciples  as  dead,  and  as  it  were  buried  in  the  grave 
Col.  3,  by  contemplation,  to  whom  he  said,  Ye  are  dead,  and  your 
life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  He,  then,  that  seeks  for 
death  rejoices  when  he  finds  the  grave  ;  for  whoso  desires  to 
mortify  himself,  is  exceeding  joyful  on  finding  the  rest  of 
contemplation ;  that  being  dead  to  the  world  he  may  lie  hid, 
and  bury  himself  in  the  bosom  of  interior  love  from  all  the 
disquietudes  of  external  things. 

10.  But  since  in   addition  to   this,  that  he   speaks   of  a 
treasure  being   dug   up,  the    finding   of   a   grave   is  further 


Treasures  buried  with  SaintsoJ  old.  Man*s  waijhid  toliim.  249 

introduced,  it  is  needful  that  our  mind's  eye  sliould  keep  this  Book 
in  view,  that  the  ancients  buried  their  dead  with  their  wealth. 


He,  then,  that  seeks  for  a  treasure,  *  rejoices  when  he  has 
found  the  grave,'  in  that  when  we,  in  quest  of  wisdom,  turn 
the  pages  of  Holy  Writ,  when  we  trace  out  the  examples  of 
those  that  have  gone  before  us,  we  as  it  were  derive  joy  from 
the  grave,  for  we  find  the  mind's  wealth  among  the   dead, 
who,  because  they'  are  perfectly  dead  to  this  world,  rest  in  J^^^J^*"^^ 
secret  with,  their  riches  beside  them.     And  so  he  is  made 'for  they 
rich  by  the  grave,  who,  following  the  example  of  the  righ-^  °' 
teous,  is  raised  up  in  the  excellency  of  contemplation.     But 
when  he  asks,  saying,  Wherefore  is  light  given  to  him  that 
is  in  misery  ?   he  intimates  the  reason  for  which  he  ventures 
to  put  such  a  question,  by  saying, 

Ver.  23.    Why  is  light  given  to  a  man  whose  way  is  hid, 
and  luhom  God  hath  encompassed  with  darkness  ? 

11.  For  *  man's   way  is   hid  to   him,'   in  that  though    he     vii. 
already  takes  cognizance  of  the  kind*  of  hie  that  he  is  lead-'' quail- 
ing, he  does  not  yet  know  to  what  issue  it  tends.     Though 

his  affections  are  now  fixed  on  things  above,  though  he  seeks 
them  with  all  his  longings,  he  is  yet  ignorant  whether  he 
shall  persevere  in  the  same  longings.  For  forsaking  our 
sins  we  strive  after  righteousness,  and  we  know  whence  we 
are  come,  but  we  know  nothing  whereunto  we  may  arrive. 
We  know  what  we  were  yesterday,  but  we  cannot  tell  what 
we  may  chance  to  be  to-morrow.  *  Man's  way  then  is  hid  to 
him,'  in  that  he  so  sets  the  foot  of  his  labour,  that,  this  not- 
withstanding, he  can  never  foresee  the  issue  of  the  accom- 
plishment thereof. 

12.  Now  there  is  also  another  *  hiding  of  our  way.'  For 
there  aie  times  when  we  are  ignorant,  whether  the  very 
things  which  we  believe  we  do  aright,  are  rightly  done  in 
the  strict  Judge's  eye.  For,  as  we  have  also  said  a  long  way 
above,  it  often  hai)i)ens  that  an  action  of  ours,  which  is 
cause  for  our  condemnation,  passes  with  us  for  the  aggran- 
dizement of  virtue.  Often  by  the  same  act,  wliereby  we 
think  to  a])pease  the  Judge,  He  is  urged  to  anger,  when 
favoura])le.  As  Solomon  bears  witness,  saying,  llierc  is  a  Prov 
way  nhich  seemeth  right  unto  a  man  ;  hut  the  end  thereof  ^*y  ^2. 
are  the  ways  qf  death.     Hence,  whilst  holy  men  are  getting 


250    Good  men  left  still  hi  doubt  of  their  final  success* 

Job  3,  the  masteiy  over  their  evil  habits,  their  very  good  practices 

'- — even  become  an  object  of  dread  to  them,  lest,  when  they 

desire  to  do  a  good  action,  they  be  decoyed  by  a  semblance 
of  the  thing,  lest  the  baleful  canker  of  corruption  lurk  under 
the  fair  appearance  of  a  goodly  colour.  For  they  knovr  that 
they  are  still  charged  with  the  burthen  of  corruption,  and 
cannot  exactly  discern  the  things  that  be  good.  And 
when  they  bring  before  their  eyes  the  standard  of  the  final 
Judgment,  there  are  times  when  they  fear  the  \^ry  things 
which  they  approve  in  themselves;  and  indeed  they  are  in 
mind  wholly  intent  on  the  concerns  of  the  interior,  yet 
alarmed  from  uncertainty  about  their  doings,  they  know  not 
whither  they  are  going.  Hence  after  he  had  said,  Where- 
fore is  light  given  to  one  that  is  in  misery  ?  it  is  with 
propriety  added,  to  a  man  whose  way  is  hid?  As  though 
the  words  were,  '  Why  has  that  man  this  life's  success 
for  his  portion,  who  knows  not  of  his  course  of  con- 
duct, in  what  esteem  it  is  held  by  his  Judge.  And  it  is 
rightly  subjoined,  And  whom  God  hath  encompassed  with 
darkness.  For  man  is  ^  encompassed  with  darkness,'  since 
howsoever  he  may  burn  with  heavenly  longings,  he  is  ignorant 
how  it  goes  with  him  in  the  interior.  And  he  is  in  great  fear 
lest  aught  concerning  himself  should  meet  him  in  the  Judg- 
ment, which  is  now  hidden  from  himself  in  the  aspirations  of 
holy  fervour.  '  Man  is  encompassed  with  darkness,'  in  that 
he  is  closed  in  by  the  clouds  of  his  own  ignorance.  Is  not 
that  man  ^  encompassed  with  darkness,'  who  most  often 
neither  remembers  the  past,  nor  finds  out  the  future,  and 
scarce  knows  the  present .?    That  wise  man  had  seen  himself 

Wisd.o,  tobe  encompassed  with  darkness,  when  he  said.  And  with 
labour  do  we  find  the  things  that  are  before  us;  but  the 
things  that  are  in  heaven  who  shall  search  out? 

The    Prophet  beheld   himself  *  encompassed   with'    such 
'  darkness,'   when   he  was   unable    to  discover   the  interior 

Ps.  18,  springs  of  His  inmost  economy,  saying.  He  made  darkness 
His  secret  place.  For  the  Author  of  our  being,  in  that, 
when  we  were  cast  out  into  this  place  of  exile.  He  took 
from  us  the  light  of  His  vision,  buried  Himself  from  our  e}'es 
as  it  were  '  in  the  secret  place  of  darkness.' 
^^"^     13.  Now  as  often  as  we  attentively  regard  this  same  dark- 


Spiritual  food  comes  not  till  sighed  after.  251 

ness  of  our  blind  estate,  we  stir  xm  the  mind  to  lamentation.  Book 
For  it  weeps  for  the  state  of  blindness,  which  it  is  under 


without,  if  it  remember  in  humihty  that  it  i's  bereft  of  light 
in  the  interior,  and  when  it  looks  to  the  darkness  which 
suiTounds  it,  it  is  wrung  with  ardent  longing  for  the  inward 
brightness,  and  rent  with  thought's  whole  effort,  and  that 
light  above,  which  as  soon  as  created  it  relinquished,  now 
debarred,  it  makes  the  object  of  its  search.  Whence  it  very 
often  happens  that  that  radiance  of  inward  joy  bursts  out 
amidst  those  very  tears  of  piety ;  and  that  the  mind,  which 
had  lain  torpid  in  a  state  of  blindness,  being  fed  with  sighs, 
receives  strength  to  gaze  at  the  interior  brightness.  Whence 
it  rightly  proceeds, 

Ver.  24.  For  my  sighing  cometh  before  I  eat. 

14.  For  the  soul's  *  eating'  is  its  being  fed  with  the  con-  viii. 
templations  of  the  light  above,  and  thus  it  sighs  before  it 
eats,  in  that  it  first  travails  with  the  groanmgs  of  sorrow,  and 
afterwards  is  replenished  with  the  cheer  of  contemplation. 
For  except  it  sigh,  it  eats  not,  in  that  he  that  refuses  to 
humble  himself,  in  this  exile  we  are  in,  by  the  groanings  of 
heavenly  desires,  never  tastes  the  delights  of  the  eternal 
inheritance.  P'or  all  they  are  stan-ed  of  the  food  of  truth, 
that  take  joy  in  the  emptiness  of  this  scene  of  our  pilgrimage, 

but  he  *  sighs,'  that  *  eats,'  because  all  who  are  touched  with 
the  love  of  truth,  are  at  the  same  time  fed  with  the  refresh- 
ments of  contemplation.  The  Prophet  *  ate  sighing,'  when 
he  said.  My  tears  have  been  my  bread.  For  the  soul  is  fedPs-42,3. 
by  its  own  grief,  when  it  is  lifted  up  to  the  joys  above  by 
the  tears,  which  it  sheds,  and  indeed  it  bears  within  its 
sorrowliil  sighings,  but  it  receives  food  for  its  refreshing,  the 
more  the  force  of  its  love  gushes  out  in  weeping.  And  hence 
blessed  Job  still  goes  on  with  the  violence  of  that  weeping, 
adding, 

And  my  roarings  are  poured  out  like  overflowing  waters. 

15.  Waters,  that  overflow,  advance  with  a  rush,  and  swell     ix. 
with  billows  evermore  increasing.     Now  whilst  the  Elect  set 

the  judgments  of  God  before  the  eyes  of  their  mind,  whilst 
they  dread  the  secret  sentence  concerning  them,  whilst  they 
trust  to  attain  to  God,  but  yet  arc  in  fear  lest  they  should 
not  attain,  while  they  call  to  mind  their  past  doings,  which 


252  The  Riyhteousfear  lest  they  sin  in  their  yood  works. 

Job  3,  they  weep  over,  whilst  they  shrink  from  the  events  that  still 
await  them,  in  that  they  are  unknown,  there  are  gathered  in 


them  as  it  were  a  kind  of  billows,  as  of  water,  which  spend 
themselves  in  the  roarings  of  grief,  as  upon  a  shore  beneath 
them.  The  holy  man  then  saw  how  great  are  the  billows  of 
our  thoughts  in  our  penitential  mourning,  and  he  called  the 
very  waves  of  our  grief  overflowing  waters,  saying,  And  my 
roarinys  are  like  overjlowiny  waters.  Now  there  are  times 
when  the  righteous,  as  we  likewise  said  a  little  above,  even  in 
the  midst  of  their  very  good  works,  are  affiighted  and  give 
themselves  to  continual  mouniing,  lest  they  should  offend 
by  some  secret  misdemeanour  therein.  And  when  God's 
scourges  suddenly  take  hold  of  them,  they  imagine  that  they 
have  done  despite  to  the  grace  of  their  Maker,  in  that  being 
either  impeded  by  infirmities,  or  weighed  down  with  sadness, 
they  are  not  ready  to  perform  works  of  mercy  to  their  neigh- 
bours ;  and  their  heart  turns  to  mourning,  for  that  the  body 
is  become  slack  to  its  devout  ministration.  And  whereas 
they  see  that  they  are  not  adding  to  their  reward,  they  fear 
that  their  past  deeds  also  have  been  displeasing.  Hence 
when  blessed  Job  described  his  roaring  like  overflowing 
waters,  he  thereupon  added, 

Ver.  25.  For  the  thiny  that  I  yr eat iy  feared  is  come  upon 
me,  and  that  which  I  am  afraid  of  is  come  unto  me. 
X.  16.  The  righteous  therefore  lament  and  fear,  and  torment 

themselves  with  bitter  lamentations,  because  they  dread  to 
be   given  over,  and  though   they  rejoice  in  their  own  cor- 
'  correp- rection  ^,  the  correction  itself  disturbs   their  fearful   spirits, 
**°         lest  the  evil,  which  they  are  undergoing  should  not  be  the 
merciful  stroke  of  discipline,  but  the  righteous  visitation  of 
vengeance.      And   the    Psalmist    reflecting   thereupon   says 
Ps.  90,  with  justice,  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  Thine  anyer  ^    For 
^^'         the   power    of  God's    anger    cannot   be    conceived   by  our 
faculties,  in  that  His  dispensation,  by  its  undiscerned  pro- 
visions   concerning    us,    often    takes   us   up   in    that    very 
point  where  it  is  counted  to  abandon  us,  and  in  the  very 
thing  wherein  it  is  supposed  to  take  us  up,  it  forsakes  us. 
So  that  very  often  that  is  rendered  grace  to  us,  which  we 
call  wrath,  and  that  is  sometimes  wrath,  which  we  account 
to  be  grace.     For  strokes  of  aflliction  are  the  correction  of 


Power  makes  some  proud,  others  watchful.  '253 

some  men,  but  others  they  lead  to  a  frenzy  of  impatience,  and   Book 
there  are  some  wliom  prosperity,  in  that  it  soothes  them, ^— 


calms  from  a  state  of  madness,  while  there  are  others  whom, 
seeing  that  it  u])lifts  them,  it  wholly  turns  adrift  from  every 
hope  of  conversion.  Now  vice  forces  all  men  down  beneath, 
but  some  the  more  easily  return  from  thence,  that  they  take 
the  greater  shame  to  themselves  to  have  fallen  thereunto. 
And  attainments  in  virtue  in  every  case  raise  men  on  high, 
yet  sometimes  some  men,  in  that  swelling  thoughts  are 
engendered  from  their  virtues,  fall  down  by  the  very  pathway 
of  their  rise.  And  so  forasmuch  as  the  power  of  God's  wrath 
is  little  known,  under  all  circumstances  it  must  needs  be 
unceasingly  feared.     It  proceeds  ; 

Ver.  26.  Did  I  not  dissemble  it?    Did  I  not  hold  myaoVn\g. 
peace?     Did  I  not  rest  quiet?     Vet  wrath  came  upon  me. 

]  7.  Though  in  every  situation  of  life,  we  sin  in  thought,  xi. 
word,  and  deed,  the  mind  is  then  humed  along  in  all  these 
three  ways  with  the  greater  freedom  from  control,  when  it  is 
lifted  up  with  this  world's  good  fortune.  For  when  it  sees 
that  it  surpasses  other  men  in  power,  feeling  proudly,  it 
thinks  high  things  of  itself,  and  when  no  opposition  is  offered 
by  any  to  the  autliority  of  its  word,  the  tongue  has  the  more 
uncontrolled  range  along  precipitous  paths ;  and  while  it  is 
permitted  to  do  all  that  it  likes,  it  reckons  all  that  it  likes  to 
be  lawfully  permitted  it.  But  good  men,  when  supported  by 
this  world's  power,  bring  themselves  under  severer  discipline 
of  the  mind,  in  proportion  as  they  know  that,  from  the 
intolerance  of  power,  they  are  persuaded  to  unlicensed  acts, 
as  if  they  were  more  licensed  to  do  them'.  Thus  they  i  vid.  b. 
refrain  their  hearts  from  surveying  their  own  glory,  they '^^•^•'^* 
check  their  tongues  from  unrestrained  talk,  they  guard  their 
actions  from  restless  roaming.  For  it  often  happens  that 
they  that  are  in  ])ower  lose  the  good  things  that  they  do, 
because  they  entertain  high  conceits,  and  while  they  reckon 
themselves  to  be  of  use  for  every  j)urpose,  they  blast  the 
merit  even  of  the  usefulness  tliey  have  laid  out.  For  in 
order  that  a  man's  deeds  may  be  rendered  of  greater  worth, 
they  must  needs  always  appear  worthless  in  his  own  esteem, 
lest  the  .same  good  action  elevate  the  heart  of  the  doer, 
and  in  elevating  overthrow  its  author  by  selfelation,  more 


254    Power  and  freedom  kept  hy  sparing  the  use  of  them. 

Job  3,  effectually  than  it  helps  the  very  persons  for  whom  it  may 
^—chance  to  be  rendered.     For  it  is  hence  that  the  King  of 


Babylon,  while  he  was  secretly  revolving  in  his  own  mind, 
Dan.  4,  in  the  pride  of  his  heart,  saying,  Is  not  this  great  Babylon 
which  I  have  builded?  was  suddenly  turned  into  an  irrational 
beast.     For  he  lost  all  that  he  had  been  made,  because  he 
would  not  humbly  keep  back  what  he  had  done ;  and  because 
in  the  pride  of  his  heart  he  lifted  himself  up  above  men,  he 
lost  that  very  human  faculty,  which  he  had  in  common  with 
man.    And  often  they  that  are  in  power  burst  out  at  random 
into  insulting  language  towards  their  dependants,  and  this 
merit,  viz.  that  they  serve  their  office  of  authority  with  vigilance, 
they  lose  by  reason  of  their  forwardness  of  speech,  plainly 
considering  with  overlittle  dread  the  words  of  the  Judge,  that 
Matt.  6,  lie  ^]iQ  shall  say  to  his  brother  without  cause  Thou  fool, 
makes  himself  obnoxious  to  hell  fire.     Often  they  that  are  in 
power,  whereas  they  know  not  how  to  refrain  lawful  actions, 
slide  into  such  as  are  unlawful,  and  unquiet.     For  he  alone 
is  never  brought  down  in  things  unlawful,  who  is  careful  to 
restrain  himself  at  times  even  from  things  lawful.     It  is  with 
the  bands  of  this  selfsame  restraint  that  Paul  shewed  himself 
1  Cor.  6,  to  be  bound  for  good,  when  he  says.  All  things  are  laicfid  to 
me,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient ;  and  in  order  to  shew 
in  what  exceeding  freedom  of  mind  he  was  set  at  large  by 
reason  of  this  very  restraint,  he  thereupon  added.  All  things 
are  lawful  for  me,  but  I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power 
of  any.     For  when  the  mind  pursues  after  the  desires  that  it 
entertains,  it  is  convicted  of  being  enslaved  to  the  things,  by 
the  love  of  which  it  is  subdued.     But  Paul,  *  to  whom  all 
things  are  lawful,'  is  '  brought  under  the  power  of  none ;'  in 
that  by  restraining  himself  even  from  things  lawful,  those 
very  objects,  which,  if  enjoyed,  would  weigh  him  down,  being 
contemned,  he  rises  above. 

18.  Let  blessed  Job  then  declare  for  our  better  instruction 
what  he  was  when  in  power,  in  these  words.  Did  I  not 
dissemble  ?  For  when  we  are  in  possession  of  power,  it  is 
both  to  be  taken  account  of  for  purposes  of  utility,  and  to  be 
kept  out  of  sight  because  of  pride,  in  order  that  he  that  uses 
it,  on  the  one  hand,  that  he  may  render  service  therewith, 
may  be  aware  that  he  has  the  power,  and  on  the  other,  that 


The  Elect  leave  earthly  cares  at  tunes  for  heaven.     255 

he  may  not  be  elated,  may  not  be  aware  that  he  has  the  Rook 

power.     Now  what  he  was  in  word  of  mouth,  let  him  add  in '- — 

these  words,  Was  I  jiot  silent  ?  What  in  respect  of  for- 
bidden deeds,  let  him  further  subjoin,  Did  I  not  rest  quiet? 
But  the  being  silent  and  quiet  admit  of  being  yet  more 
minutely  examined  into.  Thus,  to  be  silent  is  to  withhold 
the  mind  from  the  cry  of  earthly  desires.  For  all  tumult  of 
the  breast  is  a  strong  and  mighty  clamouring. 

19.  Moreover  they  rest,  that  bear  themselves  well  in  power, 
in  that  they  prefer  to  lay  aside,  at  intervals,  the  din  of  earthly 
business  for  the  love  of  God,  lest  whilst  the  lowest  objects 
incessantly  occupy  the  mind,  it  should  altogether  fall  away  from 
the  highest.     For  they  know  that  it  can  never  be  lifted  up  to 
things  above,  if  it  be  continually  busied  in  those  below  with 
tumultuous  care  and  concern;  for  what  should  that  mind  gain 
concerning  God  in  the  midst  of  business,  which,  even  when 
at   liberty,  strives  with   difficulty   to   apprehend  aught   that 
concerns  Ilim  ?     And  it  is  well  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Keep  Ps.  46, 
yourselves  alooj\  and  know  that   I  am   God.     For  he  that  ^^' 
neglects  to  *  keep  himself  aloof  to  God,  by  his  own  judgment 
upon  himself  hides  the  light  of  God's  vision  from  his  eyes. 
Hence  moreover  it  is  declared  by  Moses,  that  those  fish  that  Lev.  11, 
have  no  fins  should  not  be  eaten.     For  the  fish,  that  have  fins, 

are  wont  to  make  leaps  above  the  water.  Thus  they  onlv 
pass  into  the  bocly^  of  the  Elect  in  the  manner  of  food,  who, 
whilst  they  yield  themselves  to  the  lowest  charges,  can 
sometimes  by  the  mind's  leaps  mount  up  to  things  on  high, 
that  they  may  not  always  be  buried  in  the  deeps  of  care,  and 
be  reached  by  no  breath  of  the  highest  love  as  of  the  free  air. 
They,  then,  who  are  busied  in  tcm])oral  affairs,  then  onlv 
manage  external  things  aright,  when  they  betake  them  with 
solicitude  to  those  of  the  interior,  when  ihey  take  no  delight 
in  the  clamours  of  disquietudes  witliout,  but  repose  within 
themselves  in  the  bosom  of  trancjuil  rest. 

20.  For  men  of  depraved  minds  never  cease  to  keep  on 
the  tumult  of  earthly  business  within  their  own  breasts,  even 
when  they  are  unemployed.  I'or  they  retain  pictured  in 
imagination  the  things,  which   their  love  is  fixed  on,   and 


'  in  corpore,'  but  he  seems  to  use     arc  of  doubtful  rea<ling.     This  mav 
ablative  so,  though  many  passages     taken,  *  in  the  feeding  of  the  bodv.' 


'256      Quietness  and  inicard  life  of  good  men^  as  Jacob. 

Job  3,   though  they  be  employed  m  no  outward  work,  yet  within 

'■ —  themselves  they  are  toiling  and  labouring  under  the  weight 

of  an  unquiet  quiet.     And  if  the  management  of  these  same 
things  be  accorded  to  them,  they  wholly  go  forth  from  them- 
selves, and  follow  after  these  temporal  and  transient  concerns 
by  the  path  of  their  purpose  of  mind,  with  the  unintermitted 
steps  of  the  thoughts.     But  pious  minds,  on  the  one  hand, 
:|  seek  not  such  things  when  lacking,  and  on  the  other,  they 
bear  them  with  difficulty,  when  present, for  they  fear  lest  by  the 
k  care  of  external  things  they  be  made  to  go  out  of  themselves. 
Which  same  is  well  represented  in  the  life   of  those  two 
Gen. 25,  brothers,  concerning  whom  it  is  written,  And  Esaii  was  a 
Yuig.     cunning  hunter^  a  7nan  of  the  field ;  and  Jacob  was  a  plain 
1  so  Ixx.  man  dwelling  in  tents.     Or  it  is  said  in  Uhe  other  translation, 
he   dwelt  at  home.      For   what   is  represented  by  Esau's 
hunting  but  the  life  of  those,  who,  giving  a  loose  to  them- 
selves in  external  pleasures,  follow  the  flesh?  and,  moreover, 
he  is  described  to  be  a  man  of  the  field,  for  the  lovers  of 
this  world  cultivate  the  external  in  the  same  proportion,  that 
they  leave  uncultivated  their  internal  parts.     But  Jacob  is 
recorded  to  be  a  plain  man,  dwelling  in  tents,  or  dwelling 
at  home,  in  that,  truly,  all,  that  seek  to  avoid  being  dissipated 
in  external  cares,  abide  plain  men  in  the  interior,  and  in  the 
dwelling  place  of  their  conscience;  for  to  ^  dwell  in  tents,'  or 
'  in  the  house,'  is  to  restrain  one's  self  within  the  secrets  of 
the  heart,  nor  ever  to  let  themselves  run  loose  without  in  their 
desires,  lest,  while  men  gape   after  a  multitude  of  objects 
without,  they  be  led  away  from  themselves  by  the  alienation 
of  their  thoughts.     So  let  him,  who  was  tried  and  trained  in 
prosperity,  say.  Did  I  not  dissemble  it?    Did  I  not  hold  my 
peace?    Did  J  not  rest  quiet?    For,  as  we  have  said  above, 
when  holy  men  receive  the  smiles  of  transitory  jDrosperity,  they 
*  dissemble'  the  favour  of  the  world,  as   though  they  were 
ignorant  of  it,  and  with  a  resolute  step  they  inwardly  trample 
upon  that,  whereby  they  are  outwardly  lifted  up.     And  they 
'  hold   their  peace,'   in   that   they   never  clamour   with   the 
uproar  of  wicked   doings.     For   all   iniquity  has   its    voice 
belonging  to  it  in  the  secret  judgments  of  God.     Hence  it  is 
G^en.  18,  written,  The  cry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great.     And 
^^'        they  '  rest  quiet,'  when  they  are  not  only  hurried  away  by 


Good  men  fear  God's  Judgi7ient  of  their  best  deeds.     257 

no  unruly  appetite  of  temporal  desires,  but  over  and  above  Book 

eschew  the  busying  themselves  out  of  due  measure  with  the '- 

necessary  concerns  of  this  present  life. 

21.  But  while  they  do  this,  they  are  still  made  to  feel  the 
strokes  of  a  Father's  hand,  that  they  may  come  to  their  in- 
heritance the  more  perfect,  in  proportion  as  the  rod,  striking 
in  pity,  is  daily  purifying  them  even  fiom  the  very  least  sins. 
Thus  they  are  unceasingly  doing  righteous  acts,  yet  are 
pei*petually  undergoing  severe  troubles.  For  often  our  \ery 
righteousness  itself,  when  brought  to  the  test  of  God's  righte- 
ous eye,  proves  unrighteousness,  and  that  which  is  bright  in 
the  estimate  of  the  doer,  is  foul  in  the  Judge's  searching 
sight.  Hence  when  Paul  said.  For  I  know  nothing  by  my-  \  Cor. 
self;  he  forthwith  added.  Yet  am  I  not  Jiereby  justified ;  and"^'  '*• 
immediately  implying  the  reason  wherefore  he  was  not 
justified,  he  says,  Ihit  he  titat  judyeth  me  is  the  Lord.  As 
though  he  said,  *  For  this  reason  I  say  that  I  am  not  justified 
herein,  viz.  that  /  kiioiv  nothing  by  myself,  because  I  know 
thai  I  am  tested  with  gi'eater  exactness  by  Him,  That 
judgeth  me.'  Therefore  we  must  keep  out  of  sight  all  that 
favours  us  outwardly,  we  must  keep  under  control  whatsoever 

is  clamorous  within,  we  must  eschew  the  things  that  twine 
themselves  about  us  as  necessary,  and  yet  in  all  of  these  we 
must  still  fear  the  chastisements  of  a  strict  inquisition; 
since  even  our  xcry  perfection  itself  does  not  lack  sin,  did 
not  the  severe  Judge  weigh  the  same  with  mercy  in  the 
exact  balance  of  His  examination. 

22.  And  it  is  well  added,  Yet  indignation  came  upon  me. 
For  with  wonderful  skilfulness  of  instruction,  when  about  to 
tell  of  the  chastisements,  he  premised  the  good  deeds,  that 
each    man    might  hence   be   led  to  consider  what    punish- 
ments   await    sinners   hereafter,  if  the  righteous    even    are 
cha.stised  here  with  strokes  so  strong.     For  it  is  hence  that 
Peter  says,  For  the  time  is  come  that  judgment  must  begin  \  Pet.4 
at  the  house  of  God.     And  [f  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  ^'^'  *^- 
where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?     Hence 
Paul,  after  he  said  many  things   in   commendation   of  the 
Thessalonians,  straightway  achled,  So  that  ue  ourselves  glory  iThe%n, 
in  you  in  the  churches  of  God,  for  your  patience  and  faith  '•^•^• 
in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribulations  that  ye  endure; 

s 


258  Job's  Friends  erred  injiidghig  him  and  not  themselves. 

Job  3,  Which  is  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God. 

llisT~  ^^  ^^  ^^  ^^\^,  '  Whilst  yoii,  that  act  so  uprightly,  undergo 
so  many  hardships,  what  else  is  it  than  that  ye  are  giving 
examples  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  since  from  your 
punishment  it  is  to  be  inferred  in  what  sort  He  smites  those 
with  whom  He  is  wroth,  if  He  suffers  you  to  be  thus  afflicted, 
in  whom  He  delights  ;  or  how  He  will  strike  those  towards 
whom  He  shews  righteous  judgment,  if  He  thus  torments 
your  own  selves,  whom  with  pitifulness  He  cherishes  in 
reproving. 

23.  The  first  words,  then,  of  blessed  Job  being  ended,  his 
friends  that  had  come  in  pity  to  comfort  him,  set  themselves 
by  turns  to  the  upbraiding  of  him ;  and  while  they  launch 
out  to  words  of  strife,  they  drop  the  purpose  of  pity,  which 
they  had  come  for.  And  indeed  they  do  this  mth  no  bad 
intent,  but,  though  they  manifest  feeling  for  the  stricken  man, 
they  supposed  him  to  be  no  otherwise  stricken  than  for  his 
wickedness ;  and  whereas  guarded  speech  does  not  follow 
that  good  intention,  the  very  purpose  of  mercy  is  turned 
into  the  sin  of  an  offence.  For  it  was  their  duty  to  consider 
to  whom  and  on  what  occasion  they  spake ;  in  that  he,  to 
whom  they  had  come,  was  a  righteous  man,  and  besieged 
with  the  strokes  of  God's  hand;  and  so  they  should  from  his 
past  life  have  estimated  those  words  of  his  mouth,  which 
they  were  unable  to  understand,  and  not  have  convicted  him 
fi'om  present  strokes,  but  have  entertained  fear  for  their  own 
lives,  and  not  as  it  were  by  reasoning  have  lifted  themselves 
above,  but  by  lamenting  joined  themselves  to  that  stricken 
Saint,  so  that  their  knowledge  might  in  no  wise  display  itself 
in  words,  but  that  great  teacher,  grief,  might  instruct  the 
tongue  of  the  comforters  to  speak  aright.  And  though  they 
perchance  might  in  any  thing  be  of  a  different  mind,  as- 
suredly it  was  meet  that  they  should  express  these  feelings 
with  humility,  lest  by  words  without  restraint  they  should 
accumulate  wounds  upon  the  smitten  soul. 

24.  For  it  often  happens  that,  because  they  cannot  be 
understood,  either  the  doings  or  the  sayings  of  the  better  men 
are  displeasing  to  the  worse;  but  they  are  not  to  be  rashly 
censured  by  them,  inasmuch  as  they  cannot  be  appre- 
hended in  their  true  sense.     Often  that  is  done  in  pursuance 


Censuring  betfcr  men  a  sin  like  Uzzah\s.  259 

of  policy'  by  greater  men,  which  is  accounted  an  eiTor  R^ok 
by  their  inferiors.  Often  many  things  are  said  by  the ,  <  ^|-  _ 
strong,  which  the  weak  only  decide  upon,  because  they  know  pensa- 

tone 

nothing  about  them.  And  this  is  well  represented  by  thatin  ec'o- 
Ark  of  the  Testament  beins:  inclined   on   one   side   by  the°°?^3^- 

,  .    ,  .  ,  .    ,        1         T       .  1      .   .  ^    ,       2  Sam. 

kme  kickmg,  which  the  Levite  desning  to  set  upright, 6,  7. 
because  he  thought  it  would  fall,  he  immediately  received 
sentence  of  death.  For  what  is  the  mind  of  the  just  man 
but  the  Ark  of  the  Testament?  which,  as  it  is  being  carried, 
is  inclined  by  the  kicking  of  the  kine;  in  that  it  sometimes 
happens  that  even  he,  who  rules  well,  being  shaken  by  the 
disorder  of  the  people  subject  to  him,  is  moved  by  nought 
else  than  love  to  a  condescension  in  policy.  But  in  this, 
which  is  done  in  ])olicy,  that  very  bending,  that  is,  of  strength 
is  accounted  a  fall  by  the  inexperienced;  and  hence  there  are 
some  of  those  that  are  in  subjection,  who  j)ut  out  the  hand  of 
censure  against  it,  yet  by  that  very  rashness  of  theirs  they 
forthwith  drop  from  life.  Thus  the  Levite  stretched  forth 
his  hand  as  it  were  in  aid,  but  he  lost  his  life  in  being 
guilty  of  offence,  in  that  while  the  weak  sort  censure  the  deeds 
of  the  strong,  they  are  themselves  made  outcasts  from  the  lot 
of  the  living.  Sometimes  too  holy  men  say  some  things  con- 
descending to  the  meanest  subjects,  while  some  things  they 
deliver  contemplating  the  highest;  and  foolish  men,  because 
ihey  know  nothing  of  the  meaning  either  of  such  condescen- 
sion or  elevation,  presumptuously  censure  them.  And  what 
is  it  to  desire  to  set  a  good  man  right  for  his  condescension, 
but  to  lift  up  the  ark  that  is  inclined  with  the  presuming 
hand  of  rebuke?  what  is  it  to  censure  a  righteous  man  for 
unapprehended  words,  but  to  take  the  move  he  makes  in 
his  strength  for  the  downfall  of  error.''  But  he  loses  his  life, 
who  lifts  up  the  ark  of  God  with  a  high  mind;  in  that  no 
man  would  ever  dare  to  correct  the  upright  acts  of  the 
Saints,  unless  he  first  thought  better  things  of  himself.  And 
hence  this  Levite  is  rightly  called  Oza,  which  same  is  by 
interpretation  *  the  strong  one  of  the  Lord,'  in  that  the 
presumptuous  severally,  did  they  not  audaciously  conclude 
themselves  *  strong  in  the  Lord,'  would  never  condemn  as 
weak  the  saying  and  doings  of  their  betters.  Therefore  while 
the   friends  of  blessed  Job  leap  forth  against  him,  as  if  in 

s2 


260     He  may  seek  explanation,  hut  must  do  it  humbly. 

Job  3,  God's  defence,  they  transgress  the  rule  of  God's  ordinance  in 

-„-^—  behaving  proudly. 
Hist.         -ve     ti  i      " 

'2o.  But  when  any  of  the  doings  of  better  men  are  dis- 
pleasing to  the  less  good,  they  are  by  no   means  to  hold 
their  peace  about  the  considerations  which  influence  their 
minds,  but  to  give  utterance    thereto  with  a  great   degree 
of  humility,  so  that  the  purpose  of  him,  whose  feelings  are 
pious,  may,  in  a  genuine  manner,  keep  the  form  of  upright- 
ness, in  proportion  as  he  goes  by  the  pathway  of  lowliness. 
Thus  both  all  that  we  feel  is  to  be  freely  expressed,  and  all 
that  we  express  is  to  be  uttered  with  the  deepest  humility, 
lest  even  what  we  intend  aright  we  make  other  than  right,  by 
putting  it  forth  in  a  spirit  of  pride.     Paul  had  spoken  many 
things  to  his  hearers  with  humility,  but  it  was  with  still  more 
humility  that  he  busied  himself  to  appease  them  about  that 
Heb.13  ^ui^ble  exhortation  itself,  saying.  And  I  beseech  you,  brethren, 
22.        sujfer  the  word  of  exhortation:    for  I  have  written  a  letter 
unto  you  in  few  words.     And  likewise  bidding  farewell  to 
the   Ephesians   at  Miletus,  who    were   deeply   grieved   and 
loudly  lamenting,  he  recalls  his   humility  to  their   remem- 
Acts      brance,in  these  words,  Therefore  watch,  and  remember,  that 
20,  31.   by  the  space  of  three  years  I  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one 
night   and   day  with    tears.     Again   he   says    to    the  same 
Enh  4   P<^^'^ons  by  letter,  /   therefore,   the   prisoner  of  the   Lord, 
1.  beseech  you  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith 

ye  are  called.  Therefore  let  him  infer  from  hence,  if  he  ever 
thinks  rightly  at  all,  with  what  humility  the  disciple  ought 
to  address  the  Master,  if  the  Master  of  the  Gentiles  himself, 
in  the  very  things  which  he  proclaims  with  authority,  be- 
seeches the  disciples  so  submissively.  Let  every  one  collect 
from  hence  in  what  a  spirit  of  humility  he  should  commu- 
nicate to  those,  from  whom  he  has  received  examples  of 
good  living,  all  that  he  perceives  aright,  if  Paul  submitted 
himself  in  a  humble  strain  to  those,  whom  he  himself  raised 
up  to  life. 

26.  But  Eliphaz,  who  is  the  first  of  the  fiiends  to  speak, 
though  he  came  with  pity  to  console,  yet  in  that  he  departs 
from  meekness  of  speech,  is  ignorant  of  the  rules  of  consoling; 
and  while  he  neglects  the  guarding  of  his  lips,  he  is  guilty 
of  excess,  even  to  offering  insult  to  the  afflicted  man,  saying, 


JoVs  Friettch',  though  in  the  U'rony,  utter  much  truth.  261 

The  tiger  hath  perished  for  lack  of  prey  ^  the  roaring  of  the  Book 

Hotly  and  the  voice  of  the  fierce  lioness\  and  the  teeth  of  the '■— 

young  lions  are  broken  :  i.  e.  by  the  teeth  of  a  tiger  marking  lo.  ii'. 
out  blessed  Job,   as  it  were,  with  the   fault   of  variedness;*^-*^'" 
by  tJte  roaring  of  the  lion,  denoting  that  man's  terribleness ; 
by  the  voice  (f  the  lioness,  the  loquacity  of  his  wife ;  and  by 
the  broken  teeth  of  the  young  lions,  signifying  the  gkittony  of 
his  sons  brought  to  ruin.     And  hence  the  sentence  of  God 
rightly  reproves  the  feeling  of  the  friends,  which  had  lifted 
itself  up  in  swelling  reproach,  saying.  Ye  have  not  spoken  of-^^^^^j 
Me  the  thing  that  is  right,  as  My  servant  Job  hath. 

27.  But  I  see  that  we  must  enquire,  wherefore  Paul  makes 
use  of  their  sentiments  with  so  much  weight  of  authority,  if 
these  sentiments  of  theirs  be  nullified  by  the  Lord's  rebuke  ? 
For  they  are  the  words  of  Eliphaz  which  he  brought  before 
the  Corinthians,   saying.  For  it  is  written,  He  taketh  the  i  Cot. 3, 
nise  in  their  own  craftiness.     How  then  do  we  reject  as  evil  l^Jj  - 
what  Paul  establishes  by  authority?  or  how  shall  we  account  13. 
that  to  be  right  by  the  testimony  of  Paul,  which  the  Lord 
by  His  own  li])s  determined  not  to  be  right }   lUit  we  speedily 
leani  how  little  the  two  are  at  variance  together,  if  we  more 
exactly  consider  the  words    of  that  same  Divine  sentence, 
which  assuredly  having  declared,  Ye  have  not  spoken  of  Me 
the  thing  that  is  right;  thereupon  added,  as   3Iy  servant 
Job.     It  is  cleai'  then  that  some  things  contained  in  their 
sayings  were  right,  but  they  are   overcome   by  comparison 
with  one  who  was  better;  for  among  other  things,  which  they 
say  without  reason,  there  are  many  forcible  sentences  they 
utter  in  addressing  blessed  Job ;  but  when  comj)ared  with 
his  more  forcible  sayings  ihey  lose  the  power  of  their  forci- 
bleness.     And   many   things   that   they   say  are   admirable, 
were  they  not  spoken  against  the  afflicted  condition  of  the  holy 
man.     So  that  in  themselves  they  are  great,  but  because  they 
aim  to  j)ierce  that  righteous  j)erson,  that  greatness  loses  its 
weight,  for  with  whatever  degree  of  strength,  it  is  in  vain 
that  the  javelin  is  sent  to  strike  the   hard  stones,  since  it 
glances  off  the  further  with  blunted  point,  the  more  it  comes 
hurled  with  strength.     Therefore,  though  the  sayings  of  Job's 
friends  be  very  forcible  in  some  points,  yet,  since  they  strike 
the  Saint's  well-fenced  life,  they  turn  back  all  the  point  of 


262     Heretics,  like  Job's  Frie?ids,  mix  truth  and  error. 
Job  3,  their  sharpness.     And  therefore  because  they  are  both  great 

eye 

: — in  themselves,  and  yet  ou^ht  never  to  have  been  taken  up 

Al.LEG.  .  ./  o  1. 

'against  blessed  Job,  on  the  one  hand  let  Paul,  weighing 
them  by  their  intrinsic  excellence,  deliver  them  as  authori- 
tative, and  on  the  other  let  the  Judge,  forasmuch  as  they 
were  delivered  without  caution,  censure  them  in  respect  of 
the  quality  of  the  individual. 

•28.  But,  as  we  have  said  above  that  these  same  friends  of 
blessed  Job  contain  a  figure  of  heretics,  let  us  now  search 
^  out  how  their  words  agree  with   heretics;  for  some  of  the 
opinions  which  they  hold  are  very  right,  but  in  the  midst  of 
these  they  fall  away  to  coriiipt  notions ;  for  heretics  have 
this  especial  peculiarity,  that  they  mix  good  and  evil,  that  so 
they  may  easily  delude  the  sense  of  the  hearer.      For  if  they 
always  said  wrong,  soon  discovered  in  their  wrongheaded- 
iiess,  they  would  be  the  less   able   to  win  a  way  for  that, 
which    they    desire.     Again,    if  they   always  thought  right, 
then,  surely,  they   would   never   have    been  heretics.     But 
whilst  with  artfulness  of  deceiving  they  engage  themselves 
with  either,  both   by   the    evil  they  vitiate   the   good,   and 
by    the    good    they    conceal    the    evil,    to   the    end   that   it 
may    be    readily    admitted ;    just   as    he    that    presents    a 
cup  of  poison,  touches    the  brim  of  the  cup    with  honied 
sweets,  and  while  this  that  has  a  sweet  flavour  is  tasted  at 
the  first  sip,  that  too  wliich  brings  death  is  unhesitatingly 
swallowed.     Thus  heretics  mix  right  with  wrong,  that  by 
making  a  shew  of  good   things,  they  may  draw  hearers  to 
themselves,  and  by  setting  forth  evil  they  may  corrupt  them 
with  a  secret  pestilence.     Yet  it  sometimes   happens   that 
being  corrected  by  the  preaching  and  admonitions  of  Holy 
Church,  they  are  healed  from  such  a  contradiction  in  views, 
and  hence  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  offer  the  sacrifice  of 
their  reconciliation  by  the  hands  of  the  same  holy  man,  and 
even  under  attainder  they  are  restored  to  the  favour  of  the 
LukeU  Supreme  Judge.     Of  whom  we  have  a  fitting  representation 
^^'        in  that  cleansing  of  the  ten  lepers.     For  in  leprosy  both  a 
portion  of  the  skin  is  brought  to  a  bright  hue,  and  a  portion 
remains  of  a  healthy  colour.     Lepers  therefore  are  a  figure  of 
heretics,  for  in  that  they  blend  evil  with  good,  they  cover  the 
complexion  of  health  with  spots.     And  hence  that  they  may 


They  begin  gently^  but  end  in  violence.  263 

be  healed,  they  rightly  cry  oat,  Jesus,  MasterK      For  whereas  Book 

they  notify  that  they  have  gone  \NTong  in  His  words,  they '■ — 

humbly  call  Him  Master  when  they  are  to  be  healed,  and  so  ceptor, 
soon  as  they  retm-n  to  acknowledge  the  Master,  they  are  at  once  ^^^S- 
brought  back  to  the  right  state  ol  health.    Hut  as  on  the  savings 
of  his  friends  we  have  carried  the  preface  to  our  interpretation 
somewhat  far,  let  us  now  consider  minutely  the  ver}'  words 
themselves  which  they  spake.     The  account  goes  on ; 

C.  iv.  1,  2.  Then  Eliphaz  the  Temaniie  ansuered  and  said, 
If  ue  assay  to  commune  with  thee,  uilt  thou  be  grieved  ^ 

29.  It  has  been  already  declared  above,  what  there  is  set  xii. 
forth  in  the  interpretation  of  these  names.  Therefore, 
because  we  are  in  haste  to  reach  the  unexamined  parts,  we 
forbear  to  imfold  again  what  has  been  already  delivered. 
Accorfhngly  this  is  to  be  heedfully  observed,  that  they,  that 
bear  the  semblance  of  heretics,  begin  to  speak  softly,  sapng, 

If  we  assay  to  commune  uith   thee,  uilt  thou  be  grieved? 

>  For  heretics  dread  to  incense  their  hearers  at  the  outset  of 

/  their  commmiing  with  them,  lest  they  be  listened  to  with 

/    ears  on  the  watch,  and  they  carefully  shun  the  paining  of 

them,  that  they  may  catch  their  unguardedness,  and  what 

I      they  put  forward  is  almost  always  mild,  while  that  is  harsh 

which  they  cunningly  introduce  in  going  on.     And  hence  at 

this  time  the  friends  of  Job  begin  with  the  reverence  of  a 

gentle  address,  but  they  burst  forth  even  to  launching  the 

darts   of  the   bitterest    invectives;    for   the    roots  of   thorns 

themselves  are  soft,  yet  from  that  ver}'  softness  of  their  own 

they  put  Ibrth  that  whereby  they  pierce.     It  goes  on; 

JJut  who  can  hold  in^  the  discourse  conceived  f  'thusV. 

30.  There  be  three  kinds  of  men,  which  ditt'er  from  one    xiii. 
another    by    qualities    carried    forward    in    gradation.      For 
there  are  some,  who  at  the  same  time  that  they  conceive 

evil  sentiments  to  speak,  restrain  themselves  in  their  speech 
by  none  of  the  graveness  of  silence;  and  there  are  others, 
who,  whereas  they  conceive  evil  things,  withhold  themselves 
with  a  strong  control  of  silence.  And  there  are  some,  who 
being  made  strong  by  the  exercise  of  virtue,  are  advanced 
even  to  so  great  a  height,  that,  as  to  speaking,  they  do  not 
even  conceive  any  evil  thoughts  in  the  heart,  which  they 
should  have   to   restrain   by   keeping  silence.      It   is  shewn 


264     Need  of  self-restraint.     Job's  zeal  in  well-doing. 

Job  4,  then  to  which  class  Eliphaz  belongs,  who  bears  witness  that 
„ ''    he  cannot  *  withhold  his  conceived  discourse.'     Wherein  too 

HIST. 

he  made  known  this,  that  he  knew  that  he  would  give  offence 
by  speaking.  For  he  would  never  be  anxious  to  withhold 
words  that  he  cannot,  unless  he  were  assured  beforehand  that 
he  would  be  inflicting  wounds  by  the  same;  for  good  men 
check  precipitancy  of  speech  with  the  reins  of  counsel,  and 
they  take  heedful  thought,  lest,  by  giving  a  loose  to  the 
wantonness  of  the  tongue,  they  should  by  heedlessness  of 
•  con-     speech  pierce  their  hearer's  spirits^;  hence  it  is  well  said  by 

sci6n- 

tiam       Solomon,  He  that  letteth  out  water  is  a  head  of  strife.     For 

t'J^'J*     '  the  water  is  let  out,'  when  the  flowing  of  the  tongue  is  let  loose. 

Vulg.  And  he  that  '  letteth  out  water,'  is  made  the  '  beginning  of 
strife,'  in  that  by  the  incontinency  of  the  lips,  the  com- 
mencement of  discord  is  afforded.  Thus,  as  the  wicked  are 
light  in  mind,  so  they  are  precipitate  in  speech,  and  neglect 
to  keep   silence,  thoroughly  considering  w'hat   they  should 

2  con-  say.  And  what  a  light  spirit^  conceives,  a  lighter  tongue 
delivers  apace.  Hence  on  this  occasion  Eliphaz  infers  from 
his  own  experience  a  thing,  which  in  a  feeling  of  hopeless- 
ness he  believes  concerning  all  men ;  saying,  But  who  can 
withhold  his  conceived  discourse?     It  proceeds; 

Ver.  3,  4.  Behold,  thou  hast  instructed  many.,  and  thou 
hast  strengtlioicdthe  weak  hands.  Thy  words  have  npholden 
him  thai  was  falling,  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble 
knees. 
xiv.  31.  If  the  text  of  the  historical  account  be  regarded  in 
itself,  it  is  of  great  service  to  the  reader,  that  in  blessed  Job, 
instead  of  the  ripping  up  of  vices,  proclaim  is  made  of  his 
virtues  by  his  reviling  friends ;  for  the  testimony  to  our 
manner  of  life  is  never  so  strong,  as  when  commendable  things 
are  told  by  him,  who  aims  to  fasten  guilt  upon  our  head. 
But  let  us  consider  of  v/hat  a  lofty  height  that  man  was, 
who  by  instructing  the  ignorant,  strengthening  the  weak, 
upholding  the  faltering,  amid  the  cares  of  his  household, 
amidst  the  charge  of  countless  concerns,  amidst  anxious 
feelings  for  his  children,  amidst  the  pursuit  of  so  many 
laborious  occupations,  devoted  himself  to  putting  others  in 
the  right  way.  And  being  busied  indeed,  he  executed  these 
offices,  yet  being  free,  he  did  service  in  the  master's  office  of 


Some  praise  given  to  gain  credit  for  calumny.       265 

instruction.  By  exercising  superintendence,  he  disposed  of  Book 
temporal  tilings,  by  preaching,  he  announced  eternal  truths;  — '— 
uprightness  of  life,  both  by  practice  he  shewed  to  all 
beholders,  and  by  speech  he  conveyed  to  all  that  heard  him. 
But  all  that  are  either  heretics  or  bad  men,  in  recording  the 
excellencies  of  the  good,  turn  them  into  grounds  of  accusa- 
tion. Hence  Eliphaz  deduces  occasion  of  reviling  against 
blessed  Job  from  the  same  quarter,  whence  he  related  com- 
mendable things  of  him  ;   for  it  goes  on, 

Ver.  5.  But  now  it  is  come  upon  thee^  and  thou  faintest ; 
it  toucheth  tJiee,  and  thou  art  troubled. 

3*2.  All  men  of  froward  mind  assail  the  life  of  the  righteous    xv. 
in  two  ways;  for  either  they  assert  that  what  they  say  is  wrong, 
or  that  what  they  say  aright  they  never  observe ;  and  hence 
blessed  Job   is  reproved  by  his  friends  further  on   for  his 
mode  of  speech,  whereas  now  he  is  torn  in  pieces  for  having 
spoken  right  things,  but  not  having  observed  them.    And  so 
at  one  time  the  speech,  and  at  another  time  the  practice  of 
the  good  meets  with  the  disapproval  of  the  wicked,  in  order 
that  either  the  tongue  being  rebuked  may  hold   its  peace, 
or  ihe  life,  being  convicted  by  the  testimony  of  that  same 
tongue  of  theirs,  may  give  way  under  the  charge.     And  mark 
that  first  they  bring  forward  commendations  of  the  tongue, 
and  afterwards  complain  of  the  weakness  of  the  life.     For 
the  wicked,  that  they  may  not  openly  shew  themselves  to 
be  evil,  sometimes  say  such  good  things  of  the  just,  as  they 
know  to  be  already  received  concerning  them  by  others  also. 
But  as  we  have  said  above,  these  very  points  they  forthwith 
strain  to  the  increase  of  guilt,  and  from  hence,  that  they  spoke 
favourable  things  also,  they  point  out  that  credit  is  to  be  given 
them  in  the  reverse,  and  with  more  seeming  truth  they  intimate 
evil   things,   in    proportion    as    they   commended    the    good 
witli  seeming  zeal.     Thus   they  wrest  words  of  favourable 
im])ort  to  the  service  of  accusation,  in  that  they  afterwards 
more  deeply  wound  the  life  of  the  righteous  from  the  same 
source,  whence  a  little  before  in  semblance  thev  vindicated 
it.      But  it  often  happens  that  their  good  qualities,  which  they 
first  condenni  when  possessed,  they  afterwards  admire,  as  if 
departed.     And  hence  Eliphaz,  as  he  declares  them  to  be 


266         Fear  leads  to  strenylh,  strength  to  Palioicc. 

Job  4, departed,  subjoins  the  virtues  of  the  holy  man,  enumerating 

— ^ —  them,  and  saying, 

» V.thus  Ver.  6.  ^  Where  is  thy  fear,  thy  strength,  thy  patience,  and 
the  perfectness  of  thy  ways  ? 
xvi.  33.  All  which  same  he  makes  to  succeed  that  sentence 
which  he  set  before,  saying,  But  note  a  stroke  is  come  upon 
thee, and  tliou  faintest;  ittoucheih  thee,  and  thou  art  troubled. 
Thus  he  declares  that  they  were  brought  to  nought  all  of 
them  together,  in  this,  that  he  blames  blessed  Job's  being 
troubled  by  the  scourge.  Yet  it  is  to  be  well  taken  notice 
of,  that  though  he  chides  unbeiittingly,  yet  the  ranks  of 
virtues  he  fitly  describes;  for  in  enumerating  the  virtues  of 
blessed  Job,  he  marked  out  his  life  in  four  stages,  in  that  he 
both  added  strength  to  fear,  and  patience  to  strength,  and  to 
patience,  perfection.  Since  one  sets  out  in  the  way  of  the 
Lord  with  fear,  that  he  may  go  on  to  strength;  for  as  in  the 
world  boldness  begets  strength,  so  in  the  way  of  God  bold- 
ness engenders  weakness ;  and  as  in  the  way  of  the  world 
fear  gives  rise  to  weakness,  so  in  the  way  of  God  fear  pro- 

Prov.14,  duces  strength;  as  Solomon  witnesses,  who  says.  In  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence.  For  '  strong  confidence'  is 
said  '  to  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,'  in  that,  in  truth,  our 
mind  so  much  the  more  valorously  sets  at  nought  all  the 
teiTors  of  temporal  vicissitudes,  the  more  thoroughly  that  it 
submits  itself  in  fear  to  the  Author  of  those  same  temporal 
things.  And  being  stablished  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  it 
encounters  nothing  without  to  fill  it  with  alarm,  in  that 
whereas  it  is  united  to  the  Creator  of  all  things  by  a  righ- 
teous fear,  it  is  by  a  certain  powerful  influence  raised  high 
above  them  all.  For  strength  is  never  shewn  saving  in 
adversity,  and  hence  patience  is  immediately  made  to 
succeed  to  strength.  For  every  man  proves  himself  in 
a  much  truer  sense  to  have  advanced  in '  strength,'  in 
proportion  as  he  bears  with  the  bolder  heart  the  wrongs  of 
other  men.  For  he  was  little  strong  in  himself,  who  is 
brought  to  the  ground  by  the  wickedness  of  another.  He, 
in  that  he  cannot  bear  to  face  opposition,  lies  pierced  with 
the  sword  of  his  cowardice.  But  forasmuch  as  perfection 
springs  out  of  patience,  immediately  after  patience  we  have 


Eliphaz  thinks  the  righteous  perish  not  here.  267 

the  perfectness  of  his  ways  introduced.     For  he  is  really   Book 
perfect,  who  feels  no  impatience  towards  the  imperfection  of  — — 


his  neighbour;  since  he  that  goes  off,  not  being  able  to  bear 
the    imperfection    of   another,   is   his    own   witness   against 
himself,    that   he   is   not   yet   perfectly   advanced.      Hence 
Truth  says  in  the  Gospel,  In  your  patience  possess  ye  yowr  Luke2i, 
souls.     For  what  is  it  to  possess  our  souls,  but  to  Uve  by  the  ^  ' 
rule  of  perfection  in  all  things,  to  command  all  the  motions 
of  the  mind  from  the  citadel  of  virtue  ?     He  then  that  main- 
tains patience  possesses  his  soul,  in  that  from  hence  he  is 
endued  with   strength  to  encounter  all  adversities,  whence 
even  by  overcoming  himself  he  is  made  master  of  himself; 
and  as  he  quells  himself  in  a  manner  worthy  of  all  praise,  he 
comes    forth    unquelled    with    dauntless    front,  because    by 
conquering  himself  in  his  pleasures,  he  makes  himself  in- 
vincible   to  reverses.      But   as   Eliphaz    rebuked  him  ^vith 
reviling,  so  now  he  adds  a  few  words,  as  if  in  exhortation, 
saying, 

\'er.  7.  Remember,  I  pray  thee,  who  ever  perished  heiny 
innocent  ?  or  where  were  the  rigJiteous  cut  off? 

34.  Whether  it  be  heretics,  of  whom  we  have  said  that  the    xvii. 
friends  of  blessed  Job  bore  an  image,  or  whether  any  of  the 
froward  ones,  they  are  as  blameable  in  their  admonitions,  as 
they  are  immoderate  in  their  condemnation.     For  he  says, 
Who  ever  perished  beiny  innocent?   or  where  were  the  riyh- 
<     teous  cut  off  ?    Since  it  otten  happens  that  in  this  life  both 
)     *  the  innocent  perisli/  and  '  the  righteous  are'  utterly  *  cut 
^     off,'  yet  in  perishing  they  are  reserved  to  glory  etenial.     For 
if  none  that  is  innocent  perished,  the  Prophet  would  not  say, 
The  riyh  teous  perisheth,  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart.     If  Is.  67, 
God    in    His   providential   dealings    did    not    carr>'   off  the 
righteous.  Wisdom  would  never  have  said  of  the  righteous 
man,  Yea,  speedily  was  he  taken  atvay,  lest  that  wickedness  \y\sd. 4, 
should  alter  his  understand iny.      If  no  visitation  ever  smote     * 
the  righteous,  Peter  would  never  foretell  it,  saying.  For  /AeiPet.4, 
time  is  come  that  judyment  must  beyin  at  the  house  of  God. 
They  then  are  really  righteous,  who  are  furnished  forth  by 
the  love  of  the  Country  above   to   meet  all  the  ills  of  the 
present  life.     For  all  that  fear  to  endure  ills  here,  for  the 
sake  of  eternal  blessings,  clearly  arc  not  righteous  men.     But 
Kliphaz  does  not  t;ike  account  either  that  tlir  righteous  are 


268  Evil-doers  seldoni  recompensed  in  this  life. 

Job  4,  cut  off,  or  that  the  inuocent  perish  here,  in  that  oftentimes 
~jj7^^*^^^y  ^^^^  serve  God,  not  in  the  hope  of  heavenly  glory,  but 
for  an  earthly  recompense,  make  a  fiction  in  their  own  head 
of  that  which  they  are  seeking  after,  and,  taking  upon  them- 
selves to  be  instructors,  in  preaching  earthly  immunity,  they 
shew  by  all  their  pains  what  is  the  thing  they  love.  It 
goes  on  ; 

Ver.  8,  9.  Even,  as  I  have  seen,  they  that  plough  iniquity, 
1  V.  so.  and^  sow  sorrows,  and  reap  the  same,  by  the  blast  of  God  do 
they  perish,  and  by  the  breath  of  His  nostrils  are  they  con- 
sumed. 
xviii.       35.  To  '  sow  griefs'  is  to  utter  deceits,  but  to  '  reap  griefs' 
is  to  prevail  by  so  speaking.     Or,  sui-ely,  they  *  sow  griefs,' 
who  do  froward  actions,  they  '  reap  giiefs,'  when  they  are 
punished  for  this  frowardness.     For  the  harvest  of  grief  is 
the  recompense   of  condemnation,   and    whereas  it   is  im- 
mediately introduced  that  they  that  '  sow  and  reap  griefs,' 
'  perish  by  the  blast  of  God,'  and  are  ^  consumed  by  the  breath 
of  His  nostrils,'  in  this  passage  the  '  reaping  of  grief  is 
shewn   to  be  not  punishment  as  yet,  but  the   still  further 
perfecting  of  wickedness,  for  in  *  the  breath  of  His  nostrils' 
the  punishment  of  that  '  reaping'  is  made  to  follow.     Here 
then  they  '  sow  and  reap  griefs,'  in  that  all  that  they  do  is 
wicked,  and  they  thrive  in  that  very  wickedness,  as  is  said  of 
Ps.10,5.  the   wicked   man  by  the  Psalmist,    His    ways   are   always 
grievous ;    Thy  judgments  are  far  above  out  of  his  sight:  as 
for  all  his  enemies,  he  pujfeth  at  them.     And  it  is  soon  after 
ver.  7.    added  concerning  him,  under  his  tongue  is  labour  and  grief. 
So  then  he  '  sows  griefs,'  when  he  does  wicked  things,  he 
'  reaps  griefs,'  when  from  the  same  wickednesses  he  grows 
to  temporal   greatness.     How  then   is  it  that  they  '  perish 
by  the  blast  of  God,'  who  are  for  the  most  part  permitted 
to    abide   long  here  below,  and  in   greater  prosperity  than 
the  righteous }    For  hence  it  is  said  of  them  again  by  the 
Ps.  73,  Psalmist,    TJtcy  are  not   in   trouble  as   other  men,  neither 
are  they  plagued  like  other  folk.     Hence  Jeremiah  saith, 
Jer.  12,  Wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  prosper  ?    For  be- 
Ecclus.  cause,  as  it  is  written.  For    the   Lord   is"^  a  long-suffering 
\'Jt\     re  warder.  He  oftentimes  for  \ow^  bears   with  those,  whom 

'   V  ulg.  '  "  .  . 

He  condemns  for  all  eternity.     Yet  sometimes   He   strikes 
quickly,  in  that  He  hastens  to  the  succour  of  the  pusillani- 


Eliphaz  says  of  this  world  what  is  true  of  the  next.  *269 

mity  of  the  innocent.     Tlierefore  Almighty  God  sometimes  Book 

permits  the  wicked  to  have  their   own    way  for  long,  that 1- 

the  ways  of  the  righteous  may  be  more  purely  cleansed. 
Yet  sometimes  He  slays  the  unrighteous  with  speedy 
destruction,  and  by  their  ruin  He  strengthens  the  hearts  of 
the  innocent.  For  if  He  were  now  to  smite  all  that  do  evil, 
on  whom  would  He  yet  have  to  shew  forth  the  final  Judg- 
ment ?  And  if  He  never  at  any  time  smote  any  man,  who 
would  ever  have  believed  that  God  regarded  human  affairs  .'' 
Sometimes  then  He  strikes  the  bad,  that  He  may  shew  that 
He  does  not  leave  wickedness  unpunished.  But  sometimes 
He  bears  with  the  \vicked  for  long,  that  He  may  teach  the 
heedful  what  judgment  they  are  reserved  for. 

36.  Thus  this  sentence  of  the  cutting  off  of  the  wicked,  if  it 
be  not  spoken  of  all  men  in  general  at  the  end  of  this  present 
state  of  being,  is  undoubtedly  to  a  great  degree  made  void 
of  the  force  of  tnuh;  but  it  will  then  be  true,  when  iniquity 
shall  no  longer  have  reprieve.  And  perchance  it  may  be 
more  rightly  taken  in  this  sense,  since  neither  ^  the  innocent 
perishes'  nor  '  the  u])right  is  cut  off,'  in  that  though  here  he 
is  worn  out  in  the  flesh,  yet  in  the  sight  of  the  eternal  Judge 
he  is  renewed  with  true  health.  And  they  that  ^  sow  and 
reap  griefs,'  *  perish  by  the  blast  of  God,'  in  that  in  propor- 
tion as  they  go  on  here  deeper  in  doing  wickedly,  they  are 
the  more  severely  stricken  with  the  damnation  to  follow. 
But  whereas  he  premises  this  sentence  with  the  word.  Re- 
member, it  is  clearly  evident  that  something  past  is  recalled 
to  mind,  and  not  any  thing  future  proclaimed.  Then  there- 
fore Eliphaz  would  have  spoken  more  truly,  if  he  had 
believed  that  these  things  were  wrought  on  the  head  of  the 
wicked  in  general  by  final  vengeance. 

37.  But  this  point,  that  God  is  said  to  '  breathe,'  claims 
to  be  more  particularly  made  out.  For  we,  when  we 
*  breathe,'  draw  the  air  from  the  outside  within  us,  and, 
tluis  drawn  within,  we  give  it  fortli  without.  God  then 
is  said  to  '  breathe'  in  recompensing  vengeance,  in  that 
from  occasions  without  He  conceives  the  puqiose  of  judg- 
ment within  Him,  and  from  the  internal  pur^iose  sends  forth 
the  sentence  without.  When  God  '  breathes'  as  it  were, 
somewhat  is  drawn   in   iVoni   things  without,  when    He   sees 


270         What  is  meant  by  the  blast  of  God's  breath. 

Job  3,  our  evil  ways  without,  and  ordains  judgment  within.     And 

— -^ —  again  as  if  by  God  '  breathing,'  the  breath  is  sent  forth  from 
within,  when  from  the  internal  conception  of  the  purpose, 
the  outward  decree  of  condemnation  is  delivered.  And  so 
it  is  rightly  said  that  they,  that  ^  sow  griefs,'  perish  '  by  the 
breath  of  God,'  for  wherein  they  execute  wicked  deeds 
outwardly,  they  are  deservedly  stricken  from  within.  Or, 
surely,  when  God  is  said  to  '  breathe,'  in  that  the  breath  of 
His  wrath  is  immediately  introduced,  by  the  designation  of 
His  '  breathing'  may  be  denoted  that  very  visitation  of  His. 
For  when  we  are  wroth,  we  kindle '^  with  the  breath  of  rage. 
To  shew  the  Lord  then  meditating  vengeance,  He  is  said  to 
'  breathe'  in  His  indignation,  not  that  in  His  own  Nature  He 
is  capable  of  turning  or  change,  but  that  after  long  endurance, 
when  He  executes  vengeance  upon  the  sinner.  He,  Who 
continueth  tranquil  in  Himself,  seems  in  commotion  to  them 
that  perish.  For  whereas  the  condemned  soul  sees  the  Judge 
ari'ayed  against  its  doings,  He  is  exhibited  to  it  as  troubled, 
in  that  it  is  itself  troubled  by  its  own  guiltiness  before  His 
eyes.  But  after  he  had  in  appearance  exhorted  him  with 
clemency,  he  openly  subjoins  language  of  reproach,  saying, 
Ver.   10.   The  roaring  of  the  lio?t,  and  the  voice  of  the 

^y. thus  ^lioness,  and  the  teeth  of  the  young  lions  are  broken. 
xix.  38.  For  what  does  he  call  the  roaring  of  the  lion  but,  as 
we  have  said  a  little  above,  the  severe  character  of  that  man? 
what  the  voice  of  the  lioness^  but  his  wife's  loquacity?  what 
the  teeth  of  the  young  lions,  but  the  greediness  of  his 
children?  For  because  his  sons  had  perished  when  feasting, 
they  are  denoted  by  the  term  of '  teeth ;'  and  while  unsparing 
Eliphaz  rejoices  that  they  are  all  *  broken,'  he  denounces 
them  as  deservedly  condemned.  And  he  yet  further  doubles 
the  cruelty  of  his  reproaches,  when  he  adds; 

sv.thus      Ver.   11.  ^The  tiger  perisheth  for  lack  of  prey,  and  the 

stout  lions'  whelps  are  scattered  abroad. 

XX.        39.  For  whom  does  he  denote  by  the  name  of  '  tiger'  but 

blessed  Job,  marked  with  the  stamp  of  chaugeableness   or 

covered   with    the    spots  of  dissimulation  ?    For  every  dis- 

Isembler,  in  that  he  desires  to  appear  righteous,  can  never 
shew    himself  pure   in    all    things;    for   while    he    assumes 

^  Mss.  Norm.  ap.  Ben.  and  Oxon.  '  we  are  inflated.' 


Hypocrilefi  cannot  have  all  virtues.  271 

some  virtues  in  hypocrisy,  and  secretly  gives  way  to  vicious  Hooi 

habits,  some  concealed  vices  speedily  break  out  upon  the - 

surface,  and  exhibit  the  hide  of  overlaid  hypocrisy,  like  a 
coat  for  sight,  varied  with  their  admixture,  so  that  it  is  very 
often  a  marvel  how  one,  who  is  seen  to  be  master  of  such 
great  virtues,  should  be  at  the  same  time  stained  with  such 
damnable  deeds.  But  truly  every  hypocrite  is  a  tiger,  in 
that  while  he  derives  a  pure  colour  from  pretence,  it  is  striped 
with  the  intermediate  blackness  of  vicious  habits.  For  it 
often  hap])ens  that  while  he  is  extolled  for  pureness  of 
chastity,  he  renders  himself  foul  by  the  stain  of  avarice. 
Often  while  he  makes  a  fair  shew  by  the  good  quality  of 
bountifulness,  he  is  stained  with  spots  of  lust.  Often  while 
he  is  clad  in  the  bright  aiTay  of  bountifulness  and  chastity,  he 
is  blackened  by  ferociousness  in  cruelty,  as  if  fi'om  a  zealous 
sense  of  justice.  Often  he  is  arrayed  in  bounty,  chastity, 
piti fulness,  in  a  fair  outside,  but  is  marked  with  the  inter- 
spersed darkness  of  pride.  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that 
whereas  by  the  intermixture  of  vicious  habits,  the  hypocrite 
does  not  ])resent  an  unstained  appearance  in  himself, 
the  tiger,  as  it  were,  cannot  be  of  one  colour.  And  this 
same  '  tiger'  seizes  the  prey,  in  that  he  usurps  to  himself 
the  glory  of  human  applause.  For  he,  that  is  lifted  up  by 
usurped  praise,  is  as  it  were  glutted  with  the  prey.  And 
it  is  well  that  the  applause  that  hypocrites  have  is  called 

*  prey.'  For  it  is  nought  else  than  a  prey,  when  the  things 
of  another  are  taken  away  by  violence.  Now  every  hypocrite, 
in  that  by  counterfeiting  the  life  of  righteousness  he  seizes 
for  himself  the  praise  that  belongs  to  the  righteous,  does  in 
truth  carry  off  what  is  another's.  Thus  Kliphaz,  who  knew 
that  blessed  Job  had  walked  in  ways  worthy  to  be  praised 
in  the  period  of  his  wcllbeing,  concluded  from  the  stroke  that 
came  after  that  he  had  maintained  these  in  hypocrisy,  saving, 
77/r  tifjrr  pet  islteth  Jor  lack  (tf  prey.  As  if  he  liad  said 
plainly,  '  The  sliifling  of  thine  hypocrisy  is  at  end,  because 
the  homage  of  applause  is  also  taken  from  thee,  and  thine 
hypocrisy  is  in  *  lack  of  prey,'  in  that  being  stricken  by 
the  hand  of  (iod,  it  lacks  the  favourable  regards  of  man.' 

40.  But  in  the  translation  of  the  Septuagint,  it  is  not  said 

*  the    tiger,'   but  *  the    Myrmicoleon    perisheth  for    lack  qf 


272  Job,  why  called  Ant'lion  ?    Our  Lord,  why  a  Lion? 

Job  3,  prey.''   For  the  Myrmicoleon  is  a  very  little  creature,  a  foe  to 

~ — ^— ants,  which  hides  itself  under  the  dust,  and  kills  the  ants 
Hist.  '        _  ^  ' 

laden  with  grains,  and  devours  them  thus  destroyed.  Now 
'  Myrmicoleon'  is  rendered  in  the  Latin  tongue  either  '  the 
ants'  lion,'  or  indeed  more  exactly '  an  ant  and  lion  at  once.' 
Now  it  is  rightly  called  '  an  ant  and  lion;'  in  that  with 
reference  to  winged  creatures,  or  to  any  other  small-sized 
animals,  it  is  an  ant,  but  with  reference  to  the  ants  them- 
selves it  is  a  lion.  For  it  devours  these  like  a  lion,  yet  by 
the  other  sort  it  is  devoured  like  an  ant.  When  then  Eliphaz 
says,  the  Ajil-lion  perisheth,  what  does  he  censure  in  blessed 
Job  under  the  title  of  '  Ant-lion'  but  his  fearfulness  and 
audacity?  As  if  he  said  to  him  in  plain  words, '  Thou  art  not 
unjustly  stricken,  in  that  thou  hast  shewn  thyself  a  coward 
towards  the  lofty,  a  bully  towards  those  beneath  thee.'  As 
though  he  had  said  in  plain  terms,  '  Fear  made  thee  crouch 
towards  the  crafty  sort,  hardihood  swelled  thee  full  towards 
the  simple  folk,  but '  the  Ant-lion'  no  longer  hath  *prey,'  in  that 
thy  cowardly  selfelation,  being  beaten  down  with  blows,  is 
stayed  from  doing  injury  to  others.'  But  forasmuch  as  we 
have  said  that  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  contain  a  figure 
of  Heretics,  there  is  a  pressing  necessity  to  shew  how  these 
same  words  of  Eliphaz  are  to  be  understood  in  a  typical 
sense  likewise. 

Alleo.  Ver.  10.  The  roaring  of  the  lion,  and  the  voice  of  the 
lioness,  and  the  teeth  of  the  young  lions,  are  broken. 
xxi.  41 .  Forasmuch  as  the  nature  of  every  thing  is  compounded 
of  different  elements,  in  Holy  Writ  different  things  are 
allowably  represented  by  any  one  thing.  For  the  lion  has 
magnanimity,  it  has  also  ferocity:  by  its  magnanimity  then  it 
represents  the  Lord,  by  its  ferocity  the  devil.     Hence  it  is 

Rev.  5,  declared  of  the  Lord,  Behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Jiidah, 
the  Root  of  David  hath  prevailed.    Hence  it  is  written  of  the 

1  Pet.  devil.  Your  adversary,  the  devil,  like  a  roaring  lion,  walketh 
about  seeking  tinhorn  he  may  devour.  But  by  the  title  of 
a  '  lioness'  sometimes  Holy  Church,  sometimes  Babylon  is 
represented  to  us.  For  on  this  account,  that  she  is  bold  to 
encoimter  all  that  withstand,  the  Church  is  called  a  '  lioness,' 
as  is  proved  by  the  words  of  blessed  Job,  who  in  pointing 
out  Judaea  forsaken  by  the  Church,  says,  The  sons  of  the 


5 


Heretics  fancy  they  conquer  Babylon  and  her  children.    27:3 

traders  have  not  trodden^  nor  the  lioness  passed  by  it.     And  Book 

sometimes  under  the  title  of  a  lioness  is  set  forth  the  citv  of — 

this  world,  which  is  Babylon,  which  ravins  against  the  lifes.  Vulg. 
of  the  innocent  witli  terribleness  of  ferocity,  which  being 
wedded  to  our  old  enemy  like  the  fiercest  lion,  conceives 
the  seeds  of  his  froward  counsel,  and  produces  from  her  own 
body  reprobate  sons,  as  cruel  whelps,  after  his  likeness. 
But  the  *  lion's  whelps'  are  reprobate  persons,  engendered 
to  a  life  of  sin  by  the  misleading  of  evil  spirits,  who  both 
all  of  them  together  constitute  that  great  city  of  the  world 
which  we  have  declared  before,  even  Babylon;  and  yet 
these  same  sons  of  Babylon  severally  are  called  not  *  a 
lioness'  but  '  a  lioness's  whelps.'  For  as  the  whole  Church 
together  is  denominated  Sion,  but  the  several  individual 
Saints  the  sons  of  Sion,  so  both  the  several  individuals 
among  the  reprobate  are  called  the  children  of  Babylon, 
and  all  the  reprobate  together  are  designated  the  same 
Babylon. 

42.  But  so  long  as  good  men  remain  in  this  life,  they 
keep  watch  over  themselves  with  anxious  heed,  lest  the 
lion  that  goeth  about  surprise  them  by  guile,  i.  e.  lest  our 
old  enemy  slay  them  under  some  shew  of  virtue;  lest  the 
voice  of  the  lioness  stun  their  ears,  i.  e.  lest  the  glon*  of 
Babylon  catch  away  their  minds  from  the  love  of  the 
heavenly  countiy;  lest  *  the  teeth  of  the  young  lions'  bite 
them,  i.  e.  lest  the  promptings  of  the  reprobate  gain  power 
in  their  heart.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  heretics  are  already 
as  if  secured  touching  holiness,  because  they  fancy  that 
they  have  surmounted  all  obstacles  by  the  preeminent  merit 
of  their  life.  And  hence  it  is  said  here.  The  roaring  of  the 
liony  and  the  voice  of  the  lioness^  and  the  teeth  of  the  young 
lions  are  broken.  As  though  it  were  expressed  in  plain 
words;  *  We  for  this  reason  are  never  beaten  and  bruised 
with  any  strokes,  for  that  we  tread  under  at  once  the  might  of 
the  old  enemy,  and  the  lust  of  earthly  gloiy,  and  the  prompt- 
ings of  all  the  reprobate,  overcoming  them  by  the  preeminence 
of  our  life.'     Hence  it  is  further  added; 

Vcr.  11.    The   tiyrr  perishcth   for  lack  of  prey ^  and  theVulg. 
lions'  whelps  are  scattered  abroad. 

43.  By  the  title  of  a'  tiger'  he  again  represents  him,  whom   xxii. 

r 


•274  Satan^  like  the  ant-lion^  terrible  to  the  weak. 

Job  4,  he  formerly  designated  by  tlie  name  of  a  '  lion.'     For  Satan 
'- —  both  for  his  cruelty  is  called  '  a  lion  '  and  for  the  variousness 

Alleg.  .  .  "      . 

of  his  manifold  cunning  he  is  not  unsuitably  designated  '  a 
tiger.'     For  one  while  he  presents  himself  to  man's  senses 
lost  as  he  is,  one  while  he  exhibits  himself  as  an  Angel  of 
light.     Now  by  caressing  lie  works  upon  the   minds  of  the 
foolish  sort,  now  by  striking  terror  he  forces  them  to  commit 
sin.     At  one  time  he  labours  to  win  men  to  evil  ways  with- 
out disguise,  at  another  time  he  cloaks  himself  in  his  prompt- 
ings under  the  garb  of  virtue.     This  beast,  then,  which  is  so 
variously  spotted,  is  rightly  called  '  a  tiger,'  being  with  the 
LXX  called  an  *  Ant-lion,'  as  we  have  said  above.     Which 
same  creature,  as  we  have  before  shewn,  hiding  itself  in  the 
dust  kills  the  ants  can-ying  their  corn,  in  that  the  Apostate 
Angel,  being  cast  out  of  heaven  upon  the  earth,  in  the  very 
pathway  of  their  practice  besets  the  minds  of  the  righteous, 
providing  for  themselves  the  provender  of  good  works,  and 
whilst  he  overcomes  them  by  his  snares,  he  as  it  were  kills 
by  surprise  the  ants  canying  their  grains.     And  he  is  rightly 
called  '  Ant-lion,'  i.  e.  '  a  lion  and  ant.'     For   as   we  have 
said,  to  the  ants  he  is  '  a  lion,'  but  to  the  birds  of  the  air, 
*  an  ant,'  in  that  our  old  enemy,  as  he  is  strong  to  encounter 
those  that  yield  to  him,  is  weak  against  such  as  resist  him. 
For  if  consent  be  yielded  to  his  persuasions,  like  a  lion  he 
can  never  be  sustained,  but  if  resistance  be  offered,  like  an 
ant  he  is  ground  in  the  dust.     Therefore  to  some  he  is  *  a 
lion,'  to   others  '  an  ant,'  in  that  carnal  minds  sustain  his 
cruel   assaults   with   difficulty,  but  spiritual  minds  trample 
upon  his  weakness  with  virtue's  foot.    Heretics  then,  because 
they  are  full  of  pride  by  pretension  to  sanctity,  say  as  it  were 
in  exultation,  TJie  Ant-lion^  or  probably,  the  tiger  perisheth 
for  lack   of  prey.     As  though  the  words  were  plainly  ex- 
pressed, '  The  old  foe  has  no  prey  in  us,  in  that,  as  far  as 
regards  our  purposes,  he  already  lies  defeated.'    Now  it  is  for 
this  reason  that  he  is  again  mentioned  under  the  title  of  *  an 
Ant  lion,'  or  of  *  a  tiger,'  who  had  been  already  set  forth  by 
the  '  roaring  of  the  lion  broken,'  because  whatever  is  said  in 
joy,  is  repeated  over  and  over.     For  when  the  mind  is  full  of 
exultation,  it  redoubles  the  expressions.     And    hence    the 
Psalmist,  from  true  joy,  frequently  repeats  this,  that  he  was 


The  Prmidfear  not.     Heretics  pretend  secret  knoicledge.  275 

assured   that   he  had   been   lieard,   saying,    The   Lord  hath   Book 
lieard  the  voice  of  my  iceepiug.     The  Lord  hath  heard  my 


P».  6,  8. 
supplications.      The  Lord  hath  received  my  prayer.  9. 

44.  But  when  holy  men  are  glad  of  heart  that  they  have 

been  rescued  from  some  evil  habits,  they  possess*  themselves'  I-it. 

' shake  ' 

with  great  fear  even  in  that  very  gladness.     For  though  they 

be  now  rescued  from  the  commotion  of  any  single  storm, 

yet   they  call    to    mind    that   they   are   still    tossing   in    tlie 

treacherous  waves  of  an  uncertain  sea,  and  they  so  exult  in 

hope  that  they  tremble  in  fear,  and  so  tremble  in  fear  that 

they  exult  in  confidence  of  hope.     Whence  it  is  said  by  the 

same  Psalmist,  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  P^.  2, 

'  .        11. 

trembling.     But  on  the  other  hand,  they,  whom  a  specious 

shew  of  sanctity  fills  with   big  thoughts,  when  they  get  the 

better  of  any  one  evil  habit,  immediately  erect  their  heart  in 

pride,  and  as  it  were  glory  in  the  perfection  of  their  lives, 

and  for  this,  that  perchance  they  have  been  once  snatched 

from  the  perils  of  the  storm,  they  already  forget  that  they 

are  still  at  sea,  they  look  upon  themselves  as  great  in  all 

things,  and  imagine  that  they  have  wholly  overcome  their 

old  adversary;    they  regard  all  men  below  them,  in  that  they 

believe  that  their  wisdom  places  them  above  all.     Whence 

it  is  added ; 

Now  a  secret  irord  was  spoken  to  me.  Vulg. 

45.  *  A  secret    word,'  heretics  pretend  to  hear,  that  they  xxiii. 
may  bring  a  certain  reverence  for  their  preaching  over  their 
hearers'    minds.       And    hence    they    preach    with    a   secret 
meaning,  that  their   preaching    may   seem   to    be    holy,   in 
proportion   as  it  is   at   the   same   time   hidden.     Now   they 
are   loath   to  have  a  common   sort  of  knowledge,  lest  they 
should   be  placed   on   a   par   with   the  rest  of  their  fellow- 
creatures,  and  they  are  ever  making  out  new  things,  which 
whilst  others  know  nothing  of,  they  plume  their  own  selves 
on  the  preeminence  of  their  knowledge  before  inexperienced 
minds.     And  this  knowledge,  as  we  have  said,  they  teach  is 
occult;  for,  that  they  may  be  able  to  shew  it  to  be  wonderfiil, 
they  aflirni  that  they  obt;iined  it  by  secret  means.      Hence 
with  Solomon  the  woman,  bearing  the  semblance  of  heretics, 
says,  Stolen  waters  are '  sweeter^  and  bread  eaten  in  secret  P^ov.  9, 
is  more  pleasant.     Whence  in  this  place  too  it  is  added  ;        i  Vulg. 

T  2 


'276       Ileal  door  of  Truth^  the  Church's  public  tencJiing. 
Job  4,       And  mine  ear  as  it  ii'ere  by  stealth  received  the  veins^  of 

13.  .  . 

-r—^ —  tJte  ichispering  thereof 

I  Vulg.  They  '  receive  the  veins  of  whispers  by  stealth,'  in  that 
abandoning  the  grace  of  knowledge  in  fellowship,  they  do 
not  enter  thereinto  by  the  door,  as  the  Lord  witnesses,  Who 

John  saith,  He  that  entereth  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheepfold, 
'  *  but  climbeth  up  some  other  icay,  the  same  is  a  thief  and 
a  robber;  But  lie  that  enteretli  in  by  the  door  is  the  shepherd 
of  the  sheep.  Therefore  he  '  receives  the  veins  of  divine 
whispers  by  stealth,'  who,  whilst  the  door  of  public  preaching 
for  receiving  the  knowledge  of  His  excellency  is  forsaken, 
searches  out  the  gaps  and  chinks  of  a  froward  understanding. 
But  because  the  thief  and  robber,  who  enters  by  another 
way,  both  loves  the  darkness,  and  abhors  the  clearness  of 
the  light,  it  is  properly  added; 

Ver.  13.  In  the  horror  of  a  vision  of  the  nighty  when 
deep  sleep  falleth  on  men, 
xxiv.  46.  It  often  happens,  that  while  heretics  are  bent  to 
discourse  of  things  above  them,  they  become  their  own 
witnesses  against  themselves,  that  what  they  deliver  is  not 
true.     For  in  a  vision  of  the  night  the   sight  is  uncertain. 

^  rimas  Therefore  they  declare  that  they  received  *  the  inklings^  of 
whispers'  in  '  the  terror  of  a  vision  of  the  night,'  for,  that  the 
things,  which  they  teach,  may  be  made  to  appear  sublime 
to  others,  they  declare  that  they  themselves  can  scarcely 
comprehend  them.  But  it  may  be  inferred  from  hence 
how  far  that  can  be  rendered  certain  to  their  hearers,  which 
they  themselves  beheld  but  dubiously.  And  so  is  it  marvel- 
lously ordered,  that  while  they  run  on  speaking  of  sublime 
things,  in  the  exposure  of  folly,  they  are  entangled  in  the 
very  words  of  their  sublimity.  Now  to  what  height  they  rear 
themselves  for  singtdarity  of  wisdom,  is  shewn,  when  he  adds 
in  the  same  breath,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  men.  As 
if  it  were  openly  said  by  heretics,  *  When  men  are  asleep 
beneath,  we  wake  to  receive  heavenly  truths,  in  that  to  us  all 
that  is  known,  to.  the  knowledge  whereof  the  dull  hearts  of 
men  cannot  arise.'  As  if  they  said  in  plain  words,  *  In 
things,  wherein  our  understanding  rises  erect,  the  faculties 
of  the  rest  of  the  world  lie  asleep.'  But  sometimes,  when 
they  see   that  this  is  disregarded  by  the  hearer,  they  feign 


Pretended  awe  in  Heretics.     Sensible  notions  of  God,     277 

that  they  are  themselves  in  fear  of  what  they  say.     Whence  Book 

it  is  added ;  '— 

Ver.  14.  Fear  came  upon  me  and  trembling,  which  made 
all  my  boftes  to  shake. 

47.  For  because  they  desire  to  appear  objects  of  wonder  xxvi. 
for  the  loftiness  of  tlieir  instructions,  they  affect  to  be  awed 

at  the  accounts  which  they  make  up.  And  whilst  it  is  a  less 
difficulty  to  hear  than  to  speak,  they  are  bold  enough  to  put 
forth  that,  which,  forsooth,  they  feign  that  they  the  very 
same  persons  were  scai'cely  able  to  hear.  Whence  it  is 
added  yet  further; 

Ver.  15,  16.  And  when  a  spirit  passed  be/ore  mij  face, 
the  hair  of  nnj  flesh  stood  up.  Tliere  stood  one,  but  I  knew 
twt  the  face  of  him. 

48.  That  they  may  shew  that  they  have  been  made 
acquainted  with  incomprehensible  mysteries,  they  relate,  not 
that  *  a  spirit'  stood  still,  but  that  it  *  passed  by  before  their 
face.'  And  they  pretend  that  they  beheld  a  countenance 
they  knew  not,  that  they  may  prove  themselves  to  bo  known 
to  Him,  Wliom  the  human  mind  is  not  equal  to  know.  And 
here  it  is  further  added; 

An  image  teas  before  mine  eyes,  and  1  heard  the  voice 
as  it  were  of  a  light  breath  of  air. 

49.  Heretics  often  picture  God  to  themselves  by  a  sensible  xxvii. 
form*,  seeing  that  they  are  unable  to  behold  Him  spiritually.'  imagi- 
And  they  tell  that  they  hear  His  '  voice  as  of  a  light  breath  °^^  ^^ 
of  air,'  in  that  for  the  obtaining  the  knowledge  of  His  secret 
things,  they  delight  to  have   as  if  a  ])articu]ar  freedom  of 
intercourse   with    Him.     Tor    they   never   teach   the    things, 
which   God   reveals  openly,   but  such  as  are   breathed  into 

their  ears  in  a  secret  manner.  All  this,  then,  we  have  said, 
to  indicate  what  we  are  to  look  for  in  the  words  of  Eliphaz, 
as  be  bears  the  semblance  of  heretics.  But  forasmuch  as 
tlie  friends  of  blessed  Job  would  never  have  been  the  friends 
of  one  so  great,  unless  they  had  evidently  learned  something 
of  tnith,  which  same,  while  they  go  wrong  in  uttering 
sentences  of  rebuke,  yet  do  not  altogether  totter  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  let  us  return  upon  these  same  words 
a  little  way  back,  that  we  may  make  out  more  exactly  how 
the, things    which    are    said    concerning    the   perception    of 


278  Knowledge  of  Eliphaz.     The  Hidden  Word. 

Job  4,  truth,  may  be  delivered  in  a  true  sense  by  persons  viewing 
Y— — -  things  aright.     Now   sometimes  heretics  utter  things   both 
true  and  lofty,  not  that  they  themselves  receive  them  from 
above,  but  because  they  have  learnt  them  in  the  controversy 
of  Holy  Church,  nor  do  they  apply  them  to  the  furtherance 
of   conscientious    living,   but    to    the    display    of   scientific 
skill.     Whence  it  very  commonly  happens,  that  by  knowing 
they  tell  high  truths,  yet  in  living  they  know  nothing  what 
they  tell.      Therefore,  whether  as    they  represent   heretics, 
who  hold,  not   the    life,  but  the    words   of  knowledge,  or 
whether  in  the  person  of  the  friends  of  blessed  Job,  who, 
doubtless,  with  regard  to  their  knowledge  of  the  truth,  might 
in  seeing  realize  what  they  aimed  in  teaching  to  give  utter- 
ance to,  let  us  more  minutely  examine  these  sayings  which  we 
have  gone   through,  that,  while   the   words  of  EHphaz   are 
carefully  gone   into,  it  may  be   shewn  what  knowledge  he 
possessed,  though  in    that   knowledge   he   failed   to   retain 
humiUty,  who  appropriated  to  himself  peculiarly  a  benefit 
common  to  all.     For  he  says, 

Ver.  12.  Now  a  hidden  word  was  spoken  to  me. 
xxviii.      50.  For  the  invisible  Son  is  called  '  the  hidden  Word,' 
John  1,  concerning  Whom  John    saith,  In  the    beginning  was  the 
^'  Word.     Which  he  the  same  person  teaches  to  be  '  hidden' 

in  that  he  adds,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word 
was  God.     But  this  '  hidden  Word'  is  delivered  to  the  minds 
of  the  Elect,  when  the  power  of  the  Only-Begotten  Son  is 
made  manifest  to  believers.     By  '  the  hidden  word'  we  may 
also   understand  the  communication  of  inward  Inspiration, 
I  John  concerning  which  it  is  said  by  John,  His  anointing  teacheth 
'     '     you  of  all  things.     Which  same  inspiration  on  being  com- 
municated to  the  mind  of  man  lifts  it  up,  and  putting  down 
all  temporal  interests  inflames  it  with  eternal  desires,  that 
nothing  may  any  longer  yield  it  satisfaction  but  the  things 
that  are  above,  and  that  it  may  look  down  upon  all,  that, 
from  human  corruption,  is  in  a  state  of  uproar  below.     And 
so  to  hear  *  the  hidden  word'  is  to  receive  in  the  heart  the 
utterance    of  the    Holy   Spirit.     Which    same   indeed    can 
never  be  known  save  by  him,  by  whom  it  may  be  possessed. 
And  hence  it   is    said    by  the  voice   of  Truth    concerning 

Johiiiijthis  hidden  utterance.  And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He 
16.17. 


Real  secret  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  279 

shall  give  you  another  Comforter^  that    He  may  abide  icith   B«)ok 
you  for  ever;  even    The  Spirit  of  Truth,  whom   the  irorld '— 


cannot  receive.  For  as  that  '  Comforter,'  after  the  Ascension 
of  the  Mediator,  being  another  Consoler  of  mankind,  is  in 
Himself  invisible,  so  He  inflames  each  one  that  He  has 
filled  to  long  after  the  invisible  things.  And  because  worldly 
heeirts  are  set  upon  the  things  that  are  seen  alone,  the 
wo^ld  receiveth  Him  not,  because  it  doth  not  rise  up  to  the 
love  of  the  things  that  are  unseen.  For  worldly  minds,  in 
proportion  as  they  spread  themselves  out  in  interests  without, 
contract  the  bosom  of  the  heart  against  the  admission  of 
Him.  And  because  out  of  mankind  there  are  few  indeed, 
who,  being  purified  from  the  pollution  of  earthly  desires, 
are  opened  by  that  purification  to  the  receiving  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  this  word  is  called  '  a  hidden  word,'  since,  surely,  there 
are  particular  persons  that  receive  th'at  in  the  heart,  which 
the  generality  of  men  know  nothing  of.  Or  tiiily  this  same 
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  *  a  hidden  word,'  in  that  it 
may  be  felt,  but  cannot  be  expressed  by  the  noise  of  speech. 
Wlien,  then,  the  inspiration  of  God  lifts  up  the  soul  without 
noise,  *  a  hidden  word'  is  heard,  in  that  the  utterance  of  the 
Spirit  sounds  silently  in  the  ear  of  the  heart.  And  hence 
it  is  added ; 

And  mine  ear  as  it  were  stealthily  received  the  veins  of 
the  whispering  thereof 

51.  The  ear  of  the  heart  *  receives  stealthily  tlie  veins  of  xxix. 
heavenly  whispering,'  in  that  both  in  a  moment  and  in  secret 
the  inspired  soul  is  made  to  know  the  subtle  quality  of  the 
inward  utter.ince.  For  except  it  bury  itself  Irom  external 
objects  of  desire,  it  fails  to  enter  into  the  intemal  things. 
It  is  both  hidden  that  it  may  hear,  and  it  hears  that  it  may 
be  hidden ;  in  that  at  one  and  the  same  time  being  withdrawn 
from  the  visible  world  its  eyes  are  upon  the  invisible,  and  being 
replenished  with  the  unseen,  it  entertains  a  |>erfect  contempt 
for  what  is  visible.  Hut  it  is  to  be  observed  that  he  does 
not  say.  Mine  ear  received  as  it  were  by  stealth  the  whis- 
pering thereof y  but  the  veins  of  the  whispering  thereof;  for 
*  the  whispering  of  the  hidden  word'  is  the  very  utterance  of 
inward  Inspiration  itself;  but  *  the  veins  of  the  whispering'  is 
the  name  for   the  sources  of  the    occasions   whereby   that 


280  Our  knoioledge  of  God  hut  dark  and  imperfect. 

Job  4,  inspii'atioii  itself  is  conveyed  to  the  mind.  For  it  is  as  if  It 
'- — opened  '  the  veins  of  its  whispering,'  when  God  secretly  com- 
municates to  us  in  what  ways  He  enters  into  the  ear  of  our 
understandings.  Thus  at  one  time  He  pierces  us  with  love,  at 
another  time  with  terror.  Sometimes  He  shews  us  how  little 
the  present  scene  of  things  is,  and  lifts  up  our  hearts  to  desire 
the  eternal  world,  sometimes  He  first  points  to  the  things  of 
eternity,  that  these  of  time  may  after  that  grow  worthless  in 
our  eyes.  Sometimes  He  discloses  to  us  our  own  evil  deeds, 
and  thence  draws  us  on  even  to  the  point  of  feeling  sorrow  for 
the  evil  deeds  of  others  also.  Sometimes  He  presents  to  our 
eyes  the  evil  deeds  of  others,  and  reforms  us  from  our  own 
wickedness,  pierced  with  a  wonderful  feeling  of  compunction. 
And  so  to  '  hear  the  veins  of  Divine  whisperinf^  by  stealth,'' 
is  to  be  made  to  know  the  secret  methods  of  divine  Inspira- 
tion, at  once  gently  and  secretly. 

52.  Though   we   may  interpret  whether  '  the  whispering' 
or  '  the  veins  of  whispering'  in  another  way  yet.     For  he 
that  '  whispers'  is  speaking  in  secret,  and  he  does  not  give 
out,  but  imitates  a  voice.     We,  therefore,  so  long  as  we  are 
beset  by  the  corruptions  of  the  flesh,  in  no  wise  behold  the 
brightness  of  the  Divine  Power,  as  it  abides  unchangeable  in 
itself,  in  that  the  eye  of  our  weakness  cannot  endure  that 
which  shines  above  us  with  intolerable  lustre  from  the  ray 
of  His  Eternal  Being.     And  so  when  the  Almighty  shews 
Himself  to  us  by  the  chinks  of  contemplation,  He  does  not 
speak  to  us,  but  whispers,  in  that  though  He  does  not  fully 
develope    Himself,    yet    something    of    Himself   He    does 
reveal  to  the  mind  of  man.     But  then  He  no  longer  whispers 
at  all,  but  speaks,  when  His  appearance  is  manifested  to  us 
in   certainty.     It  is  hence  that  Truth  saith  in   the   Gospel, 
Johnie,  J  ^j^^^ii  fififJiQ  you  plainly  of  the  Father.     Hence  John  saith, 
1  John  For  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.     Hence  Paul  saith,  Then 
I'cor.    f^^i^ill  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known.     Now  in  this  present 
13,  12.   time,  the  Divine  whispering  has  as  many  veins  lor  our  ears 
as  the  works  of  creation,  which  the  Divine  Being  Himself  is 
Lord  of;  for  while  we  view  all  things  that  are  created,  we 
are    lifted  up    in  admiration  of  the  Creator.     For  as  water 
that  flows  in  a  slender  stream  is  sought  by  being  bored  for 
through  veins,  with  a  view  to   increase  it,  and  as  it  pours 


JVfiiht  we  have  sin.  Divine  Lijht  is  terrible.  -281 

forth  the  more  copiously,  in  proportion  as  it  finds  the  veins  Book 
more  open,  so  we,  whilst  we  heedfully  gather  the  knowledge '— 


of  the  Divine  Being  from  the  contemplation  of  His  creation, 
as  it  were  open  to  ourselves  the  '  veins  of  His  whispering,'  in 
that  by  the  things  that  we  see  have  been  made,  we  are  led 
to  marvel  at  the  excellency  of  the  Maker,  and  by  the  objects 
that  are  in  public  view,  that  issues  forth  to  us,  which  is  hidden 
in  concealment.  For  He  bursts  out  to  us  in  a  kind  of  sound  as 
it  were,  whilst  He  displays  His  works  to  be  considered  by  us, 
wherein  He  betokens  Himself  in  a  measure,  in  that  He  shews 
how  Incomprehensible  He  is.  Therefore,  because  we  cannot 
take  thought  of  Him  as  He  deserves,  we  hear  not  His  voice,  yea, 
scarcely  His  whispering.  For  because  we  are  not  equal  to  form 
a  full  and  perfect  estimate  of  the  very  things  that  are  created, 
it  is  rightly  said,  Mine  ear  as  it  were  by  stealth  received  the 
veins  of  whispering;  in  that  being  cast  forth  from  the  delights 
of  paradise,  and  visited  with  the  punishment  of  blindness, 
we  scarcely  take  in  *  the  veins  of  whispering;'  since  His  very 
marvellous  works  themselves  we  consider  but  hastily  and 
slightly.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind,  that  in  proportion  as 
the  soul  being  lifted  up  contemplates  His  excellency,  so 
being  held  back  it  shrinks  from  His  righteous  perfectness'. 'rectita- 
And  hence  it  is  rightly  added ; 

Ver.  13.   In  the  horror  of  a  vision  qf  the  night. 

53.    The  horroi'  of  a  vision  of  the  niyht  is  the  shuddering  xxx. 
of  secret   contemplation.      For    the    higher   the   elevation, 
whereat  the  mind  of  man  contemplates  the  things  that  are 
eternal,  so  nuich  the  more,  terror-struck  at  her  temporal  deeds, 
she  shrinks  with  dread,  in  that  she  thoroughly  discovers  herself 
guilty,  in  proportion  as  she  sees  herselt  to  have  been  out  of 
harmony  with  that  light,  which  shines  in  the  midst  of  dark- 
ness* above  her,  and  then  it  happens  that  the  mind  being -inter- 
enlightened  entertains  the  greater  fear,  as  it  more  clearly  sees™*^** 
by  how  much  it  is  at  variance  with  the  rule  of  truth.      And 
she,  that  before  seemed  as  it  were  more  secure  in  seeing  no- 
thing, trembles  with  sore  afl'right  from  her  very  own  profici- 
ency itself.    Though,  whatever  her  ])rogress  in  virtue,  she  does 
not  as  yet  compass  any  clear  insight  into  eternity,  but  still 
sees  with  the  indistinctness  of  a  certain  shadowy  imagining. 
And  hence  this  same  is  called  a  vision  of  the  niyht.     For  as 


282         Contemplation.     Sleep  used  for  bodily  deatk^for 

Job  4,  we  have  also  said  above,  in  the  night  we  see  doubtfully,  but 
— — — in  the  day  we  see  steadily.     Therefore  because,  as  regards 


the  contemplating  the  ray  of  the  interior  Sun,  the  cloud  of 
our  corruption  interposes  itself,  nor  does  the  unchangeable 
Light  burst  forth  such  as  It  is  to  the  weak  eyes  of  our  mind, 
we  as  it  were  still  behold  God  '  in  a  vision  of  the  night,' 
since  most  surely  we  go  darkling  under  a  doubtful  sight. 
Yet  though  the  mind  may  have  conceived  but  a  distant  idea 
concerning  Him,  yet  in  contemplation  of  His  Greatness,  she 
recoils  with  dread,  amd  is  filled  with  a  greater  awe,  in  that 
she  feels  herself  unequal  even  to  the  very  skirts  of  the  view 
of  Him.  And  falling  back  upon  herself,  she  is  drawn  to 
Him  with  closer  bonds  of  love.  Whose  marvellous  sweetness, 
being  unable  to  bear,  she  has  but  just  tasted  of  under  an 
indistinct  vision.  But,  because  she  never  attains  to  such  an 
height  of  elevation,  unless  the  importunate  and  clamorous 
throng  of  carnal  desires  be  first  brought  under  governance,  it 
is  rightly  added. 

When  deep  sleep  falleth  upon  men. 

xxxi.  ^4.  Whoever  is  bent  to  do  the  things  which  are  of  the 
world,  is,  as  it  were,  awake,  but  he,  that  seeking  inward  rest 
eschews  the  riot  of  this  world,  sleeps  as  it  were.  But  first 
we  must  know  that,  in  holy  Scripture,  sleep,  when  put 
figuratively,  is  understood  in  three  senses.  For  sometimes 
we  have  expressed  by  sleep  the  death  of  the  flesh,  sometimes 
the  stupefaction  of  neglect,  and  sometimes  tranquillity  of  life, 
upon  the  earthly  desires  being  trodden  underfoot.  Thus,  by 
the  designation    of  sleep    or  slumbering  the  death  of  the 

iThess. flesh   is  implied;    as  when   Paul    says,  And  I  would   not 
'     *     have  you  to  he  ignorant^  brethren,  concerning  them  which 

ver.  14.  are  asleep.  And  soon  after.  Even  so  them  also  ivhich  sleep 
in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him.  Again,  by  sleep  is 
designated  the  stupefaction  of  neglect;  as  where  it  is  said 

Bom. 13,  by  that   same  Paul,  Now   it   is  high    time   to   awake  out 

i^Cor     ^  sleep.     And  again.  Awake,  ye  righteous^,  and  sin   not. 

15, 34.   By  sleep  too  is  represented  tranquillity  of  life,   when  the 

"^"  caraal   desires    are   trodden   down;    as   where    these   words 

are    uttered   by  the    voice   of  the    spouse   in    the  Song    of 

CanU5,Songs,  1  sleep,  but  my  heart  waketh.  For,  in  truth,  in  pro- 
portion as  the  holy  mind  withholds  itself  from  the  turmoil  of 


mental  quiet,  for  listless  inactivity.  283 

temporal  desire,  the  more  ihorouglily  it  attains  to  know  the  Book 
things  of  the  interior,  and  is  the  more  quick  and  awake  to 


inward  concerns,  the  more  it  withdraws  itself  out  of  sight 
from  external  disquietude.  And  this  is  well  represented  by 
Jacob  sleeping  on  his  journey.  He  put  a  stone  to  his  head 
and  slept.  He  beheld  a  ladder  from  the  earth  fixed  in 
heaven,  the  Lord  resting  upon  the  ladder,  Angels  also  ascend- 
ing and  descending.  For  to  '  sleep  on  a  journey'  is,  in  the 
passage  of  this  present  life,  to  rest  from  the  love  of  things 
temporal.  To  sleep  on  a  journey  is,  in  the  course  of  our 
passing  days,  to  close  those  eyes  of  the  mind  to  the  desire  of 
visible  objects,  which  the  seducer  opened  to  the  first  of 
mankind,  saying.  For  God  doth  knoic  iJiat  in  the  day  ye  eat  Gen.  3, 
thereof,  then  your  eyes  shall  be  opened.  And  hence  it  is 
soon  altenvards  added.  She  took  of  the  fruit  thereof ^and  <iiV/ver.6,7. 
eat  J  and  ga  re  also  unto  her  husband  with  her,  and  he  did 
eat.  And  the  eyes  qf  them  both  were  opened.  For  sin  opened 
the  eyes  of  concupiscence,  which  innocence  kept  shut.  But 
to  *  see  Angels  ascending  and  descending,'  is  to  mark  the 
citizens  of  the  land  above,  either  with  what  love  they  cleave 
to  their  Creator  above  them,  or  ^nth  what  fellow-feeling  in 
charity  they  condescend  to  aid  our  infirmities. 

55.  And  it  is  very  deserving  of  observation,  that  he  that 
*  lays  his  head  upon  a  stone,'  is  he  who  sees  the  Angels  in 
his  sleep,  surely  because  that  same  person  by  resting  from 
external  works  penetrates  internal  truths,  who  with  mind 
intent,  which  is  the  governing  principle  of  man,  looks  to  the 
imitating  of  his  Redeemer.  For  to  '  lay  the  head  upon  a 
stone'  is  to  cleave  to  Christ  in  mind.  Since  they  that  are 
withdrawn  from  this  life's  sphere  of  action,  yet  whom  no 
love  transports  above,  may  have  sleep,  but  can  never  see  the 
Angels,  because  they  despise  to  keep  their  head  upon  a 
stone.  For  there  are  some,  who  fly  indeed  the  business  of 
the  world,  but  exercise  themselves  in  no  virtues.  These, 
indeed,  sleep  from  stujiefaction,  not  from  serious  design, 
and  therefore  they  never  behold  the  things  of  the  interior, 
becau.se  they  have  laid  their  head,  not  upon  a  stone,  but 
upon  the  earth.  Whose  lot  it  most  frequently  is,  that  in 
proportion  as  they  rest  more  secure  from  outward  actions,  tiie 
more  amply  they  are  gathering  in  themselves  from  idleness 
an  uproar  of  unclean   thoughts.     And   thus  under  the  like- 


284  Effort  of  abstraction  needed  for  contemplation. 

Job  4,  ness  of  Judaea  the  Prophet  bewails  the  soul  stupefied  by 
- — ^indolence,  where  he  says,  TJie  adversaries  saw  her,  and  did 
7.  mock  at  her  sabbaths.     For  by  the  precept  of  the  Law  there 

is  a  cessation  from  outward  work  upon  the  Sabbath  Day. 
Thus  her  '  enemies  looking  on  mock  at  her  sabbaths,'  when 
evil  spirits  pervert  the  very  waste  hours  of  vacancy  to 
unlawful  thoughts.  So  that  every  soul,  in  proportion  as  it  is 
supposed  to  be  devoted  to  the  service  of  God,  by  being 
removed  from  external  action,  the  more  it  drudges  to  their 
tyranny,  by  entertaining  unlawful  thoughts.  But  good  men, 
who  sleep  to  the  works  of  the  world,  not  from  inertness,  but 
from  virtue,  are  more  laborious  in  their  sleep  than  they  would 
be  awake.  For  herein,  that  by  abandoning  they  are  made 
superior  to  this  world's  doings,  they  daily  fight  against  them- 
selves, maintaining  a  brave  conflict,  that  the  mind  be  not 
rendered  dull  by  neglect,  nor,  subdued  by  indolence,  cool 
down  to  the  harbouring  of  impure  desires,  nor  in  good 
desires  themselves  be  more  full  of  fervour  than  is  right, 
nor  by  sparing  itself  under  the  pretext  of  discretion,  may 
slacken  its  endeavour  after  perfection.  These  are  the  things 
she  is  employed  withal :  she  both  wholly  withdraws  herself  from 
the  restless  appetite  of  this  world,  and  gives  over  the  turmoil 
of  earthly  actions,  and  in  pursuit  of  tranquillity,  bent  on 
virtuous  attainments,  she  sleeps  waking.  For  she  is  never 
led  on  to  contemplate  internal  things,  unless  she  be  heed- 
fully  withdrawn  from  those,  which  entwine  themselves  about 
her  without.  And  it  is  hence  that  Truth  declares  by  His 
Matt. 6,  own  mouth.  No  man  can  serve  two  masters.  Hence  Paul 
2%im  ^^^^'^^  ^^  man  that  warreth  entanfjleth  himself  with  the 
2,  4.  affairs  of  this  life,  that  he  may  please  him  that  hath  chosen 
him  to  he  a  soldier.  Hence  the  Lord  charges  us  by  the 
Ps.  46,  Prophet,  saying,  Be  still^,  and  know  that  f  am  the  Lord, 
\y\Q^^Q'TheYeioi'e,  because  inward  knowledge  is  not  cognisable  by 
ie  at      ^is  except  there  be  a  rest  from  outward  embarrasments,  the 

leisure  m 

season  of  the  hidden  word,  and  of  the  whisperings  of  God,  is 
in  this  place  rightly  set  forth,  when  it  is  said.  In  the  horror 
of  a  vision  of  the  night,  when  deep  deep  falleth  upon  men, 
in  that  truly  our  mind  is  never  caught  away  after  the  force 
and  power  of  inward  contcm})lation,  unless  it  be  first  carefully 
lulled  to  rest  from  all  agitation  of  earthly  desires.  But  the 
Inmian  mind,  lilted  on  high  by  the  engine  as  it  were  of  its 


H7iat  is  strongest  in  us  fails  hcfore  God.  -285 

contemplation,  in  proportion  as  it  sees  things  higlier  above  Book 
itself,  the  more  terribly  it  trembles  in  itself.     And  hence  it  is — 


fitly  added, 

Ver.  14.  Fear  came  upon  me  and  trembling,  which  made 
all  my  hones  to  shake. 

56.  What  is  denoted   by  ^bones'  but  strong   deeds?    Ofxxxii. 
which  also  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  He  keepeth  all  fheir^s.  34, 
bones.     And  it    often    happens    that  the  things  which  men 
do,  they  reckon  to  be  of  some  account,  because  they  know 
not,  how  keen  is  the  discernment  of  His  inward  sifting;  but 
when,  transported  on  the  wings  of  contemplation,  they  behold 
things  above,  in  some  sort  they  melt  away  from  the  security 
they  felt  in  tlieir  presumption,  and  quake  in  sight  of  God  the 
more,  in  ])roportion  as  lliey  do  not  even  reckon  their  ex- 
cellences fit  for  the  searching  eye  of  Ilim,  Whom  they  behold. 
For  it  is  hence  that  he,  who  had  gained  ground  in  doing  strong 
deeds,  being  lifted  up  by  the  Spirit,  exclaimed,  All  mg  bones  Ps.  35, 
shall  sag.  Lord,  who  is  like  utiio  TItee?    As  though  he  said, 
'  My  rtesh  is  without  words,  in  that  my  infirmities  are  wholly 
silent  before  Thee,  but  my  bones  sing  the  praises  of  Thy 
greatness.    In  that  the  very  things,  which  I  thought  to  be  strong 
in  me,  tremble  at  the  view  of  Thee.'     It  is  hence  that  Manoah 
shrinking  al  the  vision  of  the  Angel,  says,  l^Ve  shall  surely  die,  Judg. 
for  we  have  seen  The  Lord.    Whom  his  wife  immediately  com-  23.' 
forts,  witli  these  words,  If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us.  He 
would  not  have  received  a  burnt-offering,  and  a  meat-offering 
al  our  hand.     But  how  is  it  that  the  man  becomes  fearful  at 
the  vision  of  the  Angel,  and  the  woman  bold;   but  that  as 
often  as  heavenly  things  are  shewn  us,  the  spirit  indeed  is 
shaken  with  affright,  yet  hope  has  confidence  ?   For  hope  lifts 
itself  to  dare  greater  feats  from  the  same  cause,  whereby  the 
spirit  is  troubled,  in  that  it  sees  the  first  the  things  that  are 
above.     '^I'herefore  because,  when  the  mind,  being  lifted  on 
high,  beholds  the   higher  depths  of  the  secrets  of  heaven, 
all  that  is  most  solid  of  human  strength  trembles,  it  is  well 
said  here,  Fear  came  upon  me  and  trembling,  which  made  all 
my  bones  to  shake.     As  though  it  were  expressed  in  plain 
words;  *  When  I  perceived  the  secrets  of  inmost  .subtlety,  in 
that  quarter  where  I  thought  myself  in  my  own  eyes  strong, 
I  faltered  in   the  siglit   of  the  Judge/     For  contemplating 


286  fVe  know  not  ourselves.    High  visions  stay  not. 

Job  ^,  the  strictness  of  Divine  Justice,  we  justly  fear  even  for  the 
very  works  themselves,  which  we  flattered  ourselves  we  had 


so  done  that  they  were  strong.     For  our  uprightness,  when 

drawn  parallel   to    the  inward  rule,  if  it  meets  with  strict 

judgment,  comes  cross,  with  many  sinuosities  of  its  windings, 

to  the   inward    uprightness.     And    hence,  when  Paul  both 

perceived  that  he  had  the  bones  of  the  several  virtues,  and 

yet  that  these  same   bones   trembled    under  the   searching 

1  Cor.    scnitiny,  he  saith.   But  iciih  me  it  is  a  verij  small  thing 

'   *      that  I  should  be  judged  of  you,  or  of  man's  judgment ;  yea,  I 

judge  not  mine  own  self;  for  I  know  nothing  against  myself. 

Yet  because,  when   the  '  veins'  of  the   divine  '  whispering' 

were  heard,  these  same  bones  quaked,  he  thereupon  added, 

For  I  am  not  hereby  justified;  hut  he  that  judgeth  me  is  the 

Lord.     As  though  he  were  to  say,  ^  I  remember  that  I  have 

done  right  things,  yet  I  presume  not  on  my  merits;  for  our 

life  is  brought  to  the  scrutiny  of  Him,  under  Whom  even  the 

bones  of  our  strength  are  dismayed. 

57.  But  when  the  mind  is  suspended  in  contemplation, 
when,  exceeding  the  narrow  limits  of  the  flesh,  with  all  the 
power  of  her  ken,  she  strains  to  find  something  of  the  freedom 
of  interior  security,  she  cannot  for  long  rest  standing  above 
herself,  because  though  the  spirit  carries  her  on  high,  yet 
the  flesh  sinks  her  down  below  by  the  yet  remaining  weight 
of  her  corruption.     And  hence  it  is  added, 

Ver.  15.  And  as  a  spirit  passed  before  my  face,  the  hair 
of  my  flesh  stood  up. 
xxxiii      58.  ■*  A  spirit  passes  before  our  face,'  when  we  are  brought 
to  the  knowledge  of  invisible  things,  and  yet  see  these  same 
not  stedfastly,  but  with  a  hasty  glance.     For  not  even  in  the 
sweetness   of  inward  contemplation   does  the  mind  remain 
fixed   for  long,  in   that  being  made  to  recoil  by  the  very 
immensity  of  the  light  it  is  called  back  to  itself.     And  when 
it  tastes  that  inward  sweetness,  it  is  on   fire   with  love,  it 
longs  to  mount  above  itself,  yet  it  falls  back  in  broken  state 
to  the  darkness  of  its  frailty.     And  advancing  in  high  per- 
fection, it  sees  that  it  cannot  yet  see  that  which  it  ardently 
loves,  wliich  yet  it  would  not  love  ardently  did  it   not  in 
some  sort  see  the  same.     Thus  the  spirit  is  not  stationary, 
but  *  passes  by;'  because  our  contemplation  both  discloses  to 


Hairs  of  the  fleshy  superfluous  thoughts.  287 

us,  that  pant    thereafter,  the  heavenly  light,  and  forthwith    Book 
conceals   the    same    from  us    failing   from    weakness.     And 


because  in  this  life,  whatever  degree  of  virtue   a  man  may 
have  advanced  to,  he  still  feels  the  sting  of  corruption,  i^or  Wisd. 
the  corruptible  body  presseth  down  the  soul,  and  the  earthy   ' 
tabernacle  weigheth  down  the  mind  that  museth  upon  many 
things;  therefore  it  is  rightly  added.  The  hair  of  my  flesh 
stood  up. 

59.  For  *  the  hairs  of  the  flesh'  are  all  the  superfluities  of 
human  corruption.  *  The  hairs  of  the  flesh'  are  the  imagin- 
ations of  the  former  life,  which  we  so  cut  away  from  the 
mind,  that  we  let  no  grief  for  the  loss  of  them  disturb  our 
peace.  And  it  is  well  said  by  Moses,  Let  the  Levites  shave  f^nmh. 
^all  the  hairs  of  their  flesh.  For  a  *  Levite'  is  rendered  ,y' J j^^^ 
^  taken.'     And   thus  it  behoves  the  '  Levites'  to  shave   all 

*  the  hairs  of  the  flesh,'  in  that  he  who  is  *  taken'  into  the 
divine  ministrations,  ought  to  shew  himself  clear  of  all  ima- 
ginations of  the  flesh  before  the  eyes  of  God,  that  the 
mind  never  put  forth  unlawful  thoughts,  and  so  defonn  the 
fair  appearance  of  the  soul  as  it  were  by  sprouting  hairs. 
But  whatever  perfection  of  holy  living  may  have  raised  the 
condition  of  any  man,  yet  there  still  springs  up  to  him  from 
his  old  state  of  life  somewhat  to  bear.  And  hence  the  same 
hairs  of  the  Levites  are  commanded  to  be  shaven,  not  to  be 
plucked  out,  for  the  roots  still  remain  in  the  flesh  to  the 
shaven  hairs,  and  grow  again  to  be  again  cut  off*,  in  that  while 
we  are  to  use  great  diligence  in  cutting  off' all  rank  thoughts, 
yet  they  never  can  be  wholly  and  entirely  cut  off".  For  the 
flesh  is  ever  engendering  a  rank  produce,  which  the  spirit 
should  ever  be  cutting  away  with  the  knife  of  heedfulness. 
Yet  it  is  then  that  we  see  these  things  with  more  exactness, 
when  we  j)enetrate  into  the  heights  of  contemplation ;  and 
hence  it  is  rightly  said.  Whilst  a  spirit  passed  before  my 
facey  the  hair  of  my  Jlesh  stood  up. 

60.  For  when  the  human  mind  is  lifted  up  on  the 
tower  of  contemplation,  it  the  more  cruelly  torments  itself 
for  its  superfluities,  in  proj)ortion  as  it  ])erceivcs  that  which 
it  loves  to  be  infinitely  refined;  and  when  it  beholds  that 
beautiful  Being,  which  it  longs  for,  above  its  own  height,  it 
?ieverely  judges  every  thing   infirm  in  itself,  which  it  bore 


288  Carnal  nature  sees  only  the  visible. 

Job  4,  with  tranquillity  before.  Therefore  when  '  the  Spirit  passeth 
'—  by,'  '  the  hairs  quake,'  in  that  before  the  power  of  compunc- 
tion, all  rank  thoughts  flee  away,  that  nought  that  is  loose, 
nought  that  is  dissipated,  any  longer  gives  pleasure,  for 
severity  of  inward  visitings  kindles  the  inspired  soul  even 
against  its  own  self;  and  when  that  which  riseth  up  in  the 
heart  of  an  unlawful  kind,  is  cut  away  with  unintermitted 
strictness,  it  very  often  happens  that  the  invigorated  soul 
enters  into  its  ray  of  contemplation  with  a  somewhat  larger 
range,  and  almost  arrests  the  spirit  which  was  '  passing  by.' 
Yet  does  not  this  same  lingering  of  contemplation  fully  dis- 
cover the  force  of  the  Divine  nature,  for  its  vastness  transcends 
all  human  powers  thus  enlarged  and  elevated.  And  hence 
it  is  well  added  ; 
iv.thus      Yer.  16.  ^  There  stood  a  certain  one,  hut  I  could  not  discern 

the  form  tJiereof. 
xxxiv.  61.  For  we  do  not  speak  oi  a  certain  one,  saving  surely  in 
the  case  of  him,  whom  we  are  either  unwilling  or  unable  to 
express.  Now  with  what  feeling  it  is  here  said  a  certain  one, 
is  clearly  set  forth,  in  that  it  immediately  comes  in,  but  I 
could  not  discern  the  form  thereof.  For  the  human  soul, 
being  by  the  vsin  of  the  first  of  mankind  banished  from  the 
joys  of  paradise,  lost  the  light  of  the  invisible,  and  poured 
itself  out  entire  in  the  love  of  the  visible,  and  was  darkened 
in  the  interior  sight,  in  proportion  as  it  was  dissipated  with- 
out, to  the  deformment  of  itself.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass 
that  it  knows  nothing,  saving  the  things  that  it  acquaints  itself 
with  by  the  palpable  touch,  so  to  say,  of  the  bodily  eyes. 
For  man,  who,  had  he  been  willing  to  have  kept  the  com- 
mandment, would  even  in  his  flesh  have  been  a  spiritual 
being,  by  sinning  was  rendered  even  in  soul  carnal,  so  as  to 
imagine  such  things  only  as  he  derives  to  the  soul  through 
the  images  of  bodily  substances.  For  body  is  the  property 
of  heaven,  earth,  water,  animals,  and  all  the  visible  things, 
which  he  unceasingly  beholds;  and  while  the  delighted 
mind  wholly  precipitates  itself  into  these,  it  waxes  gross, 
loses  the  fineness  of  the  inward  sense;  and  whereas  it  is  now 
no  longer  able  to  erect  itself  to  things  on  high,  it  willingly 
lies  prostrate  in  its  weakness  in  things  below.  But  when 
with  marvellous  efforts  it  strives  to  rise  up  from  the  same,  it 


Man  learns  soinetchat  of  God  from  his  oum  soul.         '289 

is  great  indeed,  il'  the  soul,  thrusting  aside  the  bodily  fonn,  Book 
be  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  itself,  so  as  to  think  of  itself  — '- — 
without  a  bodily  figure,  and  by  thus  thinking  of  itself  to 
prepare    itself  a  pathway   to   contemplate  the  substance  of 
Eternity  \ 

62.  Now  in  this  way  it  shews  itself  to  its  own  eyes  as  a 
kind  of  ladder,  whereby  in  ascending  from  outward  things  to 
pass  into  itself,  and  from  itself  to  tend  unto  its  Maker.     For 
when  the  mind  quits  bodily  images,  entering  into  itself,  it 
mounts  up  to  no  mean  height;  for  though  the  soul  be  incor- 
poreal, yet  because  she  is  incorporate  with  the  body,  she  is 
known  by  that  property  of  hers,  which  is  confined  within  the 
local  bounds  of  the  flesh.     And  whereas  she  forgets  things 
known,  acquaints  herself  with  such  as  are  unknown,  remembers 
what  has  been  consigned  to  oblivion,  entertains  mirth  after 
sadness,  is  adjudged  to  j)unishir.ent  ^  after  joy;  she  herself  >  addici- 
shews  by  her  own   diversity  in  herself,  how  widely   she   is*"^ 
removed  from  the  Substance  of  eteraal  Unchangeableness, 
Which  is  always  the  same,  even  as  It  Is;   Which  every  where 
present,  every  where  invisible,  ever}'  where  whole  and  entire, 
every  where  incomprehensible,  is  by  the  longing  mind  dis- 
cerned without  seeing,  heard  without  uncertainty,  taken  in 
without  motion,  touched  without  bodily  substance,  held  with- 
out locality.     Now   when  the  mind  that  is  used  to  cor])oreal 
objects    represents    to    itself    this    same    Substance,    it    is 
loaded  with  the  phantasms  of  divers  images.      And    whilst 

it  banishes  these  from  the  eyes  of  its  attention  with  the  hand 
of  discernment,  making  every  thing  give  place  thereto,  it 
at  last  beholds  It  in  some  degree.  And  if  it  does  not  as  yet 
apprehend  what  It  is,  it  has  surely  learnt  what  It  is  not. 
And  so  because  the  mind  is  carried  away  into  unaccustomed 
ground,  when  it  pries  into  the  Es.sence  of  the  Deity,  it  is 
rightly  said  here,  A  certnin  one  stood,  hut  I  could  not  dis- 
cerii  the  form  thereof. 

63.  And  it  is  well  said,  //  stood  still;  for  every  created 
thing,  in  that  it  is  made  out  of  nothing,  and  of  itself  tends  to 
nothing,  has  not  the  property  to  stand,  but  to  run  to  an  end. 
But  a  creature  endowed  with  reason,  by  this  very  circum- 
stance, that  it  is  created  after  the  image  of  its  Maker,  is  fixed 

*  It  will  hare  been  observed,  that  he  uses  this  expression  for '  The  Eternal  One.' 

U 


•290  God  stands  ever  still,  hut  is  seen  as  in  passing. 

Job  4,  that  it  should  not  pass   into  nothing.     Now  no  irrational 

'- —  creature  is  ever  fixed,  but  only,  so  long  as,  by  the  service  of 

its  appearing,  it  is  completing  the  form  and  fashion  of  the 
universe,  it  is  delayed  in  passing  away.  For  though  heaven 
and  earth  abide  henceforth  and  for  ever,  still  they  are  at  this 
present  time  of  themselves  hastening  on  to  nought;  yet  for 
the  use  of  those,  whom  they  serve,  they  remain  to  be  changed 
for  the  better.  To  '  stand'  then  is  the  attribute  of  the 
Creator  alone,  through  Whom  all  things  pass  away.  Himself 
never  passing  away,  and  in  Whom  some  things  are  held  fast, 
that  they  should  not  pass  away.  Hence  our  Redeemer, 
because  the  fixed  state  of  His  Divine  Nature  could  not  be 
comprehended  by  the  human  mind,  shewed  this  to  us  as  it 
were  in  passing,  by  coming  to  us,  by  being  created,  born, 
dead,  buried,  by  rising  again,  and  returning  to  the  heavenly 
Matt,     realms.     Which  He  well  shadowed  out  in  the  Gospel  by  the 

20    32  .  .  . 

Luke  enlightening  the  blind  man,  to  vvhom  when  passing  on  He 
18,  40.  vouchsafed  a  hearing,  but  it  was  standing  still  that  He  healed 
his  eyes.  For  by  the  economy  of  His  Human  Nature  He 
had  His  passing  on,  but  the  standing  by  the  power  of  His 
Divine  Nature,  in  that  He  is  every  where  present.  Thus  the 
Lord  is  said  to  hear  the  complaints  of  our  blind  condition  in 
passing,  in  that  being  made  Man  He  has  compassion  on 
human  misery;  but  He  restores  light  to  the  eyes  standing 
still,  in  that  He  enlightens  the  darkness  of  our  frail  state  by 
the  efficacv  of  His  Divine  Nature.  It  is  well  then  that,  after 
it  has  been  said.  Then  a  spirit  passed  before  my  face ^  it 
should  be  added,  hut  I  could  not  discern  the  form  thereof. 
As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  Him,  Whom  1  perceived  in 
passing,  I  discovered  never  to  pass.'  He  then  that  *  passes'  is 
the  same  as  He  that '  stands  still.'  He  'passes,'  in  that  when 
known  He  cannot  be  detained.  He  '  stands  still,'  in  that,  so 
far  as  He  is  known,  He  is  seen  to  be  unchangeable.  There- 
fore, because  He,  That  is  ever  the  Same,  is  seen  by  a  hasty 
glance,  God  at  the  same  time  appears  both  passing  and  stand- 
ing still.  Or  surely  His  *  standing'  is  His  never  varying  with 
Ex.  .3,  any  change;  as  it  is  said  to  Moses,  /  AM  THAT  I  AM. 
\^'  And  as  James  represents  Him,  saying.  With  Whom  is  no 
17.  vnriahleness,  neitJier  sliadotv  of  turning.  Now  whereas  every 
innn,  that  apprehends  something  of  the  Eternal   Being  by 


Tlte  Image  of  The  Father.    The  Spirit  Mir/hty  and  yet  gentle.  291 

contemplation,    beliolds    tlie    Same    tluou'^li    His    coctcrnal   Book 

...  .  .  v 

Image,  it  is  rightly  subjoined; 


An  image  was  he/ore  mine  eye$. 

64.  For  the  Image  of  the  Father  is  the  Son,  as   Moses  xxxv. 
teaches  in  the  case  of  man  at  his  creation;  So  God  created  Gen.  i, 
man  in  His  own  image;  in  the  Image  of  God  created  He    '' 
him.     And  as  the  Wise  Man,  in  the  setting  forth  of  Wisdom, 
saith  concerning  the  same   Son,  For  She  is  the  bright nessViisd. 
of  the  everlasting  light.     And  as  Paul  hath  it,   f^lio  being '^^^' 
the   brightness   of   His  glorg,  and    the   express    Image   ofUeh.  i, 
His  Person.     When  then  His  Eternity  is  perceived  as  far  ' 

as  the  caj)ability  of  our  frail  nature  admits.  His  Image  is 
set  before  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  in  that  when  we  really 
strain  towards  the  Father,  as  far  as  we  receive  Him  we  see 
Him  by  His  Image,  i.e.  by  His  Son.  And  by  That  Image, 
Which  was  born  of  Himself  without  beginning,  we  strive  in 
some  sort  to  obtain  a  glimpse  of  Him,  Who  hath  neither 
beginning  nor  ending.  And  hence  this  same  Tnith  saith  in 
the  Gospel,  No  man  cometk  to  the  Father  but  by  Me.  And  J^^"  !**> 
it  is  well  added, 

And  I  heard  the  voice  as  it  were  of  a  light  breath. 

65.  For  what  is  signified  by  '  the  voice  of  a  light  breath,'  xxxvi. 
but  the  knowledge  of  the   Holy  Spirit,   Which  proceeding 

firom  the  Father,  and  receiving  of  that  which  belongeth 
to  the  Son,  is  gently  imparted  to  the  knowledge  of  our  John  16, 
frail  nature?  Yet  when  It  came  upon  the  Apostles,  It^'*' 
is  demonstrated  by  an  outward  sound,  like  a  vehement 
blast,  where  it  is  said.  And  suddenly  there  came  a  sotind  ^^^^'2, 
from  heaven  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind.  For  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  imparts  Itself  to  the  knowledge  of  frail 
humanity.  It  is  both  re|)resented  by  '  the  sound  of  a  rushing 
mighty  wind,'  and  also  by  the  *  voice  of  a  gentle  breath,' 
clearly,  in  that  when  It  comes.  It  is  both  *  vehement'  and 
*  gentle  ;'  '  gentle,'  in  that  It  tempers  the  knowledge  of  Itself 
to  our  perceptions,  so  as  to  be  in  some  sort  brought  under 
our  cognizance;  *  vehement,'  in  that  however  It  may  temper 
that  same,  yet  by  Its  coming,  It  confounds  while  It  illumines 
the  darkness  of  our  frail  condition.  For  It  touches  us  but 
lightly  by  Its  enlightening  inlluence,  yet  It  shakes  our 
emptiness  with  fearful  might. 

IT  2 


'290.  God  chiefly  knoicn  by  sliyht  intimations. 

Job  4,      6(3    gQ  God's  voice  is  heard  as  if  of  '  a  light  breath,'  in 

that  the   Divine  Being  never  imparts  Himself  as  He  is  to 

those  that  contemplate  Him  while  still  in  this  life,  but  to 
the  purblind  eyes  of  our  mind  He  discovers  His  bright- 
ness but  scantily.  Which  is  well  represented  by  the  very 
receiving  of  the  Law  itself,  when  it  is  said  that  Moses 
ascended,  and  God  descended  upon  the  Mount.  For  '  the 
Mount'  is  our  very  contemplation  itself,  whereinto  we  ascend, 
that  we  may  be  elevated  to  see  those  things  which  are 
beyond  our  frail  nature;  but  the  Lord  descends  thereupon, 
in  that,  when  we  advance  much.  He  discloses  some  little 
concerning  Himself  to  our  perceptions,  if  either  '  little'  or 
'  somewhat'  can  be  said  to  be  in  Him,  Who,  being  always 
One  and  abiding  the  Same,  cannot  be  understood  by  parts, 
and  yet  is  said  to  be  participated  by  His  faithful  servants, 
whereas  ^  part'  is  nowise  admissible  in  His  Substance. 
But  because  we  are  unable  to  express  Him  with  perfect 
speech,  being  hindered  by  the  scanty  measure  of  our  human 
nature,  as  by  the  impotency  of  the  infant  state,  we  give 
back  an  echo  of  Him  in  some  sort  with  stammering  utter- 
j  ance.  But  that  when  we  are  lifted  up  in  high  contemplation, 
it  is  somewhat  refined  that  w^e  attain  unto  in  the  knowledge 
I  of  the  Eternal  One,  is  shewn  by  the  words  of  Sacred  Stor}', 
when  the  illustrious  Prophet  Elijah  is  instructed  in  the 
knowledge  of  God.  For  when  the  Lord  promised  him  that 
1  Kmgs  He  would  pass  by  before  him,  saying,  And,  behold,  the  Lord 
12.'  passeth  by,  a  great  and  strong  wind  rending  the  mountains, 
and  breaking  in  pieces  the  rocks  before  the  Lord;  He  thereupon 
added,  But  the  Lord  is  not  in  the  tvind:  and  after  the 
wind  a  quaking,  but  the  Lord  is  not  in  the  quaking: 
and  after  the  quaking  a  fire,  but  the  Lord  is  not  in  the 
*he  fiY^ ;  and  after  the  fire,  a  still  small  voice.  For  the  wind 
of  a  before  the  Lord  overturns  the  mountains,  and  shatters  the 
gentle  ^ocV^,  in  that  the  affright,  which  rushes  in  upon  us  from  His 
coming,  both  casts  down  the  exaltation  of  our  hearts,  and 
melts  their  hardness.  But  the  Lord  is  said  not  to  be  in  the 
'  wind  of  quaking'''  and  in  the  fire,  but  it  is  not  denied  that 
He  is  '  in   the   still  small    voice,'   in    tliat    verily  when   the 

''  Commotionis^  (Vulg.)  without  men-     Oxf.   Mss.  however  read  commotioniy 
tiouofearf.h,  need  not  mean  earthquake,     tlie  •wind^  the  quaking^  and  x\\^  fire. 


Elijah  on  the  Mount  a  tyjje  of  content phition.  '21)3 

mind  is  Imng  alolt  in  the  height  of  eoiitemplatiun,  whatever  Book 
it  has  power  to  see  perleclly  and  completely  is  not  God, 


but  when  it  sees  something  of  great  fineness,  this  is  the  same 
as  that  he  hears  belonging  to  the  incomprehensible  substance 
of  the  Deity-     For  we  as  it  were  perceive  a  still  small  voice^ 
when  by  a  moment's  contemplation  we  taste  with  finest  sense 
the    savour    of  incomprehensible    trutli.     Accordingly   then 
onlv  is  there  truth  in  what  we  know  concernin":  God,  when 
we  are  made  sensible  that  we  cannot  know  any  thing  fully 
concerning   Him.     Hence  it  is  well    added   in  that    place, 
And  it  was  so  v:hen  Elijah  heard  it,  that  he  wrapped  his 
face  ill  his  mantle,  and  xcent  out  and  stood  at  the  entering  in 
of  the  cave.     After  the  still  small  voice,  the  Prophet  covers 
his  face  with  his  mantle,  because  in  that  very  refined  contem- 
plation he  learns  in  what  a  cloak  of  ignorance  man  is  shrouded; 
for  to   draw  the  mantle  over  the  face  is  to  veil  the   mind 
by  the  consideration  of  its  own  infirmity,  that  it  may  never 
presume  to  seek  things  above  it,  that  it  never  rashly  open 
the  eyes  of  the  understanding  beyond  itself,  but  close  them 
with  a  feeling  of  awe  to  that  which  it  cannot  apprehend. 
And  he,  in  doing  such  things,  is  described  to  have  stood  at 
the  entering  in  of  the  cave.     For  what  is  our  cave  but  this 
dwelling-j)lace  of  our  corrupt  nature,  wherein  we  are  still  held 
fast  from  remaining  oldness.?    But  when  we  begin  to  take  in 
something  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Being,  we  as  it  were 
already  stand  *  in  the  entering  in  of  our  cave ;'  for  whereas  we 
cannot  make  perfect  progress,  yet  panting  after  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  we  already  catch  something  of  the   breath  of 
liberty.    So  to  '  stand  at  the  entering  in  of  the  cave,'  is,  forcing 
aside  the  obstruction  of  our  corrupt  nature,  to  begin  to  issue 
forth  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.     And  hence  upon  the  cloud 
descending  on  the  Tabernacle,  the  Israelites  seeing  it  afar  off  Ex.  33, 
are  related  to  liave   stood  at  the  entering  in  of  their  tents,  ^* 
in  that  they,  who   in   some  sort  behold  the  coining  of  the 
Deity,  as  it   were   already  issue    forth    from   the   habitation 
of  the   flesh.     Therefore    because  with   whatt'ver  amplitude 
of  virtue  the  human  mind  may  have  enlarged  its  compass, 
yet   it   scarcely   knows    the    very   outermost   extremes   that 
belong  to  the  interior  things,  it  is  rightly  said  here,  And  I 
heard  a  voice  an  of  a  light  breath ;   but  as  at  the  time  tliat 


294  Marias  righteousness  unriyhteous  before  God. 

Job  4,  the  knowledge  of  the  Deity  shews  us  after  all  but  little  con- 

'■ — earning  Itself,  It  is  perfectly  instructing  the  ignorance  of  our 

infirmness;  let  him  that  '  heard  the  voice  of  a  light  breath/ 
declare  all  that  he  learnt  by  that  same  hearing.  It  goes  on ; 
Ver.  17.  Shall  mortal  man  be  7nore  Just  than  Qod? 
Shall  a  man  be  more  pure  than  his  Maker  '^ 
xxxvii  67.  Human  righteousness  compared  with  the  righteousness 
of  God  is  unrighteousness,  for  even  a  candle  is  seen  to  shine 
bright  in  the  dark,  but  being  set  in  the  ray  of  the  sun  its  light 
is  darkened.  What  then  did  Eliphaz  learn  when  he  was 
transported  in  contemplation,  saving  that  man  cannot  be 
justified  in  comparison  with  God }  For  we  believe  that  what 
we  do  outwardly  is  righteous,  but  when  we  never  at  all 
acquaint  ourselves  with  the  things  of  the  interior,  we  are  as  it 
were  blind  whilst  set  in  the  ray  of  the  sun.  But  when  we, 
* "°"  little  as  we  can,  discern  the  one,  it  is  not  a  little^  that  we 
que  judge  the  others,  m  that  a  man  judges  the  darkness  more 
2  A.B.  exactly,  in  proportion  as  the  brightness^  of  light  is  more 
p'^* .  truly  manifested  to  him.  For  he,  that  seeth  light,  knoweth 
ty,'  what  to  account  of  the  darkness,  as  he,  that  is  ignorant  of  the 
whiteness  of  light,  lets  pass  even  dark  objects  for  light  ones. 
And  it  is  rightly  added.  Shall  a  man  be  more  pure  than 
his  Maker?  For  whoso  murmurs  at  the  stroke,  what  does  he, 
but  charge  the  justice  of  the  striker.?  Thus  a  man  accounts 
himself  more  pure  than  his  Maker,  if  he  stirs  complaint 
against  the  scourge,  and  without  doubt  he  makes  Him  give 
place  to  himself.  Whose  judgment  he  blames  in  the  case  of 
his  own  affliction.  Thus,  that  man  may  never  dare  charge 
his  Judge  with  offence,  let  him  humbly  bethink  himself  that 
He  is  the  Author  of  Nature;  for  He,  That  with  marvellous 
skill  made  man  out  of  nothing,  does  not  pitilessly  afflict 
him  that  He  has  made;  which  Eliphaz  then  learnt  when 
he  '  heard  the  voice  as  it  were  of  a  light  breath.'  For  by 
the  contemplation  of  the  greatness  of  God  we  learn,  how 
humbly  we  should  abase  ourselves  with  fear  under  His 
visitation.  And  he,  that  hath  a  taste  of  things  above, 
bears  with  resignation  all  events  below,  in  that  he  per- 
fectly sees  within,  whereat  he  should  reckon  that  which 
he  does  without.  For  he  miscounts  himself  righteous,  who 
knows  not  the  rule  of  the  Supreme  Righteousness.     And  it 


Aiigelic  nature  in  itself  liable  to  change,  295 

often  happens  that  a  piece  of  wood  is  counted  straight,  if  it  ^00^ 

be  not  applied  to  the  rule;  but  so  soon  as  it  is  put  thereto,  '— 

we  discover  the  degree  of  distortion  wherewith  it  swells 
out,  in  that,  truly,  the  straight  line  cuts  oft' and  condemns  that, 
which  the  cheated  eye  approved  as  good.  Thus  l-^lipliaz, 
in  that  he  beheld  things  above,  delivered  a  strict  judgment 
on  all  below,  and  though  it  was  not  rightly  he  reproved 
blessed  Job,  yet  by  comparison  with  the  Creator  of  all  things 
he  rightly  describes  the  measure  of  the  creature,  saying, 

Xer.  18,  19.  Behold,  His  servants  are  not  sted/ast,  and  in 
His  Angels  He  found  folly :  Hoic  much  more  i?i  them  that 
dwell  in  houses  of  clay^  whose  foundation  is  in  the  dust,  which 
shall  be  consu?ned  as  by  the  inoth  / 

()8.  Though  the  Angelical  nature,  by  being  fixed  in  con-  xxxviii 
lemplation  of  the  Creator,  remains  unchangeable  in  its  own 
state,  yet  hereby,  tliat  it  is  a  created  being,  it  admits  in 
itself  the  variableness  of  change.  Now  to  be  changed  is  to 
go  from  one  thing  into  another,  and  to  be  without  stability 
in  one's  self.  For  every  single  being  tends  to  some  other  thing 
by  steps,  as  many  in  number  as  it  is  subject  to  motions  of 
change.  And  it  is  only  the  Incomprehensible  Nature,  which 
knows  not  to  be  moved  from  its  fixed  state,  in  that  It  knows 
not  to  be  changed  from  this,  that  It  is  always  the  Same. 
For  if  the  essence  of  the  Angels  had  been  strange  to  the 
motion  of  change,  being  created  well  by  its  Maker,  it  would 
never  have  fallen  in  the  case  of  reprobate  spirits  from  the 
tower  of  its  blessed  estate.  But  Almighty  God  in  a  mar- 
vellous  manner  framed   the   nature  of  the  highest  spiritual 

\  existences  good,  yet  at  the  same  time  capable  of  change; 
that  both  they,  that  refused  to  remain,  might  meet  with  ruin, 
and  they,  that  continued  in  their  own  state  of  creation,  might 
henceforth  be  stablished  therein  more  worthily  in  ])ro])ortion 
as  it  was  owing  to  their  own  choice,  and  become  so  much 
the  more  meritorious  in  God's  sight,  as  they  had  staid  the 
motion  of  their  nmtability  by  the    stablishing  of  the   will.* 

I  Whereas  then  this  very  Angelical  nature  too  is  in  itself 
mutable,  which  same  mutability  it  has  hereby  overcome,  in 
that  it  is  bound  by  the  chains  of  love  to  Him,  Who  is  ever 
the  Same,  it  is  now  rightly  said.  Behold,  His  servants  are  not 
stedfast.     And  there  is  forthwith  added  a  proof  of  tliis  same 


•296  Human  nature  has  its  own  moth  of  corruption. 

Job  4,  mutability,  in  that  it  is  brought  in  from  the  case  of  the  apostate 

— '■ — ^  spirits,  And  in  His  Angeh  He  found  folly.  And  from  the 
fall  of  these  He  rightly  draws  the  consideration  of  human 
frailty,  when  he  appends  thereto;  Hon-  much  more  in  them  that 
dwell  in  houses  if  clay,  whose  foundation  is  earthly,  which 
shall  be  consumed  as  by  the  moth.  For  we  inhabit  houses  of 
clay,in  that  we  subsist  in  earthly  bodies.  Which  Paul  consider- 

2  Cor.    ing  saith  well ;   But  toe  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels. 

5'  ['  And  again,  For  loe  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this 
tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an 
house  not  made  witlt  hands.  '  The  earthly  foundation'  too 
is   the   substance    of   the    flesh ;    which    the    Psalmist   had 

Ps.  139,  earnestly  contemplated  in  himself,  when  he  said,  My  bones 
are  not  hid  from  Thee,  which  Thou  madest  in  secret,  and 
my  substance  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth.  Now  the 
moth  springs  Irorn  the  garment,  and  in  its  production  de- 
stroys that  very  garment,  whereupon  it  is  produced.  And  the 
flesh  is  as  a  kind  of  garment  to  the  soul,  but  this  same  garment 
has  withal  its  moth,  in  that  from  itself  there  arises  carnal 
temptation,  whereby  it  is  rent  and  torn.  For  our  garment  is 
as  it  were  consumed  by  a  kind  of  moth  of  its  own,  in  that 
the  corruptible  flesh  engendereth  temptation,  and  by  this  is 
brought  to  destruction.  Man  is  consumed  as  if  by  a  moth, 
in  that  he  has  arising  from  himself  that,  whereby  he  is  to  be 
broken  in  pieces.  As  though  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  If 
those  spirits  cannot  be  of  themselves  unchangeable,  which 
are  kept  down  by  no  infirmity  of  the  flesh,  by  what  incon- 
ceivable temerity  do  men  account  themselves  to  hold  on 
stedfastly  in  good,  who,  wherein  they  have  their  understand- 
ing elevating  them  on  high,  have  the  clog  of  carnal  frailty 
acting  as  an  impediment  to  them,  so  that  through  the  evil  of 
a  corrupting  tendency  they  contain  a  cause  in  themselves, 
whence  they  turn  old  from  the  interior  newness.? 

69.  The  holy  Doctors  may  likewise  be  understood  by 
Mai.  2,  '  the  Angels,'  according  as  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  For  the 
Priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge,  and  they  should  seek 
'  Ange-  ific  law  at  his  mouth,  for  he  is  the  Angel^  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts.  With  whatever  degree  of  virtue  these  may  shine, 
they  can  never  be  altogether  without  sin,  so  long  as  they  are 
engaged    in    the   journey  of  this  life,  in  that  their  step  is 


God's  human  Angels  not  free  from  folly .  *2i)7 


doubtless  broii":ht  into  contact  either  with  the  mire  of  unlawful   Book 

T  V. 

practice,  or  with  the  dust  of  the  thought  of  the  heart.     Now '- — 

they  '  dwell  in  houses  of  clay,'  who  rejoice  in  this  ensnaring 
life   of  the  flesh.     Paul  had  been  brought  to  contemn  the 
inhabiting  this  house  of  clay,  when  he  said.  But  our  to//- Phil.  3, 
versntion    is   in    heaieu.     Let  him   say  then,    BeJiold,  His" 
servants  are  not  sted'ast,  and  in  His  Angels  He  hath  found 
folly:  how  much  more  in  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of  clay, 
nhose foundation  is  in  the  dust,  which  are  consumed  as  by 
the  moth  ?    As  if  he  had  said  in  plain  words,  ^  If  the  path- 
way of  the  present  life  cannot  be  passed  through  without 
defilement  by  those,  who  proclaiming  the  things  of  eternity, 
gird  themselves  up  to  encounter  those  of  time,  what  eWls  do 
they  undergo,  who  rejoice  to  be  plunged  in  the  delights  of 
the  fleshly  habitation  ?     *  For  His  servants  are  not  stedfast,' 
for  when  the  mind  strains  toward  things  on  high,  it  is  dissi- 
pated by  the  conceits  of  its  own  flesh,  so  that  oftentimes  whilst 
the  mind  pants  after  the  things  of  the  interior,  while  it  looks 
at  heavenly  objects  alone,  smitten  by  a  momentary  carnal 
delight,  it  lies  low  severed  from  itself,  and  he  that  felt  joy 
that  he  had  sunnounted  the  hindrances  of  his  frailty,  pro- 
strated  by   an  unexpected   wound,  is  only  filled  with   woe. 
Pervcrseness  then  is  found  even  in  His  Angels,  so  long  as 
those  very  men,  who  proclaim  His  truth,  the  surprisals  of  a 
deceitful  life  do  at  times  lie  heavy  on.    So  then  if  even  those 
are  smitten  by   tlie  wickedness  of  this  world,  whom  a  holy 
])urpose  presents  erect  against  the  same,  with  what  strokes 
are  not  they  jnerced,  whom  nothing  less  than '   delight  in  *  ipsa 
their  fi-ailty  brings  to  the  ground  before  its  darts .^    And  th(^se 
arc  well  described  to   be  '  consumed,'  as  it  were,  *  witli  a 
moth.'     For  a  moth  does   mischief,  and   makes   no  sound. 
So  the  minds  of  the  wicked,  in  that  they  neglect  to  take 
account  of  their  own  losses,  lose  their  soundness,  as  it  were, 
without  knowing  it.     For  they  are  losing  innocency  from  the 
heart,  truth  liom  the  lips,  contineney  from  the  flesh,  aud  in 
the  course  of  time,  life  Irom  the  sum  of  their  age.    But  they  see 
not  one  whit  that  they  are  unceasingly  letting  go  these  same, 
in  that  they  aic  busied  with  all   their  heart  in  temporal  con- 
cerns.   Thus  they  are  *  consumed  as  it  were  with  a  moth,'  in 
that  they  sufler  the  canker  of  sin  without  sound,  whilst  llu^y 


298  Bad  men  are  ever  loorhing  their  own  ruin. 

Job  4,  remain  ignorant  what  losses  in  life  and  innocency  of  heart 

— ^^-^— they  are  undergoing.     Hence  it  is  well  added, 

Ver.  20.   They  shall  be  cut  off/rom  morning  to  evening. 

xxxix  70.  For  the  sinner  is  '  cut  off  from  morning  to  even- 
ing,' in  that  from  the  beginning  of  his  life  to  the  end  thereof 
he  is  ever  getting  wounded  by  the  commission  of  sin.  For 
the  reprobate  by  increase  in  wickedness  are  at  all  times 
redoubling  blows  upon  themselves,  cut  off  by  which,  they 
may  fall  headlong  into  the  pit.     And  it  is  well  said  of  them 

Ps.  ,55,  by  the  Psalmist,  Bloody  and  deceit fal  men  shall  not  halve 
their  days.  For  to  '  halve  our  days'  is  to  part  off  the  time  of 
our  life  misspent  in  pleasure,  for  the  purpose  of  penitential 
mourning,  and  in  parting  off  to  recover  the  same  to  a  good 
use.  But  the  wicked  never  '  halve  their  days,'  in  that  not 
even  in  the  end  of  their  time  do  they  change  their  froward- 
ness  of  heart.     Contrary   whereunto    Paul   rightly    exhorts, 

Eph.  5,  saying,  Bedeeming  the  time,  because  the  days  are  evil.  For 
we  '  redeem  the  time,'  when  by  tears  we  recover  our  past 
life,  which  by  rioting  we  had  lost.     It  goes  on, 

And  because  none  understandeth,  they  perish  for  ever, 
xl.         71.  That  is  to  say,  *  none'  of  those,  who  '  shall  be  cut  off 
from  morning  unto  evening.'    '  None  understandeth,'  whether 
of  those  that  perish,  or  of  those  who  follow  the  lost  ways  of 

Is.  57,1.  the  perishing.  Whence  it  is  elsewhere  written.  The  riyh- 
teous  perisheth^andno  man  layeth  it  to  heart:  and  merciful 
men  are  taken  away,  none  considering.  Thus,  whereas  the 
wicked  are  set  upon  temporal  things  alone,  and  are  un- 
concerned to  learn  what  blessings  are  in  store  for  the  Elect 
for  everlasting,  while  they  look  to  the  affliction  of  the  just, 
but  never  learn  what  is  the  recompense  of  that  affliction, 
they  put  forth  the  foot  of  their  conversation  into  the  pit,  for 
they  willingly  shut  their  eyes  to  the  light  of  understanding. 
For  being  decoyed  by  foolish  pleasures,  whilst  for  objects, 
which  they  see,  they  entertain  an  affection,  which  belongs  to 
time,  being  meanwhile  strangers  to  themselves,  they  never 
see  whereunto  they  are  hurrying  for  all  eternity.  It  is 
possible  too  that  by  the  morning  may  be  denoted  the  pros- 
perous fortune  of  this  world,  and  by  the  evening  the  adverse 
fortune  thereof.  So  then  '  the  wicked  are  cut  oif  from 
morning  to  evening,'  in  that  by  running  riot  through  pros- 


Some,  brought  to  under standimj,  perish  not.  29fi 

perity  they  are  brou^^lit  to  ruin,  and  bcinj^  made  impatient  Pook 
by  adversity  they  are  lifted  u])   to  madness.     Tliese  would  — ^- 
uever  be  cut  off  from  morning  to  evening,  by  sin,  if  they 
either   took   prosperity  for    the    salve   or   adversity  for  the 
knife  to  their  sore. 

72.  But  forasmuch  as  the  assemblage  of  the  human  race 
is  never  so  forsaken,  that  the  whole  is  let  to  go  to  destruction, 
there  be  some,  that  look  down  upon  the  enjoyments'  of  the 
])resent  life,  even  when  they  are  present,  consider  that  they 
are  transient,  and  in  the  love  of  the  eternal  world  tread  them 
underfoot.  And  while  they  set  the  step  of  judgment  on  this 
first  stage,  they  mount  with  invigorated  soul  to  a  loftier 
height,  so  that  they  not  only  contemn  all  temporal  things, 
for  that  they  must  be  quickly  parted  with,  but  have  no  desire 
to  attach  themselves  thereto,  even  if  they  might  last  for  ever. 
And  they  withdraw  their  love  from  the  things  created  in 
beauty,  because  they  stretch  forth  by  the  steps  of  the  heart 
toward  the  Father  of  all  Heanty  Himself.  And  there  are 
some  that  love  the  good  things  of  the  present  life,  yet  never 
in  any  wise  attain  unto  them,  who  pant  after  temporal  bless- 
ings with  all  their  hearts'  desire,  who  covet  the  glory  of  the 
world,  yet  never  can  make  themselves  master  thereof.  For 
these,  so  to  speak,  the  heart  draws  them  on  to  seek  the 
world,  the  world  drives  them  back  to  search  out  the  heart. 
For  it  often  chances  that,  being  bruised  by  those  very 
adversities  which  they  suffer,  they  are  brought  back  to 
reason,  and  returning  back  into  themselves,  they  consider 
how  little  there  is  in  that,  which  they  were  seeking  after,  and 
forthwith  betake  themselves  to  wee])ing  for  the  foolishness  of 
their  desire,  and  conceive  the  stronger  yearnings  lor  eternal 
things,  in  ])roportion  to  the  folly  in  which  they  grieve  that 
they  once  spent  themselves  for  those  of  time,  llcncc, 
the  wicked  having  been  described,  it  is  well  added, 

Ver.  21.   lint  Ihey  that  have  been  lejt  shall  be  taken  auay 
from  am  an  (J  them. 

7.3.  Whom  else  do  we  understand  by  *  tlie  left,'  but  all  the     xh. 
despised  of  this  woild  .''  whom  whilst  the  present  life  chooses 
not  for  any  use  of  honour,  it  '  leaves'  as  being  the  least  and 
most  worthless.     But  the  Ix)rd  is  said  to  *  take  away  lliose 

•  Thore  is  authnrify  for  tho  plural. 


300  Christ  finds  the  world's  slave,  as  David  the  Amalekite's. 

Job  4,  that  are  left'  of  the  world,  in  that  He  condescends  to  make 
— choice  of  the   despised  of  this  life,  as  Paul  bears  witness, 


1  Cor.  1,  saying.  Not  many  wise  men  after  thejlesh,  not  many  mighty, 
26.  27.  ^^qi  many  nol)le  are  called :  but  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish 
things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise;  and  God  hath 
chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things 
that  are  mighty.  Which  is  well  represented  in  the  Book  of 
\^^^o  Kings  by  the  Egyptian  servant  fainting  in  the  way,  whom 
the  Amalekite  abandons  taken  sick  upon  the  journey,  but 
David  finds,  refreshes  with  food,  and  makes  the  guide  of  his 
route ;  he  pursues  the  iVmalekite,  finds  him  feasting,  and 
utterly  destroys  him.  For  what  does  it  mean  that  the 
Egyptian  servant  of  the  Amalekite  turns  faint  upon  the 
journey,  but  that  the  lover  of  this  present  world,  covered 
with  the  blackness  of  his  sins,  is  often  abandoned  in  weak- 
ness and  contempt  by  the  same  world,  so  that  he  is  no  longer 
able  to  run  therewith,  but  being  broken  down  by  adversity, 
grows  helpless.  But  David  finds  him,  in  that  our  Redeemer, 
Who  is  in  a  true  sense  '  strong  of  hand,'  sometimes  turns  to 
the  love  of  Himself  those,  whom  He  finds  despised  as  to  the 
glory  of  the  world,  in  that  He  refreshes  them  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  Word.  He  chose  him  the  guide  of  his 
way,  in  that  He  makes  him  even  the  preacher  of  Himself. 
And  he,  that  had  no  power  to  follow  the  Amalekite,  becomes 
the  guide  of  David,  in  that  he,  whom  the  world  forsook  as 
worthless,  not  only  when  converted  entertains  the  Lord  in 
his  affections'^,  but  by  preaching  Him  brings  Him  home 
even  to  the  hearts  of  others  also.  And  with  this  same  guide 
David  discovers  and  annihilates  the  Amalekite  as  he  feasted, 
in  that  Christ  breaks  up  the  joy  of  the  world  by  those  very 
men  as  preachers,  whom  that  world  scorned  to  have  for  its  com- 
panions. Therefore  because  it  very  often  happens  that  those, 
whom  the  world  abandons,  are  chosen  of  the  Lord,  it  is 
rightly  said  in  this  place,  Those,  that  may  have  been  left, 
shall  be  taken  from  a)nongst  tJienf.  It  proceeds; 
They  shall  die,  even  without  wisdom. 
xlii.  74.  How  is  it  that  he  set  forth  above  the  death  of  the 
wicked,  saying.  Because  none  nnderstandelh  they  shall 
perish  for  ever ;    and  concerning  the  Elect  of  God  ihere- 

<l  suas  mentes,  al.  sua  mcntc 


Hidy  Writ  will  resume  a  subject  after  interruption.       301 

upon  subjoined,  And  they  tlmt  have  heeti  left  shall  be  taken    Book 

auat/  from   among  them  ;    yet  forthwith    adds   that   which '— 

cannot  accord  with  those  Klect  ones,  saying,  They  shall  die 
even   uifhonf    wisdom ?    For  if  they   be   taken   away   from 
among  tl)o  wioked  h\  the  hand  of  God,  how  are  they  said 
'  to  die  without  wisdom  ?'    Why,  doubtless  it  is  tlie  fasliion  of 
Holy  Writ,  in  reh\ting  any  thing,  after  inserting  a  sentence 
that  concerns  another  case,  to  return  straightway  to  its  former 
subject.     Thus  after  he  had  said.  And  because  there  is  none 
that  understand'- thy  they  shall  perish  for  ever ;    he  imme- 
diately brought  in  the  lot  of  the  Elect,  saying.  But  they  that 
have  been  left  shall  be  taken  away  from  amony  them.     And 
again  directing  the  eye  of  his  meaning  to  that  destruction  of 
the  wicked,  which  he  had   foretold,  he  suddenly  subjoined, 
tJiey  shall  die,  even  nithout  n  isdom.     As  if  he  said,  Those 
of  whom  I  said  that  *  not  understanding,  they  should  perish 
for   ever,'    will    assuredly  *  die    without    wisdom."     But  we 
shall  the  better  shew  that  this  is  at  times  the  way  with  Holy 
Writ,  if  we  ])roduce  therefrom  a  similar  instance  to  this.     For 
when  Paul  the  Apostle  was  counselling  his  beloved  disciple 
for  the  settling  the  offices  of  the  Church,  that  he  might  not  by 
chance  without  due  order  promote  any  to  Holy  Orders,  he 
said,  F^ay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  neither  be  partaker  of\  Tim. 
other  mens  sins.     Keep  thyself  pure.     And  forthwith  directing  ^'  '^'^' 
his  words  to  his  bodily  infirmities,  he  says.  Drink  no  longer  yer.  23. 
water,  but   use  a   little   wine  for  thy  stomach\s  sake,  and 
thine  often  itifirniities.     And  he  immediately  subjoins  ;  Somev^r.  24. 
men's  sifis  are  open   beforehand,  going  before  to  judgment, 
and  .some  men    t/wy  follow  after.     What   connection    then 
has  that,  which  he  added  concerning  the  sins  of  different 
men  being  hidden  and  manifest,  with  this,  that  he  forbad  bin) 
in  his  weak  health  to  drink  water  .^  but  that  after  the  insertion 
of  a  clause  concerning  his  weakness  of  health  he  came  back 
again  at  the  end  to  that,  which  he  had  said  above,  Ijuj  hands 
suddenly  on  no  man^  neither  be  partaker  of  oihir  fnen\s  sins. 
For  in  order  to  shew  with  what  anxious  heed  these  same  sins 
are  to  be  incpiired  into,  after  introducing  a  cliarge  to  j)rudence 
directed  against  the  annoyance  of  bad  liealth,  he  straight- 
way put  in,  that  in  some  men  they  lay  exposed  to  view,  in 
some  hidden  from  sight,  saying,  Sf^me  men's  sins  are  open 


302         The  ivicked,  dying  without  wisdom^  find  not  life. 

Job  5,  beforehand  going  before  to  Judgment,  and  some  men  they 
— '- — follow  after.  As  then  in  this  sentence  Paul  does  not  chime 
in  with  these  same  words,  to  which,  speaking  of  the  weak- 
ness of  Timotliy's  health,  he  subjoined  it,  but  he  has  re- 
turned to  that  which  he  made  mention  of  before  after  an 
interruption;  so  when  in  this  place  Eliphaz  said  concerning 
the  Elect,  They  that  have  been  left  shall  be  taken  from 
among  them,  by  subjoining  thereupon,  they  die  even  without 
wisdom;  he  forthwith  recurs  to  that,  which  he  delivered 
concerning  the  wicked,  saying,  And  because  none  imder- 
standeth,  they  shall  perish  for  ever. 

75.  Now  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  wicked  look  down 
upon  the  Elect,  because  they  are  going  toward  a  life  that  is 
invisible  through  a  death  that  is  visible;  of  whom  it  is  well 
said  in  this  place,  They  die  even  without  wisdom.  As  though 
it  were  said  in  plain  words,  "  They  equally  indeed  eschew 
death  and  wisdom;  and  wisdom  they  wholly  get  quit  of, 
but  they  do  not  escape  the  snares  of  death.  And  whereas 
doomed,  as  they  are,  to  die  one  day,  they  might  in  dying 
have  received  life,  while  they  dread  the  death,  which  will 
most  surely  come,  they  part  both  with  life  and  wisdom 
together."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  righteous  die  in  wis- 
dom, for  that  death,  which  they  cannot  wholly  avoid,  when 
it  threatens  them  for  the  sake  of  the  ti'uth,  they  refuse  to 
put  off  to  a  later  day,  and  whilst  they  undergo  the  same 
with  resignation,  they  turn  the  punishment  of  their  race  into 
an  instrument  of  virtue ;  that  life  may  be  received  back  from 
the  same  quarter,  whence,  for  the  deserts  of  the  first  sin,  it  is 
forced  to  its  end.  But  because  Eliphaz  delivered  these 
things  with  a  true  meaning  against  the  wicked;  in  account- 
ing blessed  Job  to  be  worthy  of  blame,  he  puffed  himself  up 
in  pride  of  wisdom.  And  hence,  after  declarations  so  good 
and  righteous,  he  subjoins  words  of  mocking,  and  says. 
Chap.  V.  1.  Call  now,  if  there  be  any  that  will  answer  thee. 
xliii.  76.  For  Almighty  God  often  passes  by  the  prayer  of  that 
man  in  his  trouble,  who  slights  His  precepts  in  the  season 
Prov.  of  rest.  Hence  it  is  written.  He  that  turneth  away  his  ear 
'  "  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer  shall  be  abomination. 
Now  for  us  '  to  call,'  is  to  beseech  God  with  humble  prayer; 
but  for  God  to  *  answer,'  is  to  vouchsafe  an  accomplishment 


Eliphaz  right  in  condemning  an  angry  temper.  303 

to  our  prayers;  and  so  he  says,  Call  now,  if  anywill  answer  Book 
thee.     As  though  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  However  thou 1— 


mayest  cry  out  in  thy  distress,  thou  hast  not  God  answering 
thee,  in  that  the  voice  in  tribulation  findeth  not  Him,  Whom 
the  mind  in  tranquillity  disregarded.  Where  he  adds  in 
yet  further  derision. 

And  turn  thee  to  some  one  of  the  Saints? 

77.  As  though  he  said  in  scorn,  '  The  Saints  too  thou  xhv. 
canst  never  obtain  for  abettors  in  thy  distress,  whom  thou 
wouldest  not  have  for  companions  in  thy  mirth.     And  after 

this  mocking  he  forthwith  adds  the  sentence,  saying, 

Ver.  2.  For   wrath    killeth    the  foolish   man,  and  envy 
slayeth  the  silly  man. 

78.  Which  same  sentence  would  have  been  true,  had  it   xlv. 
not  been  delivered  against  the  patience  of  so  great  a  man. 
But  let  us  weigh  well  the  thing  that  is  said,  though  it  be 
made   to  recoil  by  the   virtue   of  his   hearer,  that  we   may 
shew  how  right  the  matter  is,  which  is  put  forth,  if  it  were 

not  unjustly  put  forth  against  blessed  Job;  since  it  is  written. 
But  Thou,  Lord,  Judgest  with  tranquillity.     We  must  above  wisd. 
all  things  know,  that  as  often  as  we  restrain  the  turbulent  ^^' ^^* 
motions  of  the  mind  under  the  virtue  of  mildness,  we  are 
essaying  to  return  to  the  likeness  of  our  Creator.     For  when 
the  peace  of  the  mind  is  lashed  with  Anger,  torn  and  rent, 
as  it  were,  it  is  thrown  into  confusion,  so  that  it  is  not  in 
harmony  with  itself,  and  loses  the  force  of  the  inward  likeness. 
Let  us  consider  then   how  great   the   sin   of   Anger  is,  by 
which,  while  we  part  with  mildness,  the  likeness  of  the  image 
of  the   Most  High  is  spoilt.     By  Anger  wisdom  is  parted 
with,  so  that  we  are  left  wholly  in  ignorance  what  to  do, 
and  in  what  order  to  do  it;  as  it  is  written.  Anger  resteth  in  Ecc.  7, 
the  bosom  of  a  fool;   in  tliis  way,  that  it  withdraws  the  light 
of  understanding,  while  by  agitating  it  troubles  the  mind. 
By  Anger  life  is  lost,  even  though  wisdom  seem  to  be  re- 
tained; as  it  is  written.  Anger  destroyeth  even  the  wise.    ForProv. 
in  truth  thetnind  being  in  a  state  of  confusion  never  puts  it  lx  ^ 
in  execution,  even  if  it  has  power  to  discern  any  thing  with 
good  judgment.     By  Anger    righteousness    is    abandoned, 
as  it  is  written,   The  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righ-^^m.i, 

20 

teonsness  of  God.     For  whereas  the  agitated  mind  works  up 


304        Anger  expels  The  Spirit,  and  overpoivers  reason. 

Job  5,  to  harshness  the  decision  of  its  reasoning  faculty,  all  that 
rage  suggests,  it  accounts  to  be  right.     By  Anger  all  the 


Moral. 

Prov.  kindliness  of  social  life  is  lost,  as  it  is  written,  Be  not  the 
25' not  (companion  of  an  angry  man ;  lest  thou  learn  his  it  ays,  and 
V.  get  a  snare  to  fhy  soul.  And  the  same  writer.  Who  can 
28  14.  dwell  ivith^  a  man  whose  spirit  is  ready  to  icratJi^?  For  he 
2"°*^^*  that  does  not  regulate   his  feelings   by  the   reason  that  is 

proper  to  man,  must  needs  live  alone  like  a  beast.  By 
Prov.  Anger,  harmony  is  interrupted  ;  as  it  is  written,  A  wrathful 
not  as  ^^^  stirrelh  up  strife,  and  an  angry  man  diggeth  up  sins. 
^:J*L    For '  an  angry  man  diggeth  up  sins,'  since  even  bad  men,  whom 

he  rashly  provokes  to  strife,  he  makes  worse  than  they  were. 
Eph.  4,  By  Anger  the  light  of  truth  is  lost;   as  it  is  written.  Let  not 

26 

the  sun  go  dou'n  upon  your  tvrath.  For  when  wrath  brings 
into  the  mind  the  darkness  of  perturbation,  God  hides  there- 
from the  ray  of  the  knowledge  of  Himself.  By  Anger  the 
brightness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  shut  out.  Contrary  where- 
Is.G6,2.unto,  it  is  written  according  to  the  old  translation.  Upon 
whom  shall  My  Spirit  rest,  saving  upon  him  that  is  hurnhle 
and  peaceful^  and  that  tremhleth  at  My  ivords  ?  For  when 
He  mentioned  the  humble  man.  He  forthwith  subjoined  the 
word  ^  peaceful;'  if  then  Anger  steals  away  peace  of  mind,  it 
shuts  its  dwelling  place  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  soul 
being  left  void  by  Its  departure,  is  immediately  carried  into 
open  frenzy,  and  is  scattered  away  to  the  very  surface  from 
the  inmost  foundation  of  the  thoughts. 

79.  For  the  heart  that  is  inflamed  with  the  stings  of  its 
own  Anger  beats  quick,  the  body  trembles,  the  tongue  stam- 
mers, the  countenance  takes  fire,  the  eyes  grow  fierce,  and 
they  that  are  well  known  are  not  recognised.  With  the 
mouth,  indeed,  he  shapes  a  sound,  but  the  understanding 
knows  nothing  what  it  says.  Wherein,  then,  is  he  far 
arrep-  removed  from  brain-struck^  persons,  who  is  not  conscious  of 
his  own  doings }  Whence  it  very  often  comes  to  pass  that 
anger  springs  forth  even  to  the  hands,  and  as  reason  is  gone 
the  further,  it  lifts  itself  the  bolder.  And  the  mind  has  no 
strength  to  keep  itself  in,  for  that  it  is  made  over  into  the 
power  of  another.  And  frenzy  employs  the  limbs  without  in 
dealing  blows,  in  proportion  as  it  holds  captive  \\  ithin  the 
very  mind,  that  is  the  mistress  of  the  limbs.      Bui  sometimes 


titiis 


Effects  of  anyer  in  speech  and  in  silence.  305 

it  does  not  put  out  the  hands,  but  it  turns  the  tongue  into   Book 
a   dart   of  cursing.     For   it   implores   with   entreaty  for   a '■ — 


brother's  destruction,  and  demands  of  God  to  do  that,  which 
the  wicked  man  himself  is  either  afraid  or  ashamed  to  do. 
And  it  comes  to  pass  that  both  by  wish  and  words  he  com- 
mits a  murder,   even  when  he  forbears  the  hurting  of  his 
neighbour  with  the  hands.     Sometimes  when   the   mind  is 
disturbed,  anger  as  if  in  judgment  commands  silence,  and  in 
proportion  as  it  does  not  vent  itself  outwardly  by  the  lips, 
inwardly  it  burns  the  worse,   so  the  angry  man  withholds 
from  converse  with  his  neighbour,  and  in  saying  nothing, 
says  how  he  abhors  him.     And  sometimes  this  rigorousness 
of  silence  is  used  in  the  economy  of  discipline,  yet  only 
if  the  rule  of  discretion  be  diligently  retained  in  the  interior. 
But  sometimes  whilst  the  incensed  mind  foregoes  the  wonted 
converse,  in  the  progress  of  time  it  is  wholly  severed  from 
the  love  of  our  neighbour,  and  sharper  stings  arise  to  the 
mind,  and  occasions  too  spring    up   which   aggravate    her 
imtation,  and  the  mote  in  the  eye  of  the  angry  man  is  turned 
into  a  beam,  whilst  anger  is  changed  into  hatred.     It  often 
happens  that  the  anger,  which  is  pent  up  within  the  heart 
from  silence,  burns  the  more  fiercely,  and   silently  frames 
clamorous  speeches,  presents  to  itself  words,  by  which  to 
have  its  wrath  exasperated,  and  as  if  set  in  judgment  on  the 
case,  answers  in  exasperation  exceeding  cruelly :  as  Solomon 
implies  in  few  words,  saying.  But  the  expectatio7i  qf  theVtox. 
wicked  is  wrath.     And  thus  it  is  brought  to  pass  that  the     ' 
troubled  spirit  finds  louder  riot  in  its  silence,  and  the  flame 
of  pent-up  anger  preys  upon  it  the  more  grievously.     Hence 
a  certain  wise  man  said  well  before  us  ^,  The  thoughts  oj  the 
angry  man  are  a  generation  qf  vipers^  they  devour  the  mind 
which  is  their  mother. 

80.  But  we  are  to  know  that  there  be  some,  whom  anger 
is  somewhat  prompt  in  inflaming,  but  quickly  leaves  them ; 
while  there  are  others  whom  it  is  slow  in  exciting,  but  the 
longer  in  retaining  possession  of.  For  some,  like  kindled 
reeds,  while  they  clamour  with  their  voices,  giv^e  out  some- 
thing like  a  crackle  at  their  kindling :  those  indeed  speedily 

^  The  words  '  before  us' do  not  seem  ture  or  Apocrypha.  The  Ben.  Edi- 
to  .indicate  quotation  from  Holy  Scrip-     tors  could  not  find  the  passage. 

X 


306  Divers  Characters.     Tivo  remedies  fir  anger. 

Job  5,  rise  into  a  flame,  but  then  they  forthwith  cool  down   into 
their  ashes;  while  others,  like  the  heavier  and  harder  kinds  of 


MonAL. 

wood,  are  slow  in  taking  fire,  but  being  once  kindled,  are 
with  difliculty  put  out ;  and  as  they  slowly  stir  themselves 
into  heat  of  passion,  retain  the  longer  the  fire  of  their  rage. 
Others  again,  and  their  conduct  is  the  worst,  are  both  quick 
in  catching  the  flames  of  anger,  and  slow  in  letting  them  go ; 
and  others  both  catch  them  slowly,  and  part  with  them 
quickly.  In  which  same  four  sorts,  the  reader  sees  clearly 
that  the  last  rather  than  the  first  approaches  to  the  excellence 
of  peace  of  mind,  and  in  evil  the  third  is  worse  than  the 
second.  But  what  good  does  it  do  to  declare  how  anger 
usurps  possession  of  the  mind,  if  we  neglect  to  set  forth  at 
the  same  lime,  how  it  should  be  checked  } 

81.  For  there  are  two  ways  whereby  anger  being  broken 
comes  to  relax  its  hold  upon  the  mind.     The  first  method  is 
that  the  heedful  mind,  before  it  begins  to  do  any  thing,  set 
before  itself  all  the  insults  which  it  is  liable  to  undergo,  so 
that  by  thinking  on   the  opprobrious  treatment  of  its  Re- 
deemer, it   may   brace   itself  to    meet   with    contradiction. 
Which  same,  on  coming,  it  receives  with  the  greater  courage, 
in  proportion  as  by  foresight  it  armed  itself  the  more  heed- 
fully.     For  he,  that  is  caught  by  adversity  unprovided  for  it, 
is  as  if  he  were  found  by  his  enemy  sleeping,  and  his  foe 
dispatches  him  the  sooner,  that  he  stabs  one  who  offers  no 
resistance.     For  he,  tliat  forecasts  impending  ills  in  a  spirit 
of  earnest  heedfulness,  as  it  were  watching  in  ambush  awaits 
the  assault  of  his  enemy.     And  he  arrays  himself  in  strength 
for  the  victory  in  the  very  point  wherein  he  was  expected  to 
be  caught  in  entire  ignorance.     Therefore,  before  the  outset 
of  any  action,  the  mind  ought  to  forecast  all  contrarieties, 
and  that  with  anxious  heed,  that  by  taking  account  of  these 
at  all  times,  and  being  at  all  times  armed  against  them  with 
the  breastplate  of  patience,  it  may  both  in  foresight  obtain 
the  mastery,  whatever  may   take  place,  and  whatever   may 
not  take  place,  it  may  account  gain.    But  the  second  method 
of  preserving  mildness  is  that,  when  we  regard  the  transgres- 
sion of  others,  we  have  an  eye  to  our  own  offences,  by  which 
we  have  done  wrong  in  the  case  of  others.     For  our  own 
frailty  being  considered  makes  excuse  for  the  ills  done  us 


Evenjmt  anger  disturbs  the  mind.  307 

by  others.  Since  that  man  bears  with  patience  an  injury  Book 
that  is  offered  him,  who  with  right  feehng  remembers  that  ^- 
perchance  there  may  still  be  somewhat,  in  which  he  himself 
has  need  to  be  borne  with.  And  it  is  as  if  fire  were  ex- 
tinguished by  water,  when  u]ion  rage  rising  up  in  the  mind 
each  person  recalls  his  own  misdoings  to  his  recollection; 
for  he  is  ashamed  not  to  spare  offences,  who  recollects  that 
he  has  himself  often  committed  offences,  whether  against 
God  or  against  his  neighbour,  which  need  to  be  spared. 

82.  But  herein  w^e  must  bear  in  mind  with  nice  discern- 
ment that  the  anger,  which  hastiness  of  temper  stirs  is  one 
thing,  and  that  which  zeal  gives  its  character  to  is  another. 
The  first  is  engendered  of  evil,  the  second  of  good.     For  if 
there  was  no  anger  originating  in  virtue.  Phinees  would  never 
have  allayed  the  fierceness  of  God's  visitation  by  his  sword. 
Because  Eli  lacked  such  anger,  he  quickened  against  himself 
the   stirrings    of  the  vengeance   of  the  Most   High   to    an 
implacable  force.     For  in  proportion  as  he  was  lukewarm 
towards  the   evil  practices  of  those   under  his  charge,  the 
severity  of  the   Eternal  Ruler  waxed  hot    against  himself. 
Of  this  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not.  Vs.  4,5. 
Which  doubtless  they  fail  to  interpret   aright,  who  would  ^"^^' 
only  have   us   angry  w^ith    ourselves,   and    not  with  others 
likewise,  when  they  sin.     For  if  we  are  bidden  to  love  our 
neighbours  as   ourselves,  it  follows  that  we   should  be   as 
angry  with  their  ening  ways  as  with  our  own  evil  practices. 
Of  this  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  Anger^  is  better  than  laughter;  Ecc.  7, 
for  by  the  sadness  ofihe  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better,  f ' 
Of  this  the  Psalmist  saith  again,  ^line  eye  is  ^-  disturbed  because  Vulg. 
of  anger^.     For  anger  that  comes  of  evil  blinds  the  eye  ofay,  thus 
the  mind,  but  anger  that  comes  of  zeal  disturbs  it.     Since  ^i'J^ 
necessarily  in  whatever  degree  he  is  moved  by  a  jealousy  forvuig. 
virtue,  the  world  of  contemplation,  which  cannot  be  known  ^-^^ 
saving  by  a  heart  in  tranquillity,  is  broken  up.     For  zeal  for 
the  cause  of  virtue  in  itself,  in  that  it  fills  the  mind  with 
disquietude  and  agitation,  presently  bedims  the  eye  thereof, 
so  that  in  its  troubled  state  it  can  no  longer  see  those  objects 
far  up  above,  which  it  aforetime  clearly  beheld  in  a  state  of 
tranquillity.     But  it  is  brought  back  on  high  with  a  more 
penetrating  ken  by  the  same  means,  whereby  it  is  thrown 

X  2 


fu- 
rore^ 


MonAL 


308  Anger  may  serve,  hut  must  not  he  let  rule. 

Job  5,  back  for  a  while  so  as  to  be  incapable  of  seeing.  For  the 
same  jealousy  in  behalf  of  what  is  right  after  a  short  space 
opens  wider  the  scenes  of  eternity  in  a  state  of  tranquillity, 
which  in  the  mean  season  it  closes  from  the  effects  of 
perturbation.  And  from  the  same  quarter  whence  the  mind 
is  confounded  so  as  to  prevent  its  seeing,  it  gains  ground,  so 
as  to  be  made  clear  for  seeing  in  a  more  genuine  way;  just  as 
when  ointment  is  applied  to  the  diseased  eye,  light  is  wholly 
withheld,  but  after  a  little  space  it  recovers  this  in  truth  and 
reality  by  the  same  means,  by  which  it  lost  the  same  for  its 
healing.  But  to  perturbation  contemplation  is  never  joined, 
nor  is  the  mind  when  disturbed  enabled  to  behold  that, 
which  even  when  in  a  tranquil  state  it  scarcely  has  power  to 
gaze  on;  for  neither  is  the  sun's  ray  discerned,  when  driving 
clouds  cover  the  face  of  the  heavens;  nor  does  a  troubled 
fountain  give  back  the  image  of  the  beholder,  which  when 
calm  it  shews  with  a  proper  likeness;  for  in  proportion  as  the 
water  thereof  quivers,  it  bedims  the  appearance  of  a  likeness 
within  it. 

83.  But  when  the  spirit  is  stirred  by  zeal,  it  is  needful  to 
take  good  heed,  that  that  same  anger,  which  we  adopt  as  an 
instrument  of  virtue,  never  gain  dominion  over  the  mind,  nor 
take  the  lead  as  mistress,  but  like  a  handmaid,  prompt  to 
render  service,  never  depart  from  following  in  the  rear  of 
reason.  For  it  is  then  lifted  up  more  vigorously  against  evil, 
when  it  does  service  in  subjection  to  reason;  since  how  much 
soever  our  anger  may  originate  in  zeal  for  the  right,  if  from 
being  in  excess  it  has  mastered  our  minds,  it  thereupon 
scorns  to  pay  obedience  to  reason,  and  spreads  itself  the 
more  shamelessly,  in  proportion  as  it  takes  the  evil  of  a  hot 
temper  for  a  good  quality;  whence  it  is  necessary  that  he 
who  is  influenced  by  zeal  for  right  should  above  all  things 
look  to  this,  that  his  anger  should  never  overleap  the  mind's 
control,  but,  in  avenging  sin,  looking  to  the  time  and  the 
manner,  should  check  the  rising  agitation  of  his  mind  by 
regulating  it  with  nicety  of  skill,  should  restrain  heat  of 
temper,  and  control  his  passionate  emotions  in  subjection  to 
the  rule  of  equity,  that  the  punisher  of  another  man  may  be 
made  more  just,  in  proportion  as  he  has  first  proved  the  con- 
queror of  himself;   so  that  he  should  correct  the  faults   of 


Anger  destroys  fools.     Envy  implies  inferiority,        309 

transgressors  in  such  a   way,  that  he  that  corrects   should   Book 

himself  first  make  advancement  by  self-restraint,  and  pass '— 

judgment  on  his  own  vehemency,  in  getting  above  it,  lest  by 
being  immoderately  stined  by  his  very  zeal  for  right,  he  go 
far  astray  from  the  right.  But  as  we  have  said,  forasmuch  as 
even  a  commendable  jealousy  for  virtue  troubles  the  eye  of 
the  mind,  it  is  rightly  said  in  this  place,  For  wrath  killeth 
the  foolish  man;  as  if  it  were  in  plain  terms,  '  Anger  from 
zeal  disturbs  the  wise,  but  anger  from  sin  destroys  the  fool;' 
for  the  first  is  kept  in  under  the  control  of  reason,  but  the 
other  lords  it  over  the  prostrate  mind  in  opposition  to  reason. 
And  it  is  well  added,  , 

'  •  so 

And  envy  slayeth  the  little^  one.  Vuig. 

84.  For  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  envy  any  but  those,  whom  xlvi. 
we  think  to  be  better  than  ourselves  in  some  respect.     And 
so  he  is  '  a  little  one,'  who  is  slain  by  jealousy.     For  he 
bears  witness  against  his  very  own  self,  that  he  is  less  than 
him,  by  envy  of  whom  he  is  tormented.     It  is  hence  that 
our  crafty  foe,  in  envying  of  the  first  man,  despoiled  him, 
in  that  having  lost  his  estate  of  bliss,  he  knew  himself  to  be 
inferior  to  his  immortality.    It  is  hence  that  Cain  was  brought 
down  to  commit  the  murder  of  his  brother;   in  that  when 
his  sacrifice  was  disregarded,  he   was  maddened  that  he, 
whose  offering  God  accepted,  was  preferred  to  himself;  and 
him,  whose  being  better  than  himself  was  his  aversion,  he 
cut  off,  that  he  might  not  be  at  all.      Hence,  Esau  was  fired 
to  the  persecution  of  his  brother;  for,  the  blessing  of  the  first- 
born being  lost,  which,  for  that  matter,  he  had  himself  parted 
with  for  a  mess  of  pottage,  he  bewailed  his  inferiority  to  him, 
whom  he  surpassed  by  his  birth.     Hence  his  own  brethren 
sold  Joseph  to  Ishmaelites,  that  were  passing  by,  in   that 
upon  the  mystery  of  the  revelation  being  disclosed,  they  set 
themselves  to  resist  his  advancement,  that  he  might  never 
become    superior   to   themselves.      Hence    Saul    persecutes 
his  servant  David  by  throwing  a  lance  at  him,  for  he  dreaded 
that  man  growing  beyond  his  own  measure,  whom  he  per- 
ceived to  be  daily  vvaxing  bigger  by  his  great  achievements 
in  the  virtues.     Thus  he  is  a  ^  little  one,'  who  is  slain  by 
envy;  in  that  except  he  himself  proved  less,  he  would  not 
grieve  for  the  goodness  of  another. 


310  Envy  ruins  any  virtue  that  we  may  have. 

Job  5,       85.  But  herein  we  must  bear  in  mind,  that  thougli  in  every 
— — ^ —  evil  thing  that  is  done,  the  venom  of  our  old  enemy  is  infused 
mto  the  heart  of  man,  yet  m  this  wickedness,  the  serpent 
stirs  his  whole   bowels,  and    discharges   the   bane   of  spite 
fitted  to  enter  deep  into  the  mind.      Of   whom  also  it  is 
Wisd.    written,  Nevertheless,  through  envy  of  the  devil  came  death 
'     '     into  the  ivorld.     For  when  the  foul  sorp  of  envy  corrupts  the 
vanquished  heart,  the  very  exterior  itself  shews,  how  forcibly 
the   mind  is  urged  by  madness.     For   paleness  seizes  the 
complexion,  the   eyes  are  weighed  clown,  the   spirit  is  in- 
flamed, while  the  limbs  are  chilled,  there  is  frenzy  in  the 
heart,  there  is  gnashing  with  the  teeth,  and  while  the  growing 
hate  is  buried  in  the  depths  of  the  heart,  the  pent  wound 
works  into  the  conscience  with  a  blind  grief.     Nought  of 
its  own  that  is  prosperous  gives  satisfaction,  in  that  a  self- 
inflicted  pain  wounds  the  pining  spirit,  wliich  is  racked  by 
the  prosperity  of  another:  and  in  proportion  as  the  structure 
of  another's  works  is  reared  on  high,  the  foundations  of  the 
jealous  mind  are  deeper  undermined,  that  in  proportion  as 
others  hasten  onward  to  better  things,  his  ov>^n  ruin  should 
be  the  worse ;   by  which  same  downfall  even  that  is  brought 
to  the  ground,  which  was  believed  to  have  been  raised  in 
other  doings   with   perfect   workmanship.      For  when   envy 
has  made  the  mind  corrupt,  it  consumes  all  that  it  may  have 
found  done   aright.     Whence  it  is  well   said  by  Solomon, 
Prov.     A  sound  heart  is  the  life  of  the  JiesJc  hut  envy  the  rottenness 
'  ^^'   of  the  hones.     For  what  is  denoted  by  '  the  flesh,'  saving 
weak  and  tender  things?   and  what  by  the  '  bones,'  saving 
strong  deeds.?    And  it  is  most  common  that  some  with  real 
innoccncy  of  heart   should    appear   to    be   vveak    in    some 
points  of  their  practice,  whilst  some  now  perform  deeds  of 
strength  before  the  eyes  of  men,  but  yet  towards  the  excel- 
lences of  others  they  are  inwardly  consumed  with  the  plague 
of  envy;  and  so  it  is  well  said,  A  sound,  heart  is  the  life  of 
Hie  flesh.     In   that  where    inward  innoccncy  is  preserved, 
even  if  there   be   some   points  weak  without,  yet  they  are 
sometime  made  strong  and  fast.     And  it  is  rightly  added. 
But    envy  the   rottennes.^   of  the    bones.     For   by  the    bad 
quality    of    envy    even    strong    deeds    of    virtue    go    for 
nought  before  the  eyes  of  God.     Since  the  rotting  of  the 


Heavenly  desires  leave  no  place  fur  Envy.  311 

bones    from    envy   is    the    spoiling    of    the    strong    things  Book 

even.  1— 

86.  But  why  do  we  say  such  things  concerning  envy, 
unless  we  likewise  point  out  in  what  manner  it  may  be  rooted 
out?  For  it  is  a  hard  thing  for  one  man  not  to  envy  another 
that,  which  he  earnestly  desires  to  obtain  ;  since  whatever  we 
receive  that  is  of  time  becomes  less  to  each  in  proportion  as 
there  are  many  to  divide  it  amongst.  And  for  this  reason 
envy  wrings  the  longing  mind,  because  that,  which  it  desires, 
another  man  getting  either  takes  away  altogether,  or  curtails  in 
quantity.  Let  him,  then,  who  longs  to  be  wholly  and  entirely 
void  of  the  bane  of  envy,  set  his  affections  on  that  inheritance, 
which  no  number  of  fellowheirs  serves  to  stint  or  shorten, 
which  is  both  one  to  all  and  whole  to  each,  which  is  shewn 
so  much  the  larger,  as  the  number  of  those  that  are  vouch- 
safed it  is  enlarged  for  its  reception.  And  so  the  lessening 
of  envy  is  the  feeling  of  inward  sweetness  arising,  and  the 
utter  death  of  it  is  the  perfect  love  of  Eternity.  For  when 
the  mind  is  withdrawn  from  the  desire  of  that  object,  which 
is  divided  among  a  multitude  of  participators,  the  love  of 
our  neighbour  is  increased,  in  proportion  as  the  fear  of  injury 
to  self  from  his  advancement  is  lessened.  And  if  the  soul 
be  wholly  ravished  in  love  of  the  heavenly  land,  it  is  also 
thoroughly  rooted  in  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  and  that 
without  any  mixture  of  envy.  For  whereas  it  desires  no 
earthly  objects,  there  is  nothing  to  withstand  the  love  it  has 
for  its  fellow.  And  what  else  is  this  same  charity  but  the 
eye  of  the  mind,  which  if  it  be  reached  by  the  dust  of 
earthly  love,  is  forthwith  beaten  back  with  injury  from  its 
gaze  at  the  inward  light?  But  whereas  he  is  '  a  little  one,' 
who  loves  earthly  things,  and  a  great  one  that  longs  after  the 
things  of  eternity,  it  may  be  suitably  enough  rendered  in 
this  sense  likewise,  Atid  envy  slayeth  the  foolish  ojie;  in 
that  no  man  perishes  by  the  sickness  of  this  plague,  except 
him  that  is  still  unhealthy  in  his  desires. 


THE  SECOND  PART. 


BOOK  VI. 

The  whole  of  the  fifth  chapter,  beginning  at  the  third  verse,  is  explained 
first  in  a  spiritual  sense,  a  few  parts  in  an  allegorical,  and  a  great  many 
in  a  moral  sense. 

i.  Saving  the  historical  verity,  I  proposed  to  myself  to  make 

out  the   sayings  of  blessed  Job    and   of  his  fi'iends  by  the 
mystical  mode  of  interpretation :  for  it  is  plain  to  all  that  are 
acquainted  with  the  truth,  that  Holy  Writ  takes  care  to  hold 
out  in  promise  the  Redeemer  of  the  world  in  all  its  state- 
ments, and  that  it  has  aimed  to  represent  Him  by  all  the 
Elect  as  by  His  members.     And  hence  blessed  Job  is  in  the 
Latin  tongue  rendered  '  grieving,'  that  both  by  his  name  and 
by  his  wounds  the  Passion  of  our  Redeemer  might  be  sig- 
Is. 63,4.  nified,  of  Whom  the  Prophet  saith,  Surely  He  hath  home 
our  griefs,  and   carried   our   sorrows.     x4nd  the  Tempter, 
having  robbed  him   of  every  thing,  slew  both  his  servants 
and  his  children;  in  that  at  the  time  of  His  Passion  he  smote 
with  the  weapon  of  faithlessness  not  only  the  Jewish  people, 
that  served   Him   out   of  fear,   but  the   very  Apostles   also 
themselves,  that  were  regenerated  in  His  love.     The  body  of 
blessed  Job  is  mangled  with   wounding,  for  our  Redeemer 
does  not  disdain  to  be  pierced  with  nails  upon  the  stock  of 
the  Cross.     And  he  received  wounds,  from  the  sole  of  the 
foot  to  the  very  crown  of  his  head,  in  that  not  only  in  her 
last  and  lowest  members,  but  even  up  to  the  very  highest, 
Holy  Church,  which  is  His  Body,  is  hai'assed  with  persecu- 
Coi.  1,   tion  by  the  raging  Tempter.     Hence  also  Paul  said.  And  Jill 
^^'        up  thai  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ.     And 
his  wife  strives  to  persuade  him  to  curse,  in  that  all  the  car- 
nal minds  within  the  pale  of  Holy  Church  prove  abettors 


Job* s  friends  spoke  truths  hut  not  of  his  case.  313 

of  the  cunning    Tempter.     For  she,   who   prompts  him  to  Book 
cursing,  represents  the  life  of  the  carnal  sort;   since,  as  we 


have  already  said  above,  all  persons  of  unchastened  habits 
within  the  pale  of  Holy  Church,  in  proportion  as  they  are 
brought  nigh  to  the  good  by  their  faith,  pinch  them  harder 
by  their  life.  For  because  they  cannot  be  avoided,  as  being 
of  the  number  of  the  faithful,  they  are  borne  by  the  faithful 
as  the  greater  harm,  in  proportion^  as  it  is  nearer  home. i  see  p. 
But  his  friends,  who  come  as  if  to  administer  consolation, 
but  run  out  into  words  of  bitter  upbraiding,  bear  the  likeness 
of  heretics,  who,  in  striving  to  defend  God  against  the 
righteous,  only  offend  Him. 

2.  These  things  then,  wliich  have  been  more  fully  delivered 
above,  I  have  endeavoured  to  gather  into  a  small  compass 
after  their  mystical  representation,  that  by  this  very  repetition 
it  might  be  recalled  to  the  recollection  of  my  reader,  that  I 
minister  to  the  spiritual  understanding.  And  yet,  when 
occasion  of  usefulness  demands,  I  also  busy  myself  to  make 
out  yvTLth  minute  exactness  the  letter  of  the  history,  but  when 
it  is  needed  I  embrace  both  at  the  same  time,  that  the 
allegory  may  put  forth  spiritual  fruit,  which  same  nevertheless 
is  produced  by  the  historical  verity  as  from  the  root.  Now 
the  friends  of  blessed  Job,  who,  we  have  said,  bear  the 
likeness  of  heretics,  we  by  no  means  condemn  for  their 
words  throughout;  for  whereas  it  is  delivered  against  them 
by  the  sentence  from  above.  For  ye  have  not  spoken  before  Job  42, 
Me  the  thing  that  is  right ;  and  it  is  thereupon  added,  Like 
My  servant  Job ;  it  is  plainly  manifest  that  that  is  not  altogether 
set  at  nought,  which  is  only  disapproved  by  comparison  with 
what  is  better.  For  they  incautiously  slip  into  censure  of 
him,  but  yet,  as  they  are  the  friends  of  so  great  a  man,  from 
familiar  intercourse  with  him  they  learnt  many  mystical 
truths.  Whence,  as  we  have  also  said  above,  Paul  uses 
their  very  words,  and  by  taking  these  in  aid  of  his  statement, 
he  testifies  that  they  were  delivered  from  a  source  of  truth. 
Which  same  nevertheless  Truth  does  rightly  censure,  in  that 
no  sentence,  however  full  of  force,  should  be  delivered 
against  a  holy  man.  Accordingly  the  words  of  Eliphaz  may 
be  considered  in  a  mystical  sense,  whereby  he  addresses 
blessed  Job,  saying. 


314  Tke  '  Foolish^  here  may  vican  the  Jews. 

Job  5,      Ver.  3.  I  have  seen  the  foolish  taking  root;  but  suddenly 

■    '        I  cursed  his  ^  beauty. 
Myst.  f  ^  ,       , 

1  so  V.  3.  For  the  Jewish  people  shewed  itself  to  be  '  foolish, 
^^'  in  that  it  slightly  regarded  the  very  Presence  of  Eternal 
Wisdom  in  the  flesh.  And  it  waxed  strong,  as  it  were, 
by  taking  root,  in  that  it  had  power  over  the  life  of  the  Elect 
to  the  extinction  thereof  in  time.  And  Eliphaz  despises 
such  an  one,  cursing  him,  in  that  all  heretics,  whom  we  have 
said  the  friends  of  blessed  Job  bear  a  figure  of,  while 
they  boast  themselves  in  the  name  of  Christ,  censure  in  a  way 
of  authority  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews.  Concerning  which 
same  foolish  one  it  is  forthwith  added, 

Ver.  4.  His  children  are  far  from  safety^  and.  they  are 
crushed  in  the  gate,  neither  shall  there  be  any  to  deliver  them. 
4.  They  all  are  '  the  children'  of  this  foolish  man,  who 
are  generated  by  the  preaching  of  that  unbelief,  and  these 
*  are  far  from  safety,'  for  though  they  enjoy  the  temporal  life 
without  trouble,  they  are  stricken  the  worse  with  eternal 
vengeance,  as   the  Lord  says  concerning  these  same   sons 

Matt,  of  such  an  one,  Woe  unto  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypo- 
'  '  crites,  for  ye  compass  sea  and  laud  to  make  one  proselyte,  and 
when  he  is  made  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell 
than  yourselves.  It  follows,  And  tliey  are  crushed  in  the 
gate,  neither  shall  there  be  any  to  deliver  them.  Who  else 
is  to  be  understood  by  the  name  of  gate,  but  the  Mediator 

John     between  God  and  Man,  Who  saith,  /  am  the  door;  by  Me 

10    9.  ^      J 

'  if  ciny  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved.  The  sons,  then,  of 
this  foolish  man  advance  without  the  gate,  and  they  are 
'  crushed  in  the  gate,'  for  the  evil  offspring  of  the  Jews, 
before  the  Mediator's  coming,  prospered  in  the  observance 
of  the  Law,  but  in  the  presence  of  our  Redeemer  itself  they 
fell  away  from  the  service  of  the  Divine  Being,  proving 
outcasts  by  the  deserts  of  their  faithlessness.  And  verily 
there  is  none  '  to  rescue  them,'  for  while  they  strive  by  their 
persecution  to  kill  the  Redeemer  Himself,  they  cut  them- 
selves off  from  the  proffered  means  of  their  rescue.  And  it 
is  well  added  concerning  him, 

Ver.  5.    Whose  harvest   the  hungry   eateth  up,    and  the 
armed  one  shall  seize  him. 

iv.         5.  Now  '  the  harvest'  of  this  foolish  man  was  the  crop  of 


God^s  gifts,  when  not  improved  hy  us,  pass  to  others.     315 

Sacred  Writ.     For  the  words  of  the  Prophets  are  like   so  Book 

many  grains  of  the  ears,  which  the  foolish  man  had,  but  did '— 

not  eat.     For  the  Jewish  people  indeed  held  the  Law  as  far 
as  the  letter,  but,  from  an  infatuated  pride,  as  to  the  sense 
thereof,  they  went  hungering.     But  ^  the  hungry  eateth  the 
harvest'  of  this  foolish  one,  in  that  the  Gentile  folk  eats  by 
taking  in  the  words  of  the  Law,  in  which  the  Jewish  people 
toiled  and  laboured  without  taking  them  in.     These  hungry 
ones  of  faith  the  Lord  foresaw,  when  He  had  said  by  the 
Evangelist,  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  afteriAzti.d, 
righteousness^  for  they  shall  be  filled.     Of  these  hungry  ones  ' 
Hannah  saith  prophesying,  They  that  werefidU  have  hired  out  i  Sam. 
themselves  for  bread,  and  they  that  were  hungry  were  satis-  '   * 
fied.     And   as  he  lost  the  harvest,  it  is  rightly  added  how 
the  foolish  man  himself  too  perishes,  where  it  is  said,  And 
himself  shall  the  armed  one  seize.     The  old  enemy,  being 
*  armed,'  seized  the  Jewish  people,  for  he  extinguished  in 
them  the  life  of  faith  by  the  darts  of  deceitful  counsel,  that 
in  the  very  point,  wherein  they  imagined  themselves  to  be 
rooted  in  God,  they  might  resist   His  dispensation.     And 
Truth  forewarns  the  Disciples  of  this,  saying.  Yea,  the  time  John 
cometh  that  whosoever  killeth  you  ivill  think  thai  he  doeth     '    ' 
God  service.     It  follows. 

And  the  thirsty  shall  drink  his  riches. 

6.  The  riches  of  this  '  foolish'  one  '  the  thirsty  drink,'  in     v. 
that  by  the  streams  of  Sacred  Writ,  which  the  Jewish  people 
possessed  in  the  display  of  pride,  the  converted  minds  of  the 
Gentiles  are  watered.     And  hence  it  is  said  to  those  same 
persons  by  the  Prophet,  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  Isaiah 
ye  to  the  waters;  and  he  that  hath  no  silver,  come  ye.     For^^' 
that  the  divine  oracles  are  denoted  by  the  word  ^  silver,'  is 
testified  by  the  Psalmist  in  these  words.  The  ivords  of  the  Ps.  12, 
Lord  are  pure  words,  as  silver  tried  in  the  fire.     They  then  ^* 
that  *  have  no   silver,'   are  bidden   to  the  '  waters,'  in  that 
the  Gentile  world  which  had  never  received  the  precepts  of 
Holy  Writ,  is  satisfied  with  the  outpouring  of  Divine  Reve- 
lation, which  they  now  drink  of  the  more  eagerly,  in  propor- 
tion as  they  thirsted  for  it  long  time  in  a  state  of  drought. 
Thus  the  very  same  Divine  oracles  are  called  at  once  '  har- 
vests' and  '  riches;'  '  harvests,'  because  they  refresh  the  hun- 


316     Holy  Writ  supplies  both  strong  meat  and  easy  drink. 

Job  5,  gering  soul;  '  riches/  because  they  array  us  in  a  rare  richness 

— — -^ — of  moral  excellences.      The  same  things  are  said  both  to 
Myst. 

be  '  eaten,'  and  to  be  *  drunk,'  for  this  reason,  that  whereas 

there  are  certain  things  therein  that  are  obscure,  which  we 
understand  not  without  they  be  interpreted,  these  same 
we  in  a  manner  swallow  eating;  and  whereas  certain  other 
things  indeed,  that  are  easy  to  be  understood,  we  so  take  as 
we  find  them,  these  we  drink  as  if  unchewed,  in  that  we 
swallow  them  unbroken.  These  things  we  have  rim  through 
in  brief  mode  under  their  mystical  signification,  lest  perchance 
we  might  seem  to  have  passed  over  any  thing;  but  because 
they  could  not  be  the  friends  of  blessed  Job,  except  in  some 
points  they  also  shone  conspicuous  for  high  moral  worth, 
it  remains  that  in  their  words  we  examine  the  force  of  their 
import  in  a  moral  sense,  that,  whilst  the  weight  and  substance 
of  their  speech  is  made  out,  it  may  be  shewn  what  sort  of 
teaching  they  were  masters  of. 

Ver.  3.  /  have  seen  the  foolish  taking  root,  but  suddenly 
I  cursed  his  beauty. 
Moral.  7.  *  The  foolish'  is  as  it  were  made  fast  in  the  earth  by 
VI'  '  taking  root,'  in  that  he  is  fixed  in  the  love  of  earth  with  all 
his  heart's  desire.  And  hence  Cain  is  recorded  to  have  been 
the  first  that  builded  a  city  in  the  earth,  that  it  might  be  plainly 
shewn,  that  that  same  man  laid  a  foundation  in  the  earth, 
who  was  turned  adrift  from  the  firm  hold  of  our  heavenly  coun- 
try. The  foolish  man  as  it  were  lifts  himself  up  by  '  taking 
root,'  when  he  is  buoyed  up  in  this  world  with  temporal  good 
fortune,  so  that  he  obtains  whatsoever  he  desires,  is  subject  to 
no  crosses,  prevails  against  the  weak  without  meeting  with 
resistance,  gainsays  those  that  do  well  with  authority,  is  ever 
attaining  to  better  circumstances  by  means  of  worse  prac- 
tices, so  that  from  the  very  cause  that  he  is  forsaking  the 
path  of  life,  he  lives  for  the  time  the  happier.  But  when 
the  weak  see  that  the  wicked  flourish,  they  are  alarmed,  and 
being  troubled  in  their  own  breasts  by  the  prosperity  of 
sinners,  they  inwardly  falter  in  the  mind's  footsteps.  It  was 
the  likeness  of  these  same  that  the  Psalmist  took  when  he 
Ps.  73,  declared,  But  as  for  me^  my  feet  were  almost  gone^  my  steps 
^'^'  had  well  nigh  slipped;  for  I  was  envious  at  the  sinners, 
when  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked. 


Worldly  glory  even  note  scorned  by  the  wise.  317 

8.  But  when  the  strong  see  their  glory,  they  forthwith  fix  Book 

their  minds  upon  the  punishment  which  is  to  follow  after '— 

that  glory,  and  with  deep  thought  of  heart  within  they 
contemn  that,  which  swells  the  proud  without  with  the 
bigness  of  empty  inflation.  It  is  then  well  said,  /  have 
seen  the  foolish  taking  root^  hut  suddenly  I  cursed  his  beauty. 
For  to  '  curse  the  beauty'  of  the  fool  is  to  condemn  his  glory 
by  an  advised  sentence,  for  he  is  the  more  frightfully  drowned 
in  tonnents,  the  higher  he  is  lifted  up  in  sins ;  for  the  being 
lifted  up  is  transient,  but  the  being  punished  is  perpetual; 
for  he,  that  meets  with  honour  on  his  road,  will  meet  with  con- 
demnation on  his  aiTival;  and  he  is  as  it  were  coming  to  a 
prison  through  pleasant  meadows,  who  is  going  on  to  ruin 
through  this  world's  prosperity.  But  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that,  when  he  says  that  he  '  cursed  the  beauty  of  the  fool,' 
he  directly  adds,  suddenly;  for  it  is  the  way  with  man's 
weak  mind  to  vary  according  to  the  modification  of  the  objects 
which  it  beholds.  Thus  it  often  happens  that  his  judgment 
is  led  by  the  mere  appearance  of  the  object  presented,  and 
his  bias  and  feeling  are  framed  according  to  the  thing  which 
is  before  his  eyes.  For  often  persons,  while  they  see  the 
glory  of  certain  individuals,  are  charmed  with  the  appearances 
thereof,  and  account  it  something  great,  and  heartily  wish 
they  might  themselves  obtain  the  like;  but  when  they  see 
the  children  of  glory  severally  either  overthrown  of  a  sudden, 
or  perchance  even  brought  to  death,  they  acknowledge  with 
a  sigh  that  human  glory  is  altogether  nought,  so  as  to 
exclaim  at  once,  '  See  what  a  nothing  is  man  I'  Which 
indeed  they  would  say  with  more  propriety,  if  when  they 
saw  man  in  possession  of  glory,  then  thinking  of  his 
destruction,  they  had  felt  that  transitory  power  is  nought. 
For  it  is  then  that  we  are  to  reflect  what  a  nothing  human 
exaltation  is,  when  by  its  successes  it  mounts  above  others; 
then  we  ought  to  reflect  with  what  speed  happiness  will  flee 
away,  when  it  flourishes,  as  if  for  ever,  before  the  eyes  of 
men.  For  that  the  glory  of  a  perishable  being  is  nothing 
in  the  actual  hour  of  death,  any  of  the  weak  sort  can  pre- 
sently consider.  For  then  even  they  hold  it  cheap,  who  even 
until  death  follow  after  it  with  affection.  So  that  it  is  well 
said,  /  have  seen   the  foolish   taking  root,  hut  suddenly  I 


318  l^he  wicked  crushed  in  the  gate  of  Judgment. 

Job  5,  cursed  his  beauty.     As  if  he  said   plainly;    *  Against   the 
r-r— ^ —  beauty  of  the  foolish  T   admitted  no   delay  in   my  em'sinff, 

Moral.  -^  .  _  .        .        "  . 

for  as  soon  as  I  discerned  it,  I  saw  along  with  it  the  punish- 
ment that  comes  after;  for  I  should  not  have  cursed  suddenly, 
if  any  delight  in  that  glory  had  kept  hold  of  me,  but  I  cursed 
without  tardiness,  for  beholding  his  punishments  which  are 
destined  to  endure,  I  condemned  his  power  without  hesi- 
tating.' But  because  in  every  case  the  more  the  wicked 
make  way  in  this  world,  the  greater  numbers  they  drag 
ial.///6-  to  destruction,  it  is  rightly  subjoined.  Let  his  children  be^ 
s/haiiTef^*'  /^'^^^^  safety.  For  the  children  of  the  foolish  one  are 
they,  that  after  his  copy  are  brought  forth  in  this  world's 
ambition;  who  truly  are  so  much  the  fluther  from  safety, 
in  proportion  as  in  the  practice  of  iniquity  they  are  stricken 
by  no  infirmity.     Of  these  it  is  well  added, 

Ver.  4.  And  they  shall   be  crushed  in  the  gate;    neither 

shall  there  be  any  to  deliver  them. 

vii.        9.  For  as  the  entrance  of  a  city  is  called  the  ^  gate,'  so  is 

the  day  of  Judgment  the  gate  of  the  Kingdom,  since  all  the 

Elect  go  in  thereby  to  the  glory  of  their  heavenly  country. 

And  hence  when  Solomon  saw  this  day  approaching  for  the 

Prov.     recompensing  of  Holy  Church,  he    said.  Her  husband  is 

'  *■  ■    knOi'cn  in  the  gates,  when  he  sitleth  among  the  elders  of  the 

land.     For  the  Redeemer  of  mankind  is  the  '  husband'  of 

Holy  Church,  Who  shews  Himself  ^  renowned'  in  the  gates. 

-  A.B.    Who^  first  came  to  sight  in  degradation  and  in  mockings, 

t  ie-*     but  shall  appear  on  high  at  the  entering  in  of  His  kingdom: 

cause     ^|-,(j  <  ^g  sitteth  among  the  elders  of  the  land,'  for  that  He 

shall   decree    sentence    of  condemnation  together  with    the 

holy  preachers  of  that  same  Church,  as  Himself  declares  in 

Matt,     the  Gospel,  Verily  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  which  have  followed 

19    28  .  '  * 

' '     '  Me,  in  the  Regeneration ,  ichen  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit 

on  the  tJirone  of  His  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve 

thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.     Which  same 

Is.  3,     Isaiah   also  foretelling  long  before   uses    these  words,    The 

Lord  tcill  enter  into  judgment  with    the  ancients  of  His 

Prov.     people.     Of  these  gates  Solomon  says  again.  Give  her  of  thv 

^^'  ^^'  fruit  of  her  hands,  and  her  oum  works  shall  praise  her  in 

the  gates.     For   Holy  Church   then  receives  of  '  the  fruit 

of  her  hands,'  when  the  recompensing  of  her  labours  lifts  her 


Spiritual  harvest  of  had  men  goes  to  others.  319 

up  to  the  entertainment  of  heavenly  blessings,  for  her  *  works  Book 
then  praise  her  in  the  gates,'  when  the  words   are  spoken 


to  her  members  in  the  very  entrance  to  His  kingdom ;  For  Matt. 
/  was  an  hmtf/red,  and  ye  gave  Me  meat;  1  teas  thirsfi/,'^  ' 
and  ye  gave  Me  drink ;  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  Me  in  ; 
naked,  and  ye  clothed  Me.  The  children  then  of  this  foolish 
man  are  lifted  up  be/ore  '  the  gate,'  but  '  in  the  gate  they 
shall  be  crushed;'  in  that  the  followers  of  this  world  cany 
themselves  proudly  in  the  present  life,  but  in  the  very 
entrance  of  the  kingdom  they  are  struck  with  an  everlasting 
visitation.  And  it  is  well  added,  Neither  is  there  any  to 
deliver  them.  For  *  Truth'  delivers  from  eternal  woe 
those  whom  in  temporal  weal  She  straitens  by  discipline. 
He,  then,  that  now  refuses  to  be  straitened,  is  left  tlien  with- 
out the  means  to  be  '  delivered.'  For  Him,  Whom  they 
care  not  to  have  as  a  Father  in  training,  the  wicked  in  the 
season  of  their  calamity  never  find  a  deliverer  in  succouring. 
It  proceeds ; 

Whose  harvest  the  hungry  one  shall  eat  up. 

10.  Even  the  foolish  man  has  a  '  harvest,'  when  any  viii. 
wicked  man  is  vouchsafed  the  gift  of  a  right  understanding, 
is  instructed  in  the  sentences  of  Holy  Writ,  speaks  good 
words,  yet  never  in  any  wise  does  the  thing  that  he  says ; 
gives  forth  the  words  of  God,  yet  does  not  love  them;  by 
his  praise  magnifies  them,  by  his  practice  tramples  on 
them.  Thus  because  this  foolish  man  both  understands  and 
speaks  that,  which  is  right,  yet  does  not  love  this  in  his 
doings,  while  he  has  a  harvest,  he  goes  starving.  Which 
same  '  the  hungry  eateth  up,'  in  that  he,  who  pants  after 
God  with  holy  desires,  learns  what  he  hears,  and  practises 
what  he  has  learnt.  And,  whilst  he  is  invigorated  by  the 
right  preaching  of  a  wrong  teacher,  what  else  is  this  than 
that  he  is  filled  with  the  produce  of  the  foolish  ?  Did  not 
'  Truth'  charge  His '  hungry  ones'  to  eat  up  the  '  harvest'  of 
the  foolish,  when,  they  being  inflamed  by  holy  desires.  He 
charged  them  concerning  the  Pharisees,  saying,^//  therefore Msitt. 
whatsoever  they  bid  you  observe,  observe  and  do;  but  do  not  '  ' 
ye  after  their  norks.  As  though  He  said  plainly;  *  By 
speaking  they  rear  the  harvest  of  the  word,  but  by  evil  living 
they  touch  it  not.     Let  this  harvest  then  be  the  reft*eshment 


320  Satan  lohen  armed.      Who  are  the  'thirsty.* 

Job  5,  for  your  hunger,  for  it  is  for  you  that  they  reserve  it  in  their 
_-— : —  own  infatuated  loathing.'     And  it  is  well  added, 

Moral.       -xt  a      i 

Ver.  5.  And  the  armed  man  shall  seize  htm, 
ix.  11.  For  our  old  enemy  is  conquered  as  an  unarmed  man, 
when,  by  openly  prompting  evil  things  to  the  mind  of  man, 
he  aims  to  destroy  all  the  good  together.  But  he  comes 
'  armed,'  when,  leaving  some  good  things  untouched,  he 
covertly  works  the  ruin  of  others.  For  often  he  does  not 
tempt  some  people  in  the  understanding,  nor  oppose  them 
in  their  meditation  on  Holy  Writ,  yet  he  undoes  the  life  of 
those  in  practice,  who,  while  they  are  praised  for  the  ex- 
cellence of  knowledge,  neglect  to  have  regard  to  the  short- 
comings of  their  works,  and  while  the  mind  is  decoyed  in 
the  delightfulness  of  good  esteem,  no  remedy  is  applied  to 
the  wounds  of  the  life ;  and  thus  the  '  armed'  enemy  has 
swallowed  up  this  man,  whom  under  the  cloak  of  deceit, 
whilst  leaving  on  one  side,  he  has  got  the  better  of  on 
another.  It  goes  on, 
» so  V.        And  the  thirsty  shall  drink  ^  his  riches. 

X.  12.  Often  the  foolish  man  has  a  fountain  of  inward  liquid, 

but  he  does  not  drink  thereof;  in  that  he  is  vouchsafed 
parts  to  understand,  yet  he  disdains  to  acquaint  himself  with 
the  sentences  of  Holy  Writ  by  the  reading  of  them ;  he 
knows  that  he  has  ability  to  understand  by  studying,  yet  he 
gives  over  in  disdain  all  study  of  the  lessons  of  truth.  '  The 
riches'  of  the  mind  too  are  the  words  of  Divine  utterance, 
yet  the  foolish  man  regards  these  riches  with  his  eyes,  while 
he  never  applies  them  to  the  purpose  of  his  own  adornment. 
For  on  hearing  the  words  of  the  law  he  sees  indeed  that  they 
are  great,  yet  he  does  not  put  himself  to  pains  to  understand 
them  with  any  earnestness  of  love.  But,  reversely,  another 
man  has  a  thirst,  but  has  not  ability;  love  draws  him  to 
meditation,  but  the  dulness  of  his  sense  withstands  him, 
and  often  in  the  science  of  the  Divine  law,  he  from  time  to 
time  finds  out  that  by  application,  which  the  man  of  parts 
remains  ignorant  of  from  carelessness.  Thus  '  the  thirsty 
drink  up  the  riches  of  this  foolish  man,'  as  often  as  those 
precepts  of  God,  which  the  quickwitted  know  nothing  of 
from  disdaining  them,  the  duller  sort  follow  after  with  warm 
affection.      In   these  verily  the   eye  of  love  lights   up   the 


Simple  minds  may  rise  high  through  earnestness.         3*21 

shades  of  dulness;  for  thirst  uncloses  that  to  the  slower  sort,  Book 
which  disdain  shuts  up  to  the  quicker.     And  they  for  this    ^  ^' 
reason  get  to  the  depths  of  understancUng,  because  they  do 
not  scorn  to  practise  even  the  very  least  things   that  they 
have  learnt,  and  while  they  aid  the  understanding  with  the 
hands,  they  lift  themselves  above   the   level   of  the   clever. 
Hence  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon,  The  lizard  cUmbeth  with  Prov. 
his  hands,  and  is  in  kings'"  palaces.     For  commonly  '  birds,'  ^^'  ^^• 
which  have  a  wing  that  lifts  them  up  to  fly,  dwell  in  the 
bushes,   and  the  *  lizard,'  which  has  no  winors  for  flvinof, 
'  climbing  with  hands,'  occupies  the  abode  of  royalty,  in  that 
often  any  that  are  quickwitted,  while  they  grow  slack  from 
carelessness,  continue  in  bad  practices,  and  the  simple  folk, 
which  have  no  wing  of  ability  to  stand  them  in   stead,  the 
excellency  of  their  practice  bears  up  to  attain  to  the  walls  of 
the  eternal  kingdom.     Whereas  then  '  the  lizard  climbeth 
with  his  hands,'  he  '  is  in  kings'  palaces ;'  in  that  the  plain 
man,  by  earnestness  of  right  practice,  reaches  that  point, 
whereunto  the  man  of  ability  never  mounts.    But  having  heard 
this,  a  question  occurs  to  our  mind,  wherefore  either  the  gift 
of  understanding  is  bestowed   on   a  heedless  man,   or  any 
earnest  mind  is  hindered  by  its  slowness?  To  which  an  answer 
is  speedily  given,  in  that  it  is  forthwith  added, 

Ver.  6.  ^  There  is  nothing  in  the  earth  without  cause.  y  ^, 

13.   For   on    this  account  it   often  happens  that  even   a     xi. 
slothful   man    receives    ability,    that   he    may  be   the    more 
deservedly  punished  for  his  carelessness,  because  he  scorns 
to  acquaint  himself  with  that  which  he  might  attain  to  without 
labour.    And  on  this  account  the  earnest  person  is  straitened 
with  slowness  of  understanding,  that  he  may  obtain  so  much 
the  larger  rewards   of  compensation,   the  more  he  toils  in 
anxiety  to   find   out.     Therefore  '  there   is   nothing  in   the 
earth  without  cause,'  since  slowness  stands  the  earnest  mind 
in  stead  for  a  reward,  and  to  the  slothful  quickness  only 
thrives  for  punishment.     But  for  the  understanding  of  those 
things  that  be  right,  we  are  at  one  time  instructed  therein  by 
earnestness  of  labour,  at  another  time  by  pains  of  affliction. 
Hence  after  it  has  been  said.  There  is  nothing  in  the  earth 
without  cause,  it  is  fitly  added  thereupon, 

Neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  ground. 

Y 


322  The  real  cause  of  trouble  is  our  sin. 

Jobs,  14.  For  '  trouble  springeth  out  of  the  ground,'  as  it  were, 
—— — when  man,  being  created  after  the  image  of  God,  is  scourged 
^\\  by  things  without  sense.  But  because  it  is  by  reason  of  the 
hidden  deserts  of  men's  souls  that  the  open  scourges  of 
chastisements  are  sent  forth,  it  happens  at  the  same  time 
that  '  trouble  springeth  not  out  of  the  ground,'  since  it  is  the 
perversity  of  our  sense,  which  requires  that  it  should  be 
stricken  by  things  that  have  no  sense.  For  thus  we  see  that 
for  our  correction  the  looked  for  rain  is  withheld  from  the 
parched  earth,  and  the  vaporous  air  is  scorched  by  the  fiery 
heat  of  the  sun ;  the  sea  rages  with  bursting  tempests,  and 
some  embarked  to  cross  its  bosom  it  cuts  off,  and  others  are 
debarred  the  longed-for  passage  by  the  rampant  water ;  the 
earth  not  only  yields  sparingly  the  produce  of  her  fertility, 
but  also  destroys  the  seeds  she  has  received.  In  all  which 
circumstances  we  clearly  discern  that  which  a  wise  man 
Wisd.  testifies  concerning  God,  And  the  world  shall  fight  with 
'  *  Him  against  the  unwise.  For  *  the  world  fights  with  the 
Lord  against  the  unwise,'  when  even  the  very  contrariety  of 
the  elements  does  service  in  the  chastisement  of  offenders. 
Yet  neither  doth  '  trouble  spring  out  of  the  ground,'  for  each 
insensate  thing  is  put  in  motion  to  our  annoyance,  only  by 
the  impulse  of  our  own  doings.  '  Trouble  does  not  spring 
out  of  the  ground,'  for  chastisement  never  a  whit  springs 
from  that  creature  that  stiikes  the  blow,  but  from  that  one, 
without  doubt,  which,  by  committing  sin,  drew  forth  the 
severity  of  the  stroke.  But  we  must  take  great  and  diligent 
heed,  that,  when  in  outward  circumstances  we  are  afflicted 
with  a  weight  of  grief,  we  reach  forward  in  hope  to  things 
above ;  that  the  mind  may  attain  the  heights  above,  in  pro- 
portion as  we  are  chastened  by  the  external  punishment. 
And  hence  it  is  justly  subjoined, 

Ver.  7.  Man  is  born  to  labour,  and  the  bird  to  flying. 

xiii.        15.  For  '  man  is  born  to  labour,'  in  that  he,  who  is  furnished 

with  the  gilt  of  reason,  bethinks  himself  that  it  is  wholly 

impossible    for   him    to   pass    through    this    season    of   his 

pilgrimage  without  sorrowing.     Hence  when  Paul  was  re- 

1  Thess.  counting    his  woes  to  his   disciples,  he  justly   added.   For 

'^'  ^'      yourselves  know  that  loe  are  appointed  thereto.     But  even  in 

that  the  flesh  is  afflicted  with  scourges,  the  mind  is  lifted  up 


An  earthly  life  is  sore  labour.  323 

to  seek  higher  things,  as  Paul  again  bears  witness,  saying,  Book 
But  though  our  outward  man  perish^  yet  the  inward  man  is 


2  Cor 

retiewed  day  by  day.     So  then,  '  man  is  born  to  labour,  and  4,  le. 


a  bird  to  flying,'  for  the  raind  flies  free  on  high  for  the  very 

same  reason  that  the  flesh  toils  the  sorer  below. 

16.  By  the  designation  of  *^  man'  too,  may  be  represented 

the  life  of  the  carnal  sort.    And  hence  Paul  savs,  For  where- i  Cor. 

*'  33 

as  there  is  among  you  envying  and  strife  and  divisions,  are    ' 

ye  not  carnal^    Soon  after  which  he  subjoins  and  says,  ^rever.  4, 

ye  not  men  ?    In  this  life,  then,  '  man  is  born  to  labour,'  for 

every  carnal  person,  in  seeking  to  obtain  transitory  things,  is 

overcharging  himself  with  the  burthen  of  his  desires.     For  it 

is  sore  labour  to  be  seeking  this  same  glory  of  the  present 

life,  at  times   to   win   it    so   sought,  and  to  guard   it   with 

diligence  when   won.     It  is  sore  labour,  with   infinite  pains 

to   lay  hold  of  that,  which  he,  that   shall  lay  hold,  knows 

can  never  remain  for  long.    But  holy  men,  forasmuch  as  they 

have  no  fondness  for  transitoiy  objects,  are  not  only  laid 

under  no  burthen  of  temporal  desires,  but  even,  if  crosses  on 

any  occasion  arise,  in  these  very  straits  and  fain  tings  are  free 

from  trouble.    For  what  is  there  more  severe  than  scourges? 

and  yet  it  is  written  concerning  the  Apostles  when  scourged, 

And  they  departed  from  the  presence  of  the  council,  re-  Acts  5, 

joicing  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for 

His  Name.    WHiat  then  can  be  labour  to  the  minds  of  those, 

to  whom  even   the   chastisement  of  stripes  is  not  labour  ? 

Man  then  is  *  born  to  labour,'  for  he  really  feels  the  ills  of 

the  present  state,  w^ho  is  agape  after  the  good  things  thereof. 

For  that  mind  which  hangs  on  the  attraction  of  things  above, 

has  beneath  it  whatsoever  is  set  in  motion  against  it  from 

without.     Therefore  it  is  well  added,  rt//c/  a  bird  to  flying. 

For  the  soul  withdraws  itself  from  the  painfulness  of  labour, 

in  proportion  as  it  raises  itself  through  hope  toward  things 

on  high.     Was  not  Paul  like  a  '  bird  born  to  flying,'  who  in 

undergoing  such  countless  crosses,  said,  Our  conversation  is  Phil.  3, 

in  heaven  ?     And  again.  We  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  2%^^. 

of  this  tabernacle  ?rere  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,^^  i. 

an  house  not  made  witJt  Jiands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.    Like 

a  bird,  then,  he  had  mounted  above  the  scenes  below,  whom, 

while  yet  lingering  on  earth  in  the  body,  the  wing  of  hope 

Y  2 


324  The  common  works  of  God  really  marvellous. 

Job  5,  was  already  bearing  up  in  the  heights.     But  forasmuch  as 
none  by  his  own  strength  can  transport  himself  on  high,  so 


Moral.  ...  i         i  •        i        •      i 

as  to  be  raised  to  the  invisible  world,  while  he  is  borne 
down  by  visible  things,  it  is  immediately  added  with  pro- 
priety, 

Ver.  8.    Wherefore  I  will  entreat  the  Lord,  and  unto  God 
would  I  tnake  my  address. 

xiv.  17.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  Him  I  petition,  by 
Whom  I  know  that  these  things  are  bestowed.'  For  if  he 
imagined  that  he  had  them  by  himself,  he  would  not  need  to 
make  his  prayer  to  God.     It  goes  on ; 

Which  doeth  great  things  and  unsearchable,  marvellous 
things  without  number. 

XV.  18.  Who  may  see  to  the  bottom  of  the  marvellous  works 
of  Almighty  God,  how  He  made  all  things  of  nothing,  how 
the  very  framework  of  the  world  is  arranged  with  a  marvellous 
mightiness  of  power,  and  the  heaven  hung  above  the  atmo- 
sphere, and  the  earth  balanced  above  the  abyss,  how  this 
whole  universe  consists  of  things  visible  and  invisible,  how 
He  created  man,  so  to  say,  gathering  together  in  a  small 
compass  another  world,  yet  a  world  of  reason;  how  con- 
stituting this  world  of  soul  and  flesh,  He  mixed  the  breath 
and  the  clay  by  an  unsearchable  disposal  of  His  Might?  A 
part,  then,  of  these  things  we  know,  and  a  part  we  even  are. 
Yet  we  omit  to  admire  them,  because  those  things  which  are 
full  of  marvels  for  an  investigation  deeper  than  we  can  reach, 
have  become  cheap  from  custom  in  the  eyes  of  men.  Hence 
it  comes  to  pass  that,  if  a  dead  man  is  raised  to  life,  all  men 
spring  up  in  astonishment.  Yet  every  day  one  that  had  no 
being  is  born,  and  no  man  wonders,  though  it  is  plain  to  all, 
v/ithout  doubt,  that  it  is  a  greater  thing  for  that  to  be  created, 
which  was  without  being,  than  for  that,  which  had  being,  to 
be  restored.  Because  the  dry  rod  of  Aaron  budded,  all  men 
were  in  astonishment ;  every  day  a  tree  is  produced  from  the 
dry  earth,  and  the  virtue  residing  in  dust  is  turned  into 
wood,  and  no  man  wonders.  Because  five  thousand  men  were 
filled  with  five  loaves,  all  men  were  in  astonishment  that  the 
food  should  have  multiplied  in  their  teeth  ;  every  day  the 
grains  of  seed  that  are  sown  are  multiplied  in  a  fulness  of 
ears,  and  no  man  wonders.     All  men  wondered  to  see  water 


Faith  more  reasonable  than  curious  questioning.         325 

I  once    turned    into    wine.     Every   day   the   earth's   moisture  Bdok 

being  drawn  into  the  root  of  the  vine,  is  turaed  by  the  grape '— 

into  wine,  and  no  man  wonders.     Full  of  wonder  then  are  all 
the  things,  which  men  never  think  to  wonder  at,  because,  as 
we  have  before  said,  they  are  by  habit  become  dull  to  the 
consideration  of  them  ;  but  when  he  said,  which  doeth  great 
things,  he  did  well  in  immediately  adding,  and  unsearchable. 
For  it  was  but  little  to   do  great  things,  if  the  things  that 
were  done  could  have  been  searched  to  the  bottom.     And  it 
is  rightly  added,  marvellous  things  without  number.     As  it 
would  have  been  but  an  inferior  greatness,  if  the  things,  which 
He  created  '  unsearchable,'  He  had  made*  but  few  in  number. 
19.   But  herein  it  ought  to  be  impressed  upon  us,  that  the 
Divine  miracles  should  both  ever  be  under  our  consideration  in 
earnestness  of  mind,  and  never  sifted  in  intellectual  curiosity. 
For  it  often  happens  that  the  thought  of  man,  when,  seeking 
the  reason  of  certain  things,  it  fails  to  find  it  out,  plunges 
into  a  whirlpool   of  doubt.     Hence  it   comes  to  pass  that 
some  men  reflect  that  the  bodies  of  the  dead  are  reduced  to 
dust,  and  while  they  are  unable  to  infer  the  power  of  the 
Resurrection  fi'om  reasoning,  they  despair  of  their  being  able 
to  be  brought  back  to  their  former  condition.     Things  that 
are  marvellous   then  are  to  be  believed  on  a  principle  of 
faith,  but  not  to  be  pried  into  by  reason.     For,  if  reason  set 
them  open  before  our  eyes,  they  would  no  longer  be  marvel- 
lous.    But  when  the  mind  may  chance  to  falter  in  these,  it 
is  needful  that  such  things  as  it  knows  by  custom,  yet  does 
not  infer  by  reason,  should  be  recalled  to  mind,  that  by  the 
weight  of  a  similar  circumstance  one  may  supply  strength  to 
the  faith,  which  one  finds  to  be  undermined  by  one's  own 
shrewdness.    For,  when  the  dust  of  the  human  flesh  is  thought 
on,  the  mind  of  some  is  shaken,  and  despairs  of  the  time, 
when   dust   shall    return  to   flesh,   and   through   the  linea- 
ments of  the  limbs  form  a  body  restored  to  life,  when  that 
dryness  of  earth  shall  flush  into  freshness  through  the  living 
limbs,  and  fashion  itself  in  distinct  parts  by  the  forms  and 
shapes  of  them.     This  indeed  can  never  be  comprehended 

a  '  fuisset,'  Ben.  as  from  the  best  Mss.     A.  B.  C.  L.  M.  Some  also  read '  qui'  for 
but  this  must  be  a  misprint  for '  fecisset,'     '  quae.' 
which  we  have  in  several  Edd.  and  Mss. 


3'26  The  Resury^ection.     Gift  of  Living  Water, 

Job  5,  by  reason,  yet  it  may  be  easily  believed  from  example.     For 
— -^ — '-  who  would  imaoine  that  from  a  single  ffrain  of  seed  a  huge 

Moral.  .       "  .  . 

tree  would  rise  up,  unless  he  had  it  as  a  certain  fact  by  ex- 
perience }    In  that  extreme  minuteness  of  a  single  grain,  and 
with  next  to  no  dissimilarity  within  itself,  where  is  the  hard- 
ness of  the  wood  buried,  and  a  pith  either  tender  or  hard 
compared  with  the  wood,  the   roughness   of  the  bark,  the 
greenness  of  the  root,  the  savour  of  the  fruits,  the  sweetness 
of  the  scents,  the  variety  of  the  colours,  the  softness  of  the 
leaves  ?     Yet  because  we  know  this  by  experience,  we  do 
not  doubt  that  all  these  spring  from  a  single  grain  of  seed. 
Where  then  is  the  difficulty  that  dust  shall  return  into  limbs, 
when  we  have  every  day  before  our  eyes  the  power  of  the 
Creator,  Who   in  a  marvellous  manner,  even  from  a  grain 
creates  wood,  and  in  a  still  more  marvellous  manner  from 
the  wood   creates  fruit  ?     Which    doeth    great    things    and 
unsearcliahle ;  marvellous  things  without  number.     For  the 
greatness  of  the  Divine  works  can  neither  be  made  out  in 
respect  of  kind   and    quality,  nor  reckoned    in    respect   of 
quantity.     Hence  it  is  still  further  added, 

Ver.  10,  11.    WJio  givetli  rain  upon  the  face  of  the  earth, 

and  sendeth  waters  upon  all  things.      TVho  setteth   up  on 

high  those  that  he  low;  and  those  which  mourn  He  exalteth 

with  safety. 

xvi.        20.  Forasmuch  as  we  believe  that  the  Mends  of  blessed 

^^^'  Job  were  enlightened  by  their  intercourse  with  him,  we  must 

needs  handle  these  words  of  Eliphaz  in  a  mystical  manner. 

Thus  Almighty  God  '  gives  rain  upon  the  earth,'  when  He 

waters  the  withered  hearts  of  the  Gentiles  with  the  grace  of 

heavenly    preaching,   and    He    *  sendeth    waters    upon    all 

things,'  in  that  by  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  He  fashions  the 

barrenness  of  lost  man  to  fruitfulness ;  as  *  Truth'  saj's  by  His 

own  lips.  Whosoever  drinketli  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give 

him,  shall  never   thirst.     But   by  the  title  of  the  universe 

man  is  denoted,  in    that   in    him    there  is  set  forth  a  tnie 

likeness    and    a   large    participation    in    common    with    the 

universe.    For  every  thing  that  is  either  is,  yet  does  not  live; 

or  is  and  lives,  yet  does  not  feel;  or  is  and  lives  and  feels, 

yet  neither  understands  nor  discriminates;  or  is  and  lives  and 

feels  and   understands   and  discriminates.     For  stones   are, 


Man  a  little  World.     Meaning  of  every  creature.''     327 

yet  do  not  live.     Trees  both  are   and  live,  yet  do  not  feel.  Book 
For  their  verdure  is  called  the  life  of  herbs  and  of  trees,  as  is 


declared  by  Paul  concerning  seeds,  Thou  fool!  that  which  lo^  36. 
thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it  die.  Brute  creatures 
both  are  and  live  and  feel,  yet  do  not  understand.  Angels 
both  are  and  live  and  feel,  and  by  understanding  they 
exercise  discernment.  Man,  then,  in  that  he  has  it  in 
common  with  stones  to  be,  with  trees  to  live,  with  animals  to 
feel,  with  angels  to  discern,  is  rightly  represented  by  the 
title  of  the  '  universe,*  in  whom  after  some  sort  the  '  universe' 
itself  is  contained.  And  hence  '  the  Truth'  saith  to  His 
disciples.  Go  ye  into  all  the  uorld,  and  preach  the  Gospel 
to  every  creature.  That  is.  He  would  have  every  creature 
to  be  taken  for  man  only,  in  whom  He  created  something 
common  with  all  things. 

21.  Though  in  this  place,  '  all  things'  may  be  understood 
in  another  sense  also.  For  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
bringing  the  rich  under  its  iniluence,  does  not  keep  back  the 
poor;  while  it  abases  the  strong,  it  does  not  forbid  the  weak 
to  come  to  it;  while  it  gathers  together  the  noble,  at  the 
same  time  it  lays  hold  of  the  base-bom ;  while  it  takes  up  the 
wise,  it  disdains  not  the  foolishness  of  the  unskilful.  God, 
then, '  sendeth  waters  upon  all  things,'  Who  by  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  calleth  to  the  knowledge  of  Himself  from  every 
class  of  men. 

22.  Again  it  may  be  that  by  the  designation  of  *  all 
things,'  the  mere  diversities  of  characters  are  set  before  us. 
For  one  is  lifted  up  by  pride,  another  is  bent  down  by  the 
weight  of  fear,  one  burns  with  lust,  another  pants  with  avarice, 
one  lets  himself  sink  from  listlessness,  another  is  fired  with 
rage.  But  while,  by  the  teaching  of  Holy  Writ,  humility  is 
given  to  the  proud  man,  confidence  bestowed  upon  the 
fearful,  the  lustful  cleansed  from  imparity  by  devotedness  to 
chastity,  the  avaricious  by  moderation  cooled  from  the  heat 
of  his  covetous  desires,  the  careless  liver  made  erect  by  the 
uprightness  of  an  earaest  mind,  the  passionate  man  restrained 
from  the  hastiness  of  his  headlong  disposition,  God  *  sendeth 
water  upon  all  things,'  for  He  adapts  the  power  of  His  Word 
in  each  severally  according  to  the  diversity  of  their  characters, 
that  each  may  find  in  His  revelation  that,  whereby  he  may 


328     Manna  contains  all  sweetness.      The  humble  exalted, 

^oB  5,  yield  the  produce  of  the  virtue  that  he  needs.  Hence  it  is 
jyj^yg^'-  said  by  a  wise  man  of  the  sweetness  of  manna,  Thou  didst 
Wisd.  send  them  from  heaven  bread  prepared  without  their  labour, 
'  '  having  in  itself  all  deligltt,  and  (lie  sweetness  of  every  taste. 
For  the  manna  contained  in  itself  all  manner  of  delight  and  the 
sweetness  of  every  taste,  for  this  reason,  that  in  the  mouth  of 
the  spiritual  sort  it  yielded  a  taste,  according  to  the  eater's 
will,  in  that  the  Divine  Word,  being  at  the  same  time  suited 
to  all  minds,  yet  never  at  variance  with  itself,  condescends  to 
the  kind  and  character  of  its  hearers ;  and  whereas  every  elect 
person  understands  it  with  profit  according  to  his  own 
fashion,  he  as  it  were  turns  the  manna  he  received  into  a 
taste  at  v.ill.  And  forasmuch  as  after  the  toils  of  good 
practice  comes  the  glory  of  compensation,  it  is  rightly 
subjoined  after  the  sending  of  water,  Who  setleth  up  on  high 
those  that  be  lotv,  and  those  which  mourn  He  exalteth  with 
safety. 

23.  •  Those  that  be  low  are    set  on  high,'  in  that  they, 

who  are  now  despised  for  the  love  of  God,  shall  then  come 

as  judges  along  with  God,  as  '  Truth'  pledges  this  which  we 

Matt^    have  just  named  to  the  same  humble  ones,  saying.  Ye  which 

'     '   have  followed  Me,  in  the  Regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  Man 

shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon 

twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.     Then 

'  those  that  mourn  the  Lord  exalts  with  safety,'  in  that  they 

who,  being  inflamed  with   desire   of  Him,  flee   prosperity, 

endure  crosses,  undergo  tortures  at  the  hands  of  persecutors, 

chasten  their  own  selves  with  grieving,  are  then  vouchsafed 

a  safety  so  much  the  more  exalted,  as  they  now  from  devout 

affection  kill  themselves  to  all  the  joys  of  the  world.     Hence 

Prov.     it  is  that  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  TJte  heart  knoweth  his  own 

'     *   soul's  bitterness,  and  a  stranger  doth  not  intermeddle  with 

his  joy.     For   the   human   mind    '  knoweth    its    own    soul's 

bitterness,'  when  inflamed  with  aspirations  after  the  eternal 

land,  it  learns  by  wee])ing  the  sorrowfulness  of  its  pilgrimage. 

But  the  '  stranger  doth  not  intermeddle  with  his  joy,'  in  that 

he,  that  is  now  a  stranger  to  the  grief  of  compunction,  is  not 

then  a  partaker  in  the  joy  of  consolation.     Hence  it  is  that 

Johnio/  Truth'  saith  in  the  Gospel,  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you, 

^^'         that  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  but  the  world  shall  rejoice; 


Love  of  Eternal  things  sets  men  above  temporal.         329 

and  ye  shall  be  sorrowful,  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  Book 

into  joy.     And  again,  And  ye  therefore  now  have  sorrow,  but — 

I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  22. 
joy  no  man  taketh  from  you.  The  Lord,  then,  is  said  '  to 
exalt  with  safety  those  which  mourn,'  in  that  to  all,  who  for 
His  sake  are  stricken  with  gi'ief  in  time,  He  vouchsafes  true 
salvation  for  their  comfort.  But  at  the  same  time  nothing 
hinders  but  that  this  may  be  understood  of  God's  Elect  even 
in  this  life. 

•24.  For  those  that  be  '  low  are  set  on  high,'  in  that  when 
they  abase   themselves   in   humility,  they  mount  above  all 
sublunary  things  in  the  discernment  of  a  lofty  mind.     And, 
while  they  reckon  themselves  to  be  worthless  in  all  things,  by 
the  discriminating  view  of  a  right  mind,  they  surmount  and 
trample  upon  the  glory  of  this  world.     Let  us  look  at  lowly 
Paul.     Mark  how  he  says  to  his  disciples.  For  we  preach  not  2  Cor. 
ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus   the  Lord,  and  ourselves  your  ^'  ^* 
servants  for  Christ's  sake.     Let  us  see  this  '  humble  man  set 
up  on  high.'     He  says,  K?iow  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  1  Cor. 
Angels^    and  again.  And  hath  raised  us  together,  and  made^^h^  2 
us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places.     Perchance  at  that  moment  ^• 
the  chain  vvas  holding  him  outwardly  fast  bound.     Yet  he 
had  been  '  set  on  high'  within,  who,  by  the  certainty  of  his 
hope,  was  already   sitting  in   heavenly  places.     Holy  men 
then  are  objects  of  scorn  without,  and  as  unworthy  persons 
have  every  indignity  put  upon  them,  yet  in  sure  confidence 
that  they  are  meet  for  the  heavenly  realms,  they  look  with 
certainty  for  the  glory   of   the  Eternal    world.     And    when 
they  are  hard  pressed  without  in  the  assaults  of  persecution, 
they  fall  back  within  into  the  fortified  stronghold  of  their 
mind;  and  thence  they  look  down  upon  all  things  passing 
far  below  them,  and  amongst  them  they  see  passing  even 
themselves  as  in  the  body.      They  dread  no  threats,  for  even 
tortures  they  so  endure  as  to  set  them  at  nought.     For  it  is 
hence  that  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  But  (he  righteous  shall  be  Prov. 
bold  as  a  lion.     Hence  it  is  written  again  by  the  same,  The^p'  ^' 
righteous  man  shall  not  be  grieved  by  any  thing  that  shall^'^i'^^' 
happen  to  him.     For  because  all  the  righteous  are  seated  on 
the  lofty  height  of  their  purposed  mind,  whereas  in  dying 
they   are    not    sensible    of  death,  it    is    so    in  a   marvellous 


330  The  proud  and  fierce  brought  down. 

Job  5,  manner,  that  the  missiles  of  the  reprobate  at  the  same  time 
— ^ — ^both  strike  them,  and  do  not  reach  them.     Those  then  that 

MVST.  '  1   .     1  .  1 

are  '  low  are  set  up  on  high,'  in  that  from  the  veiy  cir- 
cumstance that  they  despise  themselves  in  all  things,  they 
are  rendered  the  more  secure  against  them  all. 

25.  Contrary  to  which  it  is  rightly  delivered  by  the  Prophet 

Is.  47,    to  the  lost  soul  under  the  likeness  of  Babylon,  Come  down 
1.  .    .  .     .  "  . 

and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Bahtjlon,  sit  on  the 

ground;    there  is  no  throne  for  the  daughter  of  the  Chal- 
deans.    For  here  I  think  the  human  mind  is  called  a  virgin, 
not  as  undefiled,  but  as  unproductive.     And  forasmuch  as 
Babylon  is  rendered  '  confusion,'  the  barren  soul  is  rightly 
named  the  daughter  of  Babglon,  who,  in  that  she  never  puts 
forth  good  works,  whilst  she  is  framed  on  no  method  of  a  right 
life,  is  as  it  were  engendered  of  the  parentage  of  confusion. 
But  if  she  is  called  a  virgin  not  as  being  barren  but  un- 
defiled, after  that  she  is   fallen   from    the  state    of  saving 
health,  it  is  only  to  the  increase  of  her  '  confusion'  that  she 
is  called  that  which  she  once  was.     And  it  is  fitly  that  the 
Divine  voice,  in  rebuking  her,  saith  to  her.  Come  down;  for 
the  human  mind  is  stationed  on  high,  when  it  covets  the 
rewards  above;  but  it '  comes  down'  from  this  station,  when 
being  overcome  it  yields  itself  cowardly  to  decaying  worldly 
desires.    And  it  is  immediately  subjoined  to  her  with  justice, 
And  sit  in  the  dust.     For  '  coming  down  she   sits  in  the 
dust,'  in  that  quitting  heavenly  scenes,  she  grovels  in  the 
very  lowest'',  being  stained  with  earthly  imaginations.     And 
here  it  is  yet  further  added  by  way  of  repetition,  Sit  on  the 
ground.     As  if  in  uttering  reproaches  he  said  in  plain  words, 
'  Because  thou  refusedst  to  lift  thyself  by  a  heavenly  con- 
versation, laid  prostrate   beneath    thyself,   be    degraded  in 
earthly  courses.'     And   hence   it  is   forthwith    added  by   a 
necessary  consequence.  There  is  no  throne  for  the  daughter 
(f  the  Chaldeans.    For  the  Chaldeans  are  translated  *  fierce.' 
And  they  are   very  fierce,  who,  pursuing  their  own    wills, 
refuse  to   spare  even  their  own  lives.     J^^arthly  desires  are 
'  fierce,'  which  render  the   mind  hard   and  insensible   not 
only  to  the  precepts  of  the  Creator,  but  also  to  the  blows  of 

^  Ben.  '  infinnis/  but  this  must  be,     for  '  infimis/  the  reading  of  3  Edd.  and 
as  the  Translator  suggests,  a  mistake     Mss.  A.  B.  C.H.  L.  M. 


The  loorldly  left  to  self-chosen  hand  service.  331 

stripes.     But  the  *  daughter  of  the  fierce  ones  has  no  throne,'  Book 

in  that  the  mind  that  is  born  to  the  love  of  the  world  by — 

bad  desires,  and  is  by  those  same  desires  rendered  obdurate, 
herein  that  she  yields  herself  to  earthly  concupiscence,  parts 
with  the  seat  of  judgment,  and  she  sits  as  mistress  upon  no 
throne  within  her,  in  that  she  lacks  the  balance  of  discern- 
ment,  and  is   withheld  from   the   sitting  of  her  judgment, 
because  she  ranges  abroad  among  external  lusts.     For  it  is 
clear  that  that  mind,  which  has  lost  the  seat  of  counsel  with- 
in, in  a  thousand  ways  dissipates  itself  without  in  desires. 
And  because  it  shut  the  eyes  to  doing  what  it  understands, 
it  is  deservedly  blinded,  so  as  not  even  to  know  what  it  does; 
and  oftentimes  by  a  deserved  visitation  it  is  left  in  its  own 
will,  and  is  set  loose  under  those  verv  toilsome  services  of  the 
world,  which  it  pants  after  with  solicitude.     Hence  it  is  fitly 
added  in  that  place.  For  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender  is.  27, 
and  delicate.     Take  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal.     It  is   ' 
well  known  that  parents  spare  their  tender  daughter,   nor 
charge  her  with  hard  and  servile  employments.     So  Almighty 
God  as  it  were  calls  a  daughter  tender  when  He  recalls  the 
well-beloved  soul  of  each  person  from  the  wearisome  services 
of  this  world,  that,  whilst  it  is  charged  with  external  works, 
it  be  not  hardened  to  internal  desires.     But  the  '  daughter 
of  the  Chaldeans'  is  not  called  '  soft  and  tender,'  in  that  the 
mind,  which  is  abandoned  to  evil  inclinations,  is  left  in  this 
world's  travail,  the  thing  which  it  most  anxiously  desires.    So 
that  like  a  handmaid  she  drudges  in  the  service  of  the  world 
w^ithout,  who  refuses   as  a  daughter   to    love   God   within. 
Hence    she   is   bidden   to  '  take    the  millstone,  and   grind 
meal.'    A  millstone  is  whirled  round  in  a  circle,  and  the  meal 
is  thrown  out.     Now  each  separate   course   of  this  world's 
action  is  a  mill,  which,  while  it  heaps  up  a  multitude  of 
cares,  as  it  were  whirls  the  minds  of  men  in  a  circle,  and 
she  as  it  were  throws  forth  the  meal  from  herself,  in  that, 
when  the  heart  is  turned  wrong,  she  is  ever  producing  infi- 
nitely little  thoughts.      But  it  sometimes  happens  that  he, 
who   while  at  rest  is  accounted  of  some   worth,  on   being 
placed  in   any  scene    of  action   is    stripped  bare.     Hence 
we   have    it    forthwith    subjoined    in    that   place.    Uncover 
thy  baseness,  make  bare   the  shonlder,  uncover  the  thighs. 


332  Madmen  take  disease  for  strength. 

Job  5,  pciss    over    the   rivers.      For   in    the   execution    of  a    work 
2?:Jdi*  baseness  is  uncovered,'  in  that  the  base  and  abject  soul  is 
made  known  in  the  manifestation  of  working,  whereas  before 
while  at  rest,  it  was   accounted  great.     The  mind  '  makes 
bare  the  shoulder,'  when  it  brings  to  light  its  practice,  which 
was  kept  from  view.      It  '  uncovers  the  thighs,'  in  that  it 
plainly  discovers,  by  what  strides  of  desire  it  reaches  after 
the  advantages  of  the  world.     Furthermore  '  it  passes  over  the 
rivers,'  in  that  it  unceasingly  pursues  the  courses  of  this  pre- 
sent life,  which  are  daily  running  out  to  their  end.     And, 
whilst  it  gives  over  one  set,  and  follows  after  another,  it  is 
as  it  were  ever  going  on  from  river  to  river.    These  things  we 
have  delivered  by  way  of  discussion  in  few  words,  in  order 
to  shew  where  that  mind   lies   grovelling,   which  has  been 
unseated  from  the  throne  of  a  holy  purpose.     For  if  it  ever 
cease  to  pant  after  the  things  which  are  above  it,  it  plunges 
even  unceasingly  below  itself.     But  it  is  fixed  on  high,  if, 
abandoning  the  love  of  temporal  things,  it  is  bound  fast  to 
the  hope  of  a  changeless  eternity. 
Lit.        26.  It  is  well   said  then.    Who  setieth  up  on  high  those 
that  be  low.     And  it  is  fitly  added.  And  those  which  mourn 
He  exalteih  with  safety.     Oftentimes  in  this  world  even  any 
that  be  glad  of  heart  are  ^  exalted,'  whilst  they  are  svvoln  by 
the  mere  gloriousness  of  their  fortune,  but  '  those  that  mourn, 
the  Lord  exalts  to  safety,'  in  that  he  raises  His  sorrowing 
children  to  glory  by  the  solid  substance  of  true  joy;  for  they 
are  exalted  by  safety,  and  not  by  madness,  who,  set  fast  in 
good  works,  rejoice  with  a  sure  hope   in  God.     For  there 
are  some,  as  we  have   said,  who  both  do  misdeeds,  and  yet 
Prov.  2,  do  not  cease  to  rejoice.     Of  whom  Solomon  saith,    Who 
^^*        rejoice  to  do  evil,  and  delight  in  the  things  that  be  froicard. 
Ecc.  8,  And  acrain.  There  be  wicked  men,  who  are  as  secure,  as  though 
Yu\^.     they  had  the  deeds  of  the  righteous.     These,  truly,  are  not 
'  exalted  by  safety,'  but  by  foolishness,  which  same  are  full  of 
pride  when  they  ought  to  be  loaded  with  sorrow,  and  for  the 
very  reason  that  these  wretched  persons  let  themselves  out  in 
exultation,  they  are  wept  over  by  all  good  men.     Verily  not 
unlike  to  the  senses  of  madmen,  they  account  that  insanity, 
in  which  they  surpass  others,  to  be  strength.     They  know 
not  that  it  comes  from  disease,  that  they  are  able  lo  do  more 


The  icicked  serve  God's  purpose  against  their  will.       333 

than  the  sane,  and  they  as  it  were  esteem  themselves  to  have  Book 
increased  in  powers,  whilst  they  are   drawing  near  to  the 1- 


end  of  life  by  accessions  of  sickness.  These  because  they 
have  no  perception  of  reason,  are  wept  for,  and  they  laugh, 
and  they  expand  in  an  extraordinary  exultation  of  heart,  in 
the  very  same  proportion  that  from  insensibility  they  are 
ignorant  of  the  evil  they  are  undergoing.  Those  then  that 
*  mourn'  the  Lord  '  exalts  with  safety,'  in  that  the  mind  of 
the  Elect  is  full  of  joy,  derived,  not  from  the  madness  of  the 
present  life,  but  from  the  certain  prospect  of  eternal  salvation. 
Hence  it  is  fitly  added  immediately  afterwards,  with  respect 
to  this  very  destruction  of  the  wicked, 

Ver.  12.  He  disappointeth  the  devices  of  the  crafty^  so 
that  their  hands  cannot  perform  their  enterprise. 

27.  The  minds  of  the  lost  arc  ever  awake  to  evil  imagina-  xvii. 
tions,  but  very  often  the  Providence  above  counteracts  them, 

and  though  not  even  when  they  are  crushed  with  adversities 
do  they  amend  the  wickedness  of  their  counsel,  yet  that 
they  may  never  prevail  against  the  good,  He  puts  a  check 
upon  their  power.  And  against  these  it  is  brought  to  pass 
by  marvellous  retribution,  that  whilst  the  effect  of  their  evil 
doing  is  lacking  to  them,  still  conscience  gives  them  over 
convicted  to  the  just  sentence  of  the  Judge.  Whereas  then 
they  devise  evil  things,  they  shew  what  they  themselves 
are  about;  but,  whereas  they  cannot  '  perform  their  enter- 
prize,'  they,  against  whom  it  was  imagined,  are  protected; 
and  hence  is  yet  further  added  aright, 

Ver.  13.  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness^  and 
the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried  headlong. 

28.  For  oftentimes,  some  that  are  puffed  up  with  human  xviii. 
wisdom,  when  they  see  that  the  decrees  of  God  are  contrary 

to  their  inclinations,  set  themselves  to  oppose  them  with 
crafty  manoeuvres,  and  that  they  may  bend  the  power  of  the 
dispensation  of  the  Most  High  to  meet  their  own  wishes, 
they  busy  themselves  in  cunning  contrivances,  they  devise 
schemes  of  excessive  refinement.  But  they  are  only  exe- 
cuting the  will  of  God  by  the  very  way  they  are  labouring  to 
alter  it,  and  whilst  they  strive  to  withstand  the  purpose  of 
the  Almighty,  they  are  obeying  His  behests;  for  it  often 
happens   that   that   renders   good  service  to   His  provident 


3-34      Joseph's  Brethren  brought  about  what  they  resisted. 

Job  5,  ordering,  which  on  the  part  of  human  efforts  makes  a  silly 
— ^ — ^opposition  to  Him.     Therefore  the  Lord  taketh  the  wise  in 
their  own  craftiness^  when  the  acts  of  man  even  then  conve- 
niently serve  His  purposes,  when  they  are  opposed  to  them. 
Which  we  shall  the  better  shew,  if  we  bring  forward  a  few 
instances  of  actual  facts. 
Joseph's      29^  Joseph  had  been   visited  by  a  dream,  how  that  his 
thren.     brother's  sheaves  fell  down  before  his  sheaf;  he  had  been 
visited  by  a  dream,  how  that  the  sun  and  moon  together  with 
the  other  stars  worshipped  him.     And  because  he   related 
these  things  guilelessly  to  his  brethren,  envy  and  fear  of  his 
future  dominion   over  them  forthwith   smote  their  breasts ; 
and   when   they  saw  him   coming  to  them,  they  said  with 
Gen.37,  jjjalice  buruinof   asrainst  him,  Behold  tins  dreamer  cometJi. 

19.  20.  o       o  ' 

Come  now  therefore^  and  let  us  slay  him^  and  we  shall  see 
what  good  his  dreams  ivill  do  him.  And  fearing  to  become 
subject  to  his  dominion,  they  let  down  the  dreamer  into  a 
well,  and  sell  him  to  Ishmaelites  that  were  passing  by.  He, 
then,  having  been  brought  into  Egypt,  subjected  to  slavery, 
condemned  on  the  charge  of  lust,  being  vouchsafed  aid  for 
the  merits  of  his  chastity,  and  set  up  for  his  judgment  in  pro- 
phecy, was  advanced  over  the  whole  of  Egypt ;  and  by  the 
wisdom  from  on  high  with  prudent  foresight  he  collected 
stores  of  corn,  and  thus  met  the  impending  peril  of  a  scarcity. 
And  when  the  famine  poured  itself  over  the  earth,  Jacob, 
being  distressed  for  the  providing  of  food,  sent  his  sons  into 
Egypt.  They  find  Joseph,  whom  they  did  not  know,  master 
of  the  distribution  of  corn,  and  that  they  might  win  the 
favour  to  have  food  given  them,  they  were  forced  to  worship 
the  distributor  thereof  with  their  necks  bent  down  to  the 
earth.  Now  then  let  us  consider  the  course  of  the  transaction, 
let  us  consider  how  the  power  of  God  *  took  the  wise  in  their 
own  very  craftiness.'  Joseph  had  for  this  reason  been  sold, 
that  he  might  not  be  worshipped,  yet  he  was  for  this  reason 
worshipped,  because  he  was  sold;  for  they  dared  to  try  a 
thing  in  craft,  that  the  counsel  of  God  might  be  changed  ; 
but  by  resisting  they  helped  on  the  decree  of  God,  which 
they  strove  to  get  quit  of.  For  they  were  constrained  to 
execute  the  will  of  God  by  the  very  act  by  which  they 
laboured  craftily  to  alter  the  same.     Thus  whilst  the  Divine 


Saul  foiled  himself.     JonaKs  device  turned  contrary.     335 

purpose   is    shunned,   it    is    fulfilling;    thus    while    human  Book 

wisdom  resists,  it  is  ^  caught.'     Those  brethren  feared  lest '— 

Joseph  should  grow  to  an  height  above  themselves.  But 
that  which  was  arranged  by  the  Divine  disposal,  their  pre- 
cautions were  the  cause  and  occasion  of  bringing  about. 
Human  wisdom  then  was  *  caught'  in  itself,  when  in  the 
very  way  that  its  purpose  was  to  oppose  the  wnll  of  God,  it 
did  service  toward  the  completion  thereof. 

30.  Thus,  whereas  Saul  saw  David,  his  subject,  grow  up  Saul, 
in  a  daily  advance  in  valorous  achievements,  he  betrothed 

his  daughter  to  him  in  marriage,  and  demanded  that  an 
hundred  foreskins  of  the  Philistines  should  be  given  by  him 
for  her  dowry,  that  when  the  soldier  thus  challenged  sought 
to  exceed  his  own  measure,  being  delivered  over  to  the 
swords  of  his  enemies,  he  might  bring  his  life  to  an  end; 
according  as  it  is  written.  The  king  requireth  not  any  dowry,  i  Sam. 
hut  an  hundred  foreskins  of  the  Philislines^  to  be  avenged  '" 
of  the  king\s  enemies.  But  Saul  thought  to  make  David 
fall  by  the  hands  of  the  Philistines.  But  David,  strengthened 
by  the  favourable  aid  of  the  interior  Disposal,  engaged  him- 
self to  give  the  hundred,  and  he  brought  back  two  hundred 
foreskins.  By  the  convincing  force  of  which  deed  Saul 
being  overcome,  was  *  caught'  in  the  purpose  of  his  wisdom 
by  Providence  above ;  for  by  the  very  means  that  he  looked 
to  destroy  the  life  of  the  rising  soldier,  he  raised  to  the  highest 
pitch  the  fame  of  his  merits. 

31.  But  because  the  very  Elect  sometimes  strive  to  be  Jonah, 
sharp-witted  in  a  degree,  it  is  well  to  bring  forward  another 
wise  man,  and  to  shew  how  the  craft  of  mortal  men  is  com- 
prehended in  the  Inner  Counsels.  For  Jonah  desired  to  be 
sharp-witted  in  prudence,  when  being  sent  to  preach  the 
repentance  required  of  the  Ninevites,  because  he  feared  that, 

if  the  Gentiles  were  chosen,  Juda3a  would  be  forsaken,  he 
refused  to  discharge  the  office  of  that  preaching.  He  sought 
a  ship  and  settled  to  fly  to  Tharsis,  but  straightway  a  storm 
arises,  the  lot  is  cast,  that  it  may  be  found  out  to  whose  fault 
it  is  owing  that  the  sea  is  in  commotion.  Jonah  is  found  in 
the  offence,  he  is  plunged  into  the  deep,  devoured  by  the 
whale  sv>'allowing  him,  and  there  he  is  brought  by  the  beast 
carrying  h^m,  where  he  despised  to  go  of  his  own  accord. 


336         The  Jews  wrought  God's  pur-pose  toward  Christ. 

Job  5,  See,  the  tempest  of  God  finds  out  the  runagate,  the  lot  binds 
j^j^  him,  the  sea  receives  him,  the  beast  encloses  him,  and 
because  he  sets  himself  against  paying  obedience  to  his 
Maker,  he  is  carried  a  culprit  by  his  own  prison  to  that 
place,  whither  he  was  sent.  When  God  commanded,  man 
would  not  administer  the  prophecy;  when  God  breathed  on 
it,  the  beast  vomits  the  Prophet.  God  then  '  taketh  the  wise 
in  their  own  craftiness,'  when  He  brings  back  even  that  to 
serve  the  purpose  of  His  will,  by  which  the  will  of  man  sets 
itself  in  contradiction  to  Him. 
The  32.  Let  us,  yet  further,  look  well  into  the  wisdom  of  the 

Hebrews,  that  wq  may  see  what  in  its  foresight  it  resisted, 
what   by   so   resisting   it   brought    about.     Surely,  when    a 
multitude  of  believers  was  gathering  together  at  the  miracles 
of  our  Redeemer,  when  the  priests  of  the  people,  kindled  by 
the  torches  of  envy,  declared  that  all  the  world  were  going 
John  12, after  Him,  saying,  Perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  nothing?    Be- 
hold, the  world  is  gone  after  Him;  that  they  might  cut  away 
from  Him   the   strength  of  so   great  a  concourse,  they  en- 
John  ii,deavoured  to  put  an  end  to  His  power  by  death,  saying,  //  is 
expedient  that  one  man  die,  and  not  that  the  whole  nation 
perish.     Yet   the    death    of  our   Redeemer   availed    to   the 
uniting   of  His    Body,    i.   e.    of  the    Church,    and   not   to 
the  severing  away  of  it.     And  hence  it  is   commanded  by 
Lev.  1,  the  Law,  that  in  representation  of  our  Sacrifice,  the  throat  of 
^^*        the  turtledove  or  the  pigeon  should  be  cut,  and  not  entirely 
severed,  so  that  even  after  death  the  head  should  cleave  to 
1  Tim.   the  body,  in  that  verily  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man, 
^'  ^'      i.  e.  the  Head  of  all  of  us,  and  the   Sacrifice   of  the  true 
cleansing,  from  the   very  cause   that   He  underwent  death, 
was  more   truly  joined  to   us.     After  the  cutting,  then,  the 
head  of  the  turtledove  adheres  to  its  body,  for  neither  does 
the    death   that  intervenes   sever  Christ  from  His  Church. 
His  persecutors  then  did  that  which  they  laboured  after  with 
])crnicious  intent,   they  brought  death   upon   Him,   that  so 
they  might  cut  off  from  Him  the  devotedness  of  the  faithful ; 
but  faith  only  gained  growth  from  thence,  whence  the  cruelty 
of  the  faithless   looked  to   extinguish  it.     And  while  they 
reckon  that  they  are  cutting  off  His  miracles  by  persecuting 
Him,  in   truth    they   were   forced    to    extend   them   without 


God's  Will  done  by  man  freely  or  iimcillingly .  337 

knowing  it.     Therefore  the  Lord  took  the  wise  in  their  own  Book 

YI. 


craftiness,  when  He  reduced  even  that  to  the  service  of  His 
pitifulness,  in  which  the  fierceness  of  man  raged  against 
Him. 

33.  For  the  Just  and  Merciful  One,  as  He  disposes  the 
deeds  of  mortals,  vouchsafes  some  things  in  mercy,  and 
permits  other  things  in  anger;  and  the  things  which  He 
permits  He  so  bears  with,  that  He  turns  them  to  the  account 
of  His  pm-pose.  And  hence  it  isbroughtto  pass  in  a  marvellous 
way,  that  even  that,  which  is  done  without  the  Will  of  God, 
is  not  contrary  to  the  Will  of  God,  For  while  evil  deeds  are 
converted  to  a  good  use,  the  very  things  that  oppose  His 
design,  render  service  to  His  design.     For  hence  it  is  said 

by  the  Psalmist,  77/6"  works  of  the  Lord  are  great,  sought  out  Ps.  ni, 
unto  all  His  ivills.     For  His   works   are  so  great,  that  by  "       ^' 
every  thing  that  is  done  by  man.  His  Will  is  sought  out; 
for  it  often  happens  that  it  is  done  by  the  very  act,  whereby 
it  was  thought  to  be  tlu'own  aside.     Hence  again  it  is  said, 
Whatsoever  the  Lord  pleased,  that  did  He  in  Heaven  and  in  Ps.  135, 
earth.      Hence    Solomon    saith,   Tliere   is   no    wisdom,  nor  p^^^^ 
understanding,  nor  counsel  against  the  Lord.     It   remains ^l,  30. 
that,  in  all  that    we  do,  we  search  out  the  potency  of  the 
Supreme  Will,  to  which   same,  when  we  know  it,  all    our 
conduct  ought  devoutly  to  render  service,  and  to  follow  it  as 
the  guide  of  its  course,  lest  it  serve  the  same  even  against 
its  will,  if  it  declines  it  fi'om  pride.     For  the  potency  of  the 
Divine  purpose  cannot  be  evaded,  but  he  that  bridles  himself 
in  under  His  nod,  tempers  it  to  himself  with  great  efficacy; 
and  he  lightens  the  weight  thereof  to  himself,  who  willingly 
bears  it  on  the  bowed  shoulder  of  the  heart.     But  as  we  have 
above  made  mention  of  His  persecutors,  let  us  proceed  to 
shew  how  the  words  that  are  subjoined   likewise  fit   their 
blindness.     It  goes  on; 

Ver.  14.    Theg  shall  meet  with  darkness  in  the  day-time, 
and  grope  in  the  noonday  as  in  the  night. 

34.  They  '  meet  with  darkness  in  the  day-time,'  for  in  the    xix. 
very  presence  of  Truth,  they  were  blinded  by  the  deceitfulness 

of  unbelief.  For  we  see  clearly  in  the  day-time,  but  in  the 
night  the  pupil  of  our  eye  is  dimmed.  Therefore  whilst  the 
persecutors  beheld  the  miracles  of  Divine  Power,  and  yet 

z 


338      Darkness  in  the  Light.     Christ  *  The  Poor  Man/ 

Job  6,  doubted   of  His   Divine   Nature,   they    were    subjected   to 

— —  ^  darkness  in  the  day-time,'  for  they  lost  their  eyesight  in  the 

Proph  . 

'light.     Hence  it  is   that  'Light'    Itself  admonishes    them, 

John  12,  saying,  Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest   darkness  come 

Jer.  15  upon  you.     It  is  hence  that  it  is  said  of  Judaea,  Her  sun  is 

^'  gone    down  while   it    was   yet  day.      It  is  hence  that  the 

Prophet  again  took  up  in  himself  the  strain  of  persons  in 

Is.  59,    a  state  of  penitence,  in  these  words,  We  stumble  at  noonday 

10 

as  in  the  nighty  ive  are  in  dismal  places  as  dead  men.    Hence 
Is.  21,    aorain  He  says.  Watchman,  what  of  thenight^f   Watchman, 

1119 

'     *  what  of  the  night  ?  The  watchman  said,  The  morning  cometh, 

and  also   the  night.     For  '  the  watchman   came  by  night,' 

in  that  the  Guardian  of  the  human  race  even  shewed  Himself 

manifest  in  the  flesh,  and  yet  Judaea,  being  close  pressed  by 

the  darkness  of  her  faithlessness,  never  knew  Him.     Where 

it  is  well  added  in  the  voice  of  the  watchman.  The  morning 

cometh,  and  also  the  night.     For  by  His  presence  hath  a  new 

light  shone  out  upon  the  world,  and  yet  the  former  darkness 

remained  in  the  hearts  of  unbelievers.     And  it  is  well  said, 

They  shall  grope  in  the  noonday  as  in  the  night;  for  we 

search  out  by  groping  that  which  we  do  not  see  with  our 

eyes.     Now   the  Jews  had  seen  His  undisguised  miracles, 

and  yet  they  still  went  on  seeking  Him,  as  it  were  groping 

Johnio,  for  Him,  when  they  said,  How  long  dost  Thou  make  us  to 

^^'        doubt?     If  Thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly.     See,  the 

light  of  miracles  was  before  their  eyes,  yet  stumbling  in  the 

darkness  of  their  own  hearts,  they  continued  to   grope  in 

,  seeking  for  Him.     And  this  same  blindness  of  theirs  burst  out 

into  cruelty,  and  their  cruelty  even  to  the  extent  of  overt  acts 

of  persecution.     But  the  Redeemer  of  mankind  could  not  for 

long  be  held  by  the  hands  of  His  persecutors.     Hence  it  is 

forthwith  added; 

Ver.  15.  But  He  shall  save  the  poor  from  the  sword  of 

their  mouth,  and  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty. 

XX.        35.  For  it  is  this  very  Poor  Man  of  whom  it  is  said  by 

2  Cor.    Paul,  Though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor. 

^'  ^'      And  because  the  Jews  in  accusing  betrayed  the  Lord,  Whom, 

when  so  betrayed,  the  Gentiles  put  to  death,  by  '  the  sword  of 

the  mouth'  may  be  signified  the  tongue  of  the  Hebrews,  that 

''  Perhaps  he  understands,  Quid  de  node?   '  Wherefore  by  night  ?^ 


His  '  needi/  ones'  have  hope  through  His  Resurrection.    339 

were  His  accusers,  of  whom  the  Psalmist  saith,  Whose  teeth  Book 
are  spears  and  arrows^  and  their  tongue  a  sharpj  sword.    For. 


'  Ps.  57 

as  the  Gospel  also  witnesses,  they  cried  out,  Crucify  Him,  4.       ' 
Crucify  Him.     But  by  '  the  hand  of  the  violent'  may  be  set^g^^gi 
forth   the   very  Gentile  world  itself,  which   crucified   Him,  Johni9, 
which  in  our  Redeemer's  death  fulfilled  in  act  the  words  of  the  * 
Hebrews.     God  then  '  saved  this  Poor  One   both  from  the 
hand  of  the  violent,'  and  from  '  the  sword  of  the  mouth,'  in 
that  our  Redeemer,  in  His  human  Nature,  was  subjected  both 
to  the  powers  of  the  Gentiles,  and  to  the  tongues  of  the  Jews 
by  dying,  but  in  the  power  of  His  Divine  Nature  He  over- 
came them  by  rising  again.     By  which   same  resurrection 
what   else   is  brought    to    pass  than   that    our  weakness   is 
strengthened  to  conceive  the  hope  of  the  life  hereafter.?    And 
hence  it  is  well  added  immediately  afterwards, 
Ver.  16.  And  so  the  needy  shall  have  hope. 

36.  For  when  the  poor  man  is  rescued,  *  the  needy'  is   xxi. 
restored  to    hope,  for   the   lowly   people   of  the    faithful  is 
shaken  with  dismay  at  our  Redeemer  dying,  but  is  established 
firm  by  His  rising  again,  for  the  very  first  poor  ones  of  His 
people,  viz.  the  chosen  Preachers,  were  smitten  by  the  sight 

of  His  death,  but  restored  by  the  manifesting  of  His  resurrec- 
tion. When,  then,  the  poor  man  is  saved,  '  the  needy' 
recovers  hope,  for  by  the  Lord  rising  again  in  the  flesh, 
every  faithful  soul  is  strengthened  to  have  a  confident 
expectation  of  eternal  life.  But,  now,  the  Truth  has  already 
come  in  an  open  manifestation.  He  has  already  undergone 
the  death  of  the  flesh,  and  destroyed  the  same  by  rising 
again,  already  the  glory  of  the  Ascension  has  ennobled  His 
Resurrection,  and  yet  the  tongue  of  the  Hebrews  does  not 
yet  cease  to  urge  Him  with  insults;  and  He  indeed  suffers 
them  with  patience,  that  by  such  sufferance  He  may  turn 
some,  and  others  that  refuse  to  be  turned  He  may  one 
day  visit  with  severer  punishment.  For  the  tongue  of  un- 
believers will  then  be  struck  dumb  from  their  habit  of 
unbridled  speech,  when  it  shall  see  Him  coming  as  a  just 
Judge,  Whom  now  it  has  judged  unjustly.  And  hence  it  is 
well  added. 

And  iniquity  shall  stop  her  mouth. 

37.  For  now  iniquity  still  opens  wide  her  mouth,  in  that  the  xxii. 

z  2 


340  Envy  the  darker  for  light  in  others. 

Job  5(  tongue  of  unbelievers  never  ceases  to  urge  with  insults  the 
^^'  '  Redeemer  of  the  human  race.  But  she  shall  then  '  stop  her 
mouth,'  when  this  same,  which  she  will  not  shut  in  good  will, 
she  shall  shut  in  punishment.  Yet  this  may  also  be  well 
understood  of  the  conversion  of  the  persecutors.  For  when 
*  the  poor  is  saved,'  whilst  '  the  needy'  returns  to  hope, 
iniquity  is  struck  dumb,  her  mouth  being  stopped,  in  that  by 
the  miracle  of  His  Resurrection  shining  out,  whilst  a  full 
number  of  unbelievers  is  brought  to  the  faith,  it  has  ceased 
from  the  mocking  and  abuse  of  its  Redeemer.  For  its 
mouth,  which  it  opened  in  mocking  God,  it  has  wow  shut  in 
the  dread  of  Him. 

Moral.  38.  It  is  good  to  run  through  these  points  in  a  moral 
sense,  putting  aside  the  signification  of  the  Jewish  people, 
and  to  trace  out  in  what  manner  they  are  transacted  by 
wicked  men  in  general.  For  the  minds  of  the  wicked,  when 
they  see  some  things  done  well  by  their  neighbours,  are 
strained  upon  the  stretched  rack  of  their  jealousy,  and  they 
undergo  the  grievous  chastisement  of  their  own  malice,  when 
with  a  consuming  heart  they  see  good  in  others.  Therefore 
it  is  well  said,  They  meet  with  darkness  in  the  day  time. 
For  when  their  mind  is  grieved  for  the  superiority  of  another, 
there  is  an  overshadowing  from  the  ray  of  the  light;  for 
oftentimes  while  they  view  the  unconcealed  good  qualities 
in  their  neighbours,  they  look  closely  if  there  be  any  evil 
points  lying  concealed  from  sight,  and  they  busy  themselves 
in  eager  scrutinies,  if  they  may  chance  to  find  somewhat 
with  which  they  may  be  able  to  charge  them.  Sound  limbs 
indeed  are  all  they  see,  but,  with  the  eyes  of  the  heart  closed, 
they  seek  Vjy  feeling  to  find  a  sore.  And  hence  it  is  rightly 
subjoined,  And  grope  in  the  noonday  as  in  the  night.  The 
day  of  good  deeds  shines  outwardly  in  a  neighbour,  but 
they  '  grope  as  it  were  in  the  night,'  because  inwardly  they 
are  under  the  darkness  of  their  jealous  feeling.  They  busy 
themselves  to  get  to  some  points  which  they  may  censure, 
they  seek  out  an  opening  for  detraction,  but  forasmuch  as 
they  are  unable  to  find  this,  they  search  about  in  blindness 
without.  Which  is  well  set  forth  in  that  occasion,  when 
from  the  Angels  protecting  Lot,  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom 
could  not  find  the  doorway  in  his  house,  as  it  is  written, 


God  saves  the  Righteous  from  evil  hands  and  tongues.    34 1 

A7id  they  pressed  sore  upon  the  man,  even  Lot,  and  came  Book 
near  to  break  the  door.     But  the  men  put  forth  their  hand,     ^^' 
and  pulled  Lot  into  the  house  to  them,  and  shut  to  the  door,  t-il^' 
And  they  smote  the  7nen  that  were  at  the  door  of  the  house 
with  blindness,  both  small  and  great,  so  that  they  wearied 
theuhselves  to  find  the  door.     What  does  it  mean  that,  when 
the  wicked  are  up  in  arms  against  him,  Lot  is  brought  back 
into  the  house,  and  defended,  but  that  every  righteous  mau, 
while   he  encounters   the   assaults  of  evil  ones,  is  brought 
back  into  his  interior,  and  abides  undismayed.     But  the  men 
of  Sodom  cannot  find  the  door  in  Lot's  house,  because  the 
corrupters  of  souls  detect  no  opening  of  accusation  against 
the  life  of  the  righteous  man.     For,  stricken  with  bhndness, 
they  as  it  were  go  round  and  round  the  house,  who,  under  the 
influence  of  envy  scrutinize  words  and  deeds;  but  because 
in  the  hfe  of  the  just,  strong  and  praiseworthy  conduct  fronts 
them  every  way,  groping  at  random  they  feel  nothing  else 
than  the  wall.     Therefore  it  is  well  said,  And  grope  in  the 
noonday  as  in  the  night.    For  while  the  good,  which  they  see, 
it  is  out  of  their  power  to  impeach,  being  blinded  by  wicked- 
ness, they  search  out  for  impeachment  evil  which  thev  see 
nothinq;  of. 

39.  And  here  it  is  properly  subjoined.  But  he  shall  save^ex.io. 
the  poor  froin  the  sword  of  their  mouth,  and  from  the  hand 
of  the  mighty.     For  the  '  poor'  is  every  one  that  is  not  set 
up   in   his   own    eyes.      And   hence   '  Truth'    saitb    in   the 
Gospel,  Blessed  are  the  poor  in   spirit,  for    theirs  is  Me  Matt. 5 
kingdom  of  heaven.     Now  a  person  is  drawn  into  sin  in  two^- 
w^ays.     For  either  he  is  led  on  by  pleasure,  or  overcome  by 
fear.     For  '  the  sword  of  the  mouth'  is  the  mischievousness  of 
persuasion,  but  '  the  hand  of  the  mighty'  is  the  opposition 
of  power.     But  because  he  that  is  truly  humble,  who  is  here 
called  '  the  poor,'  as  he  covets  none  of  the  good  things  of 
this  world,  so  also  undauntedly  sets  at  nought  even  its  adverse 
fortune,  it  is  well  said.  But  He  saveth  the  poor  from  the 
sword  of  their  mouth,  and  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty. 
As  if  it  were  put  plainly;  '  God  doth  so  finnly  establish  the 
souls  of  the  humble  in  Himself,  that  neither  the  alluring  arts 
of  persuasion  can  draw  them,  nor  the  pains  of  i)unishment 
break  them  in  to  the  practice  of  sin.     For  hope  rears  the 


34*2    Mouth  of  the  Wicked  stopped.     Benefit  of  correction. 

Job  6,  spirit  into  the  eternal  world,  and  therefore  it  is  not  sensible 
rrz — ^— of  any  of  the  ills  without,  that  it  falls  under.     And  hence  it 

Moral.  ^  '' ^    ^  ' 

ver.  16.  is  Subjoined,  So  the  needy  shall  have  hope.  Unto  the  fruits 
of  which  same  hope,  verily,  when  the  poor  man  attaineth, 
every  one  that  is  exalted  is  struck  dumb;  and  hence  it  is  yet 
further  added.  And  iniquity  shall  stop  her  mouth.  For  the 
wicked  man  detracts  from  the  good,  and  the  righteous  ways, 
which  he  cares  not  to  practise,  he  never  ceases  to  pull  in 
pieces  by  slander,  but  iniquity  at  that  time  stoppeth  her 
mouth,  when  her  eyes  are  opened  to  see  how  great  is  the 
glory  of  the  recompense  provided  for  righteous  souls.  For 
then  he  is  not  at  liberty  to  speak  against  the  good,  in  that 
torments  hold  his  tongue  tied  by  the  deserved  retribution 
of  his  misdeeds.     Hence  it  is  well   delivered  by  Hannah, 

1  Sam.  speaking  in  prophecy,  He  will  keep  the  feet  of  his  Saints, 
'  *  and  the  toicked  shall  be  silent  in  darkness.  But  that  every 
elect  soul  may  escape  eternal  woe,  and  the  poor  mount  up 
to  everlasting  glory,  he  must  be  bruised  here  below  with 
continual  stripes,  that  he  may  be  found  purified  in  the 
Judgment.  For  we  are  every  day  borne  downwards  by  the 
mere  weight  of  our  infirmity,  but  that  by  the  wonderful 
interposition  of  our  Maker  we  are  relieved  by  succouring 
stripes.     Hence  it  is  added, 

Ver.  ]  7.  Behold,  happy  is  the  man  whom  God  correctelh. 

xxni.  40.  The  highest  virtue  is  to  avoid  sins,  that  they  should 
never  be  done,  and  second  to  that,  at  least  to  amend  them 
when  they  have  been  committed.  But  for  the  most  part  we 
not  only  never  at  all  avoid  sins  that  threaten,  but  we  do  not 
even  open  our  eyes  to  them,  when  committed.  And  the 
mind  of  sinners  is  enveloped  in  the  deeper  darkness,  in  pro- 
portion as  it  does  not  see  the  deficiency  of  its  own  blindness. 
Hence  it  is  very  often  brought  to  pass,  by  the  bountifulness 
of  God's  gift,  that  punishment  follows  upon  transgression, 
and  stripes  unclose  the  eyes  of  the  transgressor,  which 
self-security  was  blinding  in  the  midst  of  evil  ways.  For 
the  inactive  soul  is  touched  with  the  rod,  so  as  to  be  sti- 
mulated, in  order  that  he,  that  has  lost,  by  being  self-secure, 
the  firm  seat  of  uprightness,  may  mark,  upon  being  afflicted, 

I  A.B.    where  he  is  laid  prostrate;  and  thus  to  him^  the  very  sharp- 

'  huic'  '^^^^^  <jf  the  correction   becomes  the  source  of  light;    and 


GocTs  chastening  not  to  he  called  in  question.  343 

heuce  it  is  said  by  Paul,  But  all  things  that  are  proved^  Book 
are  made  manifest  by  the  light ;  for  proof  of  saving  health 


Eph.  5, 

lies  in  the  force  of  the  pain.     Hence  it  is  that  Solomon  saith^  13. 
For  healing  vAll  cause  great  offences  to  cease.     Hence  again  ecc.  10, 
he  saith,  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  correcteth.  even  a^i-^"^^- 

'  '  Prov.  3, 

a  father  the  son  in  whom  he  delighteth.     Hence  the  Lord  12. 
addresses  John  by  the  voice  of  the  ilngel'^,  saying,  As  many  Kev.  3 
as  I  love^  I  rebuke  and  chasten.     Hence  Paul  saith,  Now  no  !?• 

'  Heb.l2, 

chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  Joyous,  but  grievous,  n. 
nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of 
righteousness,  unto  them  that  are  exercised  thereby.  Al- 
though therefore  grief  and  happiness  can  never  meet  toge- 
ther, yet  it  is  rightly  said  here,  Hajjpy  is  the  man  whom  the 
Lord  correcteth.  For  by  this  means,  that  the  sinner  is 
straitly  visited  with  the  pain  of  correction,  he  is  sometimes 
trained  to  happiness,  which  knows  no  intervention  of  pain. 
It  proceeds, 

TJierefore  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord, 
4l.  Whosoever  is  smitten  for  a  fault,  and  lifted  up  in  xxiv. 
murmuring  against  the  stroke,  '  reproves  the  chastening  of 
the  Lord.'  For  he  lays  to  His  charge,  that  he  has  this 
put  upon  him  unjustly.  But  they  that  are  stricken,  not 
for  the  cleansing  of  guilt,  but  for  the  testing  of  their  forti- 
tude, when  they  inquire  into  the  causes  of  the  stroke,  must 
by  no  means  be  said  to  '  reprove  the  correction  of  the  Lord;' 
for  their  aim  is  to  discover  in  themselves  what  they  are  igno- 
rant of.  And  hence  blessed  Job,  breaking  out  into  a  voice  of 
liberty,  amidst  the  visitings  of  the  scourge,  the  more  rightly 
questions  the  judgments  of  the  smiter  concerning  him,  the 
more  he  is  really  ignorant  of  causes  for  his  suffering  in 
himself  Eliphaz,  then,  forasmuch  as  he  reckoned  that  he 
was  visited,  not  with  the  trial  of  probation,  but  of  purification, 
when  he  spoke  with  freedom  amidst  the  stripes,  supposed 
that  he  '  reproved  the  correction  of  the  Lord."*  And  we  have 
said  that  he  at  the  same  time  bears  the  likeness  of  heretics 
with  great  fitness,  in  that  whatsoever  is  done  aright  by  Holy 

"=  The  meaning  of  the  word  accord-  tion ;  which  two  senses  are  united  in 
ing  to  St.  Greg,  includes  perhaps  the  '  argumentum  salutis'  in  the  next  sen- 
notion   of  '  proof  in  a  double  sense;  tence. 

first,  the  proving  of  man's  sin  to  him;  d  This  bears  out  the  reading  of  the 

secondly,  the  fact  of  his  being  'proved'  passage  noticed  in  note  p,  p.  228. 
itself  constituting  proof  of  his  salva- 


344      Tico  ways  in  lohich  God  wounds  that  He  may  heal. 

Job  5,  Churcb,  is  ever,  in  their  judgment,  tunied  and  twisted  awry 

- — '—  to  some  fault  of  crookedness.     But  forasmuch  as  it  is  with  a 

*  good  intention  that  he  is  led  to  speak,  yet  he  takes  no  heed  to 

discriminate  who  he  is  speaking  to,  he  yet  further  subjoins, 

and  proclaims  the  dispensations  of  the  supreme  governance, 

saying, 

Ver.  18.  For    He    maketh    sore,   and    hindeth   up;     He 
ivoundeth,  and  His  hands  shall  make  whole. 

XXV.  42.  In  two  ways  Almighty  God  wounds  those,  whom  He  is 
minded  to  bring  back  to  saving  health;  for  sometimes  He 
smites  the  flesh,  and  consumes  the  hardness  of  the  heart  by 
the  fear  of  Him.  Thus  He  recalls  to  saving  health,  by  dealing 
wounds,  when  He  afflicts  His  own  Elect  outwardly,  that  they 
be  quickened  with  inward  life.     Whence  He  also  says  by 

Deut.     Moses,  /  will  kill  and  I  ?Hll  make  alive.  I  uill  wound  and 

32   39. 

'     '   /  will  heal;  for  He  '  kills,'  that  He  may  ^  make  alive,'  He 

*  wounds,'  that  He  may  '  heal;'  in  that  He  for  this  reason 

applies    stripes   without,  in    order   that   He    may    heal   the 

wounds  of  sin  within.     But  sometimes,  even  if  strokes  without 

should  seem  to  have  ceased,  He  inflicts  wounds  within,  in 

that  He  strikes  the  hardness  of  the  heart  with  the  desire  of 

Himself;  yet  in  wounding  He  heals,  in  that  when  we    are 

pierced  with  the  dart  of  His  dread.  He  recalls  us  to  a  right 

sense.     For  our  hearts  are  not  well  sound,  when  they  are 

wounded  by  no  love  of  God,  when  they  feel  not  the  wofulness 

of  their  pilgrimage,  when  they  do  not  go  soiTowing  w^ith  the 

least  degree  of  feeling  for  the  infirmity  of  their  neighbour. 

But  they  are  ^  wounded,'  that  they  may  be  '  healed,'  in  that 

God  strikes  unfeeling  souls  with  the  darts  of  His  love,  and 

straightway  makes  them  full  of  feeling,  through  the  burning 

heat  of  charity,  and  hence  the  spouse  saith  in  the  Song  of 

Cant.  2,  Songs,  For  I  am  wounded  with  love.     For  the  diseased  soul, 

'  laid  prone  upon  the  litter  of  this  place  of  banishment  in  blind 

self-security,  neither  beheld  the  Lord,  nor  sought  to  see  Him. 

But  on  being  struck  with  the  darts  of  His  love,  it  is  wounded 

in  its  innermost  ])arts  with  a  feeling  of  pious  affection,  bums 

with  the  desire  of  contemplation;  and  in  a  marvellous  manner 

she  is  made  alive  by  wounding,  who  aforetime  lay  dead  in 

a  state  of  health :  she  glows,  she  pants,  and  yearns  to  see  Him 

already,  from  Whom  she  turned.     By  being  smitten, then,  she 


God  gives  trouble  Jirst^  then  rest  345 

is  brought  back  to  a  state  of  soundness,  who  is  recalled  to  Book 
a  secure  state  of  inward  repose  by  the  disturbing  of  her_Z]L_ 
self-love.  But  when  the  wounded  soul  begins  to  pant  after 
God,  when,  setting  at  nought  all  the  alluring  arts  of  the 
world,  it  stretches  forth  in  desire  to  the  land  above,  all  is 
forthwith  turned  to  its  trial,  whatsoever  aforetime  was  ac- 
counted pleasing  and  alluiing  in  this  world.  For  they  that 
had  a  fond  affection  for  him  living  in  sin,  cruelly  assault  him 
when  he  lives  aright.  The  soul  that  is  raised  up  toward 
God,  is  subject  to  rude  assaults  from  the  flesh,  wherein  it 
formerly  lay  grovelling  in  enjoyment,  the  slave  of  evil  habits; 
former  pleasures  recur  to  the  mind,  and  push  hard  the 
resisting  soul  with  a  gi'ievous  conflict.  But  because  that, 
while  we  are  afflicted  with  transitory  labour,  we  are  rescued 
from  everlasting  pain,  it  is  fitly  subjoined; 

Ver.  19.  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six  troithles^yea,  in  seven 
there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee. 

43.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  number  *  six,'  which  is  xxvi. 
followed  by  *  the  seventh,'  saving  the  labour  and  course  of 

the  present  life?  For  God,  finishing  all  things  on  the  sixth 
day,  created  man,  and  God  rested  on  the  seventh  day ;  and  this 
same  seventh  day  is  without  an  evening,  for  there  is  no  longer 
any  end  to  close  the  rest  that  followeth.  When  all  things, 
then,  are  completed,  the  rest  followeth,  in  that  after  the 
good  works  of  the  present  life,  the  recompense  of  eternal 
rest  follows.  Therefore  '  in  six  troubles  the  Lord  delivers 
us,'  that  '  no  evil  may  touch  us  in  the  seventh,'  in  that  by 
the  training  of  His  fatherly  pity.  He  exercises  us  with  the 
labours  of  the  present  life,  but  at  the  coming  of  the  Judge, 
He  hides  us  from  the  scourge,  that  He  may  then  bring  us 
out  the  more  sure  for  His  salvation,  in  proportion  as  we  are 
now  scored  the  more  cruelly  with  scourges.  And  im- 
mediately reckoning  up  with  fitness  both  the  ills  of  the 
present  life,  and  the  aids  of  Protection  from  above,  adds, 

Ver.  20.  In  famine  He  shall  redeem  thee  from  death,  and 
in  war  from  the  poicer  of  the  sword. 

44.  As  the  '  famine'  of  the  flesh  is  the  withdrawal  of  thexxvii. 
support  of  the  body,  so  the  hunger  of  the  soul  is  the  silence 

of  divine  revelation.     Hence  it  is  rightly  delivered  by  the 
Prophet,  /  ivill  send  a  famine  in  the  land,  not  a  famine  ^"^^^^i 


346  Deliverance  fiom  famine^  sword,  and  scourge. 

Job  5,  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  of  water,  but  a  famine  of  hearing  the 

'—  words  of  the  Lord.    And  forasmuch  as  when  the  di^dne  com- 

'  munication  leaves  the  human  soul,  the  temptation  of  the 
flesh  gains  force  against  it,  it  is  fitly  brought  in.  And  in  war 
from  the  power  of  the  sword.  For  we  suffer  a  war,  when  we 
are  assailed  by  the   temptations  of  our   flesh.     Concerning 

Ps.  140,  which  same  war  the  Psalmist  saith,  Cover  my  head  in  the 
day  of  battle.  Therefore,  whereas  the  reprobate,  whilst  their 
strength  fails  from  a  '  famine'  of  the  word  of  God,  are 
furthennore  pierced  with  '  the  sword  of  war,'  the  Lord  both 
'  in  famine  redeems'  His  Elect  *  from  death,'  and  'in  war' 
He  hides  them  '  from  the  sword.'  For  while  He  refreshes 
their  souls  with  the  food  of  His  word,  He  makes  them  strong 
to  resist  the  temptations  of  the  body.  Yet  there  be  some, 
who,  though  they  recruit  themselves,  out  of  the  store  of  the 
word  of  God,  from  the  famine  of  the  interior,  though  they 
be  already  stayed  up  against  the  temptations  of  the  body 
by  the  virtue  of  continency,  yet  still  fear  to  be  stricken 
with  the  slanders  of  their  fellow-creatures,  and  oftentimes, 
whilst  they  dread  the  arrows  of  the  tongue,  they  strangle 
themselves  with  the  noose  of  sin.  And  hence  it  is  fitly 
added, 

xxviii.  Ver.  21.  Thou  shalt  he  hid  from  the  scourge  of  the  tongue. 
45.  '  The  scourge  of  the  tongue'  is  the  taunting  of  insults 
offered.  They  strike  the  righteous  '  with  the  scourge  of  the 
tongue,'  who  pursue  their  deeds  with  mockery.  For  often- 
times the  tongue,  while  it  utters  jibes,  recalls  from  a  good 
deed,  and  puts  itself  out  like  a  scourge,  in  that  it  cuts  the 
back  of  the  cowardly  soul.  Which  '  scourge  of  the  tongue,' 
the  Prophet  had  seen  plotting  against  the  elect  soul,  when 

Ps.91,3.  He  said,  promising  the  aid  that  is  above.  Surely  He  shall 
"^'  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  hunter,  and  from  the 
rough  word.  For  '  hunters'  seek  nothing  else  than  flesh, 
but  we  are  '  delivered  from  the  snare  of  the  hunters  and 
from  the  rough  word,'  when  we  overcome  both  the  snare  of 
carnal  persons,  and  the  reproaches  of  sneers,  by  setting  them 
at  nought.  For  their  words  are  '  rough,'  which  are  arrayed 
against  our  righteous  ways.  And  to  *  escape  the  roughness 
of  words,'  is  to  trample  down  the  mockings  of  calumniators  by 
shutting  our  eyes  to  them.     The  holy  soul  then  is  hidden 


The  Elect  prepared  against  the  last  Judgment.  347 

from  *  the  scourge  of  tongues,'  in  that  whilst  in  this  world  book 
it  never  seeks  the  honour  of  applause,  neither  does  it  feel  Ti- 
the insults  of  calumny.  But  there  be  some  that  already  set 
at  nought  the  words  of  the  scoraful,  already  care  nothing 
for  their  jeers,  yet  they  still  stand  in  dread  of  the  pains  and 
tortures  of  the  body.  For  our  old  adversary,  in  order  to  with- 
draw us  from  a  right  bent  of  mind,  assaults  us  in  diverse  modes, 
and  prosecutes  the  tempting  of  us  one  while  by  a  famine 
of  the  word,  another  while  by  the  conflict  of  the  flesh,  now 
by  the  scourge  of  talk,  now  by  the  distress  of  persecution. 
But  because  every  perfect  person,  when  once  he  has  over- 
come the  evil  habits  in  himself,  straightway  goes  on  to  brace 
his  mind  to  meet  the  inflictions  of  sufiering,  it  is  properly 
subjoined. 

Neither  shall  thou  be  afraid  of  calamity  when  it  cometh. 

46.  For  holy  men,  for  that  they  see  that  they  are  engaged  xix. 
with  an  adversary  of  manifold  form,  equip  themselves  vari- 
ously in  their  conflict.  For  against  a  famine,  they  have  the 
sustenance  of  God's  word;  against  the  sword  of  wai',  they 
have  the  shield  of  continency;  against  the  scourge  of  the 
tongue,  the  defence  of  patience  ;  against  the  hurt  of  outward 
misfortune,  they  have  the  aid  of  inward  love.  Hence  in  a 
marvellous  method  it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  the  more 
manifold  the  temptations  which  the  craft  of  the  enemy  brings 
upon  them,  so  much  the  richer  in  virtues  are  the  wary 
soldiers  of  God  rendered.  And  forasmuch  as  all  the  Elect 
severally,  whilst  they  bear  with  com-ageous  hearts  the  con- 
flicts of  the  present  life,  are  providing  for  themselves  security 
under  the  terrors  of  the  future  Judgment,  it  is  rightly  sub- 
joined ; 

Ver.  22.  In  destriictioti  and  famine  thou  shall  laugh. 

47.  For  the  lost  shall  then  suffer '  destruction  and  famine,'  xxx. 
when,  being  condemned  in  the  last  Judgment,  they  ai'e  parted 
asunder  from   the   sight   of  '  the  Bread'  eternal.     For  it  is 
written.  Let  the  wicked  be  taken  away,  that  he  see  not  the  is.  26 
glory  of  God.     And  the  Lord  declares  by  His  own  lips,  /loi^x. 
am  the  living  Bread,  Which  came  down  from  heaven.    Thus  51.      ' 
at  one  and  the  same  time  both  '  destruction  and  famine' 
combine  to  torture  those,  who  not  only  feel  torments  without, 

but  farther  suffer  death  within  by  the  plague  of  starvation. 


348  Hell  burns  within  and  loithout.     The  Elect  glad  at  Judgment. 

Job  5,  Hell  '  destroys '  in  that  it  burns,  famine   kills,  in  that  the 
— - — Redeemer  hides  His  face  from  them.     For  well  and  iustly 

Moral.    ,  .  i       i         •  i  •  i       •  i  •        i    ' 

they  nave  their  recompense  both  withm  and  without,  m  that 
the  wretched  people  both  by  thought  and  by  deed  did 
commit  offence.  Whence  it  is  well  said  bv  the  Psalmist, 
Ps.21,9.  TJioii  shalt  make  them  as  a  Jiery  oven  in  the  time  of  Thine 
anger:  the  Lord  shall  confound  litem  in  His  ivrath^  and  the 
Jive  shall  devour  iheni.  For  that,  which  is  '  devoured'  by 
fire,  is  kindled  from  the  outside.  But  an  oven  is  set  on  fire 
within.  And  so  in  the  time  of  God's  anger  all  the  unrigh- 
teous are  both  '  made  as  a  fiery  oven,'  and  also  *  devoured 
by  the  fire,'  in  that  at  the  appearing  of  the  Judge,  when  all 
the  multitude  of  them  is  banished  from  the  sight  of  Him, 
both  within  the  conscience  is  set  on  fire  from  the  misery  of 

1  'Desi-want\  and  without  hell  torments  the  flesh. 

1       *  J 

48.  '  The  scourge  of  the  tongue'  too  may  be  understood 
to  mean  the  sentence  of  the  final  doom,  whereby  the  Just 

Matt.  Judge  saith  to  the  lost,  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed^  into 
everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  The 
righteous  man  then  is  '  hidden  from  the  scourge  of  the 
tongue,'  and  from  the  coming  woe,  because  in  that  exceeding 
strictness  of  doom,  he  is  then  comforted  with  the  mild  voice 

ver.  35,  of  the  Judge,  when  it  is  said.  For  I  was  an  hungred^  and 

^^'  ye  gave  Me  meat:  I ivas  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  Me  drink:  I 
was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  3Ie  in :  naked,  and  ye  clothed 
Me:  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  Me:  I  was  in  prison,  and 

ver.  34.  ye  came  unto  3Ie,  Before  which  it  is  premised;  Come,  ye 
blessed  of  3Iy  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Therefore  ^  in  destruction 
and  famine"  the  righteous  man  '  shall  laugh  ;'  for,  when  the 
final  vengeance  smites  all  the  wicked,  he  himself  joys  in  the 
glory  of  a  meet  reward.  Nor  does  he  at  that  time  any  longer 
compassionate  the  damned  by  virtue  of  his  human  nature. 

2  per      For,  incorporated  into  the  Divine  Justice  by  resemblance  % 
speciemj^^    is,  by  the   unshaken   force   of  interior  strictness,  made 

thoroughly  firm.  For  the  souls  of  the  Elect,  being  reared 
up  in  the  clear  light  of  the  Righteousness  above,  are  touched 
by  no  sense  of  compassion,  in  that  the  height  of  their  bliss 
makes  them  strangers  to  misery.     Hence  also  it  is  well  said 

Ps.  52,  bv  the   Psalmist;     The  righteous  also  shall   see   this,  and 

fi.  7. 


The  had  at  last  unpitied.     Satan  a  lion.  349 

shall  fea}',  and  shall  laugh  at  hvf/,  and  shall  say,  Lo,  this  Book 
is  the  man  that   made  not   God  his  helper.     For  now  the 


righteous  see  the  wicked  and  fear,  then  they  shall  see  and 

^  laugh.     For  because  they  may  now  fall  in  imitation  of  them, 

here  they  are  holden  of  fear,  but  because  they  cannot  then 

advantage  the  damned,  there  they  entertain   no  sympathy. 

/  Therefore,  that  they  should  not  commiserate  those  that  are 

\    doomed  to  eternal  woe,  they  read  in  that  very  justice  of  the 

'    Judge  wherein  they  exist  in  bliss.     For,  a  thing  which  it  is 

not  right  to  imagine  of  them,  they  lower  the  character  of  the 

happiness  vouchsafed  them,  if,  when  placed  in  the  kingdom, 

they  wish  for  something  which  they  never  can  accomj^lish. 

But   whosoever  orders    himself  after    the   precepts   of  life, 

already  tastes  here  below  tlie  first-fruits  of  that  secure  estate 

which  shall  last  for  ever,  so  that  he  has  no  fear  of  our  old 

enemy ;  nor  at  the  coming  on  of  the  crisis  of  death  in  any 

degree  dreads  his  violent  assault.     For  to  the  righteous  the  ' 

beginning  of  their  recompense  is   most  commonly  nothing 

else  than  the  very  security  of  their  minds  in  dying.     Hence 

it  is  rightly  added, 

Neither  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  the  beast  of  the  earth, 
49.  For  our  crafty  foe  is  called  '  a  beast  of  the  earth,'  in  xxxi. 
that  he  ravins  with  the  violence  of  his  savage  nature,  to  seize 
upon  the  souls  of  sinners  at  the  hour  of  their  death.     For 
those  whom   he  deludes  by  flattery  during  their  lifetime,  he 
seizes  with   cruelty  when  they  are  dying.     Contrary  where- 
unto  the  Lord  gives  a  promise  concerning  the  Church  of  the 
Elect  through  the  Prophet,  The  evil  beast  shall  not  go  up  is.  35,9. 
thereon.     They  then  in  dying  fear  the  '  beast  of  the  earth,' 
who  when  living  fear  not  the  power  of  their  Maker.     For 
good  men,  because  they  submit  themselves  from  the  core  of 
their  heart  to  the  dread  of  God,  put  away  every  weight  of 
fear  arising  from  the  adversary's  coming.     For  it  is  hence 
that  the  Psalmist  beseeches  the   Lord,  in  these  words,  LestV$.7^2. 
he  tear  my  soul  as  a  lion.     Hence  again  he  says,  Hear  my  ps.  64 
voice,  0  God,  in  my  prayer,  preserve  my  soul  from  fear  of  the  ^'  ^* 
enemy.     For  while  they  live  they  perfectly  fear  the  Judge, 
that  when  they  die  they  may  not  dread  the  accuser.     Well 
then  is  it  said.  Neither  shall  thou  be  afraid  of  the  beast  of 
the  earth.     As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  Forasmuch  as  thou 


350     21ie  persevering  joined  to  Saints,  helped  on  by  enemies. 

Job  5,  art  not  now  overcome  by  the  enemy  in  his  alluring  address, 
thou  shalt  not  hereafter  fear  him  in  his  rage.     But  when  we 


live  well,  It  IS  very  needful  to  be  on  our  guard,  that  the 
mind,  looking  down  upon  others,  be  not  lifted  up  by  the 
pride  of  standing  alone.  Hence  it  is  that  the  blessing  of 
fellowship  is  fitly  called  to  mind,  where  the  words  are  im- 
mediately introduced  thereupon, 

But  with  the  stones  of  the  countries  shall  be  thy  covenant. 
xxxii.  50.  The  Churches  of  the  nations  are  like  separate  countries 
in  the  world,  which,  while  they  be  planted  in  one  faith,  are 
separated  by  a  diversity  of  customs  and  of  tongues. '  What 
then  do  we  take  the  stones  of  the  countries  to  mean  but  the 
Elect  ones  of  the  Church,  to  whom  it  is  declared  by  the 

1  Pet.    voice  of  him  who   was  the   first   among   the   teachers,   Ye 

2  5 

'   '       also  as  lively  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house  ?     Con- 
cerning whom   the   Lord   by  His  Prophet   promises  Holy 

Is.  54,  Church,  saying.  Behold,  I  will  lay  thy  stones  in  order. 
Whoso  then  lives  aright,  joins  himself  in  covenant '  with  the 
stones  of  the  countries.'  For  herein,  that  he  conquers  the 
desires  of  the  world,  without  doubt  he  ties  his  life  to  an 
imitation  of  the  Saints  that  have  gone  before.  But  when  he 
is  departing  from  the  practice  of  the  world,  the  assaults  of 
malicious  spirits  increase,  which  nevertheless,  the  more  they 
afflict  a  man  in  sorrow  of  heart,  bow  him  the  more  humbly 
to  his  Creator.     And  hence  it  is  added. 

And  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  be  peacemakers  to  thee. 

xxxiii.  51.  First  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  he  does  not  say,  '  made 
peaceful,'  but,  *  peacemakers,'  that  is  to  say,  not  that  they  are 
at  peace,  but  that  they  make  peace;  for  the  crafty  foes  in 
making  plots  distress,  but  the  distressed  soul  delights  the 
more  in  her  return  to  the  heavenly  home,  the  more  she  lives 
toiling  in  this  woful  place  of  exile,  and  most  truly  abases 
herself  to  the  gracious  regard  of  her  Helper,  when  she 
considers  the  most  violent  plots  of  the  enemy  against  her. 
The  beasts  of  the  earth  then  are  rendered  '  peacemakers'  to 
the  Elect,  in  that  the  malignant  spirits,  when  they  bear  down 
the  hearts  of  the  good  by  their  hostility,  drive  them  to  the 
love  of  God  against  their  will.  Thus  there  arises  a  firmer 
peace  with  God,  from  the  same  source,  whence  a  tougher 
fight  is  occasioned  us  by  our  adversaries. 


lHvil  desires  repressed  bring  peace.  351 

52.  By  the  *  beasts  of  the  earth'  too  may  be  understood  the  Book 

motions  of  the  flesh,  which,  while   they  gall  the  mind  by '— 

prompting   conduct   which   is    contrary  to   reason,  rise   up 
against  us  like  beasts.     But  when  the  heart  is  bowed  down 
under  the  Divine  Law,  even  the  incitements  of  the  flesh  are 
reduced,   so    that,   though  in  tempting  us   they  give  a  low 
muttering,  yet  they  never  mount  so  high  as  to  the  execution 
of  the  deeds,  as  to  the  madness  of  open  biting.     For  who 
that  still  subsists  in  this  conniptible  flesh,  completely  tames 
these  beasts   of  the   earth,  when   that  preeminent  Preacher 
that  was  caught  up  to  the   third  heaven,  says,  But   I  see'Rom,7j 
another  law  in  my  tiiemhers,  warring  against  the  law  of  my     ' 
mind,  and  bringing  me  into   captivity  to  the  law  of  sin, 
which  is  my  members.     But  it  is   one  thing  to  see  these 
beasts  raging  in  the  field  of  practice,  and  another  to  hold 
them  ravening  within  the  door  of  the  heart.     For  when  they 
be  forced  back  within  the  bars  of  continence,  though  they 
still  roar  by  tempting,  yet,  as  we   have   said,  they  go   not 
such  lengths  as  the  bite  of  unlawful  practice.     The  beasts  of 
the  field  then  are  peacemakers,  in  that  though  the  motions 
of  the  flesh  beat  high  in  the   desire,  yet  they  never  assail 
us  with  the  open  resistance  of  deeds,  (though  by  this  same 
circumstance,  that  they  are  called  *  peacemakers,'  even  this 
same  that  we  have  said  of  malicious  spirits  is  not  unsuitably 
understood.)     For  the  motions  of  the  flesh  '  make  peace'  for 
u&  with  God,  when  they  offer   opposition  by  tempting  us. 
For  the  mind  of  the  righteous  man,  in  that  his  way  is  directed 
to  the  realms  above,  is  sore  bestead  by  a  grievous  war  arising 
from  the  corruptible  body.    And  if  at  any  time  it  be  hindered 
in  heavenly    aspirations    by   any   enjoyment    of   this   world 
however   slight,  by  that  very  war   of  temptation,  which  it 
undergoes,  it  is  urged  on  to  set  all  its  affections  in  that, 
which  is  disturbed  by  no  opposition.     Whence  it  comes  to 
pass  that  it  recalls  to  mind  the  interior  repose,  and  fleeing 
from  the  enticements  of  the  flesh,  sighs  after  it  with  a  full 
affection.    For  temptation  constrains  every  man  to  mark  from 
whence  and  whereunto  he  is  fallen,  who  after  he  has  forsaken 
the  peace  of  God,  feels  a  strife  rise  up  against  him  from  out 
of  himself,  and  then  he  more  truly  sees  what  he  has  lost  of 
the  assured  love  of  God,  who  having  fallen  down  to  himself. 


352     Peace  for  the  body.     Man  sees  himself  in  his  fellow. 
Job  5,  finds  his  own  self  insulted  within  himself.     The  beasts  of  the 

24 

,, — '- — earth  then  make  peace  for  us,  in  that  the  motions  of  the 

Moral.  .  ^    .  .  ,          .     . 

flesh,  whilst  by  offermg  temptation  they  irritate  us,  urge  us 
forwards  to  the  love  of  the  interior  repose.  Now  it  is  rightly 
added, 

Ver.  24.  And  thou  shalt  know  thai  thy  tabernacle  shall  be 
in  peace. 

xxxiv.  53.  In  holy  Scripture  full  peace  is  described  in  one  way, 
and  peace  in  its  beginning  in  another.     For  '  Truth'  gave  to 

JohnU,  His  Disciples  peace  in  its  beginning,  when  He  said,  Peace 
I  leave  icith  you;  My  peace  1  give  imto  you.  And  Simeon 
desired   to  have  perfect  peace,  when    he   besought  saying, 

Luke  2,  JS^ow  leitest  Tliou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to 
Thy  word.  For  our  peace  begins  in  longing  for  the  Creator, 
but  it  is  perfected  by  a  clear  vision.  For  it  will  then  be 
perfect,  when  oar  mind  is  neither  blinded  by  ignorance,  nor 
moved  by  the  assaults  of  its  fleshly  part.  But  forasmuch  as 
we  touch  upon  its  first  beginnings,  when  we  either  subject 
the  soul  to  God  or  the  flesh  to  the  soul,  the  '  tabernacle'  of 
the  righteous  man  is  said  to  '  have  peace,'  in  that  his  body, 
which  he  inhabits  by  his  mind,  is  held  in  from  the  froward 
motions  of  its  desires  under  the  controlling  hand  of  righte- 
ousness But  what  advantage  is  it  to  restrain  the  flesh  by 
continence,  if  the  mind  is  uninstructed  to  expand  itself  by 
compassion  in  the  love  of  our  neighbour.?  For  that  chasteness 
of  the  flesh  is  as  nothing,  which  is  not  recommended  by 
sweetness  of  spirit.  Whence  after  the  '  peace  of  the  taber- 
nacle' it  is  fitly  subjoined, 

And  thou  shall  visit  thy  likeness,  and  shalt  not  sin. 

XXXV.  54.  For  the  likeness  of  man  is  another  man.  For  a  fellow- 
creature  is  rightly  called  our  '  likeness,'  in  that  in  him  we 
discern  what  we  ourselves  are.  Now  in  the  visiting  of  the 
body  we  go  to  our  neighbour  by  the  accession  of  steps,  but 
in  the  spiritual  visiting,  we  are  led  not  by  the  footstep  but 
by  affection.  He  then  '  visits  his  likeness,'  whoever  directs 
his  way  to  one,  whom  he  sees  to  be  like  to  himself  in  nature, 
by  the  footste))s  of  love,  so  that  by  seeing  his  own  case  in 
another,  he  may  collect  liom  himself  how  to  condescend  to 
another's  weakness.  He  '  visits  his  likeness,'  who,  that  he 
may  remodel  another  in  himself,  takes   account  of  himself 


Man  should  see  }d  in  self  in  his  neighbour.  353 

in  another.     For  hence  '  Truth,'  in  telling  by  the  mouth  of  Book 
Moses  what  had  been  done,  denoted  what  was  to  be  done, '— 


saying,  And  the  earth  brought  forth  grass  and  herb  yielding  Gen.  i, 
seed  after  his  kind,  and  the  tree  yielding  fruit,  each  one  ^* 
bearing  seed  after  his  kind.     For  '  the  tree  produces  seed 
after  its  kind'  when  our  mhid  gathers  from  itself  thought  for 
another,  and  produces  the  fructification  of  well  doing.     Hence 
the  wise  man  saith,  Do  not  that  to  any,  which  thou  wouldest^f^-  ^> 
not  have  done  to   thyself.     Hence  the  Lord   saith   in   the 
Gospel,  Therefore  all  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  Matt.  7; 
should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  to  them.     As  if  He  said  in  plain  ^' 
words,  ^  Visit  your  likeness  in  another  man,  and  from  your 
own  selves  learn  what  conduct  it  behoves  you  to  exhibit  to 
others.'     Hence  Paul  says,  And  unto  the  Jews  I  became  as  i  Cor. 
a  Jew,  that  I  might  gain  the  Jews;  to  them  that  are  under  ^i^ 
the  law,  as  under  the  law,  that  I  might  gain  them  that  are 
under  the  law;   to  them  that  are  ivithout  law,  as  without 
law,  {being  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law  to 
Christ,)     And  soon  after,  /  am  made  all  things  to  all  men,  ib.  22. 
that  I  might  save  all.     Not  indeed  that  the  great  Preacher, 
to  become  like  a  Jew,  broke  away  into  faithlessness;  nor,  that 
he  might  become  '  as  one  under  the  law,'  did  he  turn  back 
to  the  fleshly  sacrifice;  nor,  that  he  might  become  ^  all  things 
to  all  men,' did  he  change  his  singleness  of  mind  into  variety 
of  deceit;  but  by  lowering  himself,  not  by  falling,  he  drew 
near  to  the  unbelievers,  to  this  end,  that  by  taking  each  one 
into  himself  and  transforming   himself  into   each    one,  by 
sympathizing  with  them,  he  might  gather  what  it  was,  that, 
if  he  himself  were  like  them,  he  would  justly  have  desired 
should  be  bestowed  upon  him  by  others;  and  might  go  along 
with  every  eiTing  person  so  much  the  more  to  the  purpose, 
in  proportion  as  he  had  learnt  the  method  of  his  salvation  by 
the   consideration  of  his   own  case.     Well  then  is  it  said, 
And  thou  shall  visit  thy  likeness,  and  shall  not  sin.     For  sin 
is  then  perfectly  conquered,  when  every  one  sees  from  the 
likeness   of   himself,    how    to    expand   in   the    love    of   his 
neighbour.     But   when    the    flesh   is   kept   in    check    from 
evil    practices,   when    the    mind    is    exercised    in    virtuous 
habits,  it  remains  that  every  one  should  by  word  of  mouth 
teach  the  life,  which  in  his  own  ways  he  observes.     For  he 

2  a 


854  The  righteous  hear  fruit  hy  care  for  others. 

Job  6,  gathers  abundant  fruits  of  his  preaching,  who  sows  before 
,,1 — '- — the  seeds  of  welldoing.     Whence   after  the  '  peace  of  the 
tabernacle'  and  the  '  visiting  of  our  Ukeness,'  it  is  rightly 
subjoined, 

Ver.  25.  Thou  shalt  know  also  that  thy  seed  shall  be 
manifold,  and  thine  offspring  as  the  grass  of  the  earth. 
xxxvi.  55.  For  after  the  '  peace  of  his  tabernacle,'  after  *  the 
visiting  of  our  likeness,'  the  manifold  seed  of  the  righteous 
man  ariseth,  in  that  after  the  macerating  of  the  members  and 
the  fulness  of  the  moral  virtues,  the  word  of  preaching  is 
bestowed  upon  him  so  much  the  more  productive,  in  propor- 
tion as  it  is  anticipated  in  his  breast  by  the  tillage  of  perfect 
practice.  For  he  receives  eloquence  to  speak  well,  who 
expands  the  bosom  of  his  heart  by  the  exercises  of  right 
living.  Nor  does  the  conscience  hinder  the  speaker,  when 
the  life  goes  before  the  tongue.  It  is  hence  that  the  Egyptians, 
who,  by  Joseph's  management,  were  subjected  to  a  state  of 
public  servitude,  when  they  humble  themselves  by  submitting 
their  persons  to  the  king's  power,  carry  away  corn  even  for 
seed.  For  we  receive,  even  when  free,  fruit  to  eat,  when  we 
are  at  the  same  time  fed  by  the  sacred  word,  and  yet  in  the 
gratification  of  our  pleasures  roam  after  different  objects, 
which  we  seek  after  in  this  world.  But  when  we  become 
slaves,  we  receive  corn  for  seed  too,  in  that  while  we  are 
made  wholly  subject  to  God,  we  are  replenished  further  with 
the  word  of  preaching.  And  since  a  vast  progeny  of  faithful 
souls  succeeds,  when  holy  preaching  is  first  bestowed,  after 
the  multiplying  of  the  seed,  it  is  rightly  subjoined.  And  thine 
offspring  as  the  grass  of  the  earth.  The  progeny  of  the 
righteous  is  compared  to  the  grass  of  the  earth,  in  that  he 
who  is  born  in  a  copy  of  him,  while  he  quits  the  decaying 
glory  of  the  present  life,  comes  out  green  with  hope  in  the 
things  of  eternity.  Or  truly,  the  progeny  of  the  righteous 
springeth  up  like  '  the  grass,'  in  that  while  he  shews  forth 
by  his  living  what  he  declares  by  his  preaching,  an  in- 
numerable multitude  of  followers  arises.  But  whosoever 
already  looks  down  upon  all  earthly  objects  of  desire,  whoever 
spreads  himself  out  in  the  labours  of  an  active  life,  finds  it 
by  no  means  suffice  him  to  do  great  things  without,  unless 
by   c()ntem])lation   he    also    have   power   to    penetrate    into 


Burial  to  the  world  in  action  and  in  contemplation.      ^^bb 

interior  mysteries.     Hence  too  the  words  are  thereupon  fitly  Book 
introduced,  '— 


Ver.  26.  TJiou  shall  come  to  thy  grave  in  fulness^  like  as  a 
shock  of  corn-  cometh  in  in  his  season. 

56.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  name  of  the  grave,  saving  xxxvii, 
a  life  of  contemplation  ?  which  as  it  were  buries  us,  dead  to 
this  world,  in  that  it  hides  us  in  the  interior  world  away  from 
all  earthly  desires.     For  they  being  dead  to  the  exterior  life, 
were  also  buried  by  contemplation,  to  whom  Paul  said.  For 
ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.     An 
active  life  also  is  a  grave,  in  that  it  covers  us,  as  dead,  from 
evil  works;  but  the  contemplative  life  more  perfectly  buries 
us,  in   that   it   wholly  severs  us  from  all    worldly  courses. 
Whoever  then  has  already  subdued  the  insolencies  of  the  flesh 
in  himself,  has  this  task  left  him,  to  discipline  his  mind  by  the 
exercises  of  holy  practice.     And  whosoever  opens  his  mind 
in  holy  works,  has  over  and  above  to  extend  it  to  the  secret 
pursuits    of  inward    contemplation.     For   he   is  no  perfect 
preacher,  who  either,  from  devotion  to  contemplation,  neglects 
works  that  ought  to  be  done,  or,  from  urgency  in  business, 
puts  aside  the  duties  of  contemplation.     For  it  is  hence  that 
Abraham  buries  his  wife  after  death  in  a  double^  sepulchre, '  m  ^j^e- 
in  that  every  perfect  preacher  buries  his  soul,  dead  to  the  !^^^^^ 
desires   of  the   present   life,  under   the    covering   of  good  ^^'^i'-''^* 
practice  and  of  contemplation,  that  the  soul  which  aforetime,  Gen?23 
sensible  of  the  desires  of  the  world,  was  living  in  death,  may  ^^' 
as  it  were,  without  being  obnoxious  to  sense,  lie  buried  from 
carnal  concupiscence  under  an  active  and  contemplative  life. 
It  is  hence  that  the  Redeemer  of  mankind  in  the  day  time 
exhibits   His  miracles  in   cities,  and    spends   the  night  in 
devotion  to  prayer  upon  the  mountain,  namely,  that  He  may 
teach  all  perfect  preachers,  that  they  should  neither  entirely 
leave  the  active  life,  from  love  of  the  speculative,  nor  wholly 
slight  the  joys  of  contemplation  from  excess  in  working,  but 
in  quiet  imbibe  by  contemplation,  what  in  employment  they 
may  pour  back  to  their  neighbours  by  word  of  mouth.     For 
by  contemplation  they  rise  into   the  love  of  God,  but   by 
preaching  they  return  back  to  the  service  of  their  neighbour. 
Hence  with  Moses,  whilst  a  heifer  is  slaughtered  in  sacrifice.  Numb. 
scarlet  wool  twice  dyed  is  enjoined  to  be  offered  together ^^'^~^* 

2  A  2 


356     Some  minds  fitter  for  action,  some  for  contemplation. 

Job  5,  with  hyssop  and  cedar  wood.     For  we  slay  a  heifer,  when  we 
vv — '- — kill  our  flesh  to  its  lust  of  o^ratification;  and  this  we  offer 

Moral.      _  "  ' 

with  hyssop  and  cedar  and  scarlet  wool,  in  that  together  with 
the  mortifying  of  the  flesh,  we  burn  the  incense  of  faith, 
hope,  and  charity.  Tlie  hyssop  is  of  use  to  purify  our  inward 
parts;  and  Peter  Sdiy^, purifying  their  hearts  by  fait Ji.  Cedar 
wood  never  decays  by  rotting,  in  that  no  end  finishes  the 
1  Pet.  1,  hope  of  heavenly  things.  Whence  too  Peter  saith.  He  hath 
^'  begotten  2cs  again  by  a  lively  hope  by  the   resurrection  of 

Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead;  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible, 
undefiled^  and  that  fadeth  not  away.  Scarlet  wool  flames 
with  the  redness  of  its  hue,  in  ihat  charity  sets  on  fire  the 
heart  she  fills.  Whence  also  '  Truth'  saith  in  the  Gospel, 
/  am  come  to  send  fire  on  the  earth.  But  scarlet  wool  twice 
dyed  is  ordered  to  be  offered,  that  in  the  sight  of  the  internal 
Judge  our  charity  may  be  coloured  with  the  love  both  of 
God  and  of  our  neighbour,  that  the  converted  soul  may 
neither  so  delight  in  repose  for  the  sake  of  the  love  of  God, 
as  to  put  aside  the  care  and  service  of  our  neighbour,  nor 
busying  itself  for  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  be  so  wedded 
thereto,  that  entirely  forsaking  quiet,  it  extinguish  in  itself 
the  fire  of  love  of  the  Most  High.  Whosoever  then  has 
already  offered  himself  as  a  sacrifice  to  God,  if  he  desires 
perfection,  must  needs  take  care  that  he  not  only  stretch 
himself  out  to  breadth  of  practice,  but  likewise  up  to  the 
heights  of  contemplation. 

57.  But  herein  it  is  above  all  things  necessary  to  know, 
' '  *'°."",  that  the  compositions'  of  souls  are  infinitely  varied  one  with 

spersio,  ^  .... 

dough,  another,  for  there  are  some  of  such  inactivity  of  mind,  that, 
paste.  '^^  ^^  labours  of  business  fall  upon  them,  they  give  way  at 
the  very  beginning  of  their  work,  and  there  be  some  so 
restless,  that  if  they  have  cessation  from  labour,  they  have 
only  the  worse  labour,  in  that  they  are  subject  to  worse 
tumults  of  mind,  in  proportion  as  they  have  more  time  and 
liberty  for  their  thoughts.  Whence  it  behoves  that  neither 
the  tranquil  mind  should  open  itself  wide  in  the  immoderate 
exercising  of"  works,  nor  the  restless  mind  stint  itself  in 
devotion  to  contemplation.  For  often  they,  who  might  have 
contemplated  God  in  quiet,  have  fallen,  being  overcharged 
with  business;  and  often  they,  who  might  live  advantageously 


1  < 


Better  lose  the  right  eye^  (contemplation y)  than  Truth.    357 

occupied  with  the  service  of  their  fellow-creatures,  are  killed  Book 
by  the  sword  of  their  quiescence.     It  is  hence  that  some '— 


restless  spirits,  whilst  by  contemplation  they  hunt  out  more 
than  their  wits  compass,  launch  out  even  to  the  length  of 
wrong  doctrines,  and,  whilst  they  have  no  mind  to  be  the 
disciples  of  Truth  in  a  spirit  of  humility,  they  become  the 
masters  of  falsities.     It  is  hence   that  '  Truth'  saith  by  His 
own  lips.  And  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,  «/«c/Matt.5, 
cast  it  from  thee;  for  it  is  projitahle  for  thee  to  enter  if^to-^'^^^g 
life  with  one  eye,  rather  than  having  ttco  eyes  he  cast  i?ito^7. 
hell  fire.     For  the  two  lives,  the  active  and  the  contemplative, 
when  they  be  preserved  in  the  soul,  are  accounted  as  two 
eyes  in  the  face.     Thus  the  right  eye  is  the  contemplative 
life,  and  the  left  the  active  life.     But,  as  we  have  said,  there 
be  some,  who  are  quite  unable  to  behold  the  world  above, 
and  spiritual  things,  with  the  eye  of  discernment,  yet  enter 
upon   the   heights  of  contemplation,  and  therefore,  by  the 
mistake  of  a  perverted  understanding,  they  fall  away  into  the 
pit  of  misbelief.     These  then  the  contemplative  life,  adopted 
to  an  extent  beyond  their  powers,  obliges  to  fall  from  the 
truth,  which    same  persons  the  active  life    by  itself  might 
have  kept  safe  in  lowliness  of  mind  in  the  firm  seat  of  their 
uprightness.     To  these  '  Truth'  rightly  addresses  the  warning 
which  we  said  before.  And  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck 
it  out,  and  cast  it  from  thee;  for  it  is  good  for  thee  to  enter 
into  life  with  one  eye,  rather  than  having  two  eyes  to  he  cast 
into  hell  fire.    As  if  He  said  in  plain  words;  '  When  thou  art 
not  qualified  for  the  contemplative  life  by  a  fitting  degree  of 
discretion,  keep  more  safely  the  active  life  alone,  and  when 
thou  failest  in  that  which  thou  choosest  as  great,  be  content 
with  that  which  thou  heedest  as  very  little,  that  if  by  the 
contemplative  life  thou  art  forced  to  fall  from  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  thou  mayest  by  the  active  life  alone   be  able 
to    enter   into    the  kingdom    of   heaven   at   least   with    one 
eye.'     Hence  He  says  again.  But  whoso  shall  offend  one  o/Matt. 
these  little  ones  ichich  believe  in  Me,  it  were  better  for  him  ^^'  ^* 
that  a  millstone  were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and  that  he 
were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea.     What  is  denoted  by 
*  the   sea,'  but  this  present  state   of  being?    what  by   '  the 
millstone,'  but  earthly  practice,  which  while  it  binds  down 


358        Fear  our  safety  in  action,  Love  in  contemplation. 

Job  6,  the  neck  of  the  soul  by  fooHsh  desires,  sends  it  out  into  the 
-- — '- — round  of  labour.  Thus  there  are  some,  who,  while  they 
quit  earthly  courses  and  rise  beyond  the  powers  oi  their 
understanding  in  pursuance  of  the  exercises  of  contemplation, 
having  laid  aside  humility,  not  only  cast  themselves  into 
error,  but  separate  any  that  be  weak  from  the  bosom  of 
unity;  and  thus  ^  it  would  be  better  for  him,  that  offends 
one  of  the  least,  with  a  millstone  fastened  to  his  neck,  to  be 
cast  into  the  sea,'  in  that  indeed  it  would  have  been  more 
expedient  for  the  froward  mind,  if,  busied  with  the  world,  it 
were  employed  in  earthly  matters,  than,  in  the  exercises  of 
contemplation,  to  be  free  to  work  the  destruction  of  numbers. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  it  were  not  that  the  contemplative  life 
suited  some  minds  more  than  the  active  life,  the  Lord  would 
Ps.  46,  never  say  by  the  voice  of  the  Psalmist,  Be  still,  and  know 
that  I  am  God. 

58.  But  herein  it  is  necessary  to  know,  that  often  at  one 
and  the  same  time  love  stimulates  inactive  souls  to  work, 
and  fear  keeps  back  restless  souls  in  the  exercise  of  con- 
templation. For  a  weight  of  fear  is  an  anchor  of  the  heart, 
and  very  often  it  is  tossed  by  the  stormy  sea  of  thoughts,  but 
is  held  fast  by  the  moorings  of  its  self-control ;  nor  does  the 
tempest  of  its  disquietude  make  shipwreck  of  it,  in  that 
perfect  charity  holds  it  fast  on  the  shore  of  the  love  of  God*^. 
Whence  it  is  necessary  that  whoever  eagerly  prosecutes  the 
exercises  of  contemplation,  first  question  himself  with  par- 
ticularity, how  much  he  loves.  For  the  force  of  love  is  an 
engine  of  the  soul,  which,  while  it  draws  it  out  of  the  world, 
lifts  it  on  high.  Let  him  then  first  examine  whether  in 
searching  after  the  highest  things  he  loves,  whether  in  loving 
he  fears,  whether  he  knows  either  how  to  apprehend  unknown 
truths,  while  he  loves  them,  or  not  being  apprehended  to 
reverence  them  in  cherishing  fear.  For  in  contemplation, 
if  love  does  not  stimulate  the  mind,  the  dulness  of  its  tepidity 
stupefies  it.  If  fear  does  not  weigh  on  it,  sense  lifts  it  by 
vain  objects  to  the  mist  of  error,  and  when  the  door  of  secret 
things,  being  closed  against  it,  is  slow  in  being  opened,  merely 
by  its  own  presumption  alone  it  is  forced  the  fartlier  off  there- 

<*  See  St.  Macarius  Horn.  x.   '  The   souIj*  that  are  lovers  of  Truth  and  of 
God  '  &c.  also  Horn.  viii.  fin. 


High  things  not  for  the  sensual.     Action  tests  the  spirit.  359 

from,  for  it  strives  to  force  a  way  to  that  which  it  seeks  after  Book. 

without  finding,  and  when  the  proud  mind  takes  falsehood '— 

for  truth,  in  proportion  as  it  is  advancing  the  step   as   if 
inwards,  it    is   directing  it  without.      Thus   it   is   for   this 
reason  that   the  Lord,  when  about  to  give  the  Law,  came 
down   in  fire   and  in   smoke ;    in  that  He  both   enhghtens 
the  lowly  by  the  clearness  of  His  manifestation  of  Himself, 
and  darkens  the  eyes  of  the  highminded  by  the  dimness  of 
error.     First  then  the  soul  must  be  cleansed  from  all  affec- 
tion for  earthly  glory,  and  from  the  gratification  of  carnal 
concupiscence,  and  next  it  is  to  be  lifted  up  in  the  ken  of 
contemplation.     Hence  too,  when  the  Law  is  given  to  them, 
the  people  are  forbidden  the  Mount,  namely,  that  they  wlio, 
by  the  fi-ailty  of  their  minds,  still  have  their  affections  set 
upon  earthly  objects,  may  not  venture  to  take  cognizance  of 
things  above.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  said,  And  if  a  beast  fj^"^' 
touch  the  mountain,  it  shall  he  stoned.    For  '  a  beast  touches  rJeb.i2, 
the   moimtain,'   when  the   mind,   which  is  bowed  down   to 
irrational  desu'es,  lifts  itself  to  the  heights  of  contemplation. 
But  it  is  '  smitten  with  stones,'  in  that  being  unable  to  bear 
the  highest  things,  it  is  killed  by  the  mere  blows  of  the 
weight  on  high. 

59.  Let  all  then  that  strive  to  lay  hold  of  the  summit  of 
perfection,  when  they  desire  to  occupy  the  citadel  of  contem- 
plation, first  try  themselves,  by  exercising,  in   the  field  of 
practice,    that    they    may   heedfiilly   acquaint    themselves, 
if  they  now   no  longer   bring  mischiefs  upon  their  neigh- 
bours,  if    when  brought   upon    them  by  their   neighbours, 
they   bear   them   with    composure   of  mind,   if  when   tem- 
poral advantages  are  put  in  their  way,  the  mind  is  never 
dissipated  by  joy,  if,  when  they   are  withdrawn,  it  is  not 
stung  by  overmuch  regret,  and  then  let  them  reflect,  if,  wlien 
they  return  inwardly  to  themselves,  in  this  work  of  theirs 
of  exploring  spiritual  things,  they  never  draw  along   with 
them  the  shadows  of  corporeal  objects,  or  when  drawn  aloiig, 
as  they  may  be,  if  they  drive  them  off  with  the  hand   of 
discretion^;  if,  when  they  long  to  behold  the  unencompassed  '  al.  dis- 
light,  they  put  down  all  images  of  their  own  compass,  or  in  *^\°^^" 
that  which  they  seek  to  reach  unto  above  themselves,  con-  severity. 
quer  that  which  they  are.     Hence  it  is  rightly  said  here. 


360      Leah^  the  active  life,  before  Rachel,  the  contemplative. 
Job  5,  Thou   shall    come    to    thii   crave   in    abundance.     For   the 

26. 

r-; — '■ —  perfect  man  does  '  come  to  the  errave  in  abundance,'  in  that 
he  first  gathers  together  the  works  of  an  active  life,  and  then 
by  contemplation  wholly  hides  from  this  world  his  fleshly 
sense,  which  is  now  dead.     Hence  too  it  is  fitly  subjoined, 
Like  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  in  his  season. 

60.  For  the  season  for  action  comes  first,  for  contempla- 
tion last.  Whence  it  is  needful  that  every  perfect  man  first 
discipline  his  mind  in  virtuous  habits,  and  aftenvards  lay  it 
up  in  the  granary  of  rest.  For  it  is  hence  that  he,  who  was 
left  of  the  legion  of  devils  at  the  bidding  of  our  Lord,  seats 
himself  at  His  Saviour's  feet,  receives  the  words  of  instruc- 
tion, and  eagerly  desires  to  leave  his  country  in  company 
with  the  Author  of  his  recovery,  but  That  very  '  Truth'  Him- 

LukeS,  self  Who  vouchsafed  to  him  recovery,  tells  him.  Return  first 
39.  &c.         '        .  •^'  ?  c/ 

nnto  thine  oiv}i  house,  and  shew  what  great  things  God  hath 

done  nnto  thee.  For  when  we  have  the  least  particle  im- 
parted to  us  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  we  are  no  longer 
inclined  to  return  to  our  human  affairs,  and  we  shrink  from 
burthening  ourselves  with  the  wants  of  our  neighbours.  We 
seek  the  rest  of  contemplation,  and  love  only  that  which 
refreshes  without  toil.  But  after  we  are  cured,  the  Lord 
sends  us  home.  He  bids  us  relate  the  things  that  have  been 
done  with  us,  so  as  that  in  fact  the  soul  should  first  spend  itself 
in  labour,  and  that  afterwards  it  may  be  refreshed  by  con- 
templation. 

61.  It  is  hence  that  Jacob  serves  for  Rachel,  and  gets 
Gen.29,  Leah,  and  that  it  is  said  to  him.  It  is  not  the  custom  in  our 

26.  . 

country  to  give  the  youngest  before  the  first-born.  For 
Rachel  is  rendered  '  the  beginning  seen  %'  but '  Leah,' '  labo- 
rious.' And  what  is  denoted  by  Rachel  but  the  contempla- 
tive life  }  W^hat  by  Leah,  but  the  active  life  ^  For  in  con- 
templation '  the  Beginning,'  which  is  God,  is  the  object  we 
seek,  but  in  action  we  labour  under  a  weighty  bundle  of 
wants.  Whence  on  the  one  hand  Rachel  is  beautiful  but 
barren,  Leah  weak  eyed,  but  fruitful,  truly  in  that  when  the 

e   Or  rather  '  one  seeing  the  Begin-  the  new  Benedictine  ed.t.  2.  Ben.     The 

ning.'     Such  is  the  meaning  of  Rachel  meaning  generally  given  to  the  name 

if  derived   from    nS"t  ^"'^  hbr\-     ^^^  i^  *  ^  sheep.'      And   this    St.    Jerome 

Hier.  de  Norn.  Propr.  and  the  notes  in  mentions. 


Mary  above  Martha.     Action  in  heavenly  creatures.     361 

mind  seeks  the  ease  of  contemplation,  it  sees  more,  but  it  is  Book 
less  productive  in  children  to  God.     But  when  it  betakes 


itself  to  the  laborious  work  of  preaching,  it  sees  less,  but  it 
bears  more  largely.     Accordingly  after  the  embrace  of  Leah, 
Jacob  attains  to  Rachel,  in   that  every  one  that  is  perfect  is 
first  joined  to  an  active  life  in  productiveness,  and  afterwards 
united  to  a  contemplative  life  in  rest.     For  that  the  life  of 
contemplation  is  less  indeed  in  time^,  but  greater  in  -  value  i i.e. age 
than  the  active,  we  are  shewn  by  the  words  of  the  Holy  Gospel,  "^merito 
wherein  two  women  are  described  to  have  acted  in  different 
ways.    For  Mary  sat  at  our  Redeemer's  feet,  hearing  His  words, 
but  Martha  eagerly  prosecuted  bodily  services ;   and  when 
Martha  made  complaint  against  Mary's  inactivity,  she  heard 
the  words,  Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  careful  and  troubled LukeJO, 
about  many  things;   but  one  thing  is  needful:   and  Mary     '     * 
hath  chosen  that  good  part,  which-  shall  not  be  taken  away 
from  her.     For  what  is  set  forth  by  Mary,  who  sitting  down 
gave  ear  to  the  words  of  our  Lord,  saving  the  life  of  con- 
templation ?    and  what  by  Martha,  so  busied  with  outward 
services,  saving  the  life  of  action  ?     Now  Martha's  concern 
is  not  reproved,  but  that  of  Mary  is  even  commended.     For 
the  merits  of  the  active  life  are  great,  but  of  the  contempla- 
tive, far  better.     Whence  Mary's  part  is  said  to  be  '  never 
taken  away  from  her,'  in  that  the  works  of  the  active  life 
pass  away  together  with  the   body,   while   the  joys   of  the 
contemplative  life  are  made  more  lively  at  the  end-     Which 
is  well  and  briefly  set  forth  by  the  Prophet  Ezekiel,  when, 
beholding  the  flying  creatures,  he  says.  And  the  likeness  of^^e^, 
the  hands  of  a  man  icere  under  their  wings.     For  what  can  '^j  21. 
we  suppose  meant  by  the  wdngs  of  the  creatures,  saving  the 
contemplations  of  the  Saints,  by  which  they  soar  aloft,  and 
quitting  earthly  scenes,  poise  themselves  in  the  regions  of 
heaven }    What  do   we  understand   by  the  '  hands,'  saving 
deeds  ?     For  whereas  they  open  themselves  in   the  love  of 
their  neighbour,  the  good  things,  which  abound  to   them, 
they  administer  even  by  bodily  ministration;  but  *  the  hands 
are  under  the  wings,'  in  that  ihey  surpass  the  deeds  of  their 
action,  by  the  excellence  of  contemplation. 

62.  Moreover  by  '  the  grave'  it  may  be  that  not  only  our 
contemplation  in  this  life  is  understood,  but  the   rest  of  our 


362  Men  full  of  good  works  reach  the  grave  of  Eternal  Rest. 

Job  5,  eternal  and  interior  reward,  wherein  we  more  thoroughly  rest, 
the  more  perfectly  is  killed  in  us  the  life  of  corrupt  existence. 


Moral. 

He  then  '  goes  down  to  the  grave  in  abundance,' who,  after  he 
has  stored  up  the  works  of  the  present  life,  being  perfectly 
dead  to  his  mutable  condition  of  existence,  is  buried  in  the 
depth   of  the  true  light.      Whence   also  it  is  said  by   the 
Ps.  31,  Psalmist,  Thou  shalt  hide  ihem  in  the  secret  of  Thf/  presence, 
from   the  provoking  of  men.     And  the   comparison  that  is 
added  brings  this  home  to  us  with  effect,  where  it  is  sub- 
joined, Like  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  in  his  season.     For 
corn  in  the  field  is  touched  by  the  sun,  in  that  in  this  hfe 
the  soul  of  man  is  illumined  by  the  regard  of  the  light  above. 
It  receives  the  showers,  in  that  it  is  enriched  by  the  word  of 
Truth;  it  is  shaken  by  the  winds,  in  that  it  is  tried  with 
temptations;    and  it  bears  the  chaff  '  growing'  along  with  it, 
in  that  it  bears  the  life  of  daily  increasing   wickedness  in 
sinners,  directed  against  itself;  and  after  it  has  been  carried 
away  to  the  barn,  it  is  squeezed  by  the  threshing  weight,  that 
it  may  be  parted  from  the  hold  of  the  chaff,  in  that  our  mind, 
being  subjected  to  heavenly  discipline,  whilst  it  receives  the 
sti'ipes  of  correction,  is  parted  from  the  society  of  the  carnal 
sort  in  a  cleaner  state;  and  it  is  carried  to  the  granary  with 
the  chaff  left  behind,  in  that  while  the  lost  remain  without, 
the   Elect   soul   is   transported   to   the  eternal  joys  of  the 
mansion  above.     Well  then  is  it  said,  Thon  shalt  come  to  thy 
grave  in  abundance,  like  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  in  his 
season;  in  that,  whereas  the  righteous  after  sufferings  meet 
with  the  rewards  of  the  heavenly  land,  it  is  like  as  if  the 
grains  after  pressing  and  squeezing  were  carried  away  to  the 
gi'anary.     And  it  is  in  another's  season  indeed  that  they  feel 
the  strokes,  but  in  their  own  that  they  rest  from  being  struck. 
For  to  the  Elect  the  present  life  is  another's  season,  whence 
John  7,  to  some  that  were  yet  unbelievers  '  Truth'  saith.  My  time  is 
j]u]j       not  yet  come,  hut  your  time  is  alway  ready.    And  again,  But 
22,  63.  this  is  your  hour,  and,  the  power  of  darkness.     Thus  *  he 
cometh  to  his  grave  in  abundance,  like  as  a  shock  of  corn 
cometh  in  in  his  season,'  in  that  he  receives  the  rest  eternal, 
who,  that  he  may  be  set  free  of  the  chaff,  which  is  destined 
to  be  burnt,  first  feels  here  below  the  pressure  of  discipline. 
But  whereas  Eli])haz  in  the  course  of  his  address  mentioned 


True  maxims  fail  when  presumptously  applied.  363 

*  the  tabernacle,'  *  the  stones,'  '  the  beasts,'  '  the  seed,'  *  the  Book 

herbs,'  and  '  the  grave,'  he  himself  inthnates  that  he  did  not^ ^— 

speak  of  these  according  to  the  letter,  in  that  after  all  of  them 

he  thereupon  subjoins; 

Ver.  27.   Lo  this,  as  we  have  searched  it,  so  it  is- 

63.  Assuredly  it  is  clear,  that  in   these    words  he   saysxxxviii. 
nothing  upon  a  view  of  the  surface,  in  that  a  thing,  that  is 

*  searched,'  is  not  set  before  the  face.  He  then,  who  shews 
that  he  had  '  searched'  these  things,  proves  that  in  outward 
words  inward  things  were  what  he  had  in  view.  And  after 
the  whole  he  is  brought  to  the  foolishness  of  boasting,  in  that 
he  thereupon  adds; 

And  now  thou  hast  heard  it,  turn  it  in  thy  mind. 

64.  With  whatever  lessons  of  instruction  the  mind  may  be  xxxix. 
furnished,  it  argues  great  want  of  skill  to  wish  to  instruct 

one  that  is  superior,  whence  the  wery  things  which  are  rightly 
delivered  by  the  friends,  are  not  pronounced  right  by  the 
interior  Judge.  For  they  lose  the  efficacy  of  their  rightness 
herein,  that  they  are  not  suited  to  the  hearer.  For  even 
medicines  lose  their  efficacious  properties  when  they  be 
administered  to  sound  limbs.  In  all,  then,  that  is  said,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  occasion,  the  time,  and  the  individual,  be 
taken  into  account,  whether  the  truth  of  the  sentiment 
confirms  the  words  delivered,  whether  the  fitting  time  calls 
for  it,  whether  the  character  of  the  person  does  not  impugn 
both  the  truth  of  the  sentiment,  and  the  suitableness  of  the 
time.  For  he  launches  his  darts  in  a  manner  to  deserve 
praise,  who  first  looks  at  the  enemy  that  he  is  to  strike.  For 
he  masters  the  horns  of  the  strong  bow  amiss,  who  in  sending 
the  arrow  with  force,  strikes  a  fellowcountryman. 


BOOK  VII. 

He  explains  the  whole  of  the  sixth  chapter,  except  the  three  last  verses,  in 
part  allegorically  and  in  part  morally. 

i.  1.  Some  men's  minds  are  more  tormented  by  scourges  than 

Lit.  reproaches,  but  some  are  more  wounded  by  reproaches  than 
by  scourges.  For  oftentimes  the  tortures  of  speech  assail  us 
worse  than  any  pains,  and  while  they  make  us  rise  up  in  our 
vindication,  they  lay  us  low  in  impatience.  Whence,  that 
no  temptation  whatever  might  be  lacking  to  blessed  Job,  not 
only  scourges  strike  him  from  above,  but  the  sayings  of  his 
fr'iends  in  talk  gall  him,  being  sorer  than  scourges,  that  the 
soul  of  the  holy  man,  being  driven  hither  and  thither,  might 
burst  forth  in  the  emotion  of  wratli  and  haughtiness,  and 
that  all  the  purity  he  had  lived  in  might  be  defiled  by  head- 
strong pride  of  speech.  But  when  touched  by  the  scourges, 
he  gave  thanks,  when  galled  with  words,  he  answered  aright, 
and  being  smitten  he  makes  it  appear  how  little  he  esteemed 
the  well-being  of  the  body.  In  speaking  too  he  shews  how 
wisely  he  held  his  peace.  But  there  were  a  few  things  mixed 
with  his  words,  which,  in  the  judgment  of  men,  might  seem 
to  transgress  the  limits  of  patience;  of  which  we  shall  take 
a  true  view,  if  in  the  examination  of  them  we  weigh  well 
the  sentence  of  the  Most  High  Judge.  For  it  was  He,  Who 
both  in  the  first  instance  gave  blessed  Job  the  first  place  in 
Johl  8.  opp<^^ition  to  the  adversary,  saying,  Hast  thou  considered 
My  servant  Job,  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a 
perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God  and 
escheweth  evil?  It  was  He,  Who  after  the  trial  rebuked  his 
friends,  saying,  For  ye  have  not  spoken  before  Me  the  thing 
that  is  right,  as  My  servant  Job  hath.  It  remains  then,  that 
when  the  mind  wavers  with  uncertainty  in  the  discoursings 
of  blessed  Job,  it  estimate  their  weight  from  the  beginning 
and  ending  of  that  same  account.     For  one  who  was  to  fall 


Christ  the  Balance  where  grief  outiceighs  sin.  365 

could  never  have  been  commended  by  the  Eternal  Judge,  Book 

VTT 

nor  could  one  who  had  fallen  be  awarded  the  first  place. 


If  then,  when  we  be  caught  in  the  tempest  of  embarrasment, 
we  have  regard  to  the  first  and  last  points  in  this  history, 
the  vessel  of  the  soul  is  as  it  were  held  fast  at  prow  and 
stern  by  the  rope  of  its  reflections,  that  it  be  not  forced  on 
the  rocks  of  error,  and  so  we  are  not  overwhelmed  by  any 
storms  arising  from  our  ignorance,  if  we  hold  to  the  tranquil 
shore  of  the  sentence  of  the  Most  High.  For,  mark,  he  says 
a  thing  which  might  urge  the  reader's  mind  with  no  slight 
questioning.  Yet  who  could  dare  to  pronounce  that  not 
right,  which  sounds  right  in  God's  ears? 

Chap.  vi.  2,  3.   Ok  that  my  sins^  were  throiighli/  u'eighed,^soVu]g. 
whereby  I  have  deserved  tcratJi,  and  the  calamity  that  J 
suffer  laid  in  the  balances.     It  should  be  found  heavier  even 
as  the  sand  of  the  sea. 

2.  Who  else  is  set  forth  by  the  title  of '  the  balances,'  but  Myst. 
the  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  Who  came  to  weigh  the 
merit  of  our  life,  and  brought  down  with  Him  both  justice 
and  loving-kindness  together  ?  But  putting  the  greater 
weight  in  the  scale  of  mercy.  He  lightened  our  transgressions 
in  pardoning  them.  For  in  the  hand  of  the  Father  having 
been  made  like  scales  of  a  marvellous  balancing,  in  the  one 
scale  He  hung  our  woe  in  His  own  Person,  and  in  the  other 
our  sins.  Now  by  dying  He  proved  the  woe  to  be  of  heavy 
weight,  and  by  releasing  it  shewed  the  sin  to  be  light  in  mercy's 
scale  %  Who  vouchsafed  this  instance  of  grace  first,  that 
He  made  our  punishment  to  be  known  to  us.  For  man, 
being  created  for  the  contemplation  of  his  Maker,  but 
banished  from  the  interior  joys  in  justice  to  his  deserts, 
gone  headlong  into  the  wofulness  of  a  corrupt  condition, 
undergoing  the  darkness  of  his  exile,  was  at  once  subject  to 
the  punishment  of  his  sin,  and  knew  it  not;  so  that  he 
imagined  his  place  of  exile  to  be  his  home,  and  so  rejoiced 
under  the  weight  of  his  corrupt  condition  as  in  the  liberty  of 
a  state  of  salvation.    But  He  Whom  man  had  forsaken  within. 


*  Some  editions  here  add,  "  There-  and   that  to  His   mercy  that  is   light 

forethrough  true  penitence,  sins,  though  which   is   forgiven.  He  shewed,  Who 

they  be   many  and  most  grievous,  by  &c."     But  this  is  not  found  in  Mss. 
the  mercy  of  God  are  easily  forgiven  : 


366         Fallen  man's  misery  only  known  through  Christ. 

Job  6,  having  assumed  a  fleshly  nature,  came  forth  God  without ; 
'  and  when  He  presented  Himself  outwardly,  He  restored 
man,  who  was  cast  forth  without,  to  the  interior  life,  that 
He  might  henceforth  perceive  his  losses,  that  he  might 
henceforth  lament  the  sorrows  of  his  blind  state,  Man's 
woe  then  was  found  to  be  heavy  in  the  balance,  in  that  the 
ill,  which  he  was  laid  under,  he  only  knew  in  his  Re- 
deemer's appearing  presence.  For  not  knowing  the  right,  he 
bore  with  delight  the  darkness  of  his  state  of  condemnation. 
But  after  he  saw  a  thing  for  him  to  delight  in,  he  likewise 
perceived  a  thing  to  grieve  over,  and  what  he  underwent  he 
felt  was  grievous,  in  that  what  he  had  lost  was  made  known 
as  sweet.  Let  then  the  holy  man,  thrown  out  of  the  barriers 
of  silence  by  the  sayings  of  his  friend  in  discourse,  and  filled 
with  the  overflowing  of  the  prophetic  spirit,  exclaim  with  his 
own  voice,  yea,  with  the  voice  of  mankind,  Oh  that  my  sins 
were  thoroughly  weighed,  whereby  I  have  deserved  wrath, 
and  the  calamity  that  I  suffer  laid  in  the  balances  together! 
It  should  be  found  heavier  even  as  the  sand  of  the  sea.  As 
if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  The  evil  of  our  condition  under 
the  curse  is  thought  light,  in  that  it  is  weighed  without  the 
1  aequi-  Redeemer's  equity^  being  as  yet  known,  but  oh  that  He 
*^*®  would  come,  and  hang  in  the  scale  of  His  Mercy  the  woful- 
ness  of  this  dismal  exile,  and  instruct  us  what  to  seek  back 
for  after  that  exile.  For  if  He  makes  known  what  we  have 
lost,  He  shews  that  to  be  grievous  which  we  endure.'  But 
this  same  misery  of  our  pilgrimage  is  fitly  compared  to  the 
sand  of  the  sea,  (for  the  sand  of  the  sea  is  forced  without  by 
the  chafing  of  the  waters,)  in  that  man  too  in  transgressing, 
because  he  bore  the  billows  of  temptation  unsteadily,  was 
carried  out  of  himself  from  within.  Now  of  great  weight  is  the 
sand  of  the  sea,  but  the  calamity  of  man  is  said  to  be  '  heavier 
than  the  sand  of  the  sea,'  for  his  punishment  is  shewn  to 
have  been  hard,  at  the  time  when  the  sin  is  lightened  by  the 
merciful  Judge.  And  because  every  man  that  owns  the 
grace  of  the  Redeemer,  every  one  that  longs  for  a  return  to 
his  Country,  now  that  he  is  instructed,  groans  beneath  the 
burthen  of  his  pilgrimage  ;  after  the  longing  for  the  balances, 
the  words  arc  rightly  subjoined; 

Therefore  my  words  are  full  of  yriof. 


Arrows  of  preaching^  and  of  visitation.  367 

3.  He  that  loves  sojourn  abroad  instead  of  his  own  country,  Bcok 
knows  not  how  to  grieve  ev^en  in  the  midst  of  griefs.     But 


the  words  of  the  righteous  man  are  full  of  grief,  for  so  long  as  he  ^* 
is  subject  to  present  ills,  he  sighs  after  something  else  in  his 
speech  ;  all  that  he  brought  upon  himself  by  sinning  is  set 
before  his  eyes,  and  that  he  may  return  to  the  state  of  blessed- 
ness, he  weighs  carefully  the  judgments  whereby  he  is 
afflicted.     Whence  it  is  added, 

Ver.  4.  For  the  arrovjs  of  the  Almighty  are  in  me. 

4 .  For  by  the  epithet  of '  arrows'  sometimes  the  utterances    iv. 
of  preaching,  sometimes  the  arrows  of  visitation  are  denoted. 
Now  the  utterances  of  preaching  are  represented  by  '  arrows;' 

for  in  this,  that  they  smite  men's  vices,  they  pierce  the  hearts 
of  evil  doers.     Concerning  which  arrows  it  is   said  to   the 
Redeemer  at  His  coming,  Thine  arrows  are  sharp^  O  Thou  Ps.  45, 
3Iost  Mighty;   the  people  shall  fall  under  Thee  in  the  heart,  ^'  ^^^' 
Of  Him  Isaiah  saith,  /  will  send  those  that  escape  of  them  Is.  gg, 
to  the  nations,  into  the  sea,  into  Africa,  and  into  Lydia,  ^^' 
holding^  the  arrow,  into  Italy,  and  into  Greece,     Again  by  ^  Vulg. 
*  arrows'  is  represented  the  stroke  of  visitation,  as  where  Elisha  ^^'^^'^^^ 
bids  king  Joash,  '  shoot  an  arrow,'  and  when  he  shoots,  says, 
For  thou  shalt  smite  the  Syrians,  till  thou  hast  consumed^  ^\^^^^ 
them.     Whereas  then  the  holy  man  surveys  the  sorrows  of    '  ^^' 
his  pilgrimage,  because  he  groans  under  the  strokes  of  the 
visitation  of  the  Lord,  let  him  say.  Therefore  my  words  are 
filled  with  grief     For  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  are  within 
me.     As  though  he   said  in  plain  words,   '  I  being  under 
curse  of  exile  have  no  joy,  but  as  laid  under  the  Judgment, 
I  am  full  of  pain,  for  I  see  and  know  the  force  of  the  stroke.' 
But  there  are  a  great  number  that  are  chastised  with  tortiues, 
but  not  amended.     Contrary  to  which  it  is  fitly  subjoined, 
The  indignation  whereof  drinketh  up  my  spirit. 

5.  For  what  else  is  the  '  spirit  of  man,'  but  the  spirit  of  v. 
pride?  Now  '  the  arrows  of  the  Lord  drink  up  the  spirit  of 
man,'  when  the  awards  of  heavenly  visitation  keep  back 
the  chastened  soul  fi'om  self-elation.  '  The  arrows  of  the 
Lord  drink  up  the  spirit  of  man,'  in  that,  when  he  is 
intent  upon   outward  things,   they  draw  him  within.      For 

the  spirit   of  David  was   drunk  up   when    he   said,    When  Ps.  142, 
my  spirit  failed  within  me,  Thou  kneivest  my  ivays.     And  ^* 


368  Good  men  still  fear  the  terrors  of  God. 

Job  6,  again,    3Iy   soul   refused  to   be   comforted,   I  remembered 
— '. —  God  and  was  troubled,  I  complained  and  my  spirit  failed. 
Ps.  77    Therefore  '  the  mdignation  of  the  arrows  drinketh  up  the 
2'  ^-      spirit'  of  the  righteous,  for  the  decrees  from  above,  in  wound- 
ing,  work   a  change  in  the   Elect,  whom  they  find  in  any 
sins;  so  that  the  soul  being  pierced,  quits  its  hardness  of 
heart,  and   the  blood   of  confession   runs    down   from   the 
wound  that  brings  health.     For  they  consider  whence  and 
whereunto  they  have  been  cast  down,   they  consider  from 
how  high  bliss  they  have   fallen,  and  to   what  miseries  of 
their   corrupt    condition,  and  they  not   only   groan  in   the 
midst  of  the  things  which  they  are  suffering,   but  further- 
more dread  that  which  the  strict  Judge  threatens  sinners  with 
concerning  the  fires  of  hell.     Whence  the  words  are  rightly 
subjoined; 

And  the  terrors  of  Qod  do  set  themselves  in  array  against 

me. 

vi.         6.  The  mind  of  the  righteous  not  only  considers  well  what 

it  is  now  undergoing,  but  also  dreads  what  is  in  store.     It 

sees  all  that  it  suffers  in  this  life,  and  fears  lest  hereafter  it 

suffer  still  worse  things.     It  mourns  that  it  has  fallen  into  the 

exile  of  this  blind  state  away  from  the  joys  of  Paradise ;  it  fears, 

lest,  when  this  exile  is  quitted,  eternal  death  succeed.     And 

thus  it  already  undergoes  sentence  in  suffering  chastisement, 

yet  still  dreads  the  threats  of  the  Judge  to  come  as  the  con- 

Ps.  88,  sequence  of  sin.     Hence  the  Psalmist  says,  Thy  fierce  wrath 

^^'        goeth  over  me;    Thy  terrors  cut  me  off.      For  after  that  ^  the 

fierce  wratli  of  the  Internal  Judge  goeth  over.  His  terrors 

still  do  cut  us  off,'  in   that  we  already  suffer   one  evil  by 

condemnation,    and    still    dread    another    from    everlasting 

vengeance.     Let  the  holy  man  then,  weighing  well  the  ills 

that  he  is  subject  to,  exclaim,  The  arrows  of  the  Lord  are 

within  me,  the  indignation  whereof  drinketh  up  my  spirit. 

But  being  in  dread  of  worse  things  to  last  for  ever,  let  him 

add.  The  terrors  of  Qod  do  set  themselves  in  array  against 

me.     As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  Being  stricken  indeed 

1  feel  grief  for   my  present  circumstances,  but  this  is   the 

worst  feature  in  my  grief,  that  even  in  the  midst  of  punishment 

I  still  fear  eternal  woes.'    But  forasmuch  as  he  already  longs 

for  the  bringing  in  of  the  balances,  he  already  weighs  the 


TJi£  Incamaiwn  tlie  food  far  which  die  mt'wns  ctkd,    m^ 

evils  into  which  the  haraan  race  has  fallen,  thongh  he  was  Book 
placed  among  a  Genlile  people,  jet  becau.se  he  was  Ml  of-1^ 
the  gift  of  prophetic  inspiration,  in  the  following  words  he 
shews  with  what  ardent  desire  the  coming  of  the  ILedeemer 
is  thirsted  for,  whether  bj  the  Gentile  world  or  by  Judisa, 
saying, 

Ver.  5-  Doth  the  wild  ass  hray  when  he  Mth  grmsl  or 
loweth  the  ox  at  his  full  manger? 

7.  For  what  is  denoted  bj*  the  onager,'  tbatis,  the  wild  ass,AuLiEG. 
saving  the  Gentile  people,  which,  as  natnre  has  produced  it    ^"*- 
without  the  stalls  of  training,  so  has  continued  roaming  abroad 
in  the  field  of  its  pleasures?    What  is  represented  bj  "  the  ox,' 
sa\ing  the  Jewish  people,  which  being  bowed  dou-n  to  the 
yoke  of  the  dominion  above,  in  gathering  together  proselytes 
unto  hope,  drew  the  ploughshare  of  the  Law  through  ail  the 
hearts  that  it  was  able?     But  we  learn  from  the  witness  of 
blessed  Job's  life  to  believe,  that  many  even  of  tlie  Gentiles 
looked  for  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer,     And  at  the  birth  of 
the  Lord,  we  have  learnt  by  Simeon's  coming  in  the  spirit 
into  the  Temple,  with  what  longing  desire  holy  men  of  the 
Israelitisli   people  coveted  to    behold  the  mysteiy  of  Mis 
Incarnation.     Whence  too  the  same  Redeemer  sai^th  to  His 
Disciples,  For  I  tell  you  ihut  many  p^oph^is  und  Mngs  huveija^tk^, 
demredto  see  those  thiiigs  which  ye  see,  and  fmte  not  seen'^^' 
them.     The '  grass'  of  the  wild  ass  tlien,  and  the  ox's '  fodder,' 
is  this  very  Incarnation  of  the  Mediator,  by  which  both  the 
Gentile  world  and  Judiea  are  together  filled  to  the  full.     For 
because  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  All  Jesh  is  grms;  the  1^4®,^ 
Creator  of  the  imiverse  taking  flesh  of  our  substance,  willed 
to  be  made  *  grass;  that  our  flesh  might  not  remain  giuss  for 
ever;  and  so  '  the  wild  ass'  then  found  '  gi^ss,'  whe^i  the 
Gentile  people  received  the  grace  of  the  Divine  Incamiatioii. 
Then  *  the  ox'  had  not  an  empty  manger,  when  to  tlie  Jewish 
people,  looking  for  His  Flesh,  the  Law  shewed  Him  f<3Tth, 
Whom  it  prophesied  to  them  whilst  long  kept  in  expectation 
of  Him.     Wiience  too  the  Lord,  when  He  was;  bom,  as  placed 
in  a  manger,  that  it  might  be  signifled,  that  tlve  hofy  animal:*, 
which  under  the  LaT<'  had  long  been  Ibund  an  hxmgTed,  are 
fllled  with  '  the  fodder'  of  Hi.^  Incaniadon.     For  at^His 
birth  He  filled  a  mangei^  Who  gaxe  Himself  for  food  to  tl^ 


.'370     The  Law  '  unsavoury^  toifhout  the  salt  of  the  Gospel. 

Job  6,  souls  of  mortal  beings,  saying,  He  that  eateth  My  Flesh, 
?: and  drinketh  My  Blood,  dwelleth  in  Me,  and  I  in  him. 

A  T  T  "P  p  

John  6  But  because  both  the  longings  of  the  Elect  from  among  the 
^^-  Gentiles  were  for  long  deferred,  and  the  holy  men  severally 
of  the  Hebrew  people  groaned  long  while  in  expectation  of 
their  redemption,  blessed  Job,  in  giving  forth  the  mysteries 
of  prophecy,  rightly  implies  the  causes  of  distress  in  the  case 
of  either  people,  by  saying,  Will  the  wild  ass  hray  while  he  hath 
grass?  Or  will  the  ox  low  over  his  full  manger?  As  though 
it  were  in  plain  speech,  ^  The  Gentile  world  for  this  reason 
groans,  because  the  grace  of  the  Redeemer  does  not  yet 
yield  it  refreshment,  and  Judaea  on  this  account  draws  out 
her  lowings,  for  that  in  holding  the  Law,  but  not  seeing 
the  author  of  the  Law,  standing  before  the  manger  she  goes 
hungering.  And  because  this  same  Law,  before  the  coming 
of  our  Mediator,  was  held  not  in  a  spiritual  but  in  a  carnal 
manner,  it  is  wghtly  added, 

Ver.  6.  Can  that  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten  without 
salt  ? 
viii.  8.  In  the  Law,  the  virtue  of  the  hidden  meaning  is  the  salt 
of  the  letter.  Whosoever,  then,  being  intent  upon  carnal 
observances,  refused  to  understand  it  in  a  spiritual  sense, 
what  else  did  he  but  eat  '  unsavoury  food?'  But  this  *  salt,' 
'  Truth,'  on  being  known,  put  into  the  food,  when  He  taught 
that  the  savour  of  a  hidden  sense  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the 
John  5,  Law,    saying.  For  had  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  might  ^    have 

46. 

A  Vulg.  believed  3Ie,for  he  wrote  of  Me.     And  again.  Have  salt  in 
•^^^^l^Q  yourselves,  and  have  peace  one  with  another.     But  because 
50.        before  our  Redeemer's  coming,  Judaea  held  the   Law  in  a 
carnal  way,  the  Gentile  world  refused  to  bend  themselves  to 
its  precepts,  which  enjoined  hard  things.     Thus  it  would  not 
eat  unsavoury  meat.     For  before  that  it  got  the  relish  of  the 
Spirit,  it  shrunk  from  keeping  the  force  of  the  letter.     For 
which  of  the  Gentiles  would  bear  this,  which  is  therein  en- 
joined, to  cut  their  children's  flesh  for  a  religious  service  ?  to 
cut  off  the  sins  of  speech  by  death  ?     And  hence  it  is  well 
added  yet  further ; 
Vulg.         Or  can  any  one  taste,  ichat  by  being  tasted  brings  death? 
ix.         ^-  l^oi'   the    Law,    if  tasted   in   a  carnal    way,   *  brought 
death,'  in  that  it  seized  the  misdeeds  of  transgressors  with  a 


The  Scriptures^  loathed  before,  made  food  to  Gentiles,    371 

severe   visitation ;  it  '  brought   death/  in  that  both   by  the  Book 
injunction  it  made  known  the  sin,  and  did  not  by  grace  put 


it  away,  as  Paul  testifies,  saying,   The   Laiv  made  nothing  ^®^*  '^■> 
'perfect.     And  again,   Wherefore  the  Laiv  is  holy,  and  t/ieUom.?, 
commandment   holy  and  just   and  good.     And   soon   after,       ^^* 
But  sin,  that  it  might  appear  sin,  working  death  in  me  by 
that  which  is  good.     But  the  Gentile  world,  when  turned  to 
Christ,  in  that  it  understands  Him  to  be   sounding  in  the 
words  of  the  Law,  being  straitened   by  its  desires  looks  for 
Him,  Whom  it  ardently  loves,  in  a  spiritual  way  amongst 
carnal  precepts.     And  hence  in  the  voice  of  the  Church  it  is 
immediately  added  by  the  Prophetic  Spirit, 

Ver.  7.  The  things  which  my  soul  refused  to  touch  are 
for  siraitness  become  my  meat. 

10.  For  he  goes  very  far  wrong,  who  imagines  that  the  x. 
words  of  blessed  Job  were  delivered  with  an  eye  to  the 
historical  fact  alone.  For  what  would  the  holy  man,  and 
one  too  borne  up  by  the  proclaim  of  His  Maker,  have  said, 
that  was  great,  or  rather  what  that  was  true,  if  he  had  said 
that  *  unsavoury  meat  could  not  be  eaten  ?'  or  who  had 
offered  deadly  food  for  him  to   eat,  that  he  should  subjoin, 

Or  who  can  taste,  what  by  being  tasted  brings  death  ?  And 
if  we  imagine  that  was  said  of  his  friends'  discourse,  we  are 
withheld  from  this  view  by  the  sentence  that  is  subjoined, 
in  which  he  says.  The  things  that  my  soul  refused  to  touch 
are  for  straitness  become  my  meat.  For  never  let  it  be 
thought  that  the  holy  man,  when  established  in  soundness 
of  state,  at  any  time  looked  down  upon  the  words  of  his 
friends ;  who,  as  we  learn  afterwards  by  himself  attesting  it, 
was  humble  even  to  his  servants.  His  words  then  are  not 
void  of  mystical  senses,  which,  as  we  gather  from  the  end  of 
the  history,  the  internal  Arbiter  Himself  commends.  And 
these  would  never  have  gone  on  commanding  such  deep 
veneration  even  to  the  werj  ends  of  the  world,  if  they  had 
not  been  pregnant  with  mystical  meaning. 

11.  Let  blessed  Job  then,  in  that  he  is  a  member  of  holy 
Church,  speak  in  her  voice  also,  saying.  The  things  which 
my  soul  refused  to  touch  are  for  my  straitness  become  my 
meat.  For  the  Gentile  world,  after  conversion,  made  eager 
by  the   fever  of  her  love,  himgers  for   the   food    of  Holy 

2  B  2 


372  The  loathed  Gentiles  at  last  received  by  Jews. 

Job  6,  Scripture,  which  being  filled  with  pride  it  disdained  for  long. 

^^^'^^^  And  yet  these  words  agree  with  the  voice  of  Judcea  also,  if 
they  be  a  little  more  attentively  made  out.  For  from  the 
training  of  the  Law,  and  from  the  knowledge  of  the  One 
God,  she  herself  had  salt,  and  looked  dov,Ti  upon  all  the 
Gentiles  as  brute  creatures.  But  because,  when  instructed 
by  the  precepts  of  the  Law,  she  disdained  to  admit  to  herself 
the  communion  of  the  Gentiles,  what  did  she  but  loath  to 
take  '  unsavoury  food  ?^  For  the  Divine  decree  had  for- 
bidden, on  the  menace  of  death,  that  the  Israclitish  people 
should  join  in  a  league  with  strangers,  and  pollute  the  way 
of  life  in  holy  religion.  Whence  too  it  is  added.  Or  can 
any  one  taste^  what,  by  being  tasted,  brings  death?  But 
because  this  same  Judeea,  in  the  portion  of  the  Elect,  was 
converted  to  the  faith  of  the  Redeemer,  the  light  which  she 
had  become  acquainted  with  she  laboured  by  the  Holy 
Apostles  to  deliver  to  the  faithless  of  her  offspring.  But  the 
pride  of  the  Hebrew  people  rejected  the  ministry  of  her 
preaching,  whence  she  immediately  turned  aside  her  words 
of  exhortation  for  the  gathering  together  of  the  Gentiles,  as 

Acts  13,  it  is  said  also  by  the  same  Apostles,  ft  was  necessary  that 
the  W07'd  of  God  should  Jirst  have  been  spoken  to  you;  but 
seeing  that  ye  have  put  it  from  you,  and-  have  judged,  your- 
selves unworthy  of  ererlastiifg  li/'e,  lo,  we  turn  to  the 
Gentiles.  Whence  too  in  this  place  it  is  fitly  subjoined, 
7 he  things  which  my  soul  refused  to  touch  are  now  for  my 
slraitness  become  my  meat.  For  Judaea,  having  disdained 
the  life  of  the  Gentiles,  refused  as  it  were  for  long  to  touch 
her,  whose  society  she  scorned  to  admit ;  but  on  coming  to 
the  grace  of  the  Redeemer,  being  rejected  by  the  unbelieving 
Israelites,  vvliile  by  the  Holy  Apostles  she  stretches  out 
herself  for  the  gathering  together  of  the  Gentiles,  she  as  it 
were  takes  that  for  food  vvith  a  hungry  appetite,  which  be- 
fore with  loathing  she  disdained  as  unworthy.  For  she 
underwent  *  straitness^  in  her  preaching,  who  saw  that  what 
fehe  spoke  was  despised  among  the  Hebrew  people.  But  for 
her  *  straitneiss*  she  ate  the  food  which  she  had  for  long 
dcvSpised,  in  that  being  rejected  by  the  obduracy  of  the  Jews, 
she  yearns  to  lake  to  her  the  Gentile  folk>  whom  she  had 
contemnedv     Seeing  then  that  we  have  delivered  these  points 


Jol/s  longing  for  the  Saviour.     Sonship  should  endfiar.  373 

in  a  fierurative  sense,  it  remains  that  we  go  into  them  in  their  Book 
,  .  ^  °  Til. 

moral  import. 


12.  The  holy  Man,  longing  for  the  coming  of  the  Hedeemer  Moral, 
under  the  name  of  a  '  balance,'  whilst  he  opens   his   mind 

in  discourse,  instructs  us  to  earnestness  of  life;  whilst  he 
tells  his  own  tale,  marks  some  things  that  belong  to  us; 
whilst  he  brings  forward  what  we  are  to  acknowledge  con- 
cerning himself,  strengthens  unto  life  us  that  be  trembling 
and  weak.  For  now  indeed  we  live  by  the  faith  of  our 
Mediator,  and  yet  still,  for  the  cleansing  out  of  our  faults, 
endure  heavy  scourges  of  inward  visitation;  whence  also, 
after  longing  for  the  balance,  he  adds, 

Ver.  4.  For  the  arrows  of  the  Lord  are  within  rjie,  the 
indignation  whereof  drinketh  up  my  spirit, 

13.  Now  see,  as  has  been  remarked  above,  we  are  at  the     xi» 
same  time  pierced  by  the  stroke  of  Divine  correction,  and 

yet  that  is  still  worse,  which  we  apprehend  of  the  terribleness 
of  the  Judge  to  come,  and  of  His  everlasting  visitation. 
Whence  the  words  are  thereupon  introduced,  And  ilie 
terrors  of  God  do  set  themselves  in  array  against  viC'  But 
the  mind  ought  to  be  dispossessed  of  fear  and  -sadness,  and  be 
drawn  out  in  aspirations  after  the  eternal  land  alone.  For 
We  then  shew  forth  the  noble  birth  of  our  Hegeneration,  if 
We  love  Him  as  a  Father,  Whom  with  slavish  soul  we  now 
dread  as  a  Master.  And  hence  it  is  spoken  by  Patil,  For  ye^^ 
have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fmr^  hut  ye  lo- 
hate  received  the  spirit  of  the  adoption  of  sons,  ivherehy  we 
ery^  Abba^  Father,  Therefore  let  the  soul  of  the  Elect  lay 
aside  the  weight  of  fear,  exercise  itself  in  the  virtue  of  love, 
long  for  the  worthiness  of  its  renewal,  pant  after  the  likeness 
of  its  Maker j  whom  so  long  as  it  is  unablff  to  behold,  it 
tnUst  needs  await  hungering  after  His  eternal  Being,  i.  ij» 
after  its  own  internal  meat.     Whence  it  Is  also  jltstly  added, 

Vei'.  9.  I)oth  the  wild  ass  hray  when  he  hath  grass?   or 
loweth  the  ox  over  Ids  full  manger? 

14.-  Who  else  tire  denoted  bv  the  teriii  of  *  the  wild  ass,*    v'J 
feliviiig  they  who  being  set  in  the  field  of  faith,  are  UOt  bound 
by  tiie  reiils  of  any  ministration  \    Or  whom  does  the  desig- 
iiatioti  of  *  thel  oX^  set  forth,  Saving  those,  whoiii  within  the 
i»du«ds  of  Holy  Church,  the  yoke  of  Orders  takeii  Upon  thetn 


torn. 


374         The  ass  like  the  laity ^  the  ox  like  the  priesthood. 

Job  6,  constrains  to  the  ministry  of  preaching?    Now  the  '  grass'  of 
^- — ^ —  the  wild  ass,  and  the  ox's  '  fodder,'  is  the  inward  refreshing  of 
the  faithful  folk.     For  some  within  the  pale  of  Holy  Chm'ch 
are  held  after  the  manner  of  an  ox  by  the  bands  of  the 
employment  taken  upon  them,  others  after  the  manner  of  a 
'  wild  ass'  know  nothing  of  the  stalls  of  Holy  Orders,  and 
pass  their  time  in  the  field  of  their  own  will.     But  when  any 
one  in  the  secular  life  glows  with  aspirations  after  the  interior 
vision,  when  he  yearns  for  the  food  of  the  inward  refreshing, 
when  seeing  himself  starved  in  the  darkness  of  this  pilgrim 
state,  he  refreshes  himself  with  what  tears  he  may,  it  is  as  if 
'  the  wild  ass  brayed,'  not  finding  '  grass.'    Another  one  too 
is  subject  to  the  obligation  of  the  Order  he  has  taken  upon 
him,  he  spends  himself  in  the  labour  of  preaching,  and  longs 
to  be  henceforth  refreshed   by  eternal   contemplation;    but 
forasmuch  as  he  does  not  see  the  likeness  of  His  Redeemer, 
it  is  as  if  the  chained  ox  lowed  at  the  empty  manger.     For 
because  being  set  at  the  widest  distance  from  the  interior 
wisdom,  we  see  nothing  of  the  verdure  of  the  eternal  inherit- 
ance, like  brute  animals  we  go  hungering  after  the  longed- 
for  grass.     Of  which  same  grass  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  our 
John  10,  Redeemer,  Bij  Me  if  any  man  enter  i)ty  he  shall  be  saved, 
and  shall  go  in  and  out^  and  find  pasture.     But  most  often, 
which  is  wont  to  be  a  grievous  woe  to  those  that  love,  the  life 
of  the  wicked  is  arrayed  against  the  holy  aims  of  the  good, 
and  when   the   soul  is  transported  in  heavenly  aspirations, 
the   purpose   of  mind,  which  we  have   begun  with  well,  is 
dashed   to  the    ground,  being    crossed   by  the    words   and 
practices  of  the  foolish ;   so  that  the  soul,  which  had  already 
soared  up  to  things  above  in  the  eflbrts  of  contemplation, 
for  the  defeating  of  the  foolishness  of  the  froward,  girds  itself 
for  the  encounter  down  below.     AVhence  also  it  is  added, 

Ver.  6.  Or  can  thai  which  is  unsavoury  he  eaten,  not 
seasoned  with  salt  '^  Or  can  any  one  taste,  what  by  being 
tasted  bri?igs  death  ? 
xiii.  15.  For  the  words  and  the  practices  of  the  carnal  introduce 
themselves  like  food  into  our  minds,  so  as  to  be  swallowed 
up  in  the  belly  of  complacence.  But  any  of  the  Elect  eateth 
not  that  which  is  ^  unsavory,'  for  setting  apart  in  judgment 
the  words  and  the  deeds  of  the  froward,  he  puts  them  away  from 


Earthli/  talk  unsavoury.     Painful  things  hard  to  choose.  375 

the  mouth  of  his  heart.     Paul  forbade  unsavoury  meat  to  be  Book 
offered  for  the  food  of  souls,  when  he  said  to  his  disciples, 


Col.  4,6. 
Let  your  speech  be  alway  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt. 

And   to    the   Psalmist   also    the   words    of  the   children    of 

perdition  tasted  unsavoury  in  the  mouth  of  the  heart,  when  Ps.  119, 

he   said,   Tlie  wicked  have  related  tales  to^  me  which  are^^^^y 

not  after    Thy   Law.     But   often,  when   the   words   of  the 

wicked  press  themselves  with  importunity  into  our  ears,  they 

beget  in  the  heart  a  war  of  temptation.     And  though  both 

reason  reject  and  the  tongue  censure  them,  yet  that  is  with 

difficulty  mastered  within,  which  without  is  sentenced  with 

authority.     Whence  it  is  necessary  that  that  should  never 

even  reach  the  ears,  which  the  mind  must  keep  off  fi'om  the 

avenue  of  the  imagination  by  exercising  watchflilness.     Holy 

men,  then,  whereas  their  hearts  pant  with  aspirations  after 

Eternity,  lift  themselves  to  such  an  exalted  elevation  of  life, 

that  to  hear  any  longer  the  things  that  are  of  the  world  they 

account  to  be  a  grievous  burthen  bearing  them  down.     For 

they  reckon  that  to  be  impertinent  and  insufferable,  which 

does  not  tell  of  what  their  hearts  are  full  of. 

16.  Now  it  often  happens  that  the  mind  is  already  trans- 
ported to  the  realms  on  high  in  desire,  is  already  entirely 
parted  asunder  from  the  foolish  converse  of  earthly  men,  but 
is  not  yet  braced  to  prefer  the  crosses  of  the  present  life  for 
the  love  of  God ;  already  it  seeks  the  things  on  high,  already 
it  contemns  the  grovelling  follies  below,  but  it  does  not  yet 
turn  itself  to  the  endurance  of  the  adversity  which  it  has  to 
bear.     And  hence  it  is  added. 

Or  can  any  one  taste  that,  which  by  being  tasted  brings 
death  ? 

17.  For  it  is  hard  to  seek  after  that  which  torments,  to 
follow  that  which  makes  life  depart.  But  very  often  the  life 
of  the  righteous  stretches  itself  up  to  such  a  height  of  virtue, 
that  both  within  it  rules  in  the  citadel  of  interior  reason,  and 
without,  by  bearing  with  it,  brings  the  folly  of  some  to  con- 
version; for  we  must  needs  bear  with  the  weaknesses  of  those, 
whom  we  are  striving  to  draw  on  to  strong  things.  For 
neither  does  any  man  lift  up  one  that  is  fallen,  save  he, 
who  in  compassion  bends  the  uprightness  of  his  position. 
But  when  we  compassionate  the  weakness  of  another,  we  are 


^70  Bitter  things  if  row  ^weet  to  keavenlt/  rnindsi. 

Jcr»«i,  the  mote  strongly  aeiTed  as  to  our  own;  jio  that,  from  love 
H;;^^  of  the  things  of  futurity,  the  soul  prepares  itself  to  meet 
the  ilk  of  the  present  time,  and  looks  out  for  the  hurts  of  the 
body,  which  it  used  to  fe^ir*  For  its  heavenly  aspirations 
being  enlarged,  it  h  more  and  more  straitened,  and  v/hen  it 
mm  how  great  h  the  sweetness  of  the  eternal  land,  it 
fervestly  loves  for  the  mhe  of  that  the  bitter  tast(e»  of  the 
pr<?s^ent  life*  Whence  after  the  disdain  of  ^  unsavoury  meat,' 
after  the  inipog^ibility  of  the  tasting  of  death,  it  is  with 
propriety  Mibjoined, 

Ter,  7.  T/w  Ihiiii/.^  u/nch  mtj  mid  refused  to  touch  are  for 
my  ^iraititem  become  my  meat* 
XV.        IS,  f  ov  the  soul  oi  the  righteoti:?,  gc^ifi^  ^n  lo  ^ts  progress, 
wh^em  before,  when  it  ^m^d.  for  its  own  interests  alone, 
it  loathe^d  io  bear  the  burthens  of  another,  and,  too  littk 
sympathising  with  others^  cottld  not  stand  against  advei'sities, 
now  thai  h  constrains  iU^M  to  bear  with  the  weakness  of  its 
seighbottr,  acqtiires  strength  to  ovei-cotn^  adversity,  so  that 
im  the  \m^  of  truth  it  m^\^  the  hurts  of  the  present  lifi^ 
With  m  much  the  m(}m  eourage  aft^rtrards,  that  before  it  fSed 
tmm  thetn  in  it^  weaknesf^.    For  by  its  bendtug  it  is  made  erect, 
by  ii§  drawing  io\\m^^  another  it  is  stretehed  out,  by  its 
fellow-f^di^g  it  is  strengthened,  and  when  it  open^  itself 
Otti  in  {hi  love  of  otir  n^ghbotir,  It  as  it  were  gathers  from 
J-M^^ii^fl^  with   what  fesolui#tigs^   to   lift   itself  Up    to    its 
Makef.      V&f  (ihmi^^  whleh  lowers  m  ftecoidlug  to  the 
imm  (fi  ^Mt  gyittpathy,  lifts  ti&  the  higher  npon  the  height  of 
e^^ntetiiplsition,  and  enlarged  manifold  it  already  b>irns  with 
blggt^f  ^k§it^%  ftlfgftdy  hmi^  high  io  atiain  to  the  life  of  the 
^pitit^  mi^n  thmtgh  thfough  th^  tofmimis  of  the  body.    What 
ih^i  fiibygtimg  hg  tgfui^^d  k)  i^tteh^  i\m  same  for  streiitness  h0 
ftftfetwttrd^  ^iik^h,  wh©  gi'atee  eoniaiuitig  his  dfesiifes,  now 
t(i^  kve  ^i  h\^  heavily  Connli-y  loves  even  the  vety  pains, 
whitdi  i^f  long  he  h^d  feared/    For  if  the  niind  is  bent 
k>w^td.*i  Ood  with  a  ^inm^  ptifpoi^e^  whsitevet  bittef  betldei^ 
it  in  ihi.<^  pi-e?etJt  life  it  aeeotinlsj  sweel^  all  that  annoys  it 
te^kwis  t'efei,  fttid  it  lotig^  to  pm^  even  ihtoUfjh  detitJij  that 
\i  Mm  moi-e  eomptetely  pOf^j^efes  itself  (d"  life/     It  desires  to 
be  ntierly  annihilated  beh)W^  thittlttrtay  niore  iwiX^  moiint  on 
\\\^h^     \h\%  till  ihk  t  way  be  k\m\y  ieprei?ietttiFig  to  b^ 


Joh*s  calUng  God  Holy  shews  his  wish  for  sorrow  real.    377 

the  case  with  the  mind  of  a  righteous  man  in  general,  and  Book 
with  the  mind  of  blessed  Job,  if  he  do  not  himself  subjoin  '- 


the  words, 

Ver.  8 — 10.  Oh  that  I  might  have  my  request^  and  thai 
God  would  grant  me  the  thing  that  I  long  for!  Even  that 
He  That  hath  begun  would  destroy  me.  Let  Jiim  let  loose 
His  hand,  and  cut  me  ojfl  Let  this  he  my  comfort ;  that  He 
should  afflict  me  with  sorrow,  and  not  spare* 

19,  But  perchance  he  entreats  such  things  through  stub-   xvi, 
bornness,  perchance,  in  that  he  wishes  to  be  entirely  annihi- 
lated, he  charges  the  injustice  of  the  smiter*     Far  be  the 
thought!    For  with  what  feeling  he  begs  it,  he  shews  in  the 
following  words,  saying,  Nor  nil  I  L  gainsay  the  speech  of  the 
Holy  One.     So  then  he  never  murmurs  against  the  injustice 
of  Him  that  dealeth  the  blow,  who  even  amidst  the  strokes 
calls  his  smiter  '  the  Holy  One/     But  we  ought  to  know 
that  it  is  sometimes  the  adversary,  and  sometimes  God  that 
bruises   us   with    afilietioB.     Now  by   the   bruising   of   the 
adversary,  we  are  made  defaulters  in  virtue;  but  when  we  are 
broken  by  the  bruising  of  the  Lord,  from  vicious  habits  We 
are  made  strong  in  virtue.     This  bruising  the  Prophet  had 
foreseen  when  he  said,  Thou  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  Ps, '2,9, 
iron,  Thou  shall  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter^s  vessel. 
The  Ix)rd  '  rules  and  breaks  us  with  a  rod  of  iron,' in  that  by 
the  strong  rule  of  righleousiiess  in  His  dispensation,  while  He 
fe^nimates  us  within,  He  distresses  us  without/     For  as  He 
abases  the  power  of  the  flesh,  He  exalts  the  purpose  of  the 
(Spirit;  and  hence  this  bruising  is  compared  to  a  potter's  vessel, 
as  is  also  delivered  by  Paul,  ^w/  2ve  have  this  treasure  iniCaf, 
earthen  t'essels.     And  describing  at  the  same  time  the  dashing   ' '' 
in  pieces  and  the  ruling  V^^  saitli,  Though  our  outward  man^  ^«fe» 
perish^  yet  the  inwafd  man  i&  renewed  day  by  day:     Let  the  te'^ 
holy  man  who  is  eager  to  draw  ne^r  to  God  even  through  shait 
fttrokes^  exclaim  in  the  spirit  of  humility,  them, 

Ver.  fi^.    That  He  That  hath  hequn  would  bruise  m^!  ^2S' 

20.-  For  very  oiien  the   Lord   begins   to   Work   m   us   ihns/mii 
brtiising  of  our  vicious  habits,  but  when  the  mind  is  lifted  np^^^^^' 
fet  the  very  first  step  of  its  progress,  and  when  it  already  xvii# 
exalts  itself  as  on  the  ground  of  its  virtuous  attainmentSj  it 
opens  ari  entrancei  to  the  adversaryj  that  rages  against  it^ 
whd  p^iife(fatin^  intd  the  depths  of  the  heart,  dashes  in  piece?? 


378         God  men  wish  self-confidence  cured  by  suffering. 

Job  6,  all  that  he  may  find  therehi  spnnging  fi'om  the  earnestness 

— ?J of  a  good  beginning,  and  shews  himself  the  more  violent  in 

the  breaking  of  it  in  proportion  as  he  is  the  sorer  grieved 
that  it  had  made  progress,  though  but  a  little  way.  Whence 
too,  as  the  Gospel  is  witness,  by  the  voice  of  '  Truth,'  the 
unclean  spirit,  which  went  out  alone,  returns  with  seven 
other  spirits  to  the  neglected  dwelling-place  of  the  con- 
science. Lest  then,  after  the  beginnings  of  divine  coii'ection, 
the  old  adversary  snatch  him  unawares,  and  drag  him  along 
for  the  breaking  in  pieces  of  his  virtues,  the  holy  man  fitly 
beseeches,  saying.  That  He  That  hath  begun  would  bruise 
me.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  That  which  He  has 
begun  in  me  may  He  not  cease  to  perfect  by  smiting  me, 
lest  He  deliver  me  over  forsaken  to  the  adversary  to  bruise 
me.'     Hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined, 

Tliat  He  ivould  let  loose  His  hand,  and  cut  tne  off. 
xviii.       21.    For  oftentimes  being   swoln  with    the   confidence  of 
lengthened  prosperity,  we  are  lifted  up  in  a  certain  kind  of 
frame  of  self-elation,  and  when  our  Creator  sees  that  we  are 
lifted  up,  but  does  not  exercise   His   love   towards  us   by 
stripes.  He  as  it  were  keeps  His  hand  hid,  as  to  the  smiting 
of  our  evil  ways.     Did  He  not  tie  the  hand  of  His  affection, 
when  He  said  to  the  people,  when  guilty  of  transgression, 
Ezek.     /   ii;ill    twt    any   more    be    wroth    with    thee ;     and,    3Iy 
'     *  jealousy    is   departed  from    thee.      Therefore,    *  That   He 
w^ould  let  loose  His  hand,'  means,  ^  that  He  would    exer- 
cise His  affection.'     And  it  is  rightly  added,  '  and  cut  me 
off.'     For  whenever  either  the  sudden  pain  of  the  scourge, 
or   the    trial   of  our   weakness,  falls  upon  us  in   a  state  of 
security,  and  elated   with    the  abundance   of  our   virtuous 
attainments,  the    pride    of  our   hearts,  being  cut  down,   is 
precipitated  from  the  height  of  its  seat,  so  that  it  dares  do 
nothing  of  itself,  but  levelled  by  the  blow  of  its  frailty,  seeks 
the  hand  of  one  to  lift  it.     Hence  it  is  that,  when  holy  men 
are  looked  upon  with  admiration  on  the  grounds  of  the  secret 
dispensation  of  God's  providence   towards  them,  they  the 
more   dread  their  very  prosperity  itself:    they  long   to   be 
subjected  to  trial,  they  covet  to  be  stricken,  that  fear  and 
pain  may  discipline  the  unwary  mind,  lest  when  an  enemy 
brcaketh  out  of  ambush  on  this  road  of  our  pilgrimage,  its 
self-security  cause  its  gi'cater  downfal.     Hence  the  Psalmist 


Correction  desired  here  for  fear  of  future  Judgment.      379 

says,  Examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  prove  me.     Hence  he  says  Book 
again,  For  I  am  ready  for  the  scourges.     For  because  holy 


Ps.26,2; 

men  see  that  the  wound  of  their  inward  con*uption^  cannot  38, 17. 
be  without  putridity,  they  gladly  set  them  under  the  hand  of 
the  physician  for  lancing,  that  the  wound  being  opened,  the 
venom  of  sin  may  run  out,  which,  with  a  whole  skin,  was 
inwardly  working  their  destruction.  Hence  it  is  yet  further 
added ; 

Ver.  10.  And  let  this  be  my  consolation,  that  afflicting  me 
with  pain  He  spare  not. 

22.  The   Elect,  when    they  know   that   they  have    done 

unlawful  things,  but  find  upon  careful  examination  that  they 

have  met   with  no  afilictions  in  return   for  those  unlawful 

deeds,  with  the  immense  force  of  their  fear,  are  in  a  ferment 

with  alarm,  and  labour  and  travail  with  dark  misgivings,  lest 

grace  should  have  forsaken  them  for  ever,  seeing  that  no 

recompensing   of   their   ill-doing   keeps   them    safe   in    the 

present  life;  they  fear  lest  the  vengeance  which  is  suspended 

be  stored  to  be  dealt  in  heavier  measure  at  the  end;  they 

are  eager  to  be  stricken  with  the  correction  of  a  Father's 

hand,  and  they  reckon   the  pain   of  the  wound  to  be  the 

medicine  of  saving  health.     Therefore  it  is  rightly  said  in 

this  place,   Let   this   he  my  consolation,  that  afflicting  me 

with   grief  He  spare  not.     As  if  it  were  in  plain   words, 

*  May  He,  Who  spares  people  here  for  this  cause,  that  He 

may  strike  them  for  ever  and  ever,  therefore  strike  me  here, 

that,  by  not  sparing  me.  He  may  spare  me  for  ever.     For  I 

console  myself  in  being  afflicted,  in  that  conscious  of  the 

rottenness  of  human  corruption,  by  being  wounded  I  gain 

assurance  for   the   hope    of  saving   health.'     And   that   he 

uttered  it  not  with  a  svvoln  but  with  a  humble  mind,  he 

makes  plain,  as  we  have  before  said,  by  the  addition,  in  the 

words, 

Neither  will  I  gainsay  the  tvords  of  the  Holy  One. 
23.  Most  often  the  words  of  God  to  us  are  not  the  sounds    xx, 
of  speech,  but  the  enforcement  of  deed.     For  He  speaks  to 
us  in  that  which  He  works  upon  us  in  silence.     Blessed  Job 
then  would  be  gainsaying  the  words  of  God,  if  he  murmured 
at  His  blows;  but  what  feelings  he  entertains  for  his  smiter 

b  Ben.  *  correptionii?,'  which  seems  to  be  a  misprint.     Tr. 


380  Strength  of  the  Elect  patience^  of  the  wicked  stubbornness. 

Job  6,  is  shewn  by  him,  who,  as  we  have  ah*eady  said,  calls  Him 
'  Holy  One'  from  whom  be  is  submitting  to  blows.     It  goes 


nn 


on 

Ver.  11-     What  is  my  strength   that  I  should  hold  up? 
And  what  is  mine  end  that  I  should  deal  patiently? 
xxi-        24.  It  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind,  that  the  *  strength'  of 
the  righteous  is  of  one  sort,  and  the  strength  of  iho  reprobate 
of  another.     For  the  strength  of  the  righteous  is  to  subdue 
the  flesh,  to  thwart  our  own  wills,  to  annihilate  the  gratifi* 
cation  of  the  present  life,  to  be  in  love  with  the  roughnesses 
of  this  world  for  the  sake  of  eternal  rewards j  to  set  at  nought 
the    allurements   of  prosperity,  to   overcome  the    dread   of 
adversity  in  our  hearts.     But  the  strength  of  the  reprobate  is 
to  have  the  affection  unceasingly  set  on  transitory  things,  to 
hold  out  with  insensibility  against  the  strokes  of  our  Creator, 
not  even  by  adversity  to  be  brought  to  cease  from  the  lovg 
of  temporal  things,  to  go  on  to  the  attainment  of  vain  glory 
even  with  waste  of  life,  to  search  out  larger  measures  of 
wickedness,  to  attack  the  life  of  the  good,  not  only  with 
Words  and  by  behaviour,  but  even  with  weapons,  to  put  their 
trust  in  themselves,  to  perpetrate  iniquity  daily  without  any 
diminution   of  desire.     Hence  it  is  that  it  is  said  by  the 
Ps*3l,  Psalmist  to  the  Elect,  Be  of  good  courage^  and  let  your  heart 
he  strengthened^  all  ye  that  hope  in  the  Lord*     Hence  it  is 
Is* 5, d2,  declared  by  the  Prophet  to  the  reprobate,    Woe  unto  yon, 
that    are  vitghty  to  drink  wine^  and  men  of  siren glh   to 
mingle  strong  drink>     Hence   it  is  declared  by  Solomoti, 
that  all  the  holy  without  any  weakening  of  desire  cOiitem* 
Cani.5:plate  the  interior  rest.     Behold  his  hed^  ichich  is  ^otomon^s, 
threescore  valiant  men  are  about  it^  of  fh^  most  valiant  of 
Israel.     Hence  the  Psalmist  directing  his  meaning  agaiinst 
the  children  of  perdition  in  the  Voice  of  the  lledemnel'  in 
Ph\59,3.  His  Passion,  saith,  Zoj  they  ham  surprised  my  souli  the 
mighty  have  rushed  forth  against  me,     Mo^  Well  did  l^ai^lh 
Is.  4o,    Cditiprehend  both   sorts  of  ^t^'ength  in  the  WOrds,  But  th^y 

^m?//a-  ^^'^^  ^^'^  ^^P^*^  ^^'^  ^^''^^  '^^^^^^  ahiinye  *  thdlr  strength,     For 

^uni      in  thsit  he  said  not  they  will  *  take/  but  they  Will  *  4,'liange/ 

talrg-     ^^  eleftrly  made  kndwn  that  that  Which  is  laid  ftside  1^  «f 

Oiie  sort,  and  that  which  is  entel'4?d  lipdn  df  Another  mti, 

85;    Af€f  tJoi  the  Jeprobabie  ako  *  feifong/  Whd  laJt€l  feUcl* 


Good  men  loiJl  not  suffer  for  rvorldlij  ends.  381 

pains  in  running  after  the  concupiscence  of  this  world,  boldly  Book 

expose  themselves  to  perils,  welcome  insults  for  the  sake  of '- 

gain,  never  give  back  from  the  hist  of  their  appetites  con- 
quered by  any  opposition,  grow  obdurate  with  scourges,  and 
for  the  sake  of  the  world  undergo  the  ills  of  the  world,  and 
so  to  say  in  seeking  the  pleasures  thereof  are  parting  with 
them,  nor  yet  in  parting  with   them  ever  weary.     Whence 
it  is  well  said  by  Jeremiah  in  the  voice  of  mankind,  iJeLan:,  3, 
hath  made   me   drmtken    with    normwood.      For  one  that'^* 
is  drunk  knows  nothing  what  he  is  undergoing.     He  then  is 
'  drunken  '«ith  wormwood,'  who  alienated  from  the  faculty  of 
reason  through  the  love  of  the  present  life,  whilst  whatsoever 
he  undergoes  for  the   sake  of  the  world  he  accounts  but 
light,  is  blind   to    the  bitterness   of  the   toil   which    he   is 
enduring,  in  that  in  enjoyment  he  is  led  on  to  the  several 
things  in  which  in  chastisement  he  is  wearied  out.     But  on 
the  other  hand  the  righteous  man  makes  it  his  aim  to  be 
weak  for  undergoing  the  perils  of  the  world  for  the  world's 
sake,  looks  to  his  own  end,  marks  how  transitory  the  present 
life  is,  and   refuses   to  undergo  toils  without  for   the   sake 
of  that,  the  enjoyment  of  which  he  has  overcome  within. 
Let  blessed   Job    then,  pressed  by  the   adversities  of  the 
present  life,  say  in  his  own  voice,  yea,  in  the  voice  of  all  the 
righteous,  WAal  u  my  strength  that  I  should  hold  up  ?    And 
what  is  mine  end  tfixit  I  should  rleal  patiently  ?     As  if  he 
made  it  known  in  plain  words,  saying,  '  I  cannot  submit  to 
the  ills  of  the  world  for  the  sake  of  the  world,  for  now  I  am 
lio  longer  strong  in  the  desire  tliereof.     For  while  I  look  to 
the  end  of  the  present  life,  why  do  I  bear  the  burthen  of 
that,  the  longing  for  which   1  tread  under  my  feet?'    And 
because  the  unrighteous  severally,  as  we  have  said,  bear  the 
toils  thereof  with  stronger  resolution  in  proportion  as  they 
feed  with   greater   avidity  on   its   enjoyment,  therefore  he 
rightly  subjoins   without  delay   that  same  strength    of  the 
reprobate,  in  the  words, 

Ver.  12»  Neither  is  my  strength  the  strength  qf  stones^ 
nor  is  myjlesh  of  brass  9 

t^6v  For  what  have  vve  here  denoted  bv  *  brass^  and  ^  stones^  xxiU 
save  the  hearts  of  the  insensate,  who  oftentimes  even  receive 
llie  strokes  of  the  Most  High,  and  yet  they  are  not  softened 


382       Stones  stricken  sound  not,  brass  sounds  without  life. 

Job  6,  by  any  strokes  of  discipline  ?  Contrary  vvhereunto,  it  is  said 
v^ — '- —  to  the  Elect  through  the  Prophet,  by  promise  from  the  Lord, 
Ezek.  I  will  take  the  slony  heart  out  of  you,  and  will  give  you  an 
i^Cof  ^^^^1^1  of  flesh,  Paul  also  says,  Though  I  speak  with  the 
13,  1.  tongues  of  men  and  of  Angels,  and  have  not  charity,  I  am 
become  as  sounding  brass,  or  a  tinklmg  cymbaL  For  we 
know  that  stones  when  struck  cannot  give  a  clear  sound,  but 
when  brass  is  struck  a  very  sonorous  sound  is  made  by  the 
striking  of  it;  which,  because  like  stones  it  is  without  life, 
has  no  sense  contained  in  the  sound.  And  there  be  some, 
who,  like  to  stones,  have  become  so  hardened  as  to  the 
precepts  of  religion,  that,  when  the  stroke  of  the  visitation  of 
the  Most  High  is  proving  them,  they  never  return  the  sound 
of  humble  confession.  But  some  differing  in  no  respect 
from  the  metallic  nature  of  brass,  when  they  receive  the 
strokes  of  the  smiting  of  the  Most  High,  give  forth  the  sound 
of  devout  confession;  but  because  they  do  not  send  out  the 
tones  of  humility  from  the  heart,  when  they  have  been 
brought  back  to  a  state  of  sound  health,  they  know  nothing 
what  they  have  vowed.  The  one  then,  being  struck  like  stones, 
have  no  tones  at  all,  while  the  other  in  nothing  omit  the 
resemblance  of  brass,  who  when  under  the  stroke  utter  good 
things  which  they  do  not  feel.  The  one  sort  refuse  even 
words  to  the  worship  of  the  smiter.  The  other  sort,  in 
promising  what  they  never  fulfil,  cry  out  without  any  life. 
Let  the  holy  man  then,  who  amidst  the  scourges  eschewed 
the  hardness  of  the  reprobate,  exclaim,  Neither  is  my 
strength  the  strength  of  stones,  nor  is  my  flesh  of  brass.  As 
though  he  made  open  confession  in  plain  words, saying,'  Under 
the  lash  of  discipline  I  keep  clear  of  similarity  to  the  repro- 
bate. For  neither  have  I  become  like  stones  so  hardened, 
that  under  the  impulse  of  the  stroke  I  turned  dumb  in  the 
duty  of  confession;  nor  again,  like  brass  do  I  give  back  the 
voice  of  confession,  while  I  know  not  the  meaning  of  the 
voice.'  But  because  under  the  scourge  the  reprobate  are  strong 
unto  weakness,  and  the  Elect  weak  unto  strength,  blessed  Job, 
while  he  declares  that  he  is  not  strong  of  a  diseased  sense, 
makes  it  plain  that  he  is  strong  of  a  state  of  saving  health. 
So  let  him  instruct  us  whence  he  received  this  same  strength, 
lest   if    he    ascribes   to   himself   the    powers    that   he   has, 


Job  not  self'trustinc/ .     Love  of  God  and  man  help  each  other.  383 

he  be  running  vigorously  to  death.     For  very  often  virtue  Book 
possessed  kills  worse  than  if  it  were  wanting,  for  while  it  lifts 


up  the  mind  to  self-confidence,  it  pierces  it  with  the  sword  of 
self-elation,  and  while  as  it  were  it  quickens  by  imparting 
strength,  slays  by  filling  with  exaltation,  i.  e.  it  forces  on  to 
destruction  the  soul,  which,  through  selftrust,  it  uproots  from 
trust  in  the  interior  strength.  But  forasmuch  as  blessed  Job 
is  both  rich  in  virtue,  and  yet  has  no  confidence  in  himself, 
and,  that  I  may  say  so,  in  powerlessness  is  possessed  of  powers, 
he  fitly  subjoins  these  words,  saying, 

Ver.  13.  Lo,  there  is  do  help  to  me  in  myself. 

27.  It  is  now  made  clear  to  whom  the  mind  of  the  stricken  xxiii. 
man   had  recourse   for  hope,   seeing  that  he  declares  that 
there  was  no  hope  to  him  in  himself;  but  because  he  intimates 

that  in  himself  he  was  weak,  for  the  earning'  of  yet  greater^  o^ '  to 
Strength,  let  him  add  how  he  was  even  forsaken  by  his  neigh-  the 
hours,  ^Mf/  friends  also  departed  from  me.     But  mark,  he  ™^,"* 
that  was  despised  without,  is  seated  within  upon  the  throne  2  v. thus 
of  judgment.     For  at  the  moment  that  he  declares  himself 
forsaken,  he  forthwith  breaks  out  into  pronouncing  sentence, 
in  the  words, 

Ver.  14.  Whoso  taketh  away  pity  from  his  fr  lend,  forsaketh 
the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

28.  Who  else  is  here  denoted  by  the  name  of  a  fi-iend,  xxiv. 
saving  every  neighbour,  who   is  united  to  us  in  a  faithful 
attachment  in  proportion  as,  having  received  from  us  good 
service  in  this  present  time,  he   effectually  aids  us  toward 
attaining  hereafter  the  eternal  country.?     For  because  there 

are  two  precepts  of  charity,  viz.  the  love  of  God  and  the  love 
of  our  neighbour,  by  the  love  of  God  the  love  of  our  neighbour 
is  brought  into  being,  and  by  the  love  of  our  neighbour  the 
love  of  God  is  fostered.  For  he  that  cares  not  to  love  God, 
verily  knows  nothing  how  to  love  his  neighbour,  and  we  then 
advance  more  perfectly  in  the  love  of  God,  if  in  the  bosom  of 
this  love  we  first  be  suckled  with  the  milk  of  charity  towards 
our  neighbour.  For  because  the  love  of  God  begets  the  love  of 
our  neighbour,  the  Lord,  when  going  on  to  say  in  the  voice 
of  the  Law  the  words.  Thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour,  prefaced  Matt. 
it  by  saying.  Thou  shall  love  the  Lord  thy  God;  for  this  39.' 
reason,  that  in  the  soil  of  our  breast  He  might  first  fix  the  I?^"'*  ^' 


384  A  friend  not  true  who  fails  in  adversity. 

Job  6,  root  of  His  lov^e,  so  that  afterwards  in  the  branches  the  love 
of  our  brethren  should  shoot  forth.     As^ain,  that  the  love  of 


God   grows  to  strength  by  the   love    of  our  neighbour,  is 

I  John  testified  bj  John,  where  he  says,  For  he  thai  hveth  not  his 

*     '     brother,  whom  he  hath  seen^  how  can  he  love  God,  Whom  lie 

hath  not  seen  ?    Which  love  of  God,  though  it  has  its  birth 

in  fear,  yet  it  is  changed  by  growing  into  affection. 

29.  But  oftentimes  Almighty  God,  to  make  known  how 

far  any  one  is  from  the  love  of  Him  and  of  his  neighbour,  or 

what  proficiency  he  has  made  therein,  regulating  all  things 

in  a  marvellous  order,  puts  down  some  by  strokes,  and  sets 

up  others  by  successes;  and  as  often  as  He  forsakes  certain 

persons  in  their  temporal  estate  and  condition,  He  shews  the 

evil  that  lurks  in  the  hearts  of  certain  others.     For  very  often 

the  persons  that  courted  us  in  the  season  of  prosperity  without 

an  equal,  are  the  very  ones  to  persecute  us  in  distress.     For 

when  a  man  in  a  prosperous  condition  is  beloved,  it  is  very 

doubtful  whether  his  good  fortune  or  the  individual  be  the 

object  of  love.      But  the  loss  of  prosperity  puts  to  the  test 

the  force  of  the  affection.     Whence  a  certain  wise  man  saith 

Ecclus.  rightly,  A  friend  cannot  be  known  in  prosperity;  and  an 

'   '     enemy  cannot  be  hidden  in   adversity*      For  neither  does 

prosperity  shew  a  friend,  nor  adversity  hide  an  enemy,  in  that 

both  the  first  is  often  hidden  by  awe  for  our  high  fortune, 

and  the  latter  is  disclosed  to  view  from  presuming  on  our 

adverse  condition.     Let  the  holy  man  then,  set  in  the  midst 

of  scourges,  exclaim.  He  that  taketh  away  pity  from   his 

friend^  forsaketh  the  fear  fif  the  Lord;  in  that  doubtless  he 

that  contemns  his  neighbour  in  consequence  of  his  adversity, 

is  clearly  convicted  never  to  have  loved  him  in  his  prosperity. 

And  since  Almighty  God  vSmites  some  for  this  reason,  that  He 

may  both  discipline  the  individuals  stricken,  and  afford  to 

those   that   are   not   stricken   opportunity  for   doing   good, 

whosoever  disregards  one  that  is  smitten,  puts   away  from 

him  an  occasion  of  virtue,  and  lifts  himself  up   the  more 

wickedly  against  his  Makef,  ill  pi-oportion  as  he  views  Him 

tis  neither  merciful  in  the  saving  of  himself,  nor  just  in  the 

wounding  of  another.     But  wc  must  obseiTe  that  blessed  JTob 

in  such  sort  describes  his  own  case,  lliat  llie  life  of  all  the 

i^lect  People    is  at  the  same  time  set   forth  by  him.     Fot 


T/tg  wicked  like  the  torrent  that  fails  in  summer.        385 

seeinsr  that  he  is  a  member  of  that  People,  when  he  describes  Book 
what  he  himself  undergoes,  he   is  also  relating  what  that '- 


People  is  subject  to,  saying, 

Ver.  15.  3Iy  brethren  have  passed  hy  me  like  a  hrook  which 
passelh  hy  rapidly  in  the  hollows. 

30.  Because  the  mind  of  the  reprobate  is  set  on  present  xxv 
things  alone,  for  the  most  part  it  proves  a  stranger  to  the 
scourge  now,  in  proportion  as  hereafter  it  remains  an  exile 
from  the  inheritance.  But  oftentimes  the  lost  hold  the  same 
faith  by  which  we  live,  receive  the  same  Sacraments  of  faith, 
are  bound  in  the  unity  of  the  same  religion,  yet  they  are 
unacquainted  with  the  bowels  of  compassion;  of  the  force  of 
that  love,  with  which  we  are  inflamed,  both  towards  God 
and  our  neighbour^  they  know  nothing.  Therefore  they  are 
rightly  called  both  *  brethren,''  and  those  that  *  pass  by,'  in 
that  by  faith  they  come  forth  from  the  same  mother's  womb 
with  ourselves,  but  are  not  rooted  in  one  and  the  same 
eaiTiestness  of  charity  towards  God  and  our  neighbour. 
Whence  they  are  also  fitly  likened  to  a  '  brook  which  passes 
by  rapidly  in  the  valleys.'  For  a  brook  flows  from  the 
highlands  down  below,  and  while  it  gathers  its  waters  from 
the  winter  rains,  is  dried  up  by  the  summer  heats;  for  they 
that  from  love  of  earthly  objects  quit  the  hope  of  the  land 
above,  seek  the  valley  as  it  were  from  the  uplands,  and  these 
are  replenished  with  the  winter  season  of  the  present  life;  but 
the  summer  of  the  Judgment  to  come  dries  them  up,  in  that 
so  soon  as  the  sun  of  the  rigour  of  the  Most  High  waxes 
hot,  it  turns  the  joy  of  the  reprobate  into  drought.  Therefore 
it  is  rightly  said,  Rapidly  passeth  by  in  the  valleys.  Since 
for  a  torrent  to  pass  by  rapidly"  to  the  valleys,  is  for  the 
mind  of  the  froward,  without  any  pains  or  hindrance  to 
descend  to  the  lowest  aims.  For  all  ascending  is  in  pains- 
taking, but  all  descending  is  in  pleasure,  in  that  in  effect  the 
step  is  strained  to  reach  a  higher  level,  but  in  relaxation,  it  is 
let  down  to  a  lower  one.  For  it  is  a  matter  of  much  toil  to 
get  a  stone  up  to  the  top  of  a  mountain,  but  it  is  no  labour  to 
let  the  same  down  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  Surely,  that 
same  is  propelled  down  without  let,  which  did  not  reach  the 
top  without  mighty  pains.  The  crop  is  sown  by  long 
"  Ben.  thus:    A.  B.  D.  E.  '  in  the  valley.' 

•2  c 


386   Uie  wicked  pass  easily  and  swiftly  to  depths  ofm  isery 

Job  6,  application,  it  is  nourished  by  a  long  course  of  shower  and 
-- — '■ —  sunshine,  yet  it  is  consumed  by  a  single  instantaneous  spaik. 
By  little  aiid  little  buildings  mount  to  a  height,  but  by 
instantaneous  falls  they  come  to  the  ground.  A  vigorous 
tree  lifts  itself  in  the  air  by  slow  accessions  of  growth,  but  all 
that  it  has  in  a  long  course  reared  on  high,  is  brought  down 
at  once  and  together.  Therefore  forasmuch  as  ascending 
is  with  pains  and  descending  with  pleasure,  it  is  rightly 
expressed  in  this  place.  My  brethren  have  passed  by  me 
like  a  brook  which  passeih  by  rapidly  in  the  valleys;  which 
too  may  be  taken  in  another  sense  likewise. 

31.  For  if  we  understand  the  valleys  to  be  the  regions  of 
punishment  below,  then  all  the  unrighteous  '  pass  away 
rapidly  like  a  brook  to  the  valleys,'  in  that  in  this  life,  which 
they  go  after  with  all  tlie  desire  of  their  heart,  they  can 
never  stay  for  long,  since  for  all  the  days  that  they  add  to 
their  age,  they  are  as  it  were  daily  tending  by  so  many  steps 
to  their  end.  They  wish  for  the  periods  to  be  lengthened  to 
them,  but  forasmuch  as  when  granted  they  cannot  hold  ; 
for  as  many  additions  as  they  are  allowed  to  their.  Hfe,  they 
are  losing  just  so  many  from  their  period  of  living;  there- 
fore the  moments  of  time,  in  so  far  as  they  pursue,  they  are 
fleeing  from  ;  in  so  far  as  they  get  them,  they  are  parting 
with  them.  Thus  they  '  pass  away  rapidly  to  the  valleys,' 
who  indeed  draw  out  to  a  great  length  their  desires  for  the 
pleasures,  but  on  a  sudden  are  brought  down  to  the  dungeons 
of  hell.  For  because  even  that  period  which  is  protracted 
by  any  length  of  life  whatever,  if  it  be  closed  by  an  ending, 
is  not  long,  those  wretched  persons  learn  from  the  end  that 
that   was   but    short,   which   they   held  only  in   letting   go. 

Eccl^es.  Whence  also  it  is  well  said  by  Solomon,  But  if  a  man  live 
many  years^  and  rejoice  in  them  all ;  yet  let  him  remember 
the  days  of  darkness ;  for  they  shall  be  many:  and  when  they 
have  come,  the  past  shall  be  convicted  of  vanity.  For  when 
the  foolish  mind  meets  on  a  sudden  with  evil  which  never 
passes  away,  it  is  made  to  understand  by  undergoing  the 
eternal  durations  thereof,  that  the  thing  which  could  pass 
away  was  vain.  I>ut  we  should  know  that  the  greater  number 
desire  to  do.  right,  but  there  arc  some  things  calculated  to 
cross  and  thwart  their  weak  minds  arising  Irom  the  present 


11,  s. 


Earthly  fears  the  way  to  spiritual  davigers.  387 

life  ;  and  whereas  they  fear  to  undergo  crosses  in  the  lowest  Book 
things,  they  offend  against  the  rule  of  right  set  by  the  decree  ^V' 
above.     Whence  it  is  rightly  subjoined, 

Ver.  16.  Over  those  that  fear  the  frost,  the  snow  rushes 
down, 

32.  For  the  frost  congeals  below,  but  the  snow  falls  down  xxvi. 
from  above.     And  often  there  are  persons,  who,  while  they  ' 
fear  temporal  adversities,  expose  themselves  to  the  severity 
of  everlasting  visitation.      Concerning  whom    it   is   rightly 
declared  by  the  Psalmist,    There   were  they  in  great'' fear Vb.u,5. 
where  no  fear  was.     For  this  man  already  longs  to  defend 
the   truth  with   freedom,  yet  being  affrighted  in   that  very 
longing  that  he  feels,  he  shrinks  from  the  indignation  of  'a 
human  power,  and  while  on  earth  he  fears  man  in  opposition 
to  the  truth,  he  undergoes  from  heaven  the  wrath  of  Truth. 
That  man,  conscious  of  his  sins,  is  already  desirous  to  bestow 
upon  the  needy  the  things  which  he  is  possessed  of,  yet  dreads 
lest  he  himself  come  to  need  them  so  bestowed,     \yhen, 
being  alarmed,  he  provides  with  reservation  for  his  own  use 
succours  of  the  flesh  for  the  future,  he  starves  the  soul  from 
the  sustenance  of  mercy,  and  when  he  fears  want  on  earth,  he 
cuts  off  from  himself  the  eternal  plenitude  of  the  heavenly 
cheer.     Therefore  it  is  well  said.  Over  those  that  fear  the 
frost,  the  snow  rushes  down.     In  that  all  who  apprehend 
from  below  what  ought  to  be  trodden  under  the  feet,  undergo 
from  above  what  is  deserving  of  apprehension,  and  when 
they  will  not  pass  by  what  they  might  have  trodden  beneath 
them,  they  meet  with  a  judgment  from  heaven  which  they 
can  in  no  sort  sustain.     Now  by  acting  thus  they  attain  the 
glory  of  the  world  in  time,  but  what  will  they  do  in  the  hour 
of  their  call,  when  terror-stricken  they  quit  at  once  all  the 
things  which  they  kept  here  with  grievous  apprehensions  ? 
And  hence  it  is  rightly  subjoined, 

Ver,  17.  WJiat  time  they  he  dissipated  they  shall  perish. 
33.  For  all  persons  that  are  ruled  by  concern  for  the  xxvii. 
present  life,  are  brought  to  nought  by  the  loss  of  it,  and 
then  they  are  undone  without,  who  have  for  long  been 
undone  within  by  disregarding  the  things  of  eternity.  Con- 
cerning whom  it  is  rightly  added,  When  they  have  become 
hot,  they  shall  he  dissolved  from   their  place.     For  every 

2  c  2 


388  Fruitless  repentance.      Way  of  falling  hack. 

Job  6,  wicked  man  when  he  *  has  become  hot  is  dissolved  from  his 

18 

~ — '■ — place,'   in  that,  in   drawing  near  to    the  Judarment   of  the 

Moral.  ,  .  ° 

Interior  Severity,  when  he  has  now  begun  to  be  heated  ni 
the  knowledge  of  his  punishment,  he  is  severed  from  that 
gratification  of  his  flesh  whereunto  he  had  long  time  clung. 
Hence  it  is  that  it  is  delivered  by  the  Prophet  against  the 
Is.  28,  reprobate,  And  rexalion  alone  shall  onhj  give  tinder  standing 
to  the  hearing ;  in  that  verily  they  never  understand  the 
things  of  eternity,  saving  when  they  are  already  made  to 
undergo  punishment  for  those  of  time  without  remedy.  Thus 
the  mind  is  heated,  and  inflames  itself  with  the  fires  of  a 
fruitless  repentance,  it  shrinks  from  being  led  to  punishment, 
and  holds  fast  to  the  present  life  in  desire,  but  it  is  dissolved 
fi'om  its  place,  in  that  panting  from  the  gratification  of  the 
flesh,  its  hardness  is  melted  by  suffering  chastisement.  But 
seeing  that  we  have  heard  what  all  the  wicked  will  undergo 
in  the  hour  of  their  removal,  let  us  hear  further  some  of 
the  ways  in  which  their  course  is  perplexed  in  the  career  of 
their  freedom.  It  goes  on, 
•  V.  in-      Ver.  18.   TJie  paths  of  their  steps  are  involved^. 

34.  All  that  is  involved  is  folded  back  into  itself  And 
there  are  some  who  as  it  were  resolve,  with  all  the  purpose 
of  their  heart,  to  resist  the  vicious  habits  that  mislead  them, 
but  when  the  crisis  of  the  temptation  comes  full  upon  them, 
they  do  not  hold  out  in  their  purposed  resolution.  For  one 
swoln  with  the  bad  daring  of  pride,  when  he  sees  that  the 
rewards  promised  to  humility  are  great,  lifts  himself  up 
against  himself,  and  as  it  were  puts  away  the  swelling  and 
turgid  bigness  of  pride,  and  vows  to  prove  himself  humble 
under  whatever  insults ;  but  when  he  has  been  suddenly 
assailed  with  the  injuriousness  of  a  single  word,  he  straight- 
way returns  to  his  accustomed  haughtiness,  and  is  brought 
into  such  a  swelling  temper  of  mind,  that  he  does  not  at  all 
remember  that  he  had  made  it  his  object  to  win  the  blessed 
attainment  of  humility.  Another,  fned  with  avarice,  is  out  of 
breath  with  eagerness  in  adding  to  his  means.  When  he  sees 
that  all  things  speedily  pass  away,  he  arrests  his  mind,  which 
is  roaming  abroad  through  covetous  desires,  he  determines 
henceforth  not  to  set  his  heart  on  any  thing,  and  to  hold 
what  he  has   already  gotten  only  under  the  reins  of  great 


XXV  ni. 


The  wicked  seem  to  conquer  a  sin,  but  relapse.  389 

control;    but  when  objects  that  delight  him   are  suddenly  Book 

presented  to  his  eyes,  thereupon  the  heart  beats  high  in  the '— 

ambition  to  obtain  them,  the  mind  cannot  contain  itself,  it 
looks  about  lor  an  opportunity  of  getting  them,  and  unmindful 
of  the  moderation  which  it  had  covenanted  with  itself,  in 
longings  for  the  attainment  of  them,  disquiets  itself  ^vith 
goading  thoughts.  Another  is  polluted  by  the  corruption  of 
lust,  and  is  now  bound  and  chained  with  long  usage,  but  he 
sees  how  excellent  is  the  pureness  of  chastity,  and  finds  it  a 
foul  disgrace  to  be  mastered  by  the  flesh.  Therefore  he 
resolves  to  restrain  the  dissoluteness  of  his  pleasures,  and 
seems  to  set  himself  with  all  his  powers  to  make  a  stand 
against  habit;  but  upon  the  image  being  either  presented 
to  his  eyes,  or  recalled  to  his  recollection,  when  he  is 
moved  by  a  sudden  temptation,  at  once  he  becomes  all 
adrift  from  his  former  state  of  preparation;  and  the  same  man, 
that  had  set  up  against  it  the  shield  of  resolution,  lies  pierced 
with  the  javelin  of  self-indulgence,  and  he  being  unstrung  is 
overcome  by  lust,  like  as  if  he  had  never  made  ready  any 
weapons  of  resolve  against  it.  Another  is  set  on  fire  with 
the  flames  of  anger,  and  is  uncontrolled  even  to  the  extent  of 
offering  insults  to  his  neighbours,  but  when  no  occasion  of 
rage  comes  across  his  spirit,  he  considers  how  excellent  the 
virtue  of  mildness  is,  how  high  the  loftiness  of  patience,  and 
sets  himself  in  order  to  be  patient  even  against  insult :  but 
when  any  slight  matter  arises  to  ruffle  him,  he  is  in  a 
moment  kindled  from  his  heart's  core  to  words  and  insults. 
So  that  not  only  the  patience  he  had  promised  never 
returns  to  his  remembrance,  but  that  the  mind  neither  knows 
its  own  self,  nor  those  revilings  which  it  utters.  And  when 
he  has  fully  satisfied  his  rage,  it  is  as  if  he  returned  after 
exercise  to  a  state  of  tranquillity,  and  then  he  calls  himself 
in  again  into  the  chambers  of  silence,  when  not  patience, 
but  the  gratification  of  its  hastiness  has  given  a  check 
to  the  tongue.  Therefore  even  late,  and  after  the  insults 
have  been  offered,  he  scarcely  restrains  himself,  seeing  that 
fiery  horses  too  are  often  checked  from  their  career,  not 
by  the  hands  of  the  controller,  but  by  the  limits  of  the 
ground.  Therefore  it  is  well  said  of  the  reprobate,  T7ie 
paths  of  their  way  are  involved.     For  in  resolve  they  aim  at 


390  One  sin  left  drags  men  hack  into  others. 

Job  6,  right  courses  indeed,  but  are  ever  doubling  back  into  their 
accustomed   evil   ones,  and   being,  as  it  were,  drawn  out 


without  themselves,  they  return  back  to  themselves  in  a 
round,  who  indeed  desire  good  ways,  but  never  depart  from 
evil  ways.  For  they  wish  to  be  humble,  yet  without  being 
despised;  to  be  content  with  their  own,  yet  without  sufiering 
need;  to  be  chaste,  yet  without  mortification  of  the  body;  to 
be  patient,  yet  without  undergoing  insults ;  and  when  they 
seek  to  make  virtuous  attainments,  yet  eschew  the  toils 
thereof,  what  else  is  this  than  that  at  one  and  the  same  time 
they  know  nothing  of  the  conflicts  of  war  in  the  field,  and 
desire  to  have  the  triumphs  for  war  in  the  city. 

35.  Not  but  that  this,  that  their  ways  are  described  as 
*  involved,'  may  be  further  understood  in  another  sense  also ; 
for  it  often  happens  with  some  people  that  they  stoutly  gird 
j  themselves  up  to  encounter  some  vices,  but  neglect  to  over- 
come others,  and  while  they  never  lift  themselves  up  against 
these,  they  are  reestablishing  against  themselves  even  those 
which  they  had  subdued.  For  one  has  now  subdued  the 
flesh  from  the  dominion  of  lust,  but  he  has  not  yet  reined  in 
the  mind  from  av^arice  ;  and  while  he  keeps  himself  in  the 
world  for  the  practising  of  avarice,  and  does  not  quit  earthly 
courses,  when  the  juncture  of  the  occasion  breaks  out,  he 
falls  into  lust  also,  which  sin  he  seemed  to  have  already 
subdued.  Another  has  overcome  the  violence  of  avarice,  but 
he  has  never  subdued  the  power  of  lust,  and  when  he  is 
providing  the  costs  of  fulfilling  his  lustful  passion,  he  submits 
the  neck  of  the  heart  to  the  yoke  of  avarice  too,  which  he 
had  for  long  got  the  mastery  of.  Another  has  now  laid  low 
rebellious  impatience,  but  has  not  yet  subdued  vainglory; 
and  when  for  this  he  winds  himself  into  the  honours  of  the 
world,  being  pierced  with  the  irritation  of  cases  that  chance, 
he  is  brought  back  a  captive  to  his  impatience,  and  whilst 
vainglory  lifts  up  the  soul  to  the  vindication  of  itself,  being 
overcome  it  submits  to  that  whicli  it  had  got  the  upper 
hand  over.  Another  has  subdued  vainglory,  but  has  not  yet 
brought  down  impatience.  And  when  in  impatience  he 
utters  a  thousand  threats  to  those  that  offer  opposition,  being 
ashamed  not  to  execute  what  he  says,  he  is  brought  back 
under  the  dominion   of  vainglory,  and   being  subdued,  by 


Paths  of  the  wicked  '  involved'  by  sin  leading  to  sin.     39J 

means  of  something  else,  he  becomes  liable  to  that,  which   Book 

he  was  rejoicing  that  he  had  fully  conquered.     Thus  then __ 

the  vices  retain  a  hold  over  their  runaway  by  mutual  aid  in 
tm*n,  and  they  as  it  were  receive  him  back,  when  already 
gone,  under  the  rule  of  their  dominion,  and  hand  him  over  to 
each  other  by  turns  for  vengeance.  Thus  *  the  paths  of  the 
ways  of  the  wicked  are  involved,'  in  that  although  by  master- 
ing one  evil  habit,  they  free  the  foot,  yet,  while  another 
sways  them,  they  entangle  it  in  the  very  one,  which  they  had 
conquered. 

36.  But  sometimes  while  the  paths  of  their  ways  are  involved, 
at  once  not  a  single  sin  is  overcome,  and  one  sin  is  done  by 
occasion  of  another.     For  oftentimes  to  theft  there  is  joined 
the  deceit  of  denial,  and  often  the  sin  of  deceit  is  increased 
by  the  guilt  of  perjury.     Often  a  misdeed  is  committed  with 
shameless  assurance,  and  often  (which  becomes  worse  than 
any  fault)  there  is  even  a  glorying  in  the  commission  of  the 
misdeed.     For  though  self-exaltation  is  apt  to  arise  on  the 
score  of  virtue,  yet  sometimes  the  foolish  mind  exalts  itself 
on  the  grounds  of  the  wickedness  it  has  done.     And  when 
transgression  is  joined  to  transgression,  what    else   is    this 
than  that  the  steps  of  the  froward  are  bound  in  involved  ways 
and  entangled  chains?  Hence  it  is  rightly  delivered  by  Isaiah 
against  the  froward  soul,  under  the  likeness  of  Judaea,  And  it  u.  34, 
shall  be  an  habitation  of  dragons,  and  a  pasture  for  ostriches,  ^^' 
and  the  demons  shall  meet  with  the  onocentaurs,  and  the 
satyr  shall  cry  to  his  fellow.     For  what  is  denoted  by  the 
'  dragons,'  saving  malice,  and  what  by  the  name  of  '  ostriches,' 
saving  hypocrisy;  as  an  ostrich  has  the  appearance  of  flight, 
but  has  not  the  use  of  flying,  for  that  hypocrisy  too  impresses 
upon  all  beholders  an  image  of  sanctity  in  connection  with 
itself,  but  knows  not  to  maintain  the  life  of  sanctity.     There- 
fore  in   the  perverse  mind   the   dragon  lies  down  and   the 
ostrich    feeds,   in   that   both    lurking   malice    is    cunningly 
covered,  and  the  guise   of  goodness  is  set  before  the  be- 
holder's  eyes.      But   what   is    represented   by   the    title    of 
'  onocentaurs,'  saving  those  that  be  both  lecherous**  and  high- 
minded?    for  in  the  Greek  tongue,  '  onos'  signiiies  '  an  ass,' 

^  '  Lubrici.'    Thus  Prudentius,  '  Oculive  pecceut  lubrici.'  Hyinu.  ad  Laud. 
Fer.  V.  Brev.  Kom. 


392  Sins  haunt  the  wicked  soul  like  evil  monsters. 

Job  6,  and  by  the  designation  of  an  *  ass'  Inst  is  denoted,  according 

1^1 — —  to  the  testimony  of  the  Prophet,  who  says,  Whose  flesh  is  as 

Ezek.     the  flesh  of  asses;  but  by  the  name  of  a  '  bulP'  the  neck 

'     *   of  pride  is  set  forth,  as  it  is  spoken  by  the  Psalmist  in  the 

Ps.  22,  voice  of  the  Lord  concerning  the  Jews  in  their  pride,  Mamj 

hulls  Jiave  compassed  me;  siroug  hulls  of  Bashan  have  heset 

me  round.     Thus  they  are  '  onocentaurs,'  who,  being  subject 

to  vicious  habits  of  lust,  lift  up  then-  neck   on  account  of 

the  very  same  cause   for  which  they   ought  to   have  been 

abased,  who,  in  serving  their  fleshly  gratifications,  all  sense 

ol'  shame  being  put  far  from  them,  not  only  do  not  grieve 

that  they  have  lost  the  way  of  uprightness,  but  further  even 

exult  m  the  working  of  confusion.     Now  *  the  demons'  meet 

with  the  *  onocentaurs,'  in  that  the  evil  spirits  readily  serve  to 

their  wish  all  those  whom  they  see  rejoicing  in  the  things 

which  they  ought  to  have  bewailed ;  and  it  is  fitly  subjoined 

'  Lat.     there,  And  the  hairy  saiijr^  shall  cry  to  hisfelloiv.    Now  what 

Tyilostts 

others  are  represented  by  the  title  of '  the  hairy  one,'  saving 
they  which  the  Greeks  call  '  Pans,'  and  the  Latins  '  Incubiy 
whose  figure  begins  in  the  human  form,  but  terminates  in 
the  extremity  of  a  beast?  Therefore  by  the  designation  of 
'  the  hairy  one'  is  denoted  the  ruggedness  of  every  sin,  which 
even  if  in  any  case  it  begins  as  if  in  a  pretext  of  reason,  yet 
always  goes  on  to  irrational  motions ;  and  it  is  like  a  man's 
ending  in  a  beast,  whilst  the  sin,  beginning  in  a  copy  of 
reason,  draws  him  out  even  to  a  result  devoid  of  reason.  Thus 
often  the  pleasure  of  eating  is  subservient  to  gluttony,  and  it 
pretends  to  be  subservient  to  the  requirement  of  nature,  and 
w^hile  it  draws  out  the  belly  into  gluttony,  sets  up  the  limbs  in 
lasciviousness.  Now  *  the  satyr  crieth  to  his  fellow,'  when 
one  wickedness  perpetrated  leads  to  the  perpetration  of 
another,  and  as  if  by  a  kind  of  voice  of  thought,  a  sin 
already  committed  invites  another  sin  which  yet  remains  to 
be  committed.  For  oftentimes,  as  we  have  said,  gluttony 
says,  '  If  you  do  not  sustain  the  body  with  plentiful  support, 
you  can  hold  on  in  no  useful  labours;'  and  when  it  has 
kindled  the  mind  by  the  desires  of  the  flesh,  immediately 

e  Taurus,  referring  to  the  name  '  ono-     and    Fauns,'    wliich    tlicy    cnmnionly 
C(  ntaurus.'  called  '  Inculii,' as  really  existing.     De 

*St.  Augustine  speaks  of '  theSilvans     Civ.  Pei,  XV.  \xiii. 


Satyrs  assembled.     Sin  blinds  its  captive  first  or  last.    393 

lust  too  in  her  turn  forms  words  of  her  own  prompting,  saying,  Book 
'  if  God  would  not  have  human  creatures  united  together  in - 


a  bodily  sort,  He  would  never  have  made  members  in  them- 
selves suited   to  the  purposes   of  so   uniting;'  and  when  it 
suggests  these  things  as  if  in  reason,  it  draws  on  the  mind  to 
unrestrained   indulgence    of  the  passions,  and   often  when 
found  out,  immediately  it  looks  out  for  the  support  of  deceit 
and  denial,  and  does  not  reckon  itself  guilty,  if,  by  telling 
lies,  its  life  may  be  protected.     Thus  '  the  satyr  crieth  to  his 
fellow,'   when,  under  some   semblance   of  reasoning,  a  sin 
following  out  of  the  occasion  of  a  preceding  sin  ensnares  the 
froward  soul;  and  when  harsh  and  rugged  sins  sink  it  low,  it 
is   as    if  *  the   satyrs'   ruled  it,   gathered  together  in  it  in 
concord;  and  thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  ways  of  their 
paths  are  always  involving  themselves  worse  and  worse,  when 
sin  taking  occasion  of  sin  enchains  the  lost  soul. 

37.  But  here  it  is  necessary  to  know  that  sometimes  the 
eye  of  the  understanding  is  first  dulled,  and  then  afterwards 
the  mind  being  taken  captive  roams  at  random  amidst  outward 
objects  of  desire,  so  that  the  blinded  soul  knows  nothing  where 
it  is  being  led,  and  willingly  surrenders  itself  to  the  allure- 
ments of  the  fleshly  part;  while  at  other  times  the  desires  of  the 
flesh  first  burst  forth,  and  after  long  custom  in  forbidden 
courses,  they  close  the  eye  of  the  heart.  For  often  the  mind 
discerns  right  ways,  but  does  not  lift  itself  up  fearlessly 
against  bad  practices,  and  it  is  overcome  while  offering 
resistance,  when  the  very  thing  that  it  does  in  exercising 
discernment  is  outdone  by  the  pleasurable  emotion  of  its 
partner^  the  flesh.  For  that  it  very  often  happens  that  first ^  camis 
the  eye  of  contemplation  is  parted  with,  and  afterwards  the  ^"* 
mind  is  subjected  to  the  toils  of  the  world  through  the 
desires  of  this  our  flesh,  Samson  is  witness  on  being  taken 
captive  by  the  Philistines^  who  after  he  had  lost  his  eyes  was '  ^^(^ 

dIivHs 

put  to  the  mill,  because  the  evil  spirits,  after  that  by  the  L  usual 
piercings  of  temptation  they  force  out  the  eye  of  contempla-  l^X '4^*^ 
tion  within,  send  it  without  into  a  round  of  labour.  Again, 
that  it  often  happens  that  both  right  practice  is  parted  with 
externally,  and  yet  the  light  of  reason  still  retained  in  the 
heart,  the  Prophet  Jeremiah  instructs  us,  who,  while  he 
relates  the  captivity  of  Zedekiah,  tells  us  the  course  of  the 


394  Virtue  once  slain  as  ZedekiaK's  sons,  reason  is  put  out  as  his  eyes. 

Job  6,  captivity  of  the  interior,  in  these  words,  Then  the  king  of 
'  -  Babylon  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  in  Rehlatha  before  his 


f'HAL 


M 

Jer,39,  eyes  ;  also  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  all  the  nobles  of  Judah, 

^'  ''•       Moreover  he  put  out  Zedekiah' s  eyes.     The  king  of  Babylon 

is  our  old  enemy,  the  master  of  the  confusion  of  the  interior, 

who  first  slaughters  the  sons  before  the  eyes  of  the  parent 

beholding  it,  in  that  he  oftentimes  so  destroys  good  works, 

that  the  very  man  who  is  taken  captive  perceives  with  terror 

that  he   is   parting   with    them.     For   the    soul    very    often 

groans,  but  yet  being  subdued  by  the  enjoyments  of  its  fellow 

the  flesh,  the  good  things  which  it  begot  it  loses  while  it 

loves  them ;  it  sees  the  ills,  which  it  undergoes,  and  yet  never 

lifts  the  arm  of  virtue  against  that  king  of  Babylon.     But 

whilst  having  its  eyes  open  it  is  struck  with   the  doing  of 

iniquity,  by  being  used  to  sin  it  is  one  day  brought  to  this, 

that   it   is   bereft    of  the    very  light   of  reason    itself  also. 

Whence  the  king  of  Babylon,  after  his  sons  had  been  first  put 

to  death,  plucked  out  Zedekiah's  eyes,  in  that  the  evil  spirit, 

after  that  good  deeds  have  been  first  put  away,  afterwards 

takes   away   the   light   of  understanding   likewise.     Which 

rightly   befals    Zedekiah    in    Reblatha,   for    *  Reblatha'    is 

rendered  '  these  many.'     For  he  at  last  has  even  the  light  of 

reason  too  closed,  who  is  weighed  down  by  bad  habit  in  the 

multitude  of  his  iniquities.     But  in  whatever  way  sin  may 

come  forth,  or  from  whatever  occasion  it  may  spring,  yet  the 

ways  of  the  reprobate  are  always  *  inv^olved,'  so  that,  being 

abandoned  to  depraved  lusts,  they  either  do  not  pursue  good 

things  at  all,  or  pursuing  them  with  a  weak  aim,  they  never 

stretch  out  the  unimpeded  steps  of  the  mind  in  pursuit  of 

them.     For  either  they  do  not  set  out  with  right  aims,  or, 

breaking  down  in  the  very  way,  they  never  attain  to  them. 

Whence  it  generally  happens  that  tiring  of  them  they  return 

to  their  own  ways,  prostrate   themselves  from  their  settled 

puq)Ose  of  mind  in  the  enjoyments  of  the  flesh,  mind  only 

the  things  that  are  transitory,  and  take  no  heed  of  those 

which  are  calculated  to  abide  with  them.     Whence  it  is  fitly 

subjoined. 

They  shall  walk  unto  emptiness,  and  perish. 

38.  For  they  all  '  walk  unto  emptiness,'  who  bring  with 
them  nothing  of  4he  fruit  of  their  labour.     Thus  one  man 


All  ways  are  *  to  emptiness,^  that  earn  not  life.  395 

spends  himself  in  the  attainment  of  honours,  another  is  in  Book 
a  fever  with  multiplying  his  means,  another  pants  after  the -^ 


obtaining  of  applause;  but  because  every  one  at  his  death 
leaves  all  such  things  here,  he  has  lost  his  labour  on  empti- 
ness, who  has  brought  nothing  with  him  before  the  presence 
of  the  Judge.    Contrary  whereto  it  is  well  delivered  in  the  Law, 
Thou  shalt  not  appear  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  empty.     For  Ex.  23, 
he  that  has  not  provided  for  himself  the  wages  of  life  earned  pj^^ 
by  well  doing, '  appears  before  the  Lord  empty.'     Hence  it  is  16,  I6. 
said   of  the  just  by  the  Psalmist,   But  they  shall  doubtless Ps.  \26 
come  again  with  rejoicing,  bringing  their  sheaves  uith  them. ^' 
For  they  come  to  the  inquisition  of  Judgment,  *  bringing 
their  sheaves  with  them,'  who  exhibit  in  themselves  those 
good   works,   whereby    they  may  obtain  life.       Hence  the 
Psalmist  says   again  concerning  every  Elect  person,    [F/jo  Ps.24,4. 
hath  not  taken  his  soul  in  vain.     For  every  one  '  takes  his 
soul  in  vain,'  who,  taking  account  of  present  things  only, 
pays  no  heed  to  those  that  shall  follow  him  to  last  for  ever. 
He  '  takes  his  soul  in  vain,'  who,  being  unconcerned  for  the 
life   thereof,  prefers   to    it   the    care    of   the  flesh;   but    the 
righteous  do  not  '  take  their  soul  in  vain,'  in  that  whatsoever 
they  do  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  body,  with  stedfast 
purpose  they  make  all  tell  to  its  weal,  that  even  though  the 
deed  pass  away,  still  the  cause  of  the  deed  may  never  pass, 
in  that  after  life  it  procures  the  rewards  of  life.     But  the 
reprobate  are  indifferent  to  take  account  of  these;  for  verily 

*  going  walking  into  emptiness,'  in  pursuing  life  they  flee 
from  it,  and  in  finding  it  they  lose  it.  But  we  are  more 
effectually  withheld  from  imitating  the  wicked,  if  we  calculate 
their  losses  by  the  end.  Whence  it  is  well  added  even  with 
a  charge, 

Ver.  19.  *  Consider  the  paths  of  Tema,  the  icays  of  ShebajiY.thus 
and  wait  a  little  ivliile. 

39.  For   Tema  is  rendered  '  the  south  wind,**  and   Sheba 

*  a  net.'  What  is  here  set  forth  by  '  the  south  wind,'  which 
dissolves  the  limbs  it  blows  on  with  its  warm  breath,  saviusr 
dissolute  laxity  of  life?  and  what  by  '  the  net,'  save  the 
fettering  of  practice?  For  they  that  aim  at  the  things  that 
are  eternal  with  a  dissolute  mind,  of  their  own  free  will  fetter 
themselves   by    the    megularity  of  their   efforts,  that  they 


396  Entanglements  of  earthly  relations. 

Job  6,  should  never    advance  towards  God  with  a  free  step,  and 

•      ' '     while  they  entangle  themselves  with  the  loose  practices  of 
their  behaviour,  they  as  it  were  set  their  feet  to  be  held  in 

'macuhstiie  meshes*  of  a  net.  For  as  we  said  a  little  way  above, 
that  there  are  persons  who  are  drawn  back  into  bad  habits, 
already  got  the  better  of,  by  means  of  other  open  evil  habits 
not  yet  overcome,  so  there  are  some  that  fall  back  into  those 
which  they  had  abandoned  by  means  of  others,  which  are 
cloked  with  the  title  of  respectability,  or  the  honourableness 
of  praise.  Thus  there  are  very  many,  who  now  no  longer  aim 
at  the  things  of  another,  and  who  with  the  love  of  tranquillity 
begun  are  parted  from  the  jarrings  of  this  world,  thirst  to  be 
instructed  in  Holy  Writ,  long  to  give  themselves  to  heavenly 
contemplations,  yet  they  do  not  abandon  with  a  perfect 
freedom  of  soul  all  concern  about  their  domestic  affairs,  and 
often  while  they  are  employed  in  the  service  of  the  same  in 
a  lawful  way,  they  are  involved  in  the  unlawful  jarrings  of 
this  world  at  the  same  time;  and  while  they  are  eager  to 
protect  their  earthly  interests  with  anxious  care,  they  quit 
that  repose  of  the  heart,  which  they  sought  for;  and  whilst 
their  substance,  that  is  escaping  from  them,  is  guarded  with 
continual  caution,  the  word  of  di\dne  knowledge  which  has 
been  conceived  in  the  heart  is  let  loose ;  in  that,  according 

Matt,  to  the  declaration  of  Truth,'  the  thorns  choke  the  seed  that 
'  has  sprung  up,  when  the  importunate  cares  of  earthly  things 
put  out  the  word  of  God  from  the  recollection.  Therefore 
they  are  walking  in  a  net  with  their  steps  all  abroad,  who, 
while  they  do  not  perfectly  forsake  the  world,  fetter  themselves 
in  their  steppings,  that  they  cannot  step. 

40.  And  there  are  very  many,  who  not  only  do  not  covet 
what  belongs  to  another,  but  even  abandon  all  that  they 
possessed  in  the  world,  who  despise  themselves,  do  not  aim 
at  any  glory  of  the  present  life,  sever  themselves  from  this 
world's  courses  of  action,  and  whatever  prosperity  may  smile 
upon  them,  they  well  nigh  tread  it  under  their  feet;  yet 
being  tied  with  the  chain  of  earthly  relationship,  while  they 
imprudently  obey  the  dictates  of  the  love  of  kindred,  it  often 
happens  that  by  the  instrumentality  of  relations  they  turn 
back  to  those  habits  which  they  had  even  together  with  self- 
:    contempt  already  subdued;  and  whereas  they  lovetheir  fleshly 


Earthly  kindred  to  he  renounced  loith  self.  397 

kin  beyond  what  needs,  being  drawn  back  without,  they  are  Book 
separated  from  the  Parent  of  the  heart.     For  we  often  see  - 


meu,  who,  as  far  as  concerns  their  own  interest,  henceforth 
no  longer  entertain  any  desires  of  the  present  hfe,  who  have 
quitted  the  world  both  in  practice  and  in  profession,  yet  for 
their  inordinate  affection  for  relations,  burst  into  the  courts 
of  justice,  biLsy  themselves  with  the  discord  of  earthly  things, 
part  with  the  freedom  of  interior  repose,  and  restore  in  their 
hearts  the  interests  of  the  world  that  were  long  undone. 
Whither  then  are  those  walking  but  into  a  net,  whom  per- 
fection of  life  commenced  had  already  set  free  from  the 
present  world,  but  whom  the  excessive  love  of  earthly  kin 
still  binds  ? 

41.  For  they  that  follow  after  the  reward  of  the  eternal 
espousals  with  close  pursuits,  and  not  with  loose  steps,  as 
they  disregard  themselves  for  the  love  of  God,  so  they  lay 
aside  every  thing  whereby  they  see  they  are  hindered;  and 
since  it  is  necessary  for  God's  sake  that  they  should  render 
service  to  all  that  they  are  able,  for  God's  sake  they  refuse 
their  private  services  even  to  their  relations.  Hence  it  is 
that  when  one  said.  Suffer  me  Jirst  to  go  and  hury  /w?/Luke9, 
father,  he  thereupon  heard  from  the  lips  of  '  Truth,'  Follow 
Me,  and  let  the  dead  hury  their  dead,  hut  go  thou  and 
preach  the  kingdom  of  God.  Wherein  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  whereas  the  chosen  disciple  is  withheld  from  the  burial 
of  his  father,  for  the  sake  of  God  it  is  not  permitted  a  devout 
person  to  do  for  a  dead  father,  from  carnal  afi'ection,  that 
which,  for  God's  sake,  he  ought  to  do  for  strangers  likewise. 
Hence  again  '  Truth'  saith,  //'  any  man  come  to  Me,  and^^^^ 
hate  not  his  father,  and  motJier,  and  wife,  and  children, 
and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he 
cannot  he  My  disciple.  In  which  same  place,  forasmuch  as 
after  the  hatred  of  our  kindred  we  have  the  hatred  of  our 
own  life  brought  in,  it  is  plainly  shewn  that  we  are  bidden 
to  hold  our  relations  in  hatred  in  such  sort  as  ourselves,  that 
urging  them  ^  away  to  the  interests  of  eternity,  and  putting  ^A.BE. 
aside  carnal  favour  towards  them,  when  it  is  a  hindrance  in  ^^{^^^ 
the  way,  we  might  learn  by  a  proportioned  skill  of  discrimi- 
nation, at  once  to  love  them  suitably,  and  to  hate  them 
savingly,  so  that  in  love  hatred  might  be  so  taught  to  arise, 


398  Relatives  to  be  served  in  duty^  not  partiality. 

Job  6,  that  we  might  be  able  to  love  more  really  in  hatred.     Hence 

^j — ^— again  it  is  said  by  Moses,  Who  said  unto  his  father  and  to 

Deut,     his   mother,    I  know   you    not,    and    to    his    hrethreii,    I 

'   *     recognise  you  not,  nor  knew  they  their  own  children;  these 

have  observed  Thy  word  and  Thy  covenant,  and  kept  TJiy 

judgments.     For  he  longs  to  know  God  more  familiarly  who, 

from  love  of  religion,  desires  to  know  no  longer  those  whom 

he  has  known  after  the  flesh.     For  the  knowledge  of  God 

is  lessened  by  a  gi'ievous  cnrlailment,  if  it  be  shared  with 

acquaintance  with  the  flesh.     Every  one  then  must  be  put 

without  the  pale  of  kindred  and  acquaintance,  if  he  would 

be  more  genuinely  united  to  the   Parent  of  all,  that  those 

same  ones,  whom  for  the  sake  of  God  he  makes  light  of  for  a 

good  end,  he  may  the  more  substantially  love,  in  proportion 

as  he  renounces  in  them  the  destructible  affection  of  carnal 

attachment. 

42.  We  ought  indeed,  even  in  a  temporal  way,  to  benefit 
more  than  the  rest  those  to  whom  we  are  more  nearly  united; 
for  a  flame  too  extends  its  burning  to  things  put  by  it,  but 
that  particular  thing,  wherein  it  originates,  it  first  sets  burn- 
ing. We  ought  to  acknowledge  the  tie  of  earthly  relation- 
ship, and  yet  to  disown  it,  when  it  obstructs  the  progress  of 
the  mind,  that  the  faithful  soul,  being  inflamed  in  devotion 
to  divine  things,  may  at  once  not  look  with  contempt  on  the 
things  which  are  joined  to  it  below,  and  that  by  regulating 
these  aright  in  itself,  it  may  mount  above  them  in  the  love  of 
thino-s  on  high.  Therefore  with  wise  caution  we  must  be  on 
our  guard,  that  no  favouring  of  the  flesh  steal  upon  us,  and 
divert  the  step  of  the  heart  fiom  the  right  path,  lest  it  hinder 
the  efficacy  of  heavenly  love,  and  sink  the  soaring  mind 
downwards  under  a  superincumbent  weight.  For  every  one 
ought  so  to  sympathize  in  the  wants  of  his  kindred,  that  yet 
by  such  sympathy  he  never  let  the  force  of  his  puipose  be 
impeded,  so  that  affection  indeed  should  fill  the  bowels  of 
the  heart,  yet  not  divert  it  from  its  spiritual  resolve.  For  it 
/  is  not  that  holy  men  do  not  love  their  fleshly  kin,  to  give 
/  them  all  things  necessary,  but  they  subdue  this  very  fondness 
within  themselves  from  love  of  spiritual  things,  in  order  so  to 
j  temper  it  by  the  control  of  discretion,  that  they  may  be  never 
led   by  it,  yea  in   a  small  measure,  and  in  the  very  least 


The  kine  with  the  Ark  shew  affection  felt,  but  controlled.  399 
degree,  to  deviate  from   the  straight  path.     And  these  are   Book 

VII 

well  conveyed  to  us  by  the  representation  of  the  kine,  which '- 


going  along  towards  the  hilly  lands  under  the  Ark  of  the 
Lord,  proceed  at  one  and  the  same  time  with  fondness  and 
with  hardened  feeling;  as  it  is  written.  Atid  the  men  did  so:  i  Sam. 
and  took  two  milch  kine,  and  tied  them  to  the  cart,  and  ' 
shut  up  their  calves  at  home:  and  they  laid  the  Ark  of  the 
Lord  upon  the  cart.  And  soon  after;  And  the  kine  took\er.\2. 
the  straight  way  to  the  way  of  Beth-shemesh,  and  they  went 
along  by  one  way,  lowing  as  they  went,  and  turned  not 
aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  For  observe,  when 
the  calves  were  shut  up  at  home,  the  kine  which  are  fastened 
to  the  waggon  bearing  the  Ark  of  the  Lord,  moan  and  go 
their  way,  they  give  forth  lowings  from  deep  within,  and  yet 
never  alter  their  steps  from  following  the  path.  They  feel 
love  indeed  shewn  by  compassion,  but  never  bend  their 
necks  behind.  Thus,  thus  must  they  needs  go  on  their  way, 
who  being  placed  under  the  yoke  of  the  sacred  Law,  hence- 
forth carry  the  Lord's  Ark  in  inward  knowledge,  so  as  never 
for  this,  that  ihey  take  compassion  on  the  necessities  of 
relations,  to  deviate  from  the  course  of  righteousness  which 
they  have  entered  upon.  For  *  Beth-shemesh*  is  rendered 
*  the  house  of  the  sun.'  Thus  to  go  to  Beth-shemesh  with 
the  Ark  of  the  Lord  placed  on  them,  is  in  company  with 
heavenly  knowledge  to  draw  near  to  the  seat  of  light  eternal. 
But  we  are  then  really  going  on  towards  Beth-shemesh,  when 
in  going  the  path  of  righteousness,  we  never  turn  aside  into 
the  adjoining  side-paths  of  error,  not  even  for  the  sake  of 
the  affection  we  bear  to  our  offspring;  kindness  to  whom 
ought  indeed  to  have  a  place  in  our  mind,  but  never  to 
turn  it  back,  lest  that  mind,  if  it  be  not  touched  by  a  feeling 
of  affection,  be  hard,  or  being  too  much  touched,  if  it  is 
turned  aside,  be  slack. 

43.  It  is  well  to  look  at  blessed  Job,  in  whom  the  yoke  of 
God's  fear  had  worn  the  neck  of  the  heart,  and  see  under 
what  controlling  influence  of  discretion  he  bears  the  Ark  of 
the  Lord's  sentence.  For  when  the  calves  are  gone  he  lows, 
in  that,  when  tidings  of  his  children's  death  were  brought 
him,  '  he  fell  upon  the  ground  with  his  head  shaven,'  yet  he 
goes  by  the  right  way  whilst  lowing,  in  that   his  lips  in 


400        Sin  to  be  '  considered''  in  others  for  our  loarning. 

Job  6,  groaning  are  opened  to  utter  tlie  praises  of  God,  whereas  he 

.  — '- —  exclaims  without  delay,  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath 

Job  f,    taken  away;   blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.     But  minds 

^^*        that  are  not  gifted  with  discretion  know  nothing  of  this  rule 

of  life,  and  in  the  degree   that  they  seek  the   ways  of  the 

Lord  negligently,  they  are  turned  back  foolishly  to  the  paths 

of  the  world. 

44.  Rightly  then  does  the  holy  man  after  '  the  paths  of 
Theman'  make  mention  of '  the  ways  of  Saba.'  For  they  whom 
the  south  wind  of  a  mischievous  warmth  has  relaxed,  are 
verily  held  bound  in  the  net  of  entanglement.  But  in  de- 
scribing the  deeds  of  the  wicked,  he  rightly  admonishes  them 
to  '  consider'  these  things ;  for  we  delight  in  froward  practices 
in  doing  them,  but  when  seen  in  others  we  pass  sentence 
upon  them,  and  the  actions,  which  in  our  own  case  we  think 
to  be  little  deserving  of  sentence,  we  learn  to  be  as  base  as 
they  really  are  by  the  conduct  of  others ;  and  so  it  comes  to 
pass  that  the  mind  is  brought  back  to  itself,  and  takes  shame 
to  do  the  thing  that  it  censures.  For  it  is  as  though  an  ugly 
face  in  a  mirror  caused  disgust,  as  often  as  the  mind  sees  in 
a  similar  life,  what  to  feel  abhorrence  for  in  itself.  Therefore 
he  says.  Consider  the  paths  of  Temau,  the  ways  of  Sheba, 
and  wait  a  little.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words;  '  Look  to  the 
harms  of  another's  lukewarmness,  and  then  you  will  the  more 
surely  take  hope  in  relation  to  eternal  things,  if  with  the  eye 
of  the  heart  rightly  directed  you  look  at  that  which  may 
disgust  you  in  others.' 

40.  And  it  is  well  said,  wait  a  little ;  for  it  often  happens, 
that  whereas  the  short  period  of  the  present  life  is  loved  as 
if  it  were  to  last  for  long,  the  soul  is  dashed  from  its  eternal 
hope,  and  being  beguiled  with  present  objects,  is  thrown 
back  by  the  blackness  of  self-despair.  And  when  it  imagines 
that  the  period  is  long  which  remains  for  it  to  live,  at  once 
upon  quitting  life  it  meets  that  eternity,  which  it  may  not  avoid. 
Ecclus.  Hence  it  is  that  it  was  spoken  by  one  that  was  wise,  Woe 
'  '  unto  you  that  have  lost  patience.  For  truly  they  '  lose 
patience,'  who,  whilst  they  reckon  to  tarry  long  amongst 
visible  things,  part  with  the  hope  of  the  invisible.  And 
while  the  mind  is  rivetted  to  present  objects,  hfe  is  ended, 
and  they  are  suddenly  brought  to  unlooked-for  punishments, 


Suddenness  of  Judgment.     Time  wastes  the  life  it  makes.  401 

which,  being  deceived  by  their  presumptuous  expectations,  Book 
they  flattered  themselves  they  would  either  never  meet  with,  — 


or  not  till  late.  Hence  '  Tiiith'  says.  Watch  therefore,  for  ^^^^' 
ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour.  Hence  again  it  is 
written,  Tlie  Day  of  the  Lord  so  cometli  as  a  thief  in  //^ej^hess. 
night;  for  because  it  is  never  seen  drawing  near  to  seize 
upon  the  soul,  it  is  likened  to  a  thief  in  the  night.  There- 
fore it  ought  to  be  the  more  apprehended  as  always  coming, 
in  proportion  as  it  cannot  be  foreknown  by  us  when  it  is 
about  to  come.  Whence  holy  men  too,  in  that  they  have 
their  eyes  incessantly  fixed  on  the  shortness  of  life,  do  as  it 
were  pass  through  life  daily  undergoing  death ;  and  prepare 
themselves  on  a  more  solid  basis  for  the  things  that  shall  last, 
in  proportion  as  they  are  ever  reflecting  by  the  end  that 
transitory  things  are  nought.  For  hence  the  Psalmist,  seeing 
that  the  life  of  the  sinner  fleeth  at  a  quick  pace,  exclaims. 

For  iiet  a  little  while  and  the  sinner  shall  not  he.     Hence  Ps.  37, 

.  .  .  10 

again  he  saith.  As  for  man,  his  days  are  as  grass.     Hence  pg*,  103, 

Isaiah  saith,  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  there-^^- 
of  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field.  Hence  James  rebukes  the 
spirit  of  the  presumptuous,  saying,  For  what  is  your  life  ?  James 
It  is  even  a  vapour  that  appeareth  for  a  little  time.  There-  '  * 
fore  it  is  rightly  said,  wait  a  little,  in  that  both  that  is 
unmeasurable  which  follows  after  without  limit,  and  all  but 
little  that  is  closed  by  an  end.  For  that  ought  not  to  seem 
long  to  us,  which  hy  the  course  of  its  allotted  period  is 
tending  not  to  be;  which  while  it  is  carried  on  by  moments, 
its  very  own  moments,  whilst  they  delay,  are  themselves 
urging  forwards;  and  from  the  very  same  cause,  from  which  it 
is  seen  to  be  in  our  possession,  it  results  that  it  ceases  to  be 
in  our  possession.  But  blessed  Job,  after  he  had  brought  in 
the  shortness  of  the  present  life  in  terms  of  contempt,  there- 
fore in  the  voice  of  all  the  Elect  rises  up  justly  against  the 
wicked,  subjoining, 

Ver.  20.   Tliey  are  confounded,  because  T  have  hoped. 

46.  When  the  wicked  inflict  evils  upon  the  good,  if  they 
see  them  to  be  shaken  from  the  interior  hope,  they  are  over- 
joyed at  their  deceiving  taking  effect,  for  they  account  the 
spread  of  their  error  to  be  the  greatest  gain,  in  that  they 
rejoice  to  have  fellows  in    perdition,  but  whilst  the  good 

2  D 


402   The  tvicked  shamed  at  siyht  of  the  Church  in  Judgment. 

Job  6,  man's  hope  is  rooted  within,  and  never  bent  to  the  ground 
— ~ — by  outward  evils,  confusion  seizes  the  soul  of  the  wicked,  in 
that  whilst  they  are  unable  to  get  at  the  innermost  parts  of 
the  distressed,  they  are  ashamed  to  prove  themselves  cruel 
for  no  end.     Therefore  let  the  holy  man  say  in  his  own  voice, 
let  him  say  in  the  endurance  of  the   Church   universal  in 
affliction  and  groaning.  Who,  amidst  the  contrarieties  of  the 
wicked,  without  any  default  of  mind,  longs  for  the  joy  of  the 
heavenly  recompense,  and  by  dying  holds  on  to  life ;  They 
are  confounded^  because  I  have  hoped.     As  though  it  were 
in  plain  words,  '  because  the  wicked  by  hard  persecutions 
fail   to    soften   the   force   of  my  rigid    mind,    surely   beinor 
covered   with   shame  they  lose    the  labours   of  their  cruel 
ways.'     And  hence  at  once  he  looks  on  the  blessings  of  the 
Retribution  to  come  as  henceforth  here,  and  marks  what  an 
arraignment  awaits  the  wicked  at  the  Judgment,  adding, 
Tliey  came  even  unto  me,  and  were  ashamed. 
xxxii.      47.  For  lost  sinners  '  come  even  to  Holy  Church'  on  the 
Alleg.  Day  of  Judgment,  in  that  they  are  then  brought  even  to  the 
beholding  of  her  glory,  that  for  the   greater  punishment  of 
their  guilt  they  may  see  in  their  rejection  what  they  have 
lost.      Then    shame    covers    the    wicked,    when    conscience 
bearing  witness  convicts  them  in  the   sight  of  the  Judge. 
Then  the  Judge  is  beheld  without,  and  the  accuser  is  felt 
within.     Then  every  sin  is  called  up  before  the  eyes,  and 
the   soul,  over  and    above    the    burnings    of  hell,  is   worse 
tortured  by  its  own  fire.     Concerning  these  it  is  rightly  said 
Is.  26,    by  the  Prophet,  Lord,  let  Thy  hand  he  exalted,  that   they 
see  not  ^,  let  them  see  and  he  confounded.     For  now  their 
merits  darken  the  understanding  of  lost  sinners,  but  then  the 
knowledge  of  their  guilt  enlightens  it,  so  that  both  now  they 
in  no  wise  see  what  is  to  be  followed,  and  then  they  perceive 
it,  after  they  have  lost  it.     For  now  they  do  not  care   to 
understand  the   things  of  eternity,  or  they  refuse  to  make 
them  their  object,  when  understood;  but  then  assuredly,  both 
understanding  and  longing  after  them,  they  have  them  dis- 
closed to  their  sight,  when  they  can  no  longer  obtain  them 
thus  longed  for. 
Lit.        48.  Which  same  words  of  blessed  Job,  moreover,  are  in  an 

P   Vulg    and  let  fhem  tint  sfr.     St.  Greg,  has  ut  for  et. 


Fearing  God  nhile  pronperoiifi,  .J  oh  feared  rioi  at  the  rod.  403 

especial  manner  suited  to  his  friends,  who  set  themselves  to  Book 

•  •  VII 

shake  the  mind  of  the  holy  man  by  bitter  upbraidings.     For 


he  says,  They  were  confounded  because  1  have  hoped.  As  if 
it  were  in  plain  words,  '  Whilst  they  fail  by  foolish  revilings 
to  turn  me  to  despair,  they  are  themselves  confounded  by 
the  madness  of  their  fool-hardiness.'  TJiey  came  even  up  unto 
mcy  and  were  ashamed.  As  though  he  expressed  it, '  Seeing 
the  sores  of  my  body,  but  ignorant  of  the  constancy  of  my 
mind,  whilst  they  took  upon  them  to  reproach  me  for 
unrighteousness,  they  did  not  yet  '  come  up  unto  me,"*  but 
striking  with  cruel  reproaches,  whereas  they  find  that  my 
soul  stands  firm  amidst  adversity, '  coming  to  me,'  as  it  were, 
*  they  are  ashamed.'  For  herein  they  '  come  to  me,'  in  that 
they  know  me  in  the  interior  of  my  heart,  and  there  they  are 
'  covered  with  shame,'  where  outward  loss  moves  me  not, 
standing  with  firm  mien.'  Now  there  are  some,  who  do  not 
know  how  to  fear  God,  saving  when  they  are  either  affrighted 
by  adversity  experienced  in  their  own  person,  or  known  in 
others ;  whom  prosperity  uplifts  from  presumptuousness,  and 
crosses  dismay  from  weakness.  Of  the  number  of  which 
same,  blessed  Job  charged  his  friends  with  being,  in  that  he 
immediately  adds;  saying, 

Ver.  21.  For  now  ye  are  come,  ye  see  my  stroke,  and  are 
afraid. 

49.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words,  *  I  feared  God  then,xxxiii, 
when,  buoyed  up  with   prosperity,   I  felt  no   hurts  of  the 
scourge.     But  ye,  who  fear  not  God  from  love,  dread  Him 
from  the  stroke  of  the  rod  alone.     It  goes  on ; 

Ver.  2-2,  23.  Bid  I  say,  Bring  unto  me  ?  or.  Give  me  of  your 
substance?  or.  Deliver  me  from  the  enemy^s  hand?  or^ 
Redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty  f 

50.  If  these  words  are  referred  to  the  person  of  Holy  xxxiv. 
Church,  as  we  have  said  that  blessed  Job's  friends  bear  the^^^^^' 
likeness  of  heretics,  he  rightly  declares  that   he  does   not 

'  want  their  substance.'  For  the  '  substance'  of  heretics  is 
not  unsuitably  taken  for  carnal  wisdom,  by  which  whilst 
they  are  wickedly  sustained,  they  as  it  were  shew  shemselves 
rich  in  words,  which  Holy  Church  does  not  go  after,  in 
proportion  as  she  goes  beyond  it  by  spiritual  understandino-. 
But  oftentimes,  while  heretics  maintain  wrong  things  con- 

2  D  2 


404    The  Church  can  spare  the  wisdom  of  misbelievers. 

Job  g,  cerning  the  Faith,  they  utter  various  refined  sayings  against 
^^^^^^  our  old  Enemy  concerning  the  temptations  of  the  flesh.  For 
sometimes  they  as  it  were  shew  in  themselves  healthy  limbs 
of  practice,  in  the  same  degree  that  as  wounded  in  f\iith  they 
are  held  in  the  head  by  the  fangs  of  the  envenomed  serpent. 
But  Holy  Church  is  not  minded  to  hear  refined  sayings 
concerning  temptation  from  those,  who,  whilst  they  deliver 
some  truths  that  relate  to  practice,  are  leading  men  onward 
into  the  falsities  of  misbelief.  Whence  it  is  rightly  said  in 
this  place.  Did  I  say,  Bring  unto  me?  or,  Give  me  aught 
of  your  substance?  or,  Deliver  me  from  the  enenn/s  liand? 
or,  Redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty'^  For  he 
calls  the  strength  of  Satan,  '  the  enemy's  hand,'  and  the 
powers  of  evil  spirits,  *  the  hand  of  the  mighty.'  Whom  he 
in  this  respect  calls  mighty,  in  that  whereas  they  were 
created  void  of  fleshl}'  infirmity,  no  impotency  being  mixed 
therewith  obstructs  their  wicked  efforts.  But  with  regard  to 
this  which  is  subjoined, 

Ver,  24.  Teach  me,  and  I  will  hold  my  tongue,  and  cause 
me  to  understand  ic  here  in  I  have  erred, 
XXXV.  51.  It  seems  doubtful  under  the  scale  of  what  pointing 
this  should  hang,  whether  it  be  joined  to  what  he  had 
brought  in,  Did  I  say,  or  whether  the  sentence  is  spoken 
disjoined  from  the  preceding,  so  that  it  is  said  thereby  in 
reproach,  Teach  me,  and  I  will  hold  my  tongue,  and  cause 
me  to  understand  wherein  I  have  erred.  Which  same 
however  agrees  with  either  pointing,  for  by  neither  does  he 
depart  from  the  path  of  sound  meaning.  But  since  we  have 
delivered  these  things  in  course  allegorically,  it  remains  for 
us  to  examine  the  words  of  the  history  in  a  moral  sense. 
Moral.  5'2.  Blessed  Job  had  undergone  the  loss  of  his  property; 
being  given  over  to  the  strokes  of  evil  spirits,  he  was  suffering 
I  Cor.  the  smarts  of  their  wounds;  yet  in  loving  the  wi^e  foolishness 
ij  25.  qJ-  Qod,  he  had  trodden  under  foot  the  foolish  wisdom  of  the 
world  with  inward  scorn.  Therefore  in  opposition  to  the  rich 
of  this  world  he  is  called  poor,  in  opposition  to  the  powerful 
he  is  called  oppressed,  in  opposition  to  the  wise  he  is  called  a 
fool.  He  answers  the  three,  that  as  poor  he  seeks  not  their 
substance,  nor  as  oppressed  their  aid  against  the  strong,  nor 
as  a  fool  does  he  seek  the  lore  of  earthly  wisdom.     For  in 


Wise  foolisJmess  of  Saints.     They  fear  not  ntati^s  power,  405 

that  the  holy  man  is  carried  off  above  himself  in  spirit,  both  Book 
being  poor  he  is  not  straitened  by  want,  and  being  oppressed - 


he  suffers  nothing,  and  being  of  free  will  foolish,  he  does 
not  gaze  with   admiration   at  carnal  wisdom.     Hence  it  is 
that  another  poor  and  oppressed  man  saith,  We  are  perplexed,"^  Cor. 
yet  not  in  despair^  persecuted,  hut  not  forsaken,  we  are  cast  ' 
down,  yet  perish  not.     Hence  it  is  that  teaching  the  wisdom 
of  a  holy  foolishness,  he  says,  But    God  hath   chosen   ihe\^^^J' 
foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise.     And,  7/3?  ^^• 
any  man  among  you  seemeth  to  he  wise  in  this  world,  let 
him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  he  wise.     Hence   making 
manifest  both  the  gloriousness  of  oppression,  and  the  riches 
of  chosen  poverty,  he  says.  As  dying,  and  heholdwe  live ;  as 2  Cor. 
chastened,  and  not  killed;  as  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing;   ' 
as  poor,  yet  making  many  rich  ;  as  having  nothing,  and  yet 
possessing  all  things. 

53.  It  is  well  on  this  point  to  lift  up  the  eyes  of  the  mind, 
and  to  see  in  the  Elect  of  God,  who  are  suffering  oppression 
without,  what  a  fortress  of  strength  they  are  masters  of  within. 
For  all  that  is  high  and  exalted  without,  in  their  secret  view 
is  grovelling,  from  the  contempt  they  feel.     For  transported 
above  themselves  in  the  interior,  they  fix  their  mind  on  high, 
and  all  that  they  meet  with  in  this  life,  they  look  upon  as 
passing  away  far  below  unconnected  with  themselves,  and  so 
to  speak,  while  they  strive  by  the  Spirit  to  become  quit  of  the 
flesh,  almost  the  very  things  they  are  undergoing,  they  are 
blind  to.     For  in  their  eyes  whatsoever  is  exalted  in  time,  is 
not   high.     For   as  though  set  upon  the  summit  of  a  high 
mountain,  they  look  down  upon  the  flats  and  levels  of  the 
present  life,  and  rising  above  themselves  in  spiritual  loftiness, 
they  see  made  subject  to  themselves,  within,  all  that  swells 
highest  without  in  carnal  glorying;  and  hence  they  spare  no 
Powers  that  are  contrary  to  truth,  but  those  whom  they  see 
to  be  uplifted  by  pride,  they  abase  by  the  authority  of  the 
Spirit.    For  it  is  hence  that  Moses,  coming  from  the  wilder- 
ness, encounters  the  king  of  Egypt  with  authority,  saying, 
Thits  saith  the  Lord  Qod  of  the  Hebrews,  How  long  wilt  Ex.  lo, 
thou  refuse  to  humble  thyself  before  Me  ?  let  My  people  go,  ^' 
that  they  may  serve  Me:  and  when  Pharaoh,  being  driven 
hard  by  the  plagues,  said,  Qo  ye,  sacrifice  to^your  God  in  this^^-  8, 

25. 


40H    Bold  freedom  of  Moses,  Nathan,  Elijah,  and  Elisha. 

Job  6,  land;  he  thereupon  answered  with  increased  authority,  It 
is  not  meet  so  to  do;  for  we  shall  sacrifice  the  abominations 


of  the  Egyptians  to  the  Lord  our  God.  It  is  hence  that 
Nathan  encounters  the  king  when  guilty ;  to  whom  first 
offering  a  similar  instance  of  the  transgression  committed, 
and  holding  him  convicted  by  the  voice  of  his  own  sentence, 
2  Sam.   he  thereupon  added,  saying,    Thou  art  the  man,  who  hast 

12   7  "^ 

'  '  done  this  thing.  It  is  hence  that  the  Man  of  God,  being  sent 
to  Samaria  to  destroy  idolatry,  when  king  Jeroboam  threw 
frankincense  upon  the  altar,  not  fearing  the  king,  not  held 
back  by  the  dread  of  death,  with  undaunted  spirit,  put  forth 
1  Kings  the  authority  of  a  free  voice  against  the  Altar,  saying,  O  Altar, 
13,  2.  j^itar,  thus  saith  the  Lord;  Behold,  a  child  shall  be  born  to 
the  house  of  David,  Josiah  by  name,  and  upon  thee  shall  he 
offer  the  priests  of  the  high  places .  It  is  hence  that  when  proud 
Ahab,  being  bowed  down  to  the  service  of  idols,  ventured  to 

1  Kings  upbraid  Elijah,  saying.   Art  thou   the  man   that  troubleth 
'         Israel?    Elijah  forthwith  struck  the  foolishness  of  the  king 

in  his  pride  with  the  authoritativeness  of  a  free  rebuke, 
ver.  18.  saying,  /  have  not  troubled  Israel,  but  thou  and  thy  fathefs 
house,  in  that  ye  have  forsaken  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord,  and  have  folloiced  Baalim.  It  is  hence  that  Elisha, 
following  his  master's  true  loftiness,  confounded  for  the  guilt 
of  unbelief  Joram  the  son  of  Ahab,  when  he  came  to  him  with 

2  Kings  the  king  Jehoshaphat,  saying.  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee? 
^'  ^^'  Get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  father  and  to  the  prophets  of 
rer.  14.  thy  mother.     And,  As  the  Lord  of  hosts  liveth,  before  Whom 

I  stand,  surely  were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  presence  of 
Jehoshaphat  the  king  of  Judah,  I  woidd  not  look  toward 
2  Kings  thee,  nor  see  thee.  Hence  it  is  that  the  same  man  held 
^' ^'^^^  Naaman  fixed  before  the  door  of  his  house,  when  he  came 
to  him  with  horses  and  chariots,  and  did  not  meet  him,  set 
up  as  he  was  with  abundance  of  talents  and  raiment;  that  he 
did  not  open  the  door  of  his  house  to  him,  but  charged  him 
by  a  messenger  that  he  should  wash  seven  times  in  the  Jordan. 
Hence  too  this  same  Naaman  was  going  away  enraged,  saying. 
Behold,  I  thought  he  will  surely  come  out  to  me.  It  is  hence 
that  Peter,  when  the  priests  and  elders,  raging  furiously 
even  in  scourging,  forbade  him  to  speak  in  the  Name  of 
Jesus,  straightway  made  answer  with  great  authority,  saying, 


Strony  deeds  of  Sain  is  explained  by  yen  tie  ones,      407 

Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  Book 
more  than  unto  God^  judge  ye.     For  we  cannot  but  speak  the   ^^^' 


things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard.     It  is  hence  that  when  19.  20.' 
Paul  saw  the  chief  Piiest  sitting  in  judgment*  against  thecal. 
Truth,  and  when  his  officer  had  struck  him  a  blow  on  the^^j^'^"^ 
cheek,  he  uttered  not  a  curse,  as  being  moved  to  wrath,  but^nce 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  prophesied  with  a  free  voice,  saying, 
God  shall  smite  thee.,  thou  whited  icall :  for  sittest  thou  /o  Acts  23, 
Judge  me  after  the  laic,  and  commandest  me  to  be  smitten^' 
contrary  to    the  law?     It  is   hence   that  Stephen  not  even 
when  doomed  to  die  dreaded  to  put  forth  authoritativeness 
of  voice  in  utterance  against  the  power  of  his  persecutors, 
saying,  Ye  stijf necked  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears,  Acts  7, 
ye  do  alicay  resist  the  Holy  Ghost:    as  your  fathers  did,^^' 
so  do  ye. 

54.  But  that  holy  men  burst  into  such  high  words  from 
passionate  affection  for  Truth,  and  not  from  the  sin  of  pride, 
they  themselves  plainly  point  out,  in  that  by  other  doings 
and    other   sayings  they  make  it   appear   with    what  great 
humility    they  are    adorned,   and   with   what    great   charity 
they    are    inflamed  toward  those  whom  they  rebuke.     For 
pride  begets   hatred,  humility  only  love.     Thus  the   words 
which   love    makes   bitter,   flow,    surely,  from  the   fountain 
head  of  humihty.      x^ccordingly,  how  could   Stephen  utter 
reproach  in  pride,  who  with  bended  knee  prayed  for  those 
whom    he   reproached,    when  they  went    on    to    worse   and 
stoned  him,  saying.  Lord,  lay  7iot  this  sin  to  their  charge.^'^^-^^- 
How  did  Paul   in  pride   utter   words   of  bitterness   against 
the  Priest  and  Chief  of  his  nation,  who  in  humility  lowers 
himself  to  the  service  of  his  disciples,  saying,  For  we  preach  2  Cor. 
not  ourselves,   but   Christ  Jesus   our    Lord,  and  ourselves  '  ^* 
your  servants  for  Christ's  sake?     How  did  Peter  resist  the 
rulers  from  pride.?  when  in  compassion  to  their  erring  course, 
he  as  it  were  nuikes  excuse  for  their  guilt,  saying,  /  wot  that  ^ctt^  3, 
through  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers.    But  those        ^' 
thi?igs  which  God  before  had  shewed  by  the  mouth  of  all  His 
prophets,  that   Christ  shoidd  svffer.  He  hath  so  fulfilled. 
And    he    draws    them   in    pity    to  life,   saying.    Repent  ye  ver.  ii). 
therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted 
out.     How  was  it  from  pride  that  Elisha  refused  to  come  to 


408  Those  who  fear  not  man  proved  often  to  he  humhle. 

Job  6,  the  sight  of  Naanian,  who  not  only  let  himself  be  seen,  but 

— — '- —  even  be  taken  hold  of  by  a  woman  ?  concerning  whom  it  is 

2  Kings  written.  And  when  she  came  to  the  3Ian  of  God  to  the  hill, 

^>  '^'^'    she  caught  him  by  the  feet^  but  Gehazi  came  near  to  thrust 

her  away.     And  the  Man  of  God  said,  Let  her  alone,  for 

her  soul  is  in  bitterness.     How  was  it  in  pride  that  Elijah 

uttered  words    of  reproach    against  the  proud  king,  seeing 

that  he  ran  humbly  before  his  chariot,  as  it  is  written,  And 

he  girded  up  his  loins,  and  ran  before  Ahab?     How  was  it  of 

pride   that   the   man  of  God  disregarded  the    presence    of 

Jeroboam,  who  out  of  pity  straightway  restored  his  withered 

1  Kings I'i oil t  hand  to  its  former  soundness?     As  it  is  written,  And  it 

13    4, 

'  *  caine  to  pass,  when  king  Jeroboam  heard  the  saying  of  the 
Man  of  God,  which  had  cried  against  the  altar  in  Bethel, 
that  he  put  forth  his  hand  from  the  altar,  saying.  Lay  hold 

ver.  6.  on  Mm.  And  his  hand  dried  up.  And  shortly  after,  And 
the  Man  of  God  besought  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king''s 
It  and  teas  restored  him  again,  and  became  as  it  teas  before. 
For  as  pride  cannot  give  birlh  to  miraculous  powers,  we  are 
shewn,  in  what  a  spirit  of  humility  the  voice  of  upbraiding 
issues,  in  that  signs  go  along  with  it.  How  did  Nathan  swell 
high  in  words  of  rebuke  against  king  David,  who  when 
there  was  sin  lacking  that  deserved  rebuke,  fell  on  his  face 

1  Kings  upon  tlie  ground  in  his  sight?  as  it  is  written.  And  they  told 
'  ^^'  the  king,  saying.  Behold,  Nathan  the  Prophet.  And  when 
he  was  come  in  before  the  king,  he  bowed  himself  before  the 
king  with  his  face  to  the  ground.  How  could  Moses,  when 
he  freely  withstood  the  ]^]gyptian  king,  indulge  contempt  for 
him,  who  while  he  held  familiar  communing  with  God, 
worshipped  with  self-abasement  Jethro  his  relation  who  was 
following  him  ?  to  whose  advice  he  paid  such  ready  obedience, 
that  after  the  secret  communications  of  God,  he  accounted 
that  great  gain,  which  came  to  him  witliout  from  the  lips 
of  man. 

55.  From  one  set  of  deeds  of  the  Saints,  then,  we  learn 
what  account  we  are  to  take  of  another.  For  holy  men  are 
neither  free  spoken  out  of  ])ride,  nor  submissive  out  of  fear. 
But  whenever  uprightness  uplifts  them  to  freedom  of  speech, 
thought  of  their  own  weakness  preserves  them  in  self-abase- 
liient.     For  thougli,  in  chiding  them,  they  smite  as  from  above 


Joh  not  self-trusting,  though  he  valued  not  vain  wisdom.  409 

the  misdoings  of  offenders,  yet  judging  themselves  the  more  Book 

exactly  in  their  own  eyes,  they  in  a  manner  take  their  place '~ 

amongst  the  refuse,  and  as  they  pursue  after  wickedness  in 
others,  so  much  the  fiercer  do  they  return  to  keep  themselves 
in  check;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  as  they  never  spare  them- 
selves in  doing  better,  they  are  the  more  watchful  in  rebuking 
the  deeds  of  other  men.  For  what,  that  is  derived  from  tlie 
powers  of  man  without,  shall  strike  them  with  wonder,  who 
alike  look  down  upon  themselves,  even  at  the  moment  that 
now  they  have  well  nigh  gotten  hold  of  the  summit  of 
interior  height.  And  so  for  this  reason  it  is  right  for  them 
to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  loftiness  of  earthlj'  exaltation  with- 
out, for  that  no  load  of  swelling  humour  weighs  down  the  eye 
within.  Hence  when  blessed  Job  disregards  earthly  wisdom, 
and  powers,  and  substance,  in  those  friends  that  were  full  of 
harsh  words,  saying.  Did  I  say,  Bring  unto  me?  or,  Give  me 
of  your  substance  ?  or.  Deliver  me  from  the  enemy  s  hand  ? 
or,  Redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty  ?  Teach  me, 
and  I  uill  hold  my  tongue,  and  cause  me  to  understand 
wherein  I  have  erred ;  what  opinion  he  entertains  about 
himself,  he  makes  appear  a  little  below,  saying.  Yea,  ye  over- 
whelm the  fatherless.  Thus  it  is  clearer  than  the  light  what 
a  weak  nature  he  sees  himself  to  be  possessed  of,  in  that  he 
calls  hvmseM fatlierless.     It  goes  on; 

Ver.  25.    IVJierefore  have  ye  detracted  from  the  words  of 
truth,  when  there  is  none  of  you  that  is  able  to  convict  them? 

56.  He  must  himself  be  pure  from  evil,  who  makes  it  his 
concern  to  correct  the  evil  practices  of  other  men^  so  as  not 
to  be  taken  up  with  earthly  imaginations,  not  to  give  way  to 
grovelling  desires,  in  order  that  he  may  the  more  clearly  see 
what  things  others  ought  to  avoid,  in  proportion  as  he  him- 
self the  more  thoroughly  eschews  thim  by  knowledge  and 
by  practice.  For  the  eye  which  dust  weighs  upon,  never 
clearly  sees  the  spot  upon  the  limb,  and  the  hands  that  hold 
mud  can  never  cleanse  away  the  overcast  dirt.  And  this* 
according  to  the  order  of  the  old  Translation  '',  the  voice  of 

•»  i.  e.  of  this  passage  in  Joh.  LXX  V.  the  words,  For  I  do  not  beg  strength 

has  V.  25,  26,  thus,  Bat  as  it  seemeth  from  i/ou,  are  suited  to  the  text  quoted 

the  u-ords  of  a  trite  man  are  evi/,  for  from  1  Chron.    He  can  hardly  refer  to 

I  do  nut  beg  strength  from  you.     And  the  slight  variation  in  that  text,  which 

yoicr  reproof  shall  not  make  my  words  does  not  alter  the  sense,  and  perhaps 

to  cease^and  I  will  not  hear  the  sound  comes  from  2  Kings  16,  8. 
of  your  words,  then  v.  27.  as  in  Eng. 


410  Men  must  he  pure  to  judge.    Idle  talk  breeds  detraction. 
Job  6,  God   rightly    conveyed   in   sense    to    David,   busied    about 


— —^ —  external  wars,  when  It  says,  Thou  slialt  not  build  a  temple^ 

iChroDv/b/'  thou  art  a  man  of  blood.    Now  he  builds  God's  Temple, 

?g'  ^'     who  is  devoted  to  correcting  and  forming  the  minds  of  his 

neighbours.     For  we  are  God's  Temple,  who  are  framed  to 

1  Cor.    life  by  His  indwelling,  as  Paul  bears   witness,  saying.  For 

'     *     the  temple  of  God  is  holy^  which  temple  ye  are.     But  a  man 

of  blood  is  forbidden  to  build  a  temple  to  God,  in  that  he 

who  is  still  devoted  to  carnal  practices,  must  needs  blush  to 

instruct  the  minds  of  his  neighbours  spiritually.     Therefore 

it  is  well  said,  Wherefore  have  ye  detracted  from  the  words 

of  truth,  when  there  is  none  of  you  that  is  able  to  convict 

them  ?  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words  ;  *  With  what  rashness  do 

ye  blame  all  ye  hear,  who  knowing  nothing  of  the  causes  of 

my  stroke,  still  utter  words  that  deserve  blame.'    It  goes  on, 

Ver.  26.    Ye  only  set  in  order  speeches  to  upbraid,  and  ye 

speak  words  against  the  wind. 

57.  There  are  two  sorts  of  speech,  which  are  very  trouble- 
some and  mischievous  to  mankind,  the  one  which  aims  to 
commend  even  froward  things,  the  other  which  studies  to  be 
always  carping  even  at  right  ones.  The  one  is  carried  down- 
ward with  the  stream,  the  other  sets  itself  to  close  the  very 
channels  and  streams  of  truth.  Fear  keeps  down  the  one, 
pride  sets  up  the  other.  The  one  aims  to  catch  favour  by 
applause ;  anger,  in  order  that  it  may  be  manifested  in 
contention,  drives  forward  the  other.  The  one  lies  grovelling 
at  command;  the  other  is  always  swelling  high  in  opposition. 
Accordingly,  blessed  Job  convicts  his  friends  of  being  of  this 
kind,  when  he  says,  Ye  do  but  set  in  order  speeches  to  up- 
braid. But  he  proceeded  to  make  known  whence  it  is  that 
men  come  even  to  the  effrontery  of  unjust  upbraiding,  when 
he  added.  And  ye  speak  words  to  the  wind.  For  to  '  speak 
words  to  the  wind'  is  to  talk  idly.  For  often  when  the 
tongue  is  not  withheld  from  idle  w^ords,  a  loose  is  even  given 
to  the  rashness  of  foolish  reviling.  For  it  is  by  certain  steps 
of  its  descent,  that  the  slothful  soul  is  driven  into  the  pitfall. 
Thus  while  we  neglect  to  guard  against  idle  words,  we  are 
brought  to  mischievous  ones,  so  that  it  first  gives  satisfaction 
to  speak  of  the  concerns  of  others,  and  afterwards  the 
tongue  by  detraction  carps  at  the  life  of  those  of  whom  it 
speaks,  and  sometimes  even  breaks  out  into  open  rcvilings. 


Silence  prevents  sins  that  may  bring  Judgment.      411 

Hence    the  incitements   are  sown    of  angry  passions,  jai's  Book 
arise,    the  fire-brands    of  animosity   are    kindled,   peace    is 


altogether  extinguished  in  men's  hearts.     Hence  it  is  well 
said  by  Solomon,  He  tit  at  letteth  out  water  is  a  beginning  Prov. 
of  brawls.    For  to  let  out  water  is  to  let  the  tongue  loose  in  a     ' 
flood  of  words,   contrary   to   which   he    at   the    same    time 
declares  in  a  favourable  sense,  savinp:,  TJie  uords  of  a  man's  f^^^'- 

^       '        ^  -^  18,  4. 

mouth  are  as  deep  waters.  He  then  that  letieth  out  water 
is  a  beginning  of  brawls,  for  he  who  neglects  to  refrain  his 
tongue,  dissipates  concord.  Hence  it  is  written  contrariwise, 
He  that  silenceth  a  fool,  soften eth  wrath.  9fi°To 

58.  But   that  every   one    that  is  given   to    much  talking  Vuig. 
cannot  maintain    the    straight    path    of   righteousness,   the 
Prophet  testifies,  in  that  he  saith,  For  an  evil  speaker  shall^s. 140, 
7iol  be  led  right   upon   the  earth.     Hence  again  Solomon  pj-ov. 
saith,  In   the  multitude  of  ivords   there  wanteth  not   sin.  ^^j  ^^• 
Hence   Isaiah   saith.  And    the  cultivation  of  righteousness, 
silence;    so   pointing   out    that    the    righteousness   of  the 
interior  is   desolated,  when   we   do  not   withhold   from  im- 
moderate talking.     Hence  James  saith,  If  any  man  among  ^^^^^^ 
you    think    liimself  to    be    religious,  and   bridleth    not   his 
tongue,  but  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  this  man's  religion  is 

vain.     Hence  he  savs  asrain,  Let  even/  man  be  swift  to  hear.  Tames 

'  1    19 

slow  to  speak.     Hence  he   adds  again.   The  tongue  is  «/^  ib.  3  8. 

unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison .  Hence  '  Truth'  warns  us 
by  his  own  lips,  saying.  Every  idle  word  that  men  shall  ^iatt. 
speak,  fhey  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment.  "' 
For  an  idle  word  is  such  as  lacks  either  cause  of  just  occa- 
sion, or  purpose  of  kind  serviceableness.  If  then  an  account 
is  demanded  for  idle  speech,  it  is  very  deeply  to  be  con- 
sidered what  punishment  followeth  after  that  much  talking, 
wherein  we  sin  even  by  words  of  pride. 

59.  Furthermore,  be  it  known  that  they  are  lost  to  the 
whole  estate  of  righteousness  altogether,  who  let  themselves 
go  in  mischievous  words.  For  the  mind  of  man,  like 
water,  both  when  closed  round  is  collected  on  high,  in  that  it 
seeks  anew  the  source  whence  it  descended,  and  when  let 
loose  it  comes  to  nought,  in  that  it  dissipates  itself  to  no 
purpose  down  below.  For  the  mind  is  as  it  were  drawn  out 
of  itself  in  so  many  streams,  as  it  lets  itself  out  in  superfluous 


4l2  Too  close  sllefice  deepens  hitter  thoughts. 

Job  6,  words  from  the  strict  control  of  silence.     And  hence  it  has 

25. 

,. — ' — no  power  to  turn  back  within  to  the  knowledge  of  itself,  in 
that  being  dissipated  without  in  much  talking,  it  loses  the 
strength  of  interior  reflection.  Therefore  it  lays  itself  bare 
in  every  part  to  the  inflictions  of  the  plotting  enemy,  in  that 
it  does  not  hedge  itself  about  with  any  defence  for  its  safe 

Prov.     keeping.     Whence  it  is  written,  He  that  hath   no  rule  over 

25   28 

'  '  his  own  spirit  in  his  talk,  is  like  a  city  that  is  broken  doivn, 
and  without  walls.  For  because  it  is  without  the  wall  of 
silence,  the  city  of  the  mind  lies  open  to  the  darts  of  the 
enemy,  and  w4ien  it  casts  itself  forth  of  itself  in  words,  it 
exhibits  itself  exposed  to  the  adversary,  and  he  gets  the 
mastery  of  it  without  trouble,  in  proportion  as  the  soul  that 
he  has  to  overcome  combats  against  its  own  self  by  much 
talking. 

60.  But  herein  be  it  known,  that  when  we  are  withheld 
from  speaking  by  excess  of  fear,  we  are  sometimes  confined 
within  the  strait  bounds  of  silence  beyond  what  need  be. 
And  whilst  we  avoid  the  mischiefs  of  the  tongue   without 
caution,  we  are  secretly  involved  in  worse.     For  oftentimes 
while  we  are  overmuch  restrained  in  speech,  we  are  subject 
to  a  mischievous  degree  of  much  talking  in  the  heart,  that 
the  thoughts  should  be  hot  within,  the  more  that  the  violent 
keeping  of  indiscreet  silence  confines  them,  and  most   often 
they  let  themselves  take  a  wider  range  in  proportion  as  they 
reckon  themselves  to  be  more  secure,  in  tliat  they  are  not 
seen  by  censors  without.     Whence  the   mind  is  sometimes 
lifted  up  in  pride,  and,  as  it  were,  regards  as  weak  those 
persons  whom  it  hears  engaged  in  talk.     And  when  it  keeps 
the  mouth  of  the  body  shut,  it  never  knows  to  what  degree 
it  is  laying  itself  open  to  evil  by  entertaining  pride.     For  it 
keeps  the   tongue   down,  but   it   sets   the    heart   uj).     And 
whereas  it  never  takes   heed   to   itself  from  inattention,  it 
censures  all  the  world  more  freely  to  itself,  in  proportion  as  it 
does  it    at  the    same  time    the   more    secretly.     And   most 
frequently  oversilent  people,  when  they  meet  with  any  wrongs, 
are  driven  into   bitterer  grief,   the   more  they   do  not   give 
utterance  to  all  that  they  are  undergoing.     For  if  the  tongue 
declared  with  cahnness  the  annoyance  inflicted,  grief  would 
flow  away  from  our  consciousness.     For  closed  wounds  give 


The  Upa  need  a  door  trell  kept,  not  a  bar.  413 

more  acute  pain,  in  that  when  the  corruption  that  ferments  Book 
within  is  discharged,  the  pain  is  laid  open  favourably  for  our '— 


recovery.  And  generally  whilst  over-silent  men  fix  their  eyes 
on  the  faults  of  any,  and  yet  hold  in  the  tongue  in  silence, 
they  are,  as  it  were,  withdrawing  the  use  of  the  salve,  after 
the  wounds  have  been  seen.  For  they  the  more  effectually 
become  the  cause  of  death,  that  they  refused  by  speaking  to 
cast  out  the  poison  which  they  might.  And  hence  if  im- 
moderate silence  were  not  a  thing  to  blame,  the  Prophet 
would  never  say,  TVoe  is  me,  for  I  have  held  my  peace.  ^-  ^'  ^• 

61.  What  then  have  we  here  to  do,  saving  that  the  tongue 
must  be  heedfully  kept  in  under  the  poise  of  a  mighty  control, 
but  not  that  it  must  be  indissolubly  chained,  lest  either  being 
let  loose  it  run  out  into  mischief,  or  being  bound  u}^,  it  be 
also  slack  to  render  service.  For  hence  it  is  said  by  one,  A 
wise  man  icill  hold  his  tongue  till  he  sees  opportunity,  that 
when  he  accounts  it  convenient,  strictness  of  silence  being 
laid  aside,  by  speaking  such  things  as  are  meet,  he  may 
devote  himself  to  answer  the  end  of  usefulness.  Hence 
Solomon  saith,  A  time  to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to  speak. 
For  the  seasons  for  changes  are  to  be  weighed  with  dis- 
cretion, lest  either  when  the  tongue  ought  to  be  restrained, 
it  let  itself  out  to  no  purpose  in  words,  or  when  it  might 
speak  to  good  purpose,  it  keep  itself  in  from  sloth.  Which 
the  Psalmist  considering  comprehended  in  a  brief  petition, 
saying,  Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  my  mouth;  and  a  doorps.Hl, 
of  guard  on  my  lips.  For  a  door  is  opened  and  shut.  He^* 
then  who  prayed  not  that  a  bar  should  be  set  to  his  lips, 
but  a  door,  openly  shewed  that  the  tongue  ought  both  to  be 
held  in  by  self-control,  and  let  loose  on  grounds  of  necessity, 
that  both  the  voice  should  open  the  discreet  mouth  at  the 
fitting  time,  and  on  the  other  hand  silence  close  it  at  the 
fitting  time.  And  because  neither  the  fiiends  of  Job,  nor  all 
heretics,  whose  likeness  they  bear,  know  how  to  observe  this, 
they  are  said  to  *  utter  words  to  the  wind.'  In  that  the 
sayings  which  the  weightiness  of  discretion  does  not  establish 
firmly,  the  breath  of  levity  carries  along. 


BOOK  VIII. 

He  explains  part  of  the  sixth  Chapter,  from  verse  27,  and  the  vhole  of 
the  seventh  and  eighth  Chapters.  In  the  course  of  this  exposition,  from 
verse  11,  to  the  end  of  the  eighth  Chapter,  he  speaks  at  length  on  the 
sin  of  hjrpocrisy. 

Lit.         1.  We  have  already  in  the  preceding  book  considered  the 
'point,  that  blessed  Job  is  making  known  to  us  the  force  of 
his  humility,  when  he  says, 

Ver.  ^Z.   Yea  ye  oienvhelm  the  fatherless^  and  ye  strive 
to  overthrow  your  friend. 

For  he  shews  what  great  weakness  he  considers  himself  to 

be  of,  who  calls  himself  fatherless.'     But  because  charity 

even  when  wounded  cannot  quit  love,  he  at  once  complains 

that   they  would   have    him  overthrown,  and  yet  witnesses 

that  he  is   their  fi-iend.     Whose   words,  as   we   have    often 

said  already,  in  such  wise  specially  apply  to  himself,  that 

yet  by  them,  in    the  Spirit   of  Prophecy,    we   have  at  the 

2  <  sen-   same  time  set  forth  the  sentiment  of  the  faithful  People,  in 

seel,      the  voice  of  the  Church  Universal.     Which  same  People, 

xxiii.§.  while  encountering  the  opposition  of  heretics,  both  regards 

itself  as    weak   in    humility,  and   yet   never    abandons  the 

greatness  of  keeping  love  entire.     For  the  People  of  Holy 

Church,  as  it  is  the  child  of  a  dead  Father,  is  not  unfitly 

called  '  fatherless,'  in  that  henceforth  indeed  through  faith  it 

follows  His  life  of  Resurrection,  but  does  not  as  yet  see  Him 

by  His  appearing.     Xow  heretics  '  overwhelm  the  fatherless,' 

when  they  bear   hard   upon    the    lowliness  of  the   faithful 

People,  by  clamorous   and  false    charges,  and  yet  he  is   a 

'  friend,'  whom  they  set  themselves  to  '  overthrow,'  in  that 

God's  faithful  People  never  cease  with  loving  affection    to 

call  to  the  Truth,  the  very   persons   whom   they  suffer  as 

persecutors.     But  herein  it  is  necessary  to  be  known,  that 

holy  men    neither  dread  from  weakness  to  be   exposed  to 

falsehoods,  nor  in  being  harmed  ever  hold  their  peace  as  to 

the  Truth.     Whence  it  is  added; 


Patience  in  sufferitig  1o  be  joined  with  active  lore.    415 

Yer.  28.  But  fulfil  what  ye  have  begun ;  give  ear,  and  see  Book 
if.  t  lie.  '  '  J}^ 


2.  For  because  be  does  not  fear  to  endure  adversities,  let     ii. 
bim  say,  But  fulfil  what  ye  have  begun;   and  because  be 
does  not  withhold  the  announcements  of  the  Truth  from  his 
very  persecutors  themselves,  let  him  add.  Give  ear,  and  see 
if  I  lie.     As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  Neither  do  I  tremble 
at  the  mischiefs    done  me    before,  nor   do  I  withhold  the 
succours  of  correction  from  uugratefiil  bearers,  in  that  1  both 
have  exercise  through  being  driven  to  straits  by  misfortune, 
and    gain   increase   by  being   kindly   devoted   to   my   very 
persecutors  themselves.'     For  the  mind  of  the  Saints,  in  this 
war  of  temptations,  being  at  once  defended  by  the  shield  of 
patience,  and  begirt  with  the  swords  of  love,  obtains  resoki- 
tion    for   the    enduring   of  bad   treatment,    and   puts   forth 
kindness  in  the  recompensing  good,  so  as  both   to  receive 
stoutly  the  weapons  of  enmities,  and  return  forcibly  the  darts 
of  love.     For  he  does  not  in  any  way  go  armed  to  the  wars, 
who  either  taking  a  shield,  uses  no  swords,  or  using  swords, 
is  not  protected  by  a  shield.     And  hence  the  soldier  of  God, 
encountered  bv  a  war  of  adversity,  ousrht  both  to  hold  before 
him  the  shield  of  patience,  lest  he  perish,  and  being  prompt 
to  preach  he  should  launch  the  darts  of  love,  that  he  may 
win  the  victory.     The   sum   of  which   armour  Paul  briefly 
informs  us  of,  saying,   Charity  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind.  1  Cor. 
But  when  one  of  either  is  wanting,  charity  is  not,  i.  e.  if    '  *' 
bearing  with  the  wicked  without  kindness,  he  has  no  love;  or 
again  if  shewing  himself  without  patience,  he  neglect  to  bear 
with    the    wicked    whom    he    loves.      Therefore    that    true 
charity  may  be  retained  by  us,  it  must  needs  be  that  both 
patience    support    kindness,    and    again    kindness    support 
patience,  that  building  up  a  large  edifice  as  it  were  in  oar 
breast,  both   patience    may  give  strength   to    the  tower   of 
kindness,  and   kindness    give  grace  to  the    firmly  founded 
edifices   of  patience.     Therefore  let  blessed  Job,  as  being 
prompt  to   patience,  say.  But  fulfil  what  ye  have  begun; 
and  as  endued  with  kindness  let  him  add,  Give  ear,  and  see 
if  I  lie. 

3.  But  because  Holy  Church,  being  well  trained  in  the     '\]\, 
school  of  humility,  does  not  enjoin  as  by  authority  the  right 


i\6       Weighing  words  before  speaking  hinders  strife. 

Job  6,  instructions  which  she  dehvers  to  those  that  be  gone  astray, 
-      '     but  wins  acceptance  for  them  by  reason,  it  is  well  said  in  th^s 
Alleo. place,  See  if  I  lie.     As  though  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  In 
{      all  that  I  declare,  give  no  credence  to  me  upon  grounds  of, 
j     authority,  but  consider  on  grounds  of  reason  whether  they 
be  true      And  if  at  any  time  she  says  what  cannot  be  com- 
prehended by  reason,  she    reasonably  advises    that  human 
reasoning  should  not  be  looked  for  in  hidden  truths.'     But  it 
often  happens  that  heretics,  when  they  meet  with  opportunity 
for  reasoning,  give  themselves  a  loose  in   the  brawlings  of 
strife.     Hence  it  is  immediately  subjoined  with  propriety, 
Ver.  '29.  Answer^  I  pray  you.,  witJtuut  strife. 
iii.         4.    For   neither  do   heretics  try  to   attain  truth   by  their 
investigations,  but  to  appear  to  be  the  winners;  and  whereas 
they  desire  to  shew  for  wise  without,  they  are  bound  within 
in  their  foolishness  with  the  chains  of  their  own  pride;  hence 
it  comes  to  pass  that  they  look  out  for  contests  of  rivalry,  and 
concerning  God,  Who  is  our  Peace,  they  know  not  how  to 
speak  with  peaceableness,  and  by  the  article  of  peace  they 
become  contrivers  of  strife.     To  whom  it  is  well  spoken  by 
1  Cor.    Paul,  But  if  any  man  seem  to  he  contentious,  we  Jiave  no 
'     '  such  custom,  neither  the  Churches  of  God.     Now  it  is  rightly 
added. 

And  speaking  that  which  is  just,  judge  ye. 
iv.  5.  For  every  one  that  speaks,  whilst  he  waits  for  his  hearer's 
sentence  upon  his  words,  is  as  it  were  subjected  to  the  judg- 
ment of  him,  by  whom  he  is  heard.  Accordingly  he  that 
fears  to  be  condemned  in  respect  of  his  words,  ought  first  to 
put  to  the  test  that  which  he  delivers;  that  there  may  be 
a  kind  of  impartial  and  sober  umpire  sitting  between  the 
heart  and  the  tongue,  weighing  with  exactness  whether  the 
heart  presents  right  words,  which  the  tongue  taking  up  with 
advantage  may  bring  forward  for  the  hearer's  judgment. 
Therefore  let  blessed  Job,  while  managing  his  own  case 
against  his  friends,  yet  telling  our  proceedings  against 
heretics,  blame  precipitancy  in  speakers,  and  gather  words 
to  suit  their  mind,  saying,  And  speaking  that  which  is  just, 
judge  ye.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words, '  If  in  this,  that  ye 
come  out  to  us  in  the  issuing  forth  of  the  tongue,  ye  would 
not  be  found  fault  with,  retain  within  the  balances  of  justice, 


Error  must  he  silenced  to  make  room  for  Truth.         417 
that  what  is  delivered  without,  may  find  acceptance  bv  the  Book 

.  .  "  YIII. 

weightiness  of  truth,  the  more  in  proportion  as  the  scales  of - 


discretion  weigh  it  well  within,  and  because  those  put  forth 
a  right  judgment  about  the  sayings  of  others,  who  are  used 
first  to  sit  in  judgment  on  their  own ;  after  that  he  had  said, 
speaking  that  which  is  just,  judge  ye,  he  immediately  adds 
with  propriety, 

Ver.  30.  And  ye  shall  not  find  iniquity  in  my  tongue,  nor 
shall  foolishness  sound  through  my  jaws, 

6.  As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain  words,  '  The  more  v. 
exactly  ye  weigh  your  own  words,  the  more  truly  ye 
estimate  those  of  others,  and  when  what  ye  say  begins  to  be 
right,  ye  will  recognise  what  ye  hear  to  be  just.  For  my 
tongue  never  sounds  of  folly  to  you,  unless  it  be  what  comes 
from  your  own  inward  thoughts.'     Thus  Holy  Church  makes 

it  her  aim  first  to  prove  the  allegations  of  her  enemies  to  be 
false,  and  then  to  make  known  the  announcements  of  the 
truth,  for  so  long  as  they  reckon  themselves  to  hold  right 
notions,  they  obstinately  assail  the  right  things  that  they 
hear.  Therefore  it  is  necessary  beforehand  that  heretics 
should  feel  their  eiTor,  lest  they  gainsay  the  truth  when  it  is 
heard.  For  neither  if  the  tiller  of  the  soil  neglect  to  root  up 
the  briars  of  the  field  by  the  cutting  of  the  share,  will  the 
earth  bring  to  a  crop  the  seed  received  into  her  bosom ;  and 
when  the  physician  does  not  get  rid  of  the  coiTuption,  by 
opening  the  wound,  healthy  flesh  never  forms  in  the  corrupt 
spot.  First  then  in  destroying  what  is  bad,  let  him  say, 
And  speaking  that  which  is  just,  judge  ye;  but  afterwards 
in  teaching  what  is  right,  let  him  add.  And  ye  shall  not  find 
iniquity  in  my  tongue,  nor  shall  foolishness  sound  through 
my  jaws.  Now  it  is  the  way  with  heretics  to  deliver  some 
things  openly,  to  hold  others  in  secret,  for  by  the  '  tongue,' 
plain  speaking  is  denoted,  but  by  the  *jaws^,'  the  secret  ^  fauces 
harbouring. 

7.  Neither  in  the  tongue  then  of  Holy  Church  does 
*  iniquity  resound,'  nor  ^  foolishness  in  her  jaws,'  for  the 
things  that  she  proclaims  in  open  utterance,  at  the  same 
time  she  preserves  in  inward  faith ;  nor  does  she  teach  one 
thing  in  public  and  keep  another  to  herself  in  secret ;  but 
she  both  delivers  what  she  thinks  by  giving  utterance  to  it, 

2  E 


418        Man's  life,  since  the  Fall,  a  trial  and  a  loarfare. 

Job  7,  and  keeps  what  she  delivers  by  living  accordingly;  and  what- 

'- —  ever  is  let  out  belonging  to  the  feast  of  heavenly  wisdom  by 

the  tongue  of  preaching,  she  tastes  this  same  by  the  jaws  of 
silent  expectation.     And  let  blessed  Job,  both  as  an  indi- 
vidual member  of  the  whole  Church,  in  telling  his  own  case, 
and  as  shewing  what  is  the  heart  of  all  of  the  Elect,  make 
known  all  that  he  feels,  that  the  testimony  of  his  speech  may 
manifest  the  uprightness  of  his  mind.     It  proceeds, 
Chap.  vii.  1.  The  life  of  man  iij)on  earth  is  a  warfare. 
vi.         8.  In  this  passage  in  the  old  Translation  the  life  of  man  is 
not  called  *  a  warfare'  at  all,  but  '  a  trial  %'  yet  if  the  meaning 
of  either  word  be  regarded,  the  sound  that  meets  the  ear 
outwardly  is   different,  yet   they  make    one   and  the   same 
concordant  meaning.     For  what  is  represented  by  the  title 
of '  a  trial,'  saving  our  contest  with  evil  spirits  ?  and  what  by 
the  designation  of '  a  warfare,'  but  an  exercising  against  our 
enemies  ?     So  that  trial  is  itself '  a  warfare,'  in  that  whilst  a 
man  is  watching  against  the  plots  of  evil  spirits,  surely  he  is 
spending  himself  under  arms  for  the  fight.     But  we  are  to 
observe  that  this  life  of  man  is  not  said  to  have  '  trial,'  but  it 
is  described  as  itself  beiiig  '  trial.'     For  having  of  free  will 
declined  from  the  upright  form  wherein  it  was  created,  and 
being  made  subject  to  the  rottenness  of  its  state  of  corruption, 
whilst  out  of  self  it  begets  mischiefs  against  self,  it  hence- 
forth becomes  the  very  thing  it  undergoes.     For  whereas  by 
letting  itself  down,  it   relinquished    the    erect   seat   of  the 
interior,  what  did  it  find  in  itself  save  the  shifting  of  change  ? 
And  though  it  now  erect  itself  thence  to  seek  things  on  high, 
it  directly  drops  down  to  its  own  level  from  the  impulse  of  a 
slippery  changeableness.     It    desires   to   stand  up  in    con- 
templation, but  has  not  the  strength.     It  strives  to  fix  firmly 
the  step  of  thought,  but  is  enfeebled  by  the  slippings  of  its 
frailty.     Which  same  burthens  of  a  changeful  lot,  forasmuch 
as  it  sought  them  out  of  free  will,  so  it  bears  them  against 
the  will.    Man  might  have  possessed  his  fleshly  part  in  quiet, 
if  created  aright  as  he    was   by  his   Maker,  he  had    been 
willing  to  be  possessed  by  Him  ;  but,  whereas  he  aimed  to 
lift  himself  up  against  his  Maker,  he  straightway  experienced 
in   himself  insolency   from    the    flesh.     Now  forasmuch    as 

•  or  '  temptation,'  LXX.  vrti^arri^tav. 


Trials  spring  even  from  virtuous  attainments.  419 

together  with  guilt*"  punishment  is  also  inherited  along  with  Book. 
it  bv  birth,  we  are  born  with  the  engrafted  evil  of  a  frail '■ 


nature;  and  we  as  it  were  carry  an  enemy  along  with  us, 
whom  we  get  the  better  of  with  toilsome  endeavours.  And 
so  the  life  of  man  is  itself^  a  trial,'  in  that  it  has  that  spring- 
ing up  to  it  from  itself,  whereby  it  is  liable  to  be  destroyed. 
And  though  it  is  ever  cutting  down  by  the  principle  of 
virtue  all  that  it  begets  in  the  principle  of  frailty,  yet  it  is 
ever  begetting  in  frailty  somewhat  to  cut  down  by  virtue. 

9.  And  so  the  life  of  man  is  in  such  a  wav  '  a  trial,'  that 
though  we  are  henceforth  restrained  from  the  commission  of 
sin,  yet  in  our  very  good  works  themselves  we  are  clouded 
now  by  the  recollection  of  evil  deeds,  now  by  the  mists  of 
self-deception  ^,  now  by  the  suspension  of  our  own  purpose  ^  seduc- 
of  mind.  Thus  one  man  henceforth  restrains  the  flesh  from 
excess,  and  yet  he  is  still  subject  to  images  thereof,  in  that 
the  things,  which  he  has  done  willingly,  come  to  mind  against 
his  vvill,  and  what  he  accounted  pleasure  he  bears  as  punish- 
ment. But  because  he  fears  to  be  drawn  again  into  the 
conquered  evil  habit,  he  restrains  his  greedy  appetite  by  the 
forcible  means  of  a  singular  abstinence,  and  by  his  abstinence 
his  face  is  rendered  pale ;  then  when  paleness  is  observed 
in  his  countenance,  his  life  is  commended  as  deserving  of 
the  reverential  regard  of  his  fellow-creatures,  and  presently 
with  the  words  of  commendation  vainglory  enters  into  the 
mind  of  this  man  of  abstinence,  which  while  the  mind  having 
received  a  shock  cannot  get  the  better  of,  it  seeks  to  blot 
from  the  face  the  paleness  whereby  that  entered  in,  and  so  it 
comes  to  pass  that  being  tied  fast  with  the  knots  of  infirmity, 
either  in  avoiding  the  paleness  of  abstinence,  it  again  dreads 
to  be  brought  under  the  dominion  of  excess,  by  food,  or 
subduing  by  abstinence  the  impulse  to  excess,  it  apprehends 
its  paleness  serving  to  vainglory.  Another  man  getting  the 
better  of  the  downfall  of  pride,  henceforth  lays  hold  of  the 
state  of  humility  with  all  the  desire  of  his  heart,  and  when 
he  sees  people  that  are  full  of  pride  breaking  out  so  far  as  to 
the  oppressing  of  the  innocent,  being  inflamed  by  the  incite- 
ment of  zeal,  he  is  forced  to  lay  aside  in  some  degree  the 
thing  he  determined  on,  he  displays  the  force  of  the  side  of 

^  culpa.  Vid.  S.  Aug.  de  Naturji  et  Gratis. 
2  E  2 


4*20  Seeming  contrary  duties^  sinful  failures. 

Job  7,  right,  and  withstands  the  evil-minded  not  with  mildness,  but 
— — ^ —  with  authority.     Whence  it  is  very  commonly  the  case,  that 

Moral.  .....  , 

either  by  pursuit  of  humility  he  is  led  to  abandon  zeal  for 
the  right,  or  again  by  zeal  for  right  he  interrupts  the 
pursuit  of  humility,  which  he  maintained.  And  when  the 
authoritativeness  of  zeal  and  lowliness  of  purpose  scarcely 
admit  of  being  preserved  together,  the  man  is  made  a  stranger 
to  himself  in  his  embarrassment.  So  that  he  is  in  a  great 
dilemma  lest  in  a  deluded  mind  either  pride  pass  itself  off 
for  the  high  tone  of  zeal,  or  timid  inactivity  feign  itself 
humility.  Another  man,  considering  how  great  is  the  sin  of 
deceit,  determines  to  fortify  himself  in  the  citadel  of  truth, 
so  that  henceforth  no  false  word  should  proceed  out  of  his 
lips,  and  that  he  should  wholly  cut  himself  off  from  the  sin  of 
lying.  But  it  very  frequently  happens  that,  when  the  truth 
is  spoken,  the  life  of  a  neighbour  is  borne  hard  upon ;  and 
whilst  the  person  fears  to  bring  injury  upon  another,  he  is 
brought  back,  as  in  an  aim  of  pity,  to  that  evil  habit  of 
deceit  which  he  had  for  long  kept  under;  and  so  it  comes 
to  pass,  that  though  wickedness  has  no  place  in  his  mind, 
yet  the  shadow  of  falsehood  dims  therein  the  rays  of  tiTith. 
And  hence  oftentimes,  because  when  a  man  is  urged  with 
questions  he  cannot  keep  silence,  either  by  telling  a  false- 
hood he  slays  his  own  soul,  or  by  speaking  the  truth  bears 
hard  upon  the  life  of  a  neighbour.  Another  man,  incited  by 
the  love  of  his  Maker,  aims  by  uninterraitted  prayer  to  with- 
hold his  mind  from  all  earthly  thoughts,  and  to  place  it  in 
safety  in  the  secret  deeps  of  inward  repose ;  but  in  the  very 
mounting  of  his  prayer,  whilst  he  is  striving  to  ascend  from 
things  below,  he  is  struck  back  by  the  vision  of  them,  and 
the  eye  of  the  mind  is  stretched  to  gaze  on  the  light,  but 
from  bodily  habit  it  is  dimmed  by  the  images  of  earthly 
things  arising.  Whence  it  very  often  comes  to  pass,  that 
the  mind  of  the  person  so  striving,  being  exhausted  by  its 
own  weakness,  either  giving  over  prayer,  is  lulled  asleep  in 
sloth,  or  if  it  continue  long  in  prayer,  the  mist  of  rising 
images  gathers  thick  before  its  eyes. 

10.  And  so  it  is  well  said.  The  life  of  man  is  a  trial  upon 
earth,  since  there  also  he  met  with  the  guiltiness  of  a  down- 
ward course,  where  he  thought  to  lay  hold  on  tlie  advance 


Small  gifts  tempt  to  idleness^  greater^  to  pride.  4*21 

raent  of  an  upward  one,  and  the  mind  is  only  thrown  into   Book 

Tcr  T  T  I 

disorder  by  the  same  act  whereby  it  strove  to  arise  out  of  its - 

disorder,  so  that  it  is  thrown  back  upon  itself  shivered  by 
the  very  means,  by  which  it  was  already  getting  above  itself 
collected  and  compacted.  This  man  being  a  stranger  to 
instruction  in  the  Divine  Law,  is  kept  down  by  his  ignorance, 
that  he  should  do  nothing  for  the  attaining  of  salvation. 
That  man  being  endued  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine 
Law,  while  he  is  delighted  that  understanding  is  vouchsafed 
to  him  beyond  other  men,  in  that  he  exults  with  a  selfish 
delight,  wastes  in  himself  the  gift  of  understanding  which  he 
has  received.  And  in  the  Judgment  he  is  shewn  to  light 
worse  than  others  by  the  same  thing,  whereby  he  is  exhibited 
brighter  than  others  for  a  season.  The  first,  because  he  is 
lifted  high  by  no  gifts  of  extraordinary  powers,  eschews  the 
more  plain  path  of  uprightness  too,  and  as  if  accounting 
himself  an  alien  to  the  heavenly  benefit,  does  evil  things  as 
though  with  more  security,  in  proportion  as  he  has  never 
been  vouchsafed  the  high  endowments  of  the  heavenly  gift. 
The  other  the  spirit  of  Prophecy  replenishes,  uplifts  to  the 
foreknowledge  of  events,  and  shews  him  things  to  come  as 
now  present.  But  whilst  oftentimes  and  in  many  cases  he  is 
lifted  above  himself,  so  that  he  does  really  contemplate  future 
events,  his  mind  being  drawn  off  into  self-confidence,  fancies 
that  that  spirit  of  Prophecy,  which  cannot  always  be  had,  is 
always  with  him,  and  when  he  takes  every  notion  that  he 
may  have  for  prophecy,  because  that  he  ascribes  this  to 
himself  even  when  he  has  nothing  of  it,  he  even  loses  it  in 
the  degree  that  he  might  possess  it.  And  so  it  comes  to 
pass,  that  he  is  brought  back  in  sorrow  behind  the  standard 
of  other  men's  merits  by  the  very  means,  whereby  he  was 
advanced  before  it  in  gladness  of  heart  in  the  esteem  of  all. 
And  so,  Tlie  life  of  man  is  a  trial  upon  earth,  in  that 
either  being  a  stranger  to  extraordinary  powers,  it  is  unable 
to  mount  to  the  heavenly  prize,  or  enriched  with  spiritual 
gifts,  it  is  one  day  ruined  the  worse  by  occasion  of  its  ex- 
traordinary powers. 

IL  But  whereas  we  have  said  a  little  above  that '  a  trial' 
is  the  same  as  '  a  warfare,'  it  is  above  every  thing  to  be  borne 
in  mind,  that  something  more  is  signified  to  us  by  the  title  of 


4*22  Man^s  life  Jiere  shorty  its  best  wages  heyond  it. 

Job  7,  '  warfare,'  than  by  the  name  of  '  trial.'     For  to  our  appre- 
-r-; — '- —  hension  there  is  this  addition  made  by  the  expression  of  '  a 

Moral.  "^  ^ 

warfare,'  namely,  that  by  warfare  there  is  made  daily  progress 
towards  an  end.  And  whilst  the  space  of  warfare  goes  on 
iB.&c.  increasing  in  a  regular  course,  the  whole  warfare  of  men  ^  is 
raan.'  at  the  same  time  diminishing.  And  so,  the  life  of  man  is 
a  warfare  upon  earthy  in  that,  as  we  have  said  above, 
each  one  of  us,  while  by  the  accessions  of  time  he  is  daily 
advancing  to  the  end  of  life,  in  adding  to  his  life,  is  making 
an  end  to  live.  For  he  looks  for  the  days  to  come  round, 
but  as  soon  as  they  are  come  for  the  lengthening  of  life,  they 
are  already  taken  away  from  the  amount  of  life ;  for  while 
the  step  of  the  traveller  too  is  advancing  over  the  ground 
in  front,  what  remains  of  the  way  is  lessening.  Thus  our 
life  is  '  a  warfare,'  in  that  in  the  same  degree  that  it  is  drawn 
out  to  its  enlargement,  it  is  brought  to  an  end,  so  as  not  to  be. 
Therefore  it  is  well  said.  The  life  of  man  is  a  warfare  upon 
earth ;  for  whilst  by  the  several  periods  of  time  it  seeks  to 
gain  ground,  by  that  very  period  which  it  adds  but  in  losing, 
it  is  made  to  pass  away  as  it  grows.  And  hence  the  very 
course  of  a  warfare  itself  is  described  in  the  words  that  are 
immediately  added. 

Are  not  his  days  also  like  the  clays  of  an  hireling  ? 
vii.  12.  The  hireling  longs  for  his  days  to  pass  the  quicker, 
that  he  may  attain  without  delay  to  the  reward  of  his  toil ; 
and  so  the  days  of  man  imbued  with  a  knowledge  of  the 
Truth  and  of  the  things  of  eternity,  are  justly  compared  to 
*  the  days  of  an  hireling,'  because  he  reckons  the  present  life 
to  be  his  road,  not  his  country,  a  warfare,  not  the  palm  of 
victory,  and  he  sees  that  he  is  the  further  from  his  reward, 
the  more  slowly  he  is  drawing  near  to  his  end.  Moreover 
we  must  bear  in  mind,  that  the  hireling  spends  his  strength 
in  labours  that  belong  to  others,  yet  procures  for  himself  a 
reward  that  is  his  own.  Now  it  is  uttered  by  the  Redeemer's 
Johnis  voice.  My  Kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  All  we,  then,  who 
^^'  being  endued  with  the  hope  of  heaven,  wear  ourselves  out 
with  the  toiling  of  the  present  life,  are  busied  in  the  concern 
of  another.  For  it  often  happens  that  we  are  even  compelled 
to  serve  the  sons  of  perdition,  that  we  are  constrained  to  give 
back  to  the  world  what  belongs  to  the  world,  and  we  are  spent 


The  Elect  anxioiLsly  labour  to  ensure  their  reward.      423 
indeed  with  another  man's  work,  yet  we  receive  a  reward  of  our  Book 

VTTT 

own,  and  by  this,  that  we  manage  uncorruptly  the  interests  of  ^ - 

others,  we  are  made  to  arrive  at  our   own.     In  reverse   of 
which,  '  Truth'  saith  to  certain  persons,  And  if  ye  have  ??(;^Lakei6, 
heenfaiihful  to  that  ichich  is  another  7nan''s,  icho  shall  give    ' 
you    that  ichich  is  your  own.      Moreover  it  is  to  be   re- 
membered,   that  an  hireling  anxiously  and  heedfully  looks 
to  it,  that  never  a  day  pass  clear  of  work,  and  that   the 
expected   end   of  the    time    should   not    come    empty   for 
his  rewarding.    For  in  his  earnestness  of  labour  he  sees  what 
he  may  get  in  the  season  of  recompense.     Thus  when  his 
work  advances,  his  assiu*ance  in  the  reward  is  increased,  but 
when  the  work  is  at  a  stand-still,  his  hope  sickens  in  respect 
of  the  recompense.     And  hence  each  of  the  Elect  reckoning 
his  life  as  the  days  of  an  '  hireling,'  stretches  forward  to  the 
reward  the  more  confident  in  hope,  in  proportion  as  he  holds 
on   the  more  stoutly  for  the  advancement    of  labour.     He 
considers  what  the  transitory  course  of  the  present  life  is,  he 
reckons  up  the  days  with  their  works.     He  dreads  lest  the 
moments  of  life  should  pass  void  of  labour.     He  rejoices  in 
adversity,  he  is  recruited  with  suffering,  he  is  comforted  by 
mourning,  in  that  he  sees  himself  to  be  more  abundantly 
recompensed  with  the  rewards  of  the  life  to  come,  the  more 
thoroughly  he  devotes  himself  for  the   love  thereof  by  daily 
deaths.     For  it  is  hence  that  the  citizens  of  the  Land  above 
say  to  the  Creator  of  it  in  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  Yea,  Ps.  44, 
for  Thy  sake  are  we  killed  all  the  day  long.     Hence  Paul '"" 
says,  /  die  daily,  brethren^  for  your  glory.     Hence  he  says  i  Cor. 
again.  For  the  which  cause  I  also  suffer  these  things ;    but^T:^^ 
I  am  not  confounded,  for  I  know  Whom  I  have  believed,  and^-,  12. 
am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed   unto    Him   against   that  day.     Therefore   holy 
men   for   all   the    labours   which  they  now  exercise,  while 
committing  them  to  '  Truth,'  already  hold  so  many  pledges 
of  their  recompense  shut  up  in  the  chamber  of  hope.     Yet 
oppressive  heat  is  now  felt  under  toil,  that  one  day  refresh- 
ment may   be    had  in   rest.      Whence   it  is    rightly  added 
immediately  afterwards, 

Ver.  2,  3.  As  a  servant  earnestly  desireth  the  shadow^  and 


424         The  heat  of  trial  makes  the  'shadotc^  longed  for. 

Job  7,  as  an  hireling  lookethfor  the  end  of  his  work^  so  am  I  made 
— ^—^to  possess   months  of  vanity,   and   I  have  numbered  me 

wearisome  nights, 
viii.        13.  Since  for  '  a  servant  to  desire  the  shadow,'  is  after  the 

heat   of  trial   and   the   sweat   of  labour   to  seek   the    cool 

of  eternal  repose.  Which  shadow  that  servant  desired, 
Ps.42,2.who  said,  My  soul  thirstethfor  God,  the  living  God;  when 
Fs.  120,  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God?  And  again.  Woe  is  me 
*•  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech.    Who  as  if  after  hard  toil  retreating 

from  the  heat,  and  seeking  a  covering  that  he  might  attain 
Ps.42,4.the  rest  of  coolness,  says  again,  For  I  will  enter  into  the 

place  of  the  wonderful  Tabernacle,  even  to  the  house  of  God. 
Phil.  1,  Paul  panted  to  lav  hold  of  this  '  shadow,'  having  a  desire  to 

23  *^  •  • 

depart  and  to  be  with  Christ,  This  shadow  they  had  already 
attained  unto  in  the  fulness  of  the  desire  of  their  hearts,  who 

Mat.20,  said.  We  which  have  borne  the  burthen  and  heat  of  the  day. 
Now  he  that  is  said  to  '  desire'  the  shadow,  is  rightly  styled 
*  a  servant,'  in  that  each  one  of  the  Elect,  so  long  as  he  is 
bound  fast  by  the  condition  of  frailty,  is  held  in  under  the 
yoke  of  corruption,  in  its  exercising  dominion  over  him,  as 
though  under  the  harrassing  effect  of  heat ;  which  same 
person,  when  he  is  stripped  of  corruption,  is  then  made 
known  to  himself  as  free  and  at  rest.     And  hence  it  is  well 

Rom.  8,  said  by  Paul  also.  Because  the  creature  itself  also  shall  be 
delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  into  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  For  the  Elect  are  now 
pressed  down  by  the  penalty  of  a  corrupt  state,  but  then  they 
are  exalted  high  by  the  glory  of  an  incorrupt.  And  in  the 
same  degree  that,  relatively  to  the  burthens  of  our  present 
constraint,  there  is  nought  of  liberty  now  manifested  in  the 
sons  of  God,  relatively  to  the  glory  of  the  liberty  to  ensue, 
nought  of  servitude  will  then  appear  in  the  servants  of  God. 
And  so  the  servile  garb  of  corruption  being  cast  off,  and  the 
nobility  of  liberty  bestovved,  the  creature  is  turned  into  the 
gloriousness  of  the  sons  of  God,  in  that  in  being  united  to 
God  by  the  Spirit,  it  is  proved  as  it  were  to  have  surmounted 
and  overcome  this  very  thing,  that  it  is  a  created  being. 
Now  he  that  still  ^  desires  the  shadow'  is  '  a  servant,'  in  that 
so   long  as  he  is  subject  to  the  heat  of  temptation,  he  is 


IVhat  is  hard  in  itself,  easy  for  the  retvard's  sake.        425 

beariDg  on  his  shoulders  the  yoke  of  a  wretched  condition,  Book 
and  it  is  rightly  added  there,  and  as  an  hireling  looks  for - 


the  reward  of  his  work. 

14.  For  an  hireling,  when  he  looks  at  the  work  to  be  done, 
at  once  resigns  his  spirit  in  consequence  of  the  length  and 
burthensomeness  of  the  labour ;  but  when  he  recalls  his 
sinking  spirit  to  take  thought  of  the  reward  of  his  work,  he 
immediately  sets  afresh  his  vigour  of  mind  for  the  exercising 
of  his  labour,  and  what  he  reckoned  a  grievous  burthen  in 
respect  of  the  work,  he  esteems  light  and  easy  on  the  grounds 
of  the  recompense.  Thus,  thus,  do  each  of  the  Elect,  when 
they  meet  with  the  crosses  of  this  life,  when  insults  upon 
their  good  name,  losses  in  their  substance,  pains  of  the  body  are 
brought  upon  them,  reckon  the  things  grievous,  which  they' 
are  tried  with ;  but  when  they  stretch  the  eyes  of  the  mind 
to  the  view  of  the  heavenly ,  country,  by  comparison  with 
their  reward  they  see  how  light  is  all  they  undergo.  For 
that  which  is  shewn  to  be  altogether  insupportable  for  the 
pain,  is  by  forecasting  reflection  rendered  light  for  the  recom- 
pense. It  is  hence  that  Paul  is  always  being  lifted  up  bolder 
than  himself  against  adversities,  in  that  *  as  an  hireling  he 
looketh  for  the  end  of  his  work.*  For  he  accounts  what  he 
undergoes  to  be  a  heavy  burthen,  but  he  reckons  it  light  in 
consideration  of  the  reward.  For  he  does  himself  declare 
how  great  the  burthen  is  of  what  he  suffers,  in  that  he  bears 
record  that  he  was  Mn  prisons  more  abundantly,  in  stripes  2  Cor. 
above  measure,  in  deaths  oft,'  &c.  who  '  of  the  Jews&J, 
five  times  received  forty  stripes  save  one.'  Who  was 
'  thrice  beaten  with  rods,  once  stoned,  thrice  suffered  ship- 
wreck, a  night  and  a  day  was  in  the  deep  of  the  sea;  who 
endured  perils  of  waters,  of  robbers,  of  his  own  countrymen, 
of  the  heathen,  in  the  city,  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  sea, 
among  false  brethren  ;'  who  '  in  weariness  and  painfulness,  in 
fastings  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness,'  had  labour  and  toil,  who 
sustained  '  fights  without,  within  fears,'  who  declares  himself 
pressed  down  above  strength,  saying,  that  ice  were  pressed'^  ^^"^^ 
out  of  measure,  above  strength,  insomuch  that  we  were  ' 
weary  even  of  life.  But  in  what  sort  he  wiped  off  him 
the  streams  of  this  hard  toil  with  the  towel  of  his  reward, 

he  himself  tells,  when  he  says.  For  I  reckon  that  the  suffer-  Rom.  8, 

•^       18. 


N 


426    JVant  and  svffering^  temporal  and  spiritual,  man's  lot. 

Job  7,  ings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  he  compared 
with  the  glory  to  come,  tvhich  shall  he  revealed  in.  us.  Thus, 
'  as  an  hireling,  he  looketh  for  the  end  of  his  work,'  who 
while  he  considers  the  increase  of  the  reward,  reckons  it  of 
no  account  that  he  labours  well  nigh  spent.  But  it  is  well 
added,  So  am  I  made  to  possess  moiiihs  of  vanity,  and 
rcearisome  nights  have  I  nnmhered  me. 

15.  For  the  Elect  serve  the  Creator  of  things,  and  yet  are 
often  driven  to  straits  by  the  want  of  things;  they  hold  fast 
in  God  by  love,  and  yet  they  lack  the  supports  of  the  pre- 
sent life.  So  they  who  do  not  aim  at  present  objects  by  their 
actions,  as  to  the  profits  of  the  world,  spend  '  months  of 
vanity.'  Moreover  they  are  subject  to  '  wearisome  nights,' 
in  that  they  bear  the  darkness  of  adversity  not  only  to  the 
extent  of  want,  but  oftentimes  to  the  anguish  of  the  body. 
For  to  undergo  contempt  and  want  is  not  hard  to  virtuous 
minds ;  but  when  adversity  is  turned  to  the  paining  of  the 
flesh,  then  surely  wearisomeness  is  felt  from  pain.  It  may 
also  be  not  unsuitably  interpreted,  that  each  one  of  the 
Saints  as  a  hireling  spends  '  months  of  vanity,'  in  that  he 
now  already  bears  the  toil,  but  does  not  yet  hold  the  reward; 
the  one  he  undergoes,  the  other  he  looks  for;  but '  he  numbers 
him  wearisome  nights,'  in  that  by  exercising  himself  in 
virtuous  habits,  he  is  accumulating  upon  his  own  head  the 
ills  of  the  present  life:  for  if  he  does  not  aim  to  advance  in 
spirit,  he  finds  the  things  of  the  world  perchance  less  gall- 
ing to  him. 

Alleg.  16.  Yet,  if  this  sentence  be  referred  to  the  voice  of  Holy 
Church,  the  meaning  thereof  is  traced  out  with  a  little  more 
particularity.  For  she  herself  has  *  months  of  vanity,'  who 
in  her  weak  members  has  to  bear  earthly  actions  running  on 
to  nought  without  the  meed  of  life.  She  '  numbers  to  her- 
self wearisome  nights,'  in  that  in  her  strong  members  she 
bears  manifold  afflictions.  For  in  this  life  there  be  some 
things  that  are  hard,  and  some  that  are  empty,  and  some 
that  are  both  hard  and  empty  at  one  and  the  same  time. 
For  from  love  of  the  Creator  to  be  tried  with  the  afflictions  of 
the  present  life,  is  hard  indeed,  but  not  empty.  For  love  of 
the  present  world  to  be  dissolved  in  ])leasures,  is  empty 
indeed,  but  not  hard.     But  for  the  love  of  that  world,  to  be 


Vanity  of  this  ivorld's  toil  not  seen  till  at  last.  427 

exjDosed  to  any  adversities,  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  both  Book 
empty  and  laborious,  in  that  the  soul  is  at  once  afflicted  by - 


adversity,  and  not  replenished  with  the  compensation  of  the 
reward.  And  so  in  those  who  being  now^  placed  within  the 
pale  of  Holy  Church,  still  let  themselves  out  in  the  pursuit 
of  their  pleasures,  and  are  thenceforth  not  enriched  with 
the  fruit  of  good  works,  she  passes  '  months  of  vanity,'  in 
that  she  spends  the  periods  of  life  without  the  gift  of  the 
reward.  But  in  those  who,  being  devoted  to  everlasting  aims, 
meet  with  the  crosses  of  this  world,  '  she  numbers  herself 
wearisome  nights,'  in  that  she  as  it  were  in  the  obscurity  of 
the  present  life  undergoes  the  darkness  of  woe.  But  in  those 
who  at  one  and  the  same  time  love  this  transitory  world,  and 
yet  are  wearied  with  its  contradiction,  she  sustains  at  once 
'  days  of  vanity,'  and  *  wearisome  nights,'  in  that  neither 
does  any  recompense  coming  after  reward  their  lives,  and  yet 
present  affliction  straitens  them.  But  it  is  rightly  that  she 
never  says  that  she  has  '  days,'  but  '  months  of  vanity'  in 
these.  For  by  the  name  of  ^  months,'  the  sum  and  total 
amount  of  days  is  represented,  and  so  by  the  *  day,'  w^e  have 
each  individual  action  set  forth :  but  by  '  months,'  the  con- 
clusion of  those  actions  is  implied.  But  it  often  happens  that 
when  we  do  any  thingin  this  world,  being  buoyed  up  by  the  eager 
intentness  of  our  hope,  this  particular  thing  that  we  are  about,  we 
never  think  empty ;  but  when  we  are  come  to  the  end  of  our 
doings,  failing  to  obtain  the  object  of  our  aims,  we  are  grieved 
that  we  have  been  labouring  for  emptiness,  and  so  we  spend  not 
only  days,  but  likewise  '  months  of  vanity,'  in  that  not  in  the 
beginning  of  our  actions,  but  only  at  the  end,  we  bethink 
ourselves  that  we  have  been  toiling  in  earthly  practices  with- 
out fruit.  For  when  trouble  follow^ s  upon  our  actions,  it  is 
as  if  the  months  of  vanity  of  our  life  were  brought  home  to 
us :  in  that  it  is  only  in  the  consummation  of  our  actions 
that  we  leam,  how  vain  was  all  our  toil  therein. 

17.  But  because  in  the  sacred  word  sometimes  '  night'  is 
put  for  ignorance,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Paul,  who 
saith  to  his  disciples  instructed  in  the  life  to  come.  Ye  are  i  Thess. 
all  the  children  of  the  light,  and  the  children  of  the  day  ;  ^'  ^' 
tve  are  not  of  the  niyht,  nor  of  darkness.     To  which  words 
he  prefixed,  But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  ib.  4. 


428  The  Penitent  number  their  past  times  of  vanity. 

Job  7,  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief.  In  this  place  the  voice 
— 1-1-1- of  Holy  Church  may  be  understood  in  the  person  of  those  of 
'  her  members,  who  after  the  darkness  of  their  state  of  igno- 
rance are  brought  back  to  the  love  of  righteousness,  and  being 
enlightened  by  the  rays  of  truth,  u^ash  out  with  their  tears  all 
that  they  have  done  amiss.  For  every  one  that  has  been 
enlightened  looks  back  to  see  how  polluted  all  that  was  that 
he  laboured  at,  in  love  with  the  present  life.  And  therefore 
Holy  Church  in  the  case  of  these,  in  whom  there  is  a  return 
to  life,  compares  her  toils  to  '  a  servant'  in  a  state  of  heat, 
and  to  '  an  hireling  longing  for  the  end  of  his  work,'  in  the 
words.  As  a  servant  earnestly  desireth  the  shadow,  and  as 
an  hireling  lookethfor  the  end  of  his  work ;  so  am  I  made 
to  possess  months  of  vatiiiy,  and  wearisome  nights  have  I 
numbered  me.  For  in  drawing  the  comparison  there  are 
two  things  which  he  premised,  as  also  in  the  describing  of 
weariness  there  are  two  which  he  thereupon  added.  For  to 
the  one  oppressed  with  heat  he  gave  '  months  of  vanity,'  in 
that  in  proportion  as  the  refreshing  of  eternity  is  more  the 
object  of  our  desire,  it  is  more  clearly  seen  how  vainly  we 
spend  our  labour  for  this  life  But  to  the  one  in  expectance 
he  brought  in  '  wearisome  nights,'  in  that  the  more  that  at  the 
end  of  our  works  we  look  at  the  reward  we  are  to  have  given 
us,  the  more  we  lament  that  we  so  long  knew  nothing  of  the 
thing  that  we  now  aim  at.  And  hence  the  very  solicitude  of 
the  penitent  is  carefully  set  forth,  so  that  it  is  said,  '  that  he 
numbered  to  himself  wearisome  nights,'  in  that  the  more 
truly  we  return  to  God,  the  more  exactly  we  consider,  while 
we  grieve  over  them,  those  toils  which  we  underwent  in  this 
world  from  ignorance.  For  as  every  one  finds  that  to  become 
more  and  more  sweet  which  he  desires  of  the  things  of  eter- 
nity, so  that  which  he  was  undergoing  for  the  love  of  the 
present  world,  is  made  appear  to  him  proportionably  bur- 
thensome.  Now  if  the  following  words  be  considered  with 
reference  to  the  historical  import  alone,  doubtless  we  have 
the  mind  of  one  in  sorrow  described  by  them,  viz,  how  in 
the  different  impulses  of  desire  he  is  variously  urged  by  the 
force  of  grief.     For  it  goes  on, 

Vcr.  4.    When   I  lie  down,  1  say,    When  shall  1  arise  ? 
and  again  I  look  for  the  evening. 


Man  clothed  in  corruption  since  the  Fall.  429 

18.  For  in  the  night,  day  is  desired,  in  the  day,  evening  is  Book 
longed  for;  in  that  grief  will  not  let  the  things  that  are  before 

us  give  satisfaction,  and  while  it  saddens  the  heart  in  the  ^^' 
experience  of  the  present,  it  is  ever  stretching  it  to  some- 
thing beyond  in  expectation,  as  it  were  by  a  consolatory 
longing.  But  because  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  afflicted 
mind  is  drawn  out  in  desire,  and  yet  its  grief,  even  though 
beguiled  by  longings,  is  not  ended;  it  is  rightly  added,  And 
I  shall  he  filled  with  pains  even  until  the  darkness.  But 
the  cause  of  this  grief  is  set  forth,  when  the  words  are  im- 
mediately introduced, 

Ver.  5.  Ml/  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods  of  dust : 
my  skin  is  dried  up  and  shrunken. 

19.  But  we   shall  make    out  these   words   more  exactly     x. 
and  more  applicably,  if  we  go  back  to  the  order  of  the  fore- 
going interpretation.     For  by  sleep  the  torpor  of  inaction, 
and  by  rising  the  exercising  of  action,  is  represented,     hy 

the  name  of  the  evening  moreover,  because  it  accords  with 
sleep,  we  have  set  forth  again  the  desire  of  inaction.  But 
Holy  Church,  as  long  as  she  is  leading  a  life  of  corruption, 
never  ceases  to  bewail  the  inconveniences  of  her  condition  of 
mutability.  For  man  was  created  for  this  end,  that,  with 
mind  erect,  he  might  mount  to  the  citadel  of  contemplation, 
and  that  no  touch  of  corruption  should  cause  him  to  swerve 
from  the  love  of  his  Maker;  but  herein,  that  he  moved  the 
foot  of  his  will  to  transgression,  turning  it  away  from  the 
innate  stedfastness  of  his  standing,  he  immediately  fell  away 
from  the  love  of  his  Creator  into  himself  Yet  in  forsaking 
the  love  of  God,  that  true  stronghold  of  his  standing,  he 
could  not  stand  fast  in  himself  either;  in  that  by  the  impulse 
of  a  slippery  condition  of  mutability,  being  precipitated 
beneath  himself  through  corruption,  he  also  came  to  be  at  strife 
with  himself.  And  now,  in  that  he  is  not  secured  by  the 
stedfastness  of  his  creation,  he  is  ever  being  made  to  vary 
by  the  fit  of  alternating  desire,  so  that  both  at  rest  he  longs 
for  action,  and  when  busied  pants  for  rest.  For  because  the 
stedfast  mind,  when  it  might  have  stood,  would  not,  it  is  now 
no  longer  able  to  stand  even  when  it  will,  in  that  in  leaving 
the  contemplation  of  its  Creator,  it  lost  the  strength  of  its 
health,  and   wherever   placed  is   ever   seeking  some  other 


430     Restless  state  of  man.     Niglit  of  trouble  even  desired. 

Job  7,  place  through  uneasiness.  And  so  in  setting  forth  the  fickle- 
v-^-^ — ness  of  the  human  ini^nd,  let  him  say,  When  I  go  to  sleep, 
I  say.  When  shall  I  arise?  and  again  I  shall  look  for  the 
evening.  As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain  words;  '  Nothing 
it  receives  suiSceth  the  mind,  in  that  it  has  lost  Him,  Who 
might  have  truly  sufficed  to  it.  Thus  in  sleep  I  long  for 
rising,  and  at  rising  I  look  for  evening,  for  both  when  at  rest 
I  aim  at  the  employment  of  action,  and  when  employed 
I  look  for  the  inaction  of  repose.' 

20.  Which  nevertheless  may  be  understood  in  another 
sense  also.  For  to  sleep  is  to  lie  prostrate  in  sin.  For  if 
the  designation  of  '  sleep'  did  not  denote  sin,  Paul  would 
1  Cor.  never  say  to  his  disciples.  Awake,  ye  righteous,  and  sin  not. 
15,  34.  ^j-^^  hence  too  he  charges  his  hearer,  saying.  Awake,  thou 
14.  '  that  steepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give 
Rom.  thee  light.  And  again;  TJiat  now  it  is  high  time  for  ns  to 
13,  11.  ^^igQ  Qiii  of  sleep.  Hence  too  Solomon  upbraids  the  sinner, 
ProT.  6  saying,  iiiTo/f'  long  wilt  thou  sleep,  O  sluggard?  Therefore 
^'  each  one  of  the  Elect,  when  he  is  oppressed  with  the  sleep 

of  sin,  strives  to  rise  to  keep  the  \^'atch  of  righteousness. 
But  often  when  he  has  risen  he  feels  himself  lifted  up  by  the 
greatness  of  his  virtuous  attainments.  And  hence  after 
attainments  in  virtue  he  desires  to  be  tried  with  the  ad- 
versities of  the  present  life,  lest  he  fall  the  worse  from 
presumption  in  his  virtuous  achievements.  For  if  he  had 
not  known  that  he  was  preserved  more  effectually  by  trial, 
Ps.26,2.  the  Psalmist  would  never  have  said,  Examine  me,  O  Lord, 
and  prove  me.  And  so  it  is  well  said  here,  When  I  go  to 
sleep,  I  say.  When  shall  I  arise?  and  again  I  shall 
look  for  the  evening ;  in  that  both  in  the  sleep  of  sin,  we  look 
for  the  light  of  righteousness,  and  when  successes  in  virtuous 
attainments  elevate  the  mind,  adversity  is  wanted  for  our 
aid,  so  that  when  the  soul  is  exalted  above  what  it  ought  to 
be  in  rejoicing  at  its  own  excellencies,  it  may  be  established 
by  sorrow  coming  forth,  through  the  encounters  of  the  present 
life.  Hence  it  is  not  said,  /  shall  dread  the  evening,  but, 
/  shall  look  for.  For  we  '  look  for'  favourable  things,  we 
dread  those  that  are  adverse  to  us.  And  so  the  good  man 
*  looks  for  evening,'  in  that  when  he  needs  to  be  tried  with 
affliction,  adversity  itself  is  made  success  to  him. 


factum 
est 


Light  and  dimness  to  the  spirit  in  turns  desired.         431 

21.  By  the  designation  of  '  evening'  there  may  also  be  Book 

understood  the  tempting  of  sin,  which  oftentimes  assaults  the - 

mind  the  sharper,  in  proportion  as  the  spirit  transports  it 
higher  to  the  regions  above.  For  never  in  this  life  is  sin  so 
entirely  abandoned  in  the  practising  of  righteousness,  that 

we  continue  without  flinching  in  the  self-same  righteousness; 
in  that  although  right  principle  does  already  drive  out  sin 
from  the  dwelling  of  the  heart,  yet  the  very  sin,  that  is  so 
banished,  taking  her  seat  at  the  doors  of  our  thought,  knocks 
for  it  to  be  opened  to  her.  And  this  Moses  too  conveyed  in 
spiritual  signification,  when  he  described  the  parts  of  time 
being  made  in  a  bodily  way,  saying,  And  there  was  light,  ^^^-^^ 
and  adding  soon  after,  Aiid  the  evening  ivas  made^.  For  the  i  Vulg 
Maker  of  all  things  foreseeing  man's  guilt,  then  exhibited  in 
Time  what  now  passes  in  the  human  mind.  For  the  light 
draws  on  to  eventide,  in  that  the  shades  of  temptation 
follow  the  light  of  righteousness.  But  because  the  light  of 
the  Elect  is  not  put  out  by  temptation,  not  night,  but  evening, 
is  recorded  as  made.  Since  it  often  happens,  that  in  the 
heart  of  the  righteous  temptation  shades  the  light  of  righteous- 
ness, but  it  does  not  put  an  end  thereto;  it  forces  it  to  the 
paleness  of  a  flickering  state,  but  does  not  utterly  quench  it. 
And  so  the  Elect  both  after  sleep  long  for  the  rising,  and 
after  rising  look  for  evening,  in  that  they  use  both  to  awake 
from  sin  to  the  light  of  righteousness,  and  when  placed  in 
that  same  light  of  righteousness,  they  are  ever  making  them- 
selves ready  to  encounter  the  snares  of  temptation;  which 
same  they  do  not  dread,  but  look  for,  as  they  are  not  ignorant 
that  even  trials  promote  the  interest  of  their  righteousness. 

22.  But  with  whatever  degree  of  virtue  they  may  have 
striven  against  their  corruption,  they  cannot  have  entire 
health,  until  the  time  that  the  day  of  their  present  life  is 
ended.  And  hence  it  is  added.  And  I  shall  hefidl  of  pains 
even  until  the  darkness.  For  one  while  adversities  burst 
upon  them,  at  another  time  successes  themselves  beguile 
them  by  insidious  joviality;  at  one  time  evil  propensities 
making  head  stir  up  a  war  of  the  flesh,  at  another  time  being 
brought  under,  they  invite  the  mind  to  pride.  Therefore  the 
life  of  good  men  is  fidl  of  pains  even  until  the  darkness,  in 
that  so  long  as  the  period  of  their  state  of  corruption  is  going 


43*2  Bad  practice,  corniptiim;  evil  thoughts,  dust. 

Job  7,  on,  it  is  shaken  by  tribulation  both  internal  and  external ;  nor 
— — —  does  it  experience  assurance  of  health,  savino:  when  it  leaves 
'behind  it  for  good  the  day  oi  temptation.  And  hence  this 
same  cause  of  these  pains  is  brought  in  immediately  after- 
wards, when  it  is  said,  My  flesh  is  clothed  with  corruption 
and  foulness  of  dust.  For,  as  we  hare  said  a  little  above, 
man  \vilt\illy  forsook  his  innate  stability,  and  plunged  him- 
sell'into  the  abyss  of  con'uption:  and  hence  now  he  either 
goes  slipping  in  impure  works,  or  deliled  by  forbidden 
thoughts.  For,  so  to  speak,  being  judicially  bowed  down 
beneath  its  own  sin,  our  nature  its  very  self  is  put  out  of  the 
pale  of  nature,  and,  when  let  loose,  it  is  carried  even  to  the 
length  of  bad  works,  while,  beins:  held  in,  it  is  dimmed  bv 
the  pressing  imagination  of  bad  works.  Thus  in  the  fultil- 
iputre-  ment  of  a  forbidden  deed,  *  corruption^  taints  the  flesh,  while 
in  the  lightness  of  evil  thought,  dust  as  it  were  rises  up  before 
the  eyes.  By  consenting  to  evil  practices  we  are  wasted 
with  corruption,  but  by  suffering  in  the  heart  the  images  of 
evil  deeds,  we  are  deliled  with  the  stains  of  dust ;  and  so  he 
says.  My  Jlesh  is  clothed  with  foulness  of  dust.  As  if  it 
were  in  plain  words;  *  The  carnal  life  that  I  am  subjected  to, 
either  the  corruption  of  wanton  practice  defiles,  or  the  cloud 
of  wretched  thought  compasses  about  in  the  recollection 
of  evil  ways. 

23.  And  vet  if  we  take  this  in  the  voice  of  the  Holv 
Church  Universal,  doubtless  we  find  her  at  one  time  sunk  to 
the  earth  by  the  *  corruption'  of  the  flesh,  at  another  time 
bv  '  the  defilement  of  dust.'  For  she  has  manv  in  her,  who 
whilst  they  are  devoted  to  the  love  of  the  flesh,  turn  corrupt 
with  the  putrefaction  of  excess.  And  there  are  some  that 
keep  indeed  from  the  gratification  of  the  flesh,  yet  grovel 
with  all  their  heart  in  earthly  practices.  So  let  Holy  Church 
say  in  the  words  of  one  of  her  members,  let  her  say  what 
she  undergoes  firom  either  sort  of  men.  My  flesh  is  clothed 
icith  corruption,  and  the  defllements  of  dust.  As  if  she 
told  in  plain  words,  saying,  *  There  are  very  many  that  are 
members  of  me  in  faith,  yet  these  are  not  sound  or  pure 
members  in  practice :  in  that  either  being  mastered  by  foul 
desires,  they  run  out  in  the  rottenness  of  corruption ;  or, 
being  devoted  to  earthly  practices,  they  are  besmeared  with 


Earthly  minds  in  the  Church  are  as  withered  skin.  433 

dust.     For  in  those,  whom  I  have  to  endure,  that  arc  full  of  Boo^ 
wantonness,  I  do  plainly  lament  for  the  flesh  turaed  corrapt  - -^H£ 
and  m  those,  whom  I  suffer  from,  that  are  seeking  the  earth' 
what  else  is  this  but  that  I  carry  it  defiled  u4th  dustr' 

24.  And  hence  it  is  properly  added  at  the  same  time  con- 
cemmg   both  sorts;  My  skin  is  dried  up   and  shrivelled 
For  m  the  body  of  the  Church,  those  that  are  devoted  to 
outward  concerns  alone  are  suitably  called  '  the  skin/  which 
same   by  becoming  diy  is  contracted,  in  that  the'soul  of 
carnal  men,  while  then:  hearts  are  set  on  present  objects,  and 
covet  what  is  close  at  hand,  have  no  mind,  as  it  were  to  be 
made  to  stretch  out  after  the  things  of  the  future  world  in 
longsuffering.     These,  while  they  disregard  the  richness  of 
the  mtenor  hope,  are  dried  up  that  they  become  shrivelled  • 
m  that  if  hopelessness  did  not  parch  their  hearts,  the  fever' 
ot  a  httle  mind  would  never  contract  them.     Thus  it  was 
this  contraction  that  the  Psalmist  dreaded,  when  m  fear  of 
the  drought  of  the  same  he  said.  May  my  soul  he  sa t , sjied  P^es^ 
as  tmlh  marrow  and  fatness.     For  the  soul  is  '  satisfied  with     " 
marrow  and  fatness,'  when  it  is  refreshed  bv  the  infusion  of 
heavenly  hope  against  the  heat  of  present  longings.     And  so 
the  '  skin'  being  dried  up   shrivels,  when   the  heart  bein- 
given  to  outward  objects,  and  dried  up  in  hopelessness  ^ 
not  stretched  out  in  love  of  its  Creator,  but  is  folded  op  i^to 
itself,  so  to  say,  by  wrinkled  thought. 

25.  But  it    is   to  be  considered  that  carnal  minds   onlv 
dehght  m   present  things,  because  they  never  weiafa  well 
how  transitory-  the  life  of  the  flesh  is.     IFor  if  they  regarded 
the  speed  of  its  flight,  they  would  never  love  it  even  when  it 
smiled  upon  them.     But  Holy  Church,  in  her  elect  members, 
daily  mmds  how  quick  a  flight  belongs  to  outward  thin-s, 
and  therefore  she  sets  firm  the  foot  of  serious  purpose  in  ^e 
interior.     And  hence  it  is  well  added ; 

Ver.  6.  My  days  are  past  more  siciftly  than  a  web  is  cut 
off  by  the  weaver. 

26.  By  a   very  suitable  image  the  time  of  the   flesh  is    xi. 
compared  to  a  web.     For  as  the  web  advances  by  threads, 
so  this  mortal  hfe  by  the  several  days;  but  in  proportion  as 

e  Thus  fu»z*^u-/i»  is  used  by  St.  Chiyawtom  for  a  petty  spirit  of  quarreUin^ 

2p 


434  Man's  life  grows  to  an  end  as  a  weh,  hut  never  stays. 

Job  7,  it  grows  to  its  bigness,  it  is  advancing  to  its  cutting  off.     For 
as  we  have  also  said  above,  whilst  the  time  in  our  hands 


Moral. 

passes,  the  time  before  us  is  shortened.  And  of  the  whole 
space  of  our  lives  those  portions  are  rendered  fevrer  that  are 
to  come,  in  proportion  as  those  are  many  in  number  that 
have  gone  by.  For  a  web,  being  fastened  above  and  below, 
is  bound  to  two  pieces  of  wood  that  it  may  be  woven  ;  but 
in  proportion  as  below  the  part  woven  is  rolled  up,  so  above 
the  part  that  remains  to  be  woven  is  being  unwound,  and  by 
the  same  act,  by  which  it  augments  itself  in  growth,  that  is 
rendered  less  which  remains.  Just  so  with  the  periods  of  our 
life,  we  as  it  were  roll  up  below  those  that  are  past,  and  un- 
wind at  top  those  that  are  to  come,  in  that  in  the  same  pro- 
portion that  the  past  become  more,  the  future  have  begun  to 
diminish.  But  because  not  even  does  a  web  suffice  for  the 
setting  forth  of  our  span  of  time,  for  the  rapid  course  of  our 
life  surpasses  the  speed  and  quickness  even  of  that  too,  it  is 
well  said  in  this  place,  3Ty  days  are  past  away  more  swiftly 
than  a  web  is  cut  off  by  the  weaver.  For  to  the  web  there 
is  a  delay  of  growth,  but  to  the  present  life  there  is  no  delay 
of  coming  to  an  end.  For  in  the  one  when  the  hand  of  the 
workman  is  stopped,  the  end  of  the  arrival  is  deferred,  but  in 
this  latter,  because  we  consume  without  end  lime  ending 
every  instant,  even  while  resting  we  are  brought  to  the  end 
of  our  way,  and  along  the  course  of  our  passage,  we  go  on 
even  in  sleeping.  Therefore  the  Elect,  seeing  that  the 
moments  of  the  present  life  run  past  at  speed,  never  in  this 
journey  of  most  rapid  motion  fix  the  purpose  of  their  hearts. 
And  hence  it  is  well  added  upon  that. 

And  are  spent  without  any  hope. 

27.  The  minds  of  lost  sinners  are  bound  fast  with  such 
love  for  the  days  of  their  present  life,  that  they  long  to  live 
for  ever  here  in  the  same  way.  So  that,  if  it  were  possible, 
they  desire  never  to  have  the  course  of  their  life  brought  to 
an  end.  For  they  are  too  indifferent  to  take  account  of  the 
future,  they  place  all  their  hope  in  transitory  things,  they 
aim  to  have  nothing  but  such  objects  as  pass  away.  And 
while  they  think  too  much  of  transitory  things,  and  never 
look  forward  to  those  that  shall  remain,  the  eye  of  their 
heart  is  so  closed  in  insensible  blindness,   that  it  is  never 


xn. 


Earthly  meiCs  hopes  here,  aonietimes  till  death.     435 

fixed  on  the  interior  light.     Whence  it  often  happens,  that  Book 

distress  akeady   shakes  the  frame,   and   approaching   death ^ 

cuts  off  the  power  of  the  breath  of  hfe,  yet  they  never  cease 
to  mind  the  things  that  are  of  the  world.     And  already  the 
avenger  is  dragging  them  to  judgment,  and  yet  they  them- 
selves, occupied   with  the  concerns   of  time,   in    the    busy 
management  of  them,  are  only  thinking  how  they  may  still 
live  on  in  this  world.     In  the  act  of  leaving  every  thing,  they 
dispose  of  all  as  if  they  were  entering  upon  the  possession  of 
them,  in  that  the  hope  of  living  is  not  broken,  at  the  very 
moment  when  life   is  at  an  end.     They  are  already   being 
forced  to  judgment  in  feeling^,  yet  they  still  cleave  to  the  ^  per 
hold  of  their  goods  in  solicitude.     For  by  the  hardened  soul  ^Trn  "" 
death  is  still  believed  to  be  far  off,  even  when  his  touch  is  felt. 
And  the  soul  is  so  separated  from  the  flesh,  that  by  keeping 
itself  in  excessive  love  for  things  present,  when  it  is  led  to 
everlasting  punishment,  it  does  not  know  this  mere  thing, 
whither  it  is  being  led ;  and  in  leaving  all  that  it  would  not 
love  with  bounds,  it  suddenly  finds  without  bounds  things 
that  it  never  anticipated.     But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mind 
of  the  righteous  is  stretched  in  intentness  after  the  eternal 
world,  even  when  the  present  life  goes  smoothly  along  with  it. 
It  enjoys  the  high  health  of  the  flesh,  yet  the  spirit  is  never 
hindered  by  dependence  on  it.     No  atom ^  of  death  as  yetsarticu- 
breaks  forth,  still  he  daily  regards  it  as  present  to  him.     For^'^"" 
because  life  is  unceasingly  slipping  by,  the  expectation   of 
living  is  wholly  cut  short  for  him.     Therefore  it  is  well  said 
of  the  passing  days,  And  are  spent  ivithout  hope.     As  if  it 
were  declared  in  plain  terms ;  '  I  have  not  placed  confidence 
of  heart  in  the  present  life,  in  that  all  that  is  passing  I  have 
dismissed  from  my  hopes,  treading  it  under  foot.'    And  hence 
it  is  rightly  added  immediately  after, 

Ver.  7.   O  remember  that  my  life  is  wind. 

28.  For  those  men  love  the  life  of  the  flesh  as  enduringj  xiii, 
who  do  not  consider  how  infinite  is  the  eternity  of  the  hfe 
to  come ;  and  whereas  they  take  no  thought  of  the  sure 
stedfastness  of  the  everlasting  state,  they  take  their  exile  for 
their  home,  darkness  for  light,  going  for  standing.  Since  they 
that  know  nothing  of  greater  things  can  never  judge  rightly 
of  the  least.     For  the  order  of  judging  requires  that  we 

2  F  2 


436       Our  short  life  matter  of  compassion  with  God. 
Job  7,  should  be  above  that  which  we  are  strivhiL?  to  tiv.     Since  if 

7  .         .  .  <j  . 

1 —  the  mind  is  not  able  to  rise  above  all  things,  it  has  no  certain 

MonAL.    .    ,  -,    ,  .  ,  .    ,     .     .  , 

Sight  at  all  in  relation  to  those,  by  which  it  is  surpassed. 
And  so  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  lost  soul  is  inadequate 
to  estimate  the  course  of  the  present  life,  because  from  love 
of  the  same  it  is  bowed  down  to  the  admiration  thereof. 
But  holy  men,  in  proportion  as  they  lift  their  hearts  towards 
the  eternal  world,  bethink  themselves  how  short-lived  that  is 
which  is  closed  by  an  ending.  And  all  that  is  passing  is 
rendered  worthless  to  their  senses,  forasmuch  as  that  pours 
in  its  light  through  the  rays  of  intelligence,  which  once 
received  never  departs.  And  as  soon  as  they  contemplate 
the  infinite  extent  of  eternity,  they  cease  any  longer  to  desire 
as  great  whatsoever  has  an  end  to  limit  it.  But  the  mind 
when  lifted  up  is  carried  beyond  the  limits  of  time,  even 
when  by  the  flesh  it  is  held  fast  in  time,  and  it  looks  down 
from  a  greater  height  on  all  that  is  to  have  an  end,  the  more 
truly  it  knows  the  things  without  end.  Now  this  very  con- 
sideration of  the  short  span  of  man's  estate  is  itself  an  offering 

^virtutis of  singular  efficacy^  to  our  Maker.  Whence  a  sacrifice  of 
this  merit  is  here  rightly  offered  together  with  prayer,  when 
it  is  said,  O  remember  that  my  life  is  iciud.  As  if  it  were 
said  in  plain  words, '  Regard  with  loving-kindness  one  that  is 
quickly  gone,  in  that  I  claim  to  be  looked  upon  by  Thee  with 
greater  pity,  even  in  proportion  as  I  myself  do  not  turn  away 
mine  eyes  from  the  contemplation  of  my  short  span.'  But 
seeing  that  when  the  season  of  our  present  life  is  cut  short, 
there  is  no  more  return  to  the  work  of  earning  our  forgiveness, 
it  is  rightly  added, 

Mine  eye  shall  no  more  return  to  see  good. 
xiv.  29.  The  eye  of  the  dead  '  no  more  returneth  to  see  good,' 
in  that  for  the  setting  forth  of  good  works,  the  soul  once 
stiipped  of  the  flesh  knows  no  return.  It  is  hence  that  the 
rich  man,  whom  the  fire  of  hell  was  devouring,  knew  that  he 
could  never  restore  himself  b}'  doing  works ;  for  he  never 
turned  himself  to  do   good  to  himself,  but  to  his  brethren 

Lukeie, that  were  left;  1  pray  thee,  father  Abraham,  that  thou 
wouldest  send  him  to  my  father'' s  house;  for  I  hare  Jive 
brethren,  that  he  may  testify  nnto  them,  lest  they  also  come 
into   this  place   of  torment.     For   hoj)e  even    though   un- 


No  return  for  work  or  for  mercy  after  death,       437 

founded  is  used  to  cheer  the  stricken  soul ;  but  the  lost,  that  Book 
they  may  feel  their  woe  the  keener,   lose  even  hope  as  to '- 


pardon.  And  hence  when  he  was  given  over  to  avenging 
flames,  he  was  not  anxious  lo  help  himself,  as  we  said,  but 
his  brethren,  in  that  he  knew  that  he  would  never  be  without 
the  torments  of  those  fires,  the  punishment  of  despair  being 
superadded.  Hence  Solomon  saith,  Whatsoever  tity  hand^cc^^^- 
flndetlt  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  viight;  for  there  is  no  work,  ' 
nor  device,  nor  knotcledge,  nor  wisdom,  in  the  grave,  ichither 
thou  goest.  So  '  the  eye  shall  no  more  return  to  see  good,' 
in  that  the  soul,  on  meeting  with  its  recompense,  is  never 
again  recalled  to  tell  to  the  account  of  practice.  Therefore 
forasmuch  as  all  that  is  seen  is  fleeting,  and  the  things  that 
follow  are  to  endure,  blessed  Job  rightly  combined  the  two 
in  one  verse,  saying,  O  remember  that  my  life  is  iiiiid : 
mine  eye  sliall  no  more  see  good.  For  looking  at  the  transi- 
toriness  of  things  present,  he  says,  O  remember  that  my  life 
is  wind.  But  contemplating  the  eternity  of  those  that 
come  after,  he  added.  Mine  eye  shall  no  more  return  to  see 
good.  And  here,  furthermore,  he  justly  proceeds  to  take 
upon  him  the  voice  of  the  whole  race  of  man  destitute  of  the 
benefit  of  redemption,  saying, 

Ver.  8.   The  eye  of  man  shall  not  see  me. 

30.  For  '  the  eye  of  Man'  is  the  pity  of  the   Redeemer,     xv. 
which  softens  the  hardness  of  our  insensibility,  when  it  looks 
upon  us.      Hence,  as  the  Gospel  witnesses,  it  is  said,  AndTuM^ei^, 
the   Lord   turned,   and    looked    upon    Peter.      And   Peter 
remembered  the  word  of  the  Lord.     And  he  went  out,  and 
wept  bitterly.     But  the  soul  when  divested  of  the  flesh  '  the 
eye  of  Man'  doth  not  henceforth  at  all  regard,  in  that  it  never 
delivers  him  after  death,  whom   grace  doth    not  restore  to 
pardon  before  death.     For  hence  Paul  saith,  Behold,  now  is  2  Cor. 
the   accepted   time,  behold,  now  is   the   day    of  salvation.   '  ^* 
Hence  the  Psalmist  saith,  For  His  mercy  is  for  the  present  Vs.  118, 
state  of  being ^ ;  for  this  reason,  that  the  man  whom  mercy 
doth  not  rescue  now,  after  the  present  state  of  being,  justice 
alone  consigns  to  punishment.     Hence  Solomon  saith.  And  Ecclef». 
if  the  tree  fall  toward  the  south  or  toward  the  north,  in  the^^^^' 
place  where  the  tree  falleth  there  it  shall  be.     For  when,  at 
d  V.  '  in  scecidmrij  which  is  so  taken  by  S.  Greg,  unlike  its  usual  meaning. 


438  The  wicked  stand  not  iii  Judgment. 

Job  7,  the  moment  of  the  falling  of  the  human  being,  either  the 
■—-^ — Holy  Spirit  or  the  Evil  Spirit  receives  the  soul  departed 
from  the  chambers  of  the  flesh,  he  will  keep  it  with  him  for 
ever  without  change,  so  that  neither  once  exalted,  shall  it  be 
precipitated  into  woe,  nor  once  plunged  into  eternal  woes,  any 
further  arise  to  take  the  means  of  escape.     Therefore  let  the 
holy  man,  contemplating  the  ills  of  mankind,  viz.  how  he  is 
removed    from    the   present   world   without   the   knowledge 
of  his  Redeemer,  and  buried  in  everlasting  flames  without 
remedy,  and  taking  up  their  voice  in  his  own  person,  give 
utterance  to  the  words.  And  the  eye  of  man  shall  not  see  me. 
Forasmuch  as  the  man  whom  the  grace  of  the  Redeemer 
doth  not  now  look  upon  to  correct,  it  doth  not  then  visit  to 
keep  from  destruction.     For  the  Lord,  when  He  cometh  to 
judgment,  looketh  on  the  sinner  to  smite,  but   He  doth  not 
look  on  him  to  acknowledge  him  in  bestowing  the  grace  of 
salvation.     He  taketh  account  of  sins,  and  knoweth  not  the 
life  of  those  that  perish.     Hence  after  that  the  holy  man  had 
averred  that  he  could  no  more  be  '  seen  by  the  eye  of  Man' 
after  the  present  life,  he  rightly  added  at  once ; 
TJime  eyes  are  upon  me,  and  I  shall  not  stand. 
^^'i-         31.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words;  *  Thou,  when  thou 
comest  in  severity  to  Judgment,  both  seest  not,  to  save,  and 
yet  seest,  to  smite,  in  that  him,  whom  Thou  lookest  not  on 
in  the  present  life  with  the  pitifulness  of  Thy  saving  care, 
hereafter  looking  on  Thou  dost  extinguish  by  Thy  law  of 
justice.     For  now  the  sinner  casts  away  the  fear  of  God,  and 
yet  lives,  blasphemes  and  yet  prospers,  because  the  pitiful 
Creator  w^ould  not  in  seeing  punish  him,  whom  He  would 
rather  by  waiting  for  bring  to  amendment;  as  it  is  written, 
"Wisd.     And  icinkest  at  the  sins  of  men  for  their  repentance.     But 
'     '   W'hen  the  sinner  is  then  looked  upon,  he  '  does  not  stand,'  in 
that  when  the  strict  Judge  minutely  examines  his  deserts, 
the  convicted  sinner  cannot  bear  up  against  his  torments. 

32.  Not  but  that  this  likewise  accords  with  the  voice  of 
the  righteous,  whose  mind  is  ever  anxiously  fixed  on  the 
coming  Judgment.  For  they  have  fears  for  every  thing  that 
they  do,  whilst  they  hecdfully  consider  who  are  the  persons, 
and  before  what  a  Judge  they  will  have  to  stand.  They 
V)ehold  the  power  of  His  Mightiness,  and  they  consider  wliat 


The  rufhteous  could  not  stand  but  through  Mercy.    439 

an  amount  of  eruilt  they  are  tied  and  bound  with  from  their  Book 
.                                                      ...     VIII. 
own  imperfection.     They  reckon  up  the  evil  deeds  of  their '- 

own  doing,  and  muhiply  over  against  them  the  benefits  of 

their  Creator.     They  reflect  how  rigidly  He  judges  wicked 

deeds,  how  minutely   He  examines   good  ones ;    and  they 

foresee  without  a  shadow  of  doubt  that  they  w^ill  be  lost,  if 

they  be  judged  apart  Irom  pity:  for  even  this  very  life  that 

we  seem  to  live  righteously  is  sin,  if,  when  He  takes  account 

of  our  lives,  the  mercy  of  God  does  not  make  allowance  for 

it  in  His  own  eyes.     For  it  is  hence  written  in   this  very 

book,  Yea^  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  His  sight.     For  strictly  Job25,5. 

judged  in  His  sight  those  very  persons  do  also  bear  spots 

of  defilement,  that  shine  bright  in  the  purity  of  holiness. 

Therefore  it  is  well  said,   T7iine  eyes  are  upon  me^  and  I 

shall  not  stand.     As  if  it  were  said  in  plain  terms  by  the 

voice  of  the  righteous  man,  *  If  I  be  sifted  with  an  exact 

scrutiny,  I  cannot  stand  up  in  undergoing  judgment,  for  life 

cannot  bear  up  against  punishment,  if  the  mercilessness  of 

just  retribution  bears  hard  upon  it.'     Now  both  the  sin  and 

the  punishment  of  that  same  human  race  is  well  added  in 

few  words,  where  it  is  said  immediately  afterwards, 

Ver.  9.  As  the  cloud  is  consumed  and  vanisJietJt  away ; 
so  he  that  goeth  doivn  to  hell  shall  come  up  no  more. 

33.  For  a  cloud  is  suspended  in  the  higher  regions,  but  it  xvii. 
is  condensed  and  driven  by  the  wind  that  it  flies,  and  it  is 
scattered  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  that  it  vanishes.  Thus, 
thus  verily  is  it  with  the  hearts  of  men,  which  by  the  faculty 
of  reason  bestowed  upon  them  dart  on  high,  but  driven  by 
the  blasts  of  the  evil  spirit,  they  are  forced  hither  and  thither 
by  the  bad  impulses  of  their  desires,  but  by  the  searching 
eye  of  the  Judge  above  they  are  melted  as  if  by  the  heat  of 
the  sun,  and  being  once  consigned  to  the  regions  of  woe, 
never  return  for  the  benefit  of  working.  Let  the  holy  man 
then,  in  setting  forth  the  elevation,  the  career,  and  the  eclipse 
of  the  human  race,  exclaim.  As  the  cloud,  is  consumed  and 
vanishetJi  away^  so  he  that  goeth  down  to  the  grave  shall 
come  up  no  more.  As  if  he  spake  in  plain  words,  saying, 
'  In  flying  on  high  he  is  brought  to  nought,  who  by  exalting 
himself  is  advancing  to  destruction,  whom,  if  sin  once  force 


440  T7ie  damned  relum  not  to  their  old  home. 

Job  7,  to  punishment,  mercy  never  more  restores  to  pardon.'    Hence 
— -^* — it  is  yet  fm'ther  added, 

Moral.  /  ' 

He  shall  return  no  more  to  his  own  house. 
xviii.       34.  As  the  house  of  the  body  is  a  bodily  habitation,  so 
that  becomes  to  each  separate  mind  '  its  own  house,'  what- 
soever thing  it  is  used  to  inhabit  in  desire.     And  so  '  there  is 
no  more  returning  to  his  own  house,'  because,  when  once  a 
man  is  given  over  to  eternal  punishments,  he  is  henceforth 
no  more  recalled  thither,  where  he  had  attached  himself  in 
love.     Moreover  by  the  designation  of  hell  the  despair  of  the 
sinner  may   also    be  set  forth,  of  which  it  is   said  by  the 
Ps.  6, 5.  Psalmist,  In  hell,  who  shall  confess  to  TJiee  ?  Whence  again 
Piov.     it  is  written,  JVhen  the  luujodlij  man  cometh  into  the  pit  of 
^^' ^'     sinners,  he  contemneth.     Now  whosoever  yields  himself  to 
ungodliness,  doth  assuredly  quit  the  life  of  righteousness  by 
a  proper  death.     But  when  a  man  after  sin  is  furthermore 
overwhelmed  by  a  mountain  of  despair,  what  else  is  this  but 
that  after  death  he  is  buried  in  the  torments  of  hell .''    There- 
ibre  it  is  rightly  said.  As  the  cloud  is  consumed,  and  vanisheth 
away,  so  he  that  goeth  down  to  hell  shall  come  tip  no  more ; 
in  that  it  very  often  happens,  that  with  the  commission  of 
wickedness  despair  also  is  united,  and  the  way  of  returning 
is  henceforth  cut  off.     But  the  hearts  of  the  despairing  are 
rightly  compared  to  clouds,  in  that  they  are  at  once  darkened 
with  the  mists  of  error,  and  thick  with  the  number  of  sins ; 
but  being  consumed,  they  vanish  away,  in  that  being  lighted 
up  by  the  blaze  of  the  final  Judgment,  they  are  scattered  to 
the  winds.     '  The   house'   too  is   often   understood  for  the 
dwelling-place  of  the  heart.     Hence  it  is  said  to  one  that 
Marks, was  healed.  Go  to  thine  house;  in  that  it  is  most  meet  that 
^^*         the  sinner  after  pardon  should  turn  back  into  his  own  mind, 
so  as  not  to  do  aught  a  second  time  which  may  justly  subject 
him  to  the  scourge.     But  he  that  has  '  gone  down  to  hell,' 
shall  no  more  '  ascend  into  his  own  house,'  in  that  him,  that 
despair  overwhelms,  it  puts  forth  without  from  the  habitation 
of  the  heart.     And  he  cannot  return  back  within,  because 
when  he  has  been  ejected  without,  day  by  day  he  falls  urged  on 
into  worse  extremes.     For  man   was  made   to  contemplate 
his  Creator,  that  he  might  ever  be  seeking  after  His  likeness, 


God  no  longer  the  dwelling  of  those  who  forsake  Him.  441 
and  dwell  in  ihe  festival  ^  of  His  love.     But  beinp:  cast  with-   Book 

.         •  •        VII T 

out  himself  by  disobedience,  he  lost  the  seat  of  his  mind,  in  - — ; — 1 

1  sol  em- 

that  being  left  all  abroad  in  dark  ways,  he  wandered  far  from  nitate 
the  habitation  of  the  true  light.     Whence  it  is  further  added 
with  propriety, 

Neither  shall  his  place  know  him  any  more. 
35.  For  '  the  place'  of  man,  but  not  a  local  place,  the    xix. 
Creator  Himself  became.  Who  created  him  to  have  his  being 
in  Himself,  which  same  place  man  did  then  forsake,  when  on 
hearing  the  words  of  the  deceiver,  he  forsook  the  love  of  the 
Creator.     But  when  Almighty  God  in  the  work  of  redemption 
shewed  Himself  even  by  a  bodily  appearing.  He  Himself,  so 
to  say,  following  the  footsteps  of  His  runagate,  came  as  a 
place  where  to  keep   man  whom  He  had  lost.     For  if  the 
Creator    could   not   in    any   sense    be  styled  '  a  place,'  the 
Psalmist,   in   praising    God,    would    never   have    said,    TJte  Ps.  102, 
children  of  thy  servants  shall  dwell  there^.     For  we  i^CTera /^j^gj-g. 
say  there,  except  when  we  mark  out  a  place  in  a  particular  is  not  in 
manner.     But  there  are  very  many,  who  even  after  they  have  lxx. 
received  the  succour  of  the  Redeemer,  are  precipitated  into 
the  darkness  of  despair,  and  they  perish  the  more  desperately, 
in  proportion  as  they  despise  the  very  offered  remedies  of 
mercv.     And  so  it  is  rio^htly  said    concerning;  him  that   is 
damned.  Neither  shall  his  place  know  him  any  more.     For 
he  is  not  known  by  his  Creator  in  His  sorer  severity  at  the 
Judgment,  in  the  same  degree  that  he  is  not  recalled  even  by 
His  gifts  to  the  grace  of  restoration.  And  hence  it  is  particularly 
to  be  observed,  that  he  does  not  say, '  Nor  shall  he  know  his 
own  place  any  more;'  but.  Neither  shall  his  place  knoiv  him 
any  more.     For  whereas  that  '  knowing'  is  ascribed  not  to 
the  person,  but  to  the  place,  the  Creator  Himself  is  mani- 
festly set  forth,  by  the  name  of  '  a  place,'  Who,  when  He 
cometh  in  strictness  for  the  final  account,  shall  say  to  all 
tliat  abide  in  iniquity,  I  know  yon  not  ichence  ye  are.     But  Lukei3, 
the  Elect  severally,  in  proportion  as  they  consider  that  lost^^* 
sinners  are  unsparingly  cut  off,  day  by  day  purify  themselves 
with  greater  diligence  from  the  stains  of  the  iniquity  they 
have  done;   and  when  they  see  others  on  the  brink  of  ruin 
grow  cold  in  the  love  of  life,  they  earnestly  inllame  them- 
selves to  tears  of  penitence.     Hence  it  is  well  added, 


442         Men  should  not  refrain  from  confessing  sin. 

Job  7,       Ver.  11.   There/ore  also  I  will  not  refrain  my  rnoiith. 

'-       36.   For  that  man  '  refrains  his  mouth,'  that  is  ashamed  to 

^^  confess  the  evil  he  has  done,  ror  to  put  the  mouth  to 
labour  is  to  employ  it  in  the  confession  of  sin  done,  but  the 
righteous  man  doth  '  not  refrain  his  mouth,'  in  that  forestalliug 
the  wrath  of  the  searching  Judge,  he  falls  wroth  upon  himself 

Ps.95,2.in  words  of  self-confession.  Hence  the  Psalmist  saith,  Let  us 
come  before  His  Presence  icith  confession^.      Hence  it  is 

Prov.     delivered  by  Solomon,  He  that  coveteth  his  sins  shall  not 

28    13 

'  *  prosper,  but  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  them  shall  have 
lb.  18,  mercy.  Hence  it  is  written  again,  The  Just  man  is  first  the 
accuser  of  himself.  But  the  mouth  is  never  opened  in 
confession,  unless  at  the  thought  of  the  searching  Judgment 
the  spirit  is  in  straits  from  fear;  and  hence  it  is  fitly  said 
afterwards, 

I  will  speak  in  the  anguish  of  my  spirit. 
xxi.  37.  For  '  anguish  of  the  spirit'  sets  the  tongue  in  motion, 
so  that  the  voice  of  confession  is  levelled  against  the  guilt  of 
evil  practice.  Moreover  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that 
oftentimes  even  the  reprobate  make  confession  of  sins,  but 
are  too  proud  to  weep  for  them.  But  the  Elect  prosecute 
^-ith  tears  of  severe  self-condemnation  those  sins_.oi*  theirs 
]  which  they  disclose  in  words  of  confession.  Hence  it  was 
well  that  after  blessed  Job  had  pledged  himself  not  to  spare 
his  lips,  he  added  directly  the  anguish  of  the  spirit.  As  if 
he  avowed  plainly,  saying,  '  The  tongue  doth  in  such  sort 
tell  of  guilt,  that  the  spirit  is  not  ever  let  go  loose  amidst 
other  things,  ii'ee  of  the  sting  of  soitow;  but  in  telling  my  sins, 
I  disclose  my  wound,  and  in  thinking  over  my  sins  for  their 
amendment,  I  seek  the  cure  of  the  wound  in  the  medicine  of 
sorrow.'  For  he  that  tells  indeed  the  evil  deeds  he  has  done, 
but  holds  back  from  lamenting  what  he  has  told,  he  as  it 
were  by  taking  off  the  covering  discovers  the  wound,  but  in 
deadness  of  mind  he  applies  no  remedy  to  the  wound. 
Therefore  it  is  needful  that  sorrow  alone  should  wring  out 
the  voice  of  confession,  lest  the  wound,  being  exposed,  but 
neglected,  in  proportion  as  it  is  henceforth  more  freely 
touched  through  the  knowledge  of  our  fellowcreatures,  fester 

•^  V.  '  in  confessionc'  Which  however  is  often  used  for  praise  and  thanks- 
giving. 


I 


Bitter  and  icholesome  self-converse  of  penitents.      443 
so  much  the  worse.     Contrariwise  the  Psalmist  had  not  onlv  Book 

*      V^T  TT 

disclosed  the  sore  of  his  heart,  but  was  furtheiTQore  applying ^ 

to  it  thus  laid  bare  the  remedy  of  sorrow,  when  he  said, 
/  achioicledge  my  sin  unto  Thee^  and  my  iniquity  uill Ps.32,5. 
I  think  on.  For  by  so  '  acknowledging'  he  discovered  the 
hidden  sore,  and  by  thus  '  thinking  on'  it,  what  else  did  he, 
than  apply  a  remedy  to  the  wound  ?  But  to  the  mind  that  is 
distressed,  and  anxiously  thinking  on  its  own  ills,  there 
arises  a  strife  in  behalf  of  self  against  self.  For  when  it  urges 
itself  to  the  sorrows  of  penitence,  it  rends  itself  with  secret 
upbraiding.     And  hence  it  is  justly  added  afterwards, 

I  will  converse  with  the  bitterness  of  my  spirit. 

38.  For  when  we  are  in  trouble  from  dread  of  God's  judgment,  xxii. 
whilst  we  bewail  some  things  done  wrong,  seeing  that  by  the 
mere  force  of  our  bitterness  alone  we  are  sluTed  up  to  enter 
into  ourselves  more  observantly,  we  find  in  ourselves  other 
things  also  to  bewail  more  largely.  For  it  often  happens 
that  what  escaped  us  in  our  insensibility,  is  made  known  to 
us  more  exactly  in  tears.  And  the  troubled  mind  finds  out 
more  surely  the  ill  that  it  has  done  and  knew  not  of,  and  its 
conflict  discovers  to  it  in  a  true  point  of  view  how  far  it  had 
deviated  from  the  peacewhich  is  of  truth,  in  that  its  guilt,  which 
while  secure  it  thought  not  of,  it  finds  out  in  itself  when 
disturbed.  For  the  bitterness  of  penance  gaining  ground 
urgently  brings  home  to  the  confounded  heart  the  unlawful 
things  it  has  committed,  exhibits  the  Judge  arrayed  against 
them  in  severity,  strikes  deep  the  threats  of  punishment, 
smites  the  soul  with  consternation,  overwhelms  it  with  shame, 
chides  the  unlawful  motions  of  the  heart,  and  disturbs  the 
repose  of  its  mischievous  self-security,  all  the  good  gifts  that 
the  Creator  has  vouchsafed  to  bestow  upon  him,  all  the  evil 
that  he  himself  has  done  in  return  for  the  good  things  of  His 
hand,  are  reckoned  up,  how  that  he  was  created  by  Him  in 
a  wonderful  way,  that  he  was  sustained  freely  and  for  nought, 
that  he  was  endowed  with  the  substance  of  reason  at  his 
creation,  that  he  was  called  by  the  grace  of  his  Creator,  that 
he  himself  even  when  called  refused  to  follow,  that  the 
pitifulness  of  Him  that  calleth  did  not  disregard  him,  not 
even  when  deaf  and  resisting,  that  he  was  enlightened  with 
gifts,  that  of  his  own  free  will,  even  after  these  gifts  received, 


444  Present  injlnnity  grievous  to  good  men. 

Job  7,  he  blinded  himself  by  wicked  deeds,  that  he  was  cleared 

*^J 11 from  the  wrong  doings  of  his  state  of  blindness  by  the  strokes 

'  of  fatherly  solicitude,  that  by  means  of  the  pains  of  these 
strokes  he  was  restored  to  the  joys  of  saving  health  by  the 
remedy  that  mercy  applied,  that  being  subject  to  certain  bad 
practices,  though  not  of  the  worst  sort,  he  does  not  cease  to 
sin  even  in  the  midst  of  these  strokes;  that  the  grace  of  God 
even  when  slighted  did  not  abandon  its  sinner.  And  thus 
whereas  it  upbraids  with  so  much  keenness  the  agitated 
mind  at  one  time  by  a  display  of  the  gifts  of  God,  another 
time  by  the  reproaches  of  its  own  behaviour,  the  bitterness 
of  spirit  has  a  tongue  of  its  own  in  the  heart  of  the  righteous, 
which  speaks  to  it  the  more  searchingly,  in  proportion  as  it 
is  heard  within.  And  hence  it  is  not  at  all  said,  •  I  will  talk 
in  the  bitterness  of  my  spirit,'  but  /  trill  converse  u:iiJi  the 
bitterness;  in  that  the  force  of  grief,  which  taking  each  sin 
separately,  stimulates  the  deadened  mind  to  lamentations,  as 
it  were  shapes  words  of  converse  to  it,  wherein  it  being 
chidden  might  find  itself  out,  and  henceforth  rise  up  with 
better  heed  to  the  safe  keeping  of  itself.  And  so  let  the 
righteous  man  say  in  his  own  voice ;  as  bearing  a  figure  of 
Holy  Church,  let  him  say  in  ours  too;  1  trill  converse  with 
the  bitterness  of  my  s^nrit.  As  if  he  spake  it  in  plainer 
words,  saying,  '  Within  I  hold  converse  with  the  anguish  of 
my  heart  against  mine  own  self,  and  without  I  hide  myself 
from  the  lash  of  the  Judge.'  Now  the  mind  that  is  borne 
hard  upon  by  the  pangs  of  penitence  is  gathered  up  close 
into  itself,  and  severed  by  strong  resolution  from  all  the 
gratifications  of  the  flesh,  it  longs  to  advance  to  things 
above,  yet  it  still  feels  opposition  from  the  corruption  of  the 
flesh.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  added  immediately, 

Ver.  12.  Am  I  a  sea  or  a  whale,  that  thou  hast  compassed 
me  about  with  a  prison  ? 
xxiii.       39.  Man  is  '  compassed  about  with  a  prison,'  in  that  he 
very  often  both  strives  to  mount  on  high  by  the  strides  of  vir- 
tuous attainments,  and  yet  is  im]:)eded  by  the  corruption  of 
his  fleshly  part.     Of  which  same  the  Psalmist  rightly  prays 
P8. 142  that  he  might  be  divested,  saying,  Bring    my  soul  out  of 
^ '         yrison^  that  I  may  praise   Thy  Name.      But  what  have  wc 
set  forth  by  the  designation  of '  the  sea,'  saving  the  hearts  of 


Satan  a  whale,  the  carnal  mind  a  sea,whicfi  God  restrains  .44.6 

carnal  men  tossed   with  swelling  thoughts  ?     and   what  by  Book 
the  name  of  '  a  whale,'  except  our  old  enemy  ?     who  when  ^^^^ 
in   taking  possession   of  the  hearts  of  the  children   of  this 
world  he  makes  his  way  into   them,  does  in  a  certain  sort 
swim  about  in  their  slippery   thoughts.     But  the  whale  is 
made  fast  in  prison,  in  that  the  evil  spint,  being  cast  down 
below,  is  kept  mider  by  the  weight  of  his  own  punishment, 
that  he   should   have   no  power  to  fly  up  to  the   heavenly 
realms,  as  Peter    testifies,  who    saith,    God  spared  not  Mc'^Fet. 
Angels  that  simied^  but  cast  them  down  to  hell,  and  delivered 
them  into  chains  of  darkness  to  be  reserved  unto  Judgment, 
*  The  whale'  is  fast  bound  in  prison,  in  that  he  is  prevented 
from  tempting  the  good  as  much  as  he  desires.     The  sea  too 
is  '  compassed  about  with  a  prison,'  in  that  the  swelling  and 
raging  desires  of  carnal  minds,  for  the  doing  of  the  evil  that 
they  loug  for,  are  clogged  by  the  straitness  of  their  inability. 
For  they  often  long  to  have  power  over  their  betters,  yet  by 
the  Divine  ordering,  that  regulates  all  things  marvellously, 
they  ai*e  made  to  bow  beneath  them.     They  desire,  being- 
exalted  high,  to  injure  the  good,  yet  being  brought  under 
their  power,  they  look  for  consolation  fi'om  them.     For  the 
sake  of  fulfilling  the  gratification   of  the   flesh,  they  covet 
length  of  years  in  the  present  life,  yet  they  are  carried  off 
from  it  with  haste.     Concerning  such  it  is  well  said  by  the 
Psalmist,  ^  And  He  put  the  waters  as  it  were  in  a  skin.     For  Ps.  78, 
'  the  waters  are  in  a  skin'  when  their  loose  desires,  in  that  J  y,, 
they  find  not  the  execution  in  deed,  are  kept  down  under  a 
carnal  heart.     Therefore  the  whale  and  the  sea  are  hemmed 
in  by  the  close  pressure  of  a  prison,  in  that  whether  as  re- 
gards the  evil   spirit  or  his   followers,  in   whose  minds  he 
gathers  himself  and  sets  rolling  therein  the  waves  of  tumultu- 
ous thoughts,  the  rigour  of  the   Most   High  confines  them, 
that  they  should  have  no  power   to    accomplish    the    evil 
things  that  they  ai'e  set  upon. 

40.  But  holy  men,  in  proportion  as  they  contemplate  the 
mysteries  of  heavenly  truths  with  more  perfect  purity  of 
heart,  pant  after  them  with  daily  increased  ardour  of  affec- 
tion. They  long  to  be  henceforth  filled  to  the  full  at  that 
fountain  head,  whence  they  as  yet  taste  but  a  little  drop  with 
the  mouth  of  contemplation.     They  long  entirely  to  subdue 


446        The  Elect  long  for  the  liberty  that  hejits  them. 

Job  7,  the  promptings  of  the  flesh,  no  longer  to  be  subject  to  any 
-— — ^  thing  unlawful  in  the  imaginations  of  the  heart  springing 
Wisd.9,  from  the  coiTuption  thereof.  But  because  it  is  written,  For 
the  corruptible  body  presseth  doivn  the  soul,  and  the  earthy 
tabernacle  weigheth  down  the  mind  that  museth  upon  many 
things,  therefore  they  henceforth  rise  above  themselves  in 
purpose  of  mind,  but  being  still  subject  to  the  capricious 
motions  of  their  imperfect  nature,  they  lament  that  they  are 
confined  in  the  prison-house  of  corruption.  Am  I  a  sea  or 
a  whale,  that  Thou  dost  compass  me  about  with  a  prison  ? 
As  if  it  were  in  plain  words  ;  *  The  sea  or  the  whale,  i.  e.  the 
wicked  and  their  prime  mover,  the  Evil  Spirit,  because  they 
desire  to  have  a  loose  given  them  for  the  mere  liberty  of 
committing  iniquity  alone,  are  justly  held  bound  in  the 
prison  of  the  punishment  inflicted  on  them.  But  I,  that 
already  long  for  the  liberty  of  Thine  eternal  state,  why  am  I 
still  enclosed  in  the  prison  of  mine  own  corruption  ?'  Not 
that  this  is  either  demanded  in  pride  by  the  righteous,  in 
that  being  inflamed  with  the  love  of  the  Truth  they  desire 
completely  to  surmount  the  narrow  compass  of  their  imper- 
fect condition;  nor  yet  that  it  is  unjustly  ordered  by  the 
Author  of  the  just,  in  that  in  delaying  the  wishes  of  His 
Elect,  He  puts  them  to  pain,  and  in  paining  purifies,  that 
they  may  one  day  be  the  better  enabled  by  that  delay,  for 
the  receiving  that  they  desire.  But  the  Elect,  so  long  as 
they  are  kept  away  from  the  interior  rest,  turn  back  into 
their  own  hearts,  and  being  there  buried  from  the  tumults  of 
the  flesh,  as  it  were  seek  a  retreat  of  infinite  delight.  But 
therein  they  often  feel  the  stings  of  temptation,  and  are 
subject  to  the  goadings  of  the  flesh,  and  there  they  meet 
with  the  hardest  toils,  where  they  had  looked  for  perfect  rest 
from  toil.  Hence  the  holy  man  after  the  prison  of  his  state 
of  corruption  that  he  told  of,  hastening  to  return  to  the 
tranquil  regions  of  the  heart,  seeing  that  he  experienced  in 
the  interior  also  all  that  same  strife,  to  escape  which  he  fled 
from  things  without,  adds  immediately,  saying, 

Ver.  13,  14.  When  I  say  my  bed  shall  comfort  me,  I 
shall  be  eased  in  speaking  with  myself  on  my  couch,  then 
Thou  scarest  me  with  dreams,  and  terrijiesi  me  through 
visions. 


Tite '  heiT  of  the  heart  Irouhled  with  *  visions'  of  Judgment.  447 
41.  For  in  Holy  Writ  a  '  bed '  a  '  couch '  or  ^  litter '  is  Book 

VIII. 
usually  taken  for  the  secret  depth  of  the  heart.     For  it  is 


XXIV  t 

hence    that   under  the  likeness   of  each  separate   soul,  the 
Spouse,  urged  by  the  piercing  darts  of  holy  love,  says  in  the 
Song  of  Songs,  By  night  on  my  bed  I  sought  him,  whom  my  Cant.  3, 
soul  love th.     For  '  by  night  and  on  the  bed  is  the  beloved^' 
sought,'   in   that  the   appearance  of  the   Invisible  Creator, 
apart  from  every  image  of  a  bodily  appearing,  is  found  in  the 
chamber  of  the  heart.     And  hence  '  Truth'  saith  to  those  same 
lovers  of  Him,    The  kingdom  of  God  is  loithin  you.     And  Luke 
again,  If  I  go  not  away.,  the  Comforter  will  not  come.     As  if  johnjg 
it  were  in  plain  words ;    *  If  I   do  not  withdraw  My  Body  7. 
from  the  eyes  of  your  fixed  regard,  I   lead  you  not  by  the 
Comforter,   the    Spirit,   to  the    perception    of  the    unseen.' 
Hence  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist  of  the  just.    The  Saints  Ps=.  149, 
shall  he  joyful  in  glory.,  they  shall  rejoice  upon  their  beds ;  ' 
in  that  when  they  flee   the  mischiefs  from  things  without, 
they  exult  in  safety  within  the  recesses  of  their  hearts.     But 
the  joy  of  the  heart  will  then  be  complete,  when  the  fight  of 
the  flesh  shall  have  ceased  without.     For  so  long  as  the  flesh 
allures,  because  as  it  were  the  wall  of  our  house  is  shaken, 
even  the  very  bed  is  disturbed.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  said 
by  that  Psalmist,  Thou  hast  made  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness.  P9.4i,3. 
For  when   temptation  of  the  flesh   moves  us,  our  infirmity 
being  made  to  tremble  disturbs  even  the  bed  of  the   soul. 
But  what  do  we  imderstand  in  this  place  by  '  dreams*  and 
'  visions'    saving  the    representations  of   the  last  searching 
Judgment  ?    What  we  already  have  some  slight  glimpse  of 
through  fear,  but  do  not  see  it  as  it  really  is.     Thus  holy 
men,  as  we  have  said,  ever  turn  back  to  the  secret  recesses 
of  the  heart,  when  from  the  world  without,  they  either  meet 
with    successes   beyond   their    wishes,    or    with    adversities 
beyond  their  strength,  and,  wearied  with  their  toils  without, 
they  seek  as  a  bed,  or  litter,  the  resting-places  of  the  heart. 
But  whilst  by  certain  pictures  of  their  imagination  they  see 
how  searching  the  judgments  of  God  are,  they  are  as  it  were 
disturbed  in  their  very  repose  on  their  beds  by  the  vision  of 
a  dream.     For  they  behold  after  what  sort  the  strict  Judge 
Cometh,  Who  while  with  the  power  of  infinite  Majesty  He 
lights  up  the  secret  recesses  of  the  heart,  will  bring  back 


448  Serious  thought  brings  terror.     Various  ki?ids  of  dreams. 
Job  7,  every  sin  before  our  eves.     They  bethink  themselves  what 

13.  14.  '  .  " 

-,T-^ — '-  the  shame  of  ihat  is,  to  be  confounded  in  the  siarht  of  the 

lUOUAL.  ° 

whole  human  race,  of  all  the  Angels  and  the  Archangels. 
They  reflect  what  agony  is  in  store  after  that  confounding, 
wlien  at  one  and  the  same  time  guilt  shall  prey  upon  the 
soul  imperishably  perishing,  and  hell  fire  upon  the  flesh 
unfailingly  failing.  When,  then^  the  mind  is  shaken  by  so 
terrific  a  conception,  what  else  is  this  but  that  a  sad  dream  is 
presented  upon  the  bed  }  Therefore  let  him  say,  When  I  say. 
My  bed  shall  comfort  me,  and  I  shall  he  eased  talking  ivith 
myself  on  my  couch;  then  Thou  scares t  me  with  dreams,  and 
terrifiest  me  through  visions.  As  if  he  confessed  openly, 
saying,  *  If  fleeing  from  external  things,  I  turn  back  into  the 
interior,  and  am  anxious  in  some  sort  to  rest  upon  the  bed 
»A.B.D.  of  mv  heart,  there,  whilst  Thou  dost  set  me  to  ^  the  contem- 
meT  plation  of  Thy  severity,  Thou  makest  me  to  fear  horribly  by 
the  mere  images  my  foresight  raises  up.'  Now  it  is  well  said. 
And  I  shall  be  eased,  talking  with  myself  in  my  bed,  in  that 
when  we  retm*n  wearied  to  the  silence  of  our  hearts,  as  it 
were  holding  converse  on  our  beds,  we  handle  the  secret 
words  of  thought  within  ourselves.  But  this  very  converse 
of  ours  is  turned  into  dread,  in  that  thereby  there  is  more 
forcibly  presented  to  us  in  imagination  the  view,  which  holds 
out  the  terrors  of  the  Judge. 
L^"^'  42.  But  lest  any  one  should  be  at  pains  to  make  out  these 

words  after  the  literal  sense,  it  is  of  great  importance  to  find 
out  in  how  many  ways  the  mind  is  aff*ected  by  images  from 
dreams.     For  sometimes  dreams  are  engendered  of  fulness  or 
emptiness  of  the  belly,  sometimes  of  illusion,  sometimes  of 
illusion  and  thought  combined,  sometimes  of  revelation,  while 
sometimes  they  are  engendered  of  imagination,  thought,  and 
revelation  together.    Now  the  two  which  we  have  named  first, 
we  all  know  by  experience,  while  the  four  subjoined  we  find 
in  the  pages  of  Holy  Writ.    For  except  dreams  were  very  fre- 
quently caused  to  come  in  illusion  by  our  secret  enemy,  the 
Ecclus.  Wise  Man  would  never  have  pointed  this  out  by  saying,  For 
^^'        dreams  and  vain  illusions "  have  deceived  many,  or  indeed. 
Lev.  19,  ^or  shall  ye  use  enchantments,  nor  observe  dreams.     By 

or* 

Vulg.     which  words  it  is  shewn  us  how  great  an  abomination  they 

^  The  words  vain  illusions,  are  not  in  the  Lat.  or  Gr. 


Dreamxfrom  illusio,,,  thought,  or  revelation.        449 

are  in  that  they  are  joined  with  'auguries.'  Again,  excepting  Book 
they  sometimes  came  of  thought  and  illusion  together,  Llof  ^""• 

zzz  Tr""'" ""''  ^'' "  "-'""^  --^''  ^^-^^  '^-  Eei; 

rfl        "^  *'"""'*•     ^""^  ""!«-  dreams  sometimes  had^" 
then  ong.n  m  a  mystery  of  a  revelation,  Joseph  would  never 
have  seen  h.mself  in  a  dream  appointed  to  be  advanced  abov 
his  brethren    nor  would  the   espoused  of  Mary  have  been 
warned  by  the  Angel  in  a  dream  to  take  the  Child  and  to  fly 
into  Egypt       Again,  unless  dreams  sometimes  proceeded 
from  thought  and  revelation  together,  the  Prophet  Dan'l,   „ 
makmg  out  the  vision  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  would  never  ha  " 
2:^:         *°"°"'^' -  t'^^  -°t;  A.  for  thee,  O  king,  tky^.^  , 
thoughts  came  mo  thy  mind  upon  thy  bed,  uhat  should^^-' 
com.  to  pass  hereafter,  and  He  That  reLleth  secrets  makfh 

t:r  T^:  Tt  ''^'^  ""^ '-  ^"^^-  ^-^^  --  ^- 

ThUnZ^  '  T^'  "'""''''  "'"^  ^'^'''^  «  areat  image....  3. 

bejore  thee,  ^c.  Thus  while  Daniel  declares  in  awful  terms  the 
dream  about  to  be  fulfilled,  and  shews  in  what  thouThts  it 
had  Its  nse,  it  is  made  plain  and  manifest  that  the  thing    erv 
frequently  proceeds  from  thought  and  revelation  combined  "^ 
43    Now  It  IS  clear,  that  since  dreams  shift  about  in  such  a 
vanety  of  cases,  they  ought  to  be  the  less  easily  be]  eved 
m  proportion  as  it  less  easily  appears  from  what  influencin; 
ause  they  spnng.     For  it  often  happens  that  to  those,  wh  m 
the  Evi  Spirit  cuts  off  when  awake  through  the  love  of  th™ 
presen   life,  he  promises  the  successes  of  fortune  even  wh  ,sl 
they  sleep,    and    those,  whom    he  sees   to  be   in  dread  o 
misfortunes,  he  threatens  with  them  the  more  cruelly  by  the 
representations   of  dreams,    that    he   may    work   upon    the 
incautious  soul  by  a  different  kind  of  influence,  and  either 
by  elevating  It   with   hope  or  sinking  it  with  dread,  m" 
disturb  Its  balance      Often  too  he  sets  himself  to  work  upoi 
the  souls  of  the  Saints  themselves  by  dreams,  that  at  leas 
for  a  passing  moment  they  may  be  thrown  otf  the  line  of 
steady  thought,  though  by  their  own  act  they  straightway 
shake  the  mind  clear  of  thedelusive  phantasy.  Andour  VZ^ 
ing  foe,  in  proportion  as  he  is  utterly  unable  to  get  the  belt" 
of  them  when  awake,  makes  the  deadlier  assault  upon  them 
asleep.     Whom   yet   the   dispensation    of  the    Highest    in 


450  Qood  men  choose  death  to  the  world. 

Job  7,  loving-kindness  alone  allows  to  do  so  in  his  malevolence, 
j^j^^^lest  in  the  souls  of  the  Elect  their  mere  sleep,  though  nothing- 
else,  should  go  without  the  meed  of  suffering.  Therefore  it 
is  well  spoken  to  Him  that  ruleth  over  all.  When  I  say,  my 
bed  shall  comfort  me,  I  shall  be  eased  talking  with  myself 
on  my  couch ;  then  Thou  scarest  me  with  dreams,  and 
terrijiest  me  through  visions.  Svn-ely  in  that  God  ordcreth  all 
things  wonderfully,  even  He  Himself  doth  that  thing,  which 
.  the  Evil  Spirit  seeks  to  do  unjustly,  whilst  He  letteth  it  not  be 
done  saving  justly.  Now  forasmuch  as  the  life  of  the  righ- 
teous is  at  once  assaulted  on  watch  by  temptation,  and 
harassed  in  dreaming  by  illusion ;  undergoes  without  the 
mischiefs  of  its  corruption,  and  within  painfully  carries  in 
itself  unlawful  thoughts ;  what  may  it  do  in  order  to  pluck 
the  foot  of  the  heart  out  of  the  mazes  of  such  numberless 
entanglements  }  Yea,  thou  blessed  man,  with  what  dismay 
and  trouble  thou  art  every  way  compassed  about  we  have 
leamt ;  now  let  us  be  informed,  what  plan  thou  dost  devise 
to  encounter  the  same.     It  goes  on, 

Ver.  15.  So  that  my  soul  chooseth  hanging  and  my  bones 
death. 
XXV.  44.  What  is  then  represented  by  the  soul  but  the  bent  of 
the  soul,  and  by  the  bones,  the  strength  of  the  flesh  ?  Now 
every  thing  that  is  hung  is  assuredly  lifted  up  from  things 
beneath;  therefore  '  the  soul  chooseth  hanging  that  the  bones 
may  die,'  in  that  whilst  the  mind's  intent  lifts  itself  on  high, 
it  extinguishes  all  the  strength  of  the  exterior  life  in  itself. 
For  the  Saints  know  it  for  a  most  certain  truth,  that  they  can 
never  enjoy  rest  in  the  present  life,  and  so  they  '  choose 
hanging,'  in  that  quitting  earthly  objects  of  desire,  they  raise 
the  mind  on  high.  But  whilst  hung  on  high  they  inflict 
death  on  their  bones,  in  that  for  love  of  the  laud  above, 
having  their  loins  girt  in  ])ress  and  pursuit  after  virtuous 
attainments,  all  wherein  they  were  aforetime  strong  in  the 
world,  they  load  with  the  chain  of  self-abasement.  It  is 
w^ell  to  mark  how  Paul  had  his  soul  suspended  aloft,  who 
Gal.  2,  sai(^   Nevertheless  I  live:  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me, 

20.  ,  J  •> 

Phil.  1,  And   again ;    Having  a  desire   to  depart   and   to   be   with 
^^'  „,    Christ.    And,  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain. 

ver.  21.  '  '  "^ 

Who  recalling  to  mind  the  achievements  of  earthly  strength, 


Some  part  with  all,  others  die  to  what  they  keep.    451 

^e6,ew  0/  the  Hebrews,  as  touching,  the  Law  a  PharLe  ■   ^"I- 
<-o,,cenn„ff,eal,perseculinff  the  Church  of  God.     But  bCff^ 

ot  tS  t  f  ""'' '°""  "'^'  "^^  ^1°-  -  death  :Ls-   ■ 
hZuZtr  ™"^^'^'^'^  d-'--«'  in  that  he  adds, 

CA/^..     ^Ihich    same   bones   he   implies   were    still    m'ore 
mercdesslv  dealt  with  to  destruction  in  himself,  when  he  aTds 

but  dung.     But  lu  what  manner  he  hung  without  life  and 
tinrV'/T''  '^  ^'''''  -  '^-  ^^  ^'-^^  in  It  place 

Which  is  through  thejaith  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  whereas  bv 
bnng.ng  together  his  declarations  we  have  avouched  Pau' 
to  have  been  suspended  aloft  dead  to  the  world,  let  us  now 
shew  whether  blessed  Job,  being  filled  with  the  sa"! 
goes  onr       "'  -^o^^Pi-ence  of  the  exterior  life.     It 

iT'rt  ^ ':"'' 3"'"  over  hope,  I  will  not  live  any  longer. 

4o.  There  be  some  of  the  righteous,  who  so  entertain  the  xxvi 
de  .re  of  heavenly  things,  that,  notwithstanding  this,  they  are 
not  broken  off  from  the  hope  of  things  earthlv?   The  inhed" 
ance  bestowed  on  them  by  God  they  keep  for  the  supplv  of 

inainrf^.  Sottire-;  r'  tt"  -' "''-"  '-^ 

.-u  1  .  ^^^  ^"^se  are  stran^rers  to 

hose  same  th.ngs  that  they  have,  in  that  they  are  not  Lund 
in  affection  to  those  very  goods  which  they  keep  in  thek 
possession.  And  there  are  some  of  the  righteous  who 
bracing  thenaselves  up  to  lay  hold  of  the  very  hei4t  of 
per  ecuon,  whilst  they  aim  at  higher  objects  withi,  abandon 
all  things  without,  who  bare  themselves  of  the  g;ods  pos" 
•sessed  by  them,  strip  themselves  of  the  pride  of  honour 
who  by  continuance  in  a  giatefid  sorrow  affect  their  hearts' 
^ith  longing  for  the  things  of  the  interior,  refuse  to  recehe 

the7drk"o^°r'°"  "!,"  ^^^  ^^'^'■'°^'  -"^^  '^h"-  -  «Piri 

Pa„l   n        [      "[  '"'P"""""^  enjoyment.     For  it  is  said  by 
Paul  to  such  as  these.  For  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  ,2c„,.3  a 

•2  G  2 


452        Longing  for  Eternity  excludes  hope  in  Time. 

Job  7,  with  Christ  in  God.     The  Psalmist  spoke  in  their  voice, 
-^ — '- — when  he  said.  My  soul  longeth,yea,  even  fainteth  for  the 
Fs.si, 2.  courts  of  the  Lord.     For  they  '  long'  but  do  not '  faint,'  who 
are  already  imbued  indeed  with  heavenly  desires,  but  not- 
withstanding are  still  not  tired  of  the  enjoyments  of  earthly 
objects.     But  he  '  longeth,  yea,  even  fainteth,  for  the  courts 
of  the  Lord,'  who  whilst  he  desires  the  eternal  world,  doth 
not  hold  on  in  the  love  of  the  temporal.    Hence  the  Psalmist 
Ps.  119,  saith  again.  My  soul  fainteth  for  Thy  salvation.     Hence 
Liike  9, '  Truth'  bids  us  by  His  own  lips,  saying,  Lf  any  man  will 
j^'        come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself.     And  again  ;   Whoso- 
14,  33.  ever  he  he  of  you  that  forsaketh  not  all  that  he  hath,  he 
cannot  be  My  disciple.     Thus  the  holy  man,  his  soul  parted 
from  earthly  objects  of  desire,  sets  himself  in  the  number  of 
such  as  those,  when  he  saith,  /  liave  given  over  hope,  L  will 
not  live  any  longer.     Since  for  a  righteous  man  '  to  give 
over  hope'  is  to  quit  the  good  things  of  the  present  life,  in 
making  choice  of  eternity,  and  to  put  no  trust  in  temporal 
possessions.     And  whilst  doing   this,  he   declares   that   he 
'  will  not  live  any  longer,'  in  that  by  a  quickening  death  he  is 
daily  killing  himself  to  the  life  of  passion  \    For  be  it  far  from 
us  to  think  that  the  holy  man  should  despair  of  the  bountiful- 
ness  of  God's  mercy,  that  he  should  withdraw  the  step  of 
the  heart  from  advancing  in  the  interior  way,  that  forsaking 
the  love  of  the  Creator  he  should  as  it  were  stop  on  the  road 
lacking   a   guide,    and   pierced    with   the   sword   of  rifling 
despair,  be  brought  to  ruin.     But  lest  we  seem  violently  to 
wrest  his  sayings  according  to  the  caprice  of  our  own  view, 
we  ought  to  form  our  estimate  of  what  is  promised  by  that 
which  follows  after.     For  in  what  sense  he  said  this,  he  does 
himself  immediately  point  out,  in  that  he  adds. 
Spare  me,  O  Lor d^,  for  my  days  are  nothing. 
xxvii.      46.  For  neither  do  the  two  words  agree  together,  I  have 
given  over  hope,  and,  spare  me.     For  he  that  *  gives  over 
hope,'  no  longer  begs  to   be   spared;  and  he  who  is  still 
anxious  to  be  spared,  is  surely  far  from  '  giving  over  hope.' 
It  is  on  one  sort  of  grounds  then  that  he  '  gives  over  hope,' 

•  The   word   seems   taken   here  for     it  '  by  suffering  in  this  life.' 
earthly  feelings.     Some  Mss.  read  '  re-         S  Domine^  not  in  V.  Eng.  V.*  let  me 
parationis,'  one,  leaving  out '  a,'  makes     alone.' 


The  prenent  life  nothiny^  when  seen  with  Elernily.  453 

and  on  another  that  the  holy  man  prays  to  be  spared ;  in  Book 

that  whilst  he  abandons  the  good  things   of  this  transitory '— 

life  in  '  gi^'ing  over  the  hope'  thereof,  he  rises  more  vigorous 
in  hope  for  the  securing  of  those  that  shall  endure.  So  that 
in  *  giving  over  hope,'  he  is  the  more  effectually  brought  to 
the  hope  of  pardon,  who  seeks  the  things  to  come  so  much 
the  more  determinately,  in  proportion  as  he  more  thoroughly 
forsakes  those  of  the  present  time  in  giving  up  hope.  And 
we  are  to  take  notice,  that  when  teaching  us  the  strength  of 
his  heart,  he  delivered  indeed  but  one  sentiment  about  him- 
self, but  in  teaching  it  to  us  he  has  repeated  it  a  third  time. 
For  what  he  had  said  above.  My  soul  chooseth  hanyiny,  it 
was  in  repeating  this,  that  he  added  the  words,  /  have  given 
over  hope,  and  in  aiming  at  the  blessings  of  eternity,  and 
putting  behind  those  of  time,  he  last  of  all  brought  in  this, 
Spa?'e  me.  And  what  he  said  above,  And  my  hones  deaths 
this  same  it  was  that  he  added,  /  will  not  live  longer,  and 
this  he  delivered  to  end  with,  for  my  days  are  nothing. 
But  he  rightly  considers  that  his  '  days  are  nothing,'  because 
as  we  have  often  remarked  already  a  little  above,  holy  men, 
the  more  thoroughly  they  are  acquainted  with  things  above, 
in  the  same  proportion  they  look  down  upon  the  things  of 
earth  from  a  loftier  height.  And  therefore  they  see  that  the 
days  of  the  present  life  are  ^  nothing,'  because  they  have  the 
eyes  of  their  illumined  soul  fixed  in  the  contemplation  of 
eternity.  And  when  they  return  thence  to  themselves,  what 
do  they  find  themselves  to  be  but  dust  ?  And  being  conscious 
of  their  frailty,  they  are  in  dread  of  being  judged  with 
severity;  and  when  they  regard  the  force  of  that  vast  Energy, 
they  tremble  to  have  it  put  to  the  test  what  they  are.  And 
hence  it  is  further  added  with  propriety, 

Ver.  17.    What  is  man,  that  Thou  shouldest  magnify  Jiim  ? 
and  that  Tfiou  shouldest  set  Tliine  heart  upon  him? 

47.  God  magnifieth  man,  in  that  He  enriches  him  with  the  xxviii. 
bountiful  gift  of  reason,  visits  him  with  the  inspiration  of 
grace,  exalts  him  with  the  greatness  of  imparted  virtue ;  and 
whereas  he  is  nothing  in  himself,  yet  through  the  bounty  of 
His  lovingkindness  He  vouchsafes  to  him  to  be  a  partaker  of 
the  knowledge  of  Himself.  And  the  Lord  '  setteth  His 
heart  upon  man'  so  magnified,  in  that  after  His  gifts  He 


454         God  judges  man  for  gifts  that  magnify  him. 

Job  7,  brings  forth  judgment,  weighs  merits  with  exactness,  rigidly 

— — ^ — tries  the  weights  of  life,  and  exacts  punishment  from  him 
/111  •  • 

afterwards  the  more  strictly,  in  proportion   as  He  prevents 

him  here  more  bounteously  by  the  benefit  bestowed.       So 

then  let  the  holy  man  view  the  immensity  of  the  Supreme 

Majesty,  and  recall  the  eye  of  reflection  to  his  own  frailty. 

Let  liim  see  that  flesh  cannot  comprehend  that  which  Truth 

through  the  Spirit  teaches  concerning  Himself.     Let  him  see 

that  man's  spirit,  even  when  it  is  lifted  up,  is  not  able  to  bear 

the  Judgment,  which  God  holds  over  it,  on  a  trial  of  strict 

recompensing,  and  let  him   say.   What  is  man,  tltat   Thou 

shouldest  magnify  him?  and  that  Thou  shouldest  set  Thine 

heart  upon  him?     As  though  he  cried  out  in  plain  words, 

saying,  '  Man  is  magnified  with  a  spiritual  gift,  but  yet  he  is 

flesh,  and  after  Thy  gifts,  Thou  takest  strict  account  of  his 

ways;  yet  if  he  be  judged  with  pity  set  aside,  the  weight  that 

rests  over  him  fi-om   Thine   exactness,  not  even   the  spirit 

that    is   raised   to    righteousness    has    strength   to    sustain, 

seeing  that  though  Thy  gifts  draw  him  out  beyond  his  own 

compass,  yet  at  the  inquest  of  Thy  strict  scrutiny  his  own 

frailty  contracts  him.'    And  hence  it  is  fitly  added  still  further; 

Ver.  18.  And  that  Thou  shouldest  visit  him  in  the  dawn^ 

and  try  him  suddenly  ? 

xxix.  48.  Which  is  there  of  us  that  does  not  know  that  it  is 
called  the  '  dawn,'  when  the  night  season  is  now  changing 
into  the  brightness  of"  light?  so  we  too  are  closed  in  by  the 
darkness  of  night,  when  we  are  dimmed  by  the  practice  of 
wickedness ;  but  the  night  is  turned  into  light,  when  the 
darkness  of  our  erring  state  is  illuminated  by  knowledge  of 
the  Truth.  The  night  is  turned  into  light,  when  the  splendour 
of  righteousness  lights  up  our  hearts,  which  the  blindness  of 
sin  lay  heavy  upon.     This  dawn  Paul  saw  rise  in  the  minds 

Rom.  of  the  disciples,  when  he  said.  The  night  is  far  spent,  the 
'  '  day  is  at  hand.  And  so  the  Lord  '  visits  us  at  the  dawn,'  in 
that  He  illumines  the  darkness  of  our  state  of  error  with  the 
light  of  the  knowledge  of  Himself,  uplifts  us  with  the  gift  of 
contemplation,  exalts  us  to  the  stronghold  of  virtue.  But  it 
is  to  be  observed,  that  after  God  *  visits  him  at  the  dawn,' 
He  '  tries  man  suddenly,'  in  that  both  in  drawing  near  He 
advances  oiir  souls  to  virtuous  heights,  and  in  withdrawing 


Gifts  partially  withdrawn  to  humble  men.  4:65 

Himself  He  suffers  them  to  be  assaulted  with  temptation.  Book 

.  YIII. 

For  if  after  the  bestowal  of  the  gifts  of  virtue,  she  is  never — '■ — - 


moved  by  any  assault  of  temptation,  the  soul  boasts  that  she 
has  these  of  herself.  Therefore  that  she  may  at  one  and  the 
same  time  enjoy  the  gifts  of  a  firm  state,  and  humbly  ac- 
knowledge her  own  state  of  infirmity,  by  the  visitation  of 
grace  she  is  lifted  up  on  high,  and  by  the  withdrawal  of  the 
same,  it  is  proved  what  she  is  in  herself.  Which  is  well 
intimated  to  us  in  the  history  of  the  book  of  sacred  reading, 
wherein  Solomon  is  recorded  both  to  have  received  wisdom 
from  on  high,  and  yet  directly  after  that  very  wisdom  was  i  Kings 
received,  to  have  been  assailed  by  the  disputing  of  the  '  ' 
harlots.  For  immediately  after  he  had  received  the  grace 
of  that  great  enlightenment,  he  was  exposed  to  the  strife  of 
base  women ;  for  that  oftentimes  when  the  visiting  of  the 
interior  bounty  illuminates  our  mind  with  virtues  vouchsafed 
it,  even  filthy  imaginations  forthwith  disorder  it,  that  the  soul, 
which  being  lifted  up  exults  in  the  immensity  of  the  gift, 
being  at  the  same  time  struck  by  temptation,  may  discover 
what  she  is.  So  Elijah  both  being  visited  at  the  dawn,  opened 
the  doors  of  heaven  by  a  word,  and  yet  being'  tried  suddenly,' 
fleeing  helpless  through  the  desert,  was  in  dread  of  a  single 
woman.      Thus  Paul  is  carried  to   the   third  heaven,  and  i  Kings 

19   3. 

penetrating  into  the  secrets  of  Paradise,  he  is  held  in  con-  2  Cor. 
templation;    and    yet    when  he   returns  to  himself,  travails  ^2, 2. 
against  the  assaults  of  the  flesh,  and  is  subject  to  another 
law  in  his  members,  by  whose  rebellion  within  him  he  grieves 
to  see  the  law  of  the  Spirit  hard  bestead.     Therefore  God 
*  visits   at   the    dawn,'    but,    after    this    visiting.    He    '  tries 
suddenly,'  in  that  He  both  lifts  up  by  the  gift  vouchsafed, 
and  by  the  same  being  for  a  while  withdrawn,  shews  unaided^ '  ipsum 
man  to  himself.     Which  doubtless  we  are  so  long  subject 
to,  until  the  time,  when  the  pollution  of  sin  being  clean  taken 
away,  we  be  renewed  to  the  substance  of  promised  incorrup- 
tion.     Hence  it  is  fitly  added  yet  further, 

Ver.  19.  How  long  tvilt  JJtou  not  depart  from  me,  nor  let 
me  alone  until  I  swallow  down  my  spittle. 

49.  The  spittle  runs  into  the  mouth  from  the  head,  but  xxx. 
from  the  mouth  it  is  carried  into  the  belly  by  being  swallowed. 
And  what  is  our  head  saving  the  Deity,  through  Whom  we 


456  Spittle  of  contemplation  not  yet  swallowed. 

Job  7,  derive  the  original  of  our  being,  so  as  to  be  *  creature,'  as 
— — ^ —  Paul  bears  witness,  who  declares,  The  head  of  every  man  is 
1  Cor.  Christ,  and  the  head  of  Christ  is  God;  and  what  is  our 
^^y^'  bellj,  saving  the  mind,  which,  whilst  it  takes  its  food,  i.  e. 
heavenly  perception,  being  invigorated,  doth  surely  rule  the 
members  of  the  several  actions.  For  except  Holy  Writ  did 
sometimes  describe  the  mind  by  the  name  of  '  the  belly,' 
Prov.  Solomon  surely  would  never  have  said.  The  spirit  of  man  is 
'  *  the  candle  of  the  Lord,  searching  all  the  inward  parts  of 
the  belly;  forasmuch  as  whilst  the  grace  of  heavenly  visita- 
tion illumines  us,  it  discloses  even  all  the  depths  of  the 
mind  that  are  hidden  from  our  sight.  What  then  is  meant 
by  the  term  *  spittle,'  but  the  savour  of  interior  contempla- 
tion, which  runs  down  from  the  head  to  the  mouth,  in  that 
issuing  from  the  brightness  of  the  Creator,  whilst  we  are  still 
set  in  this  life,  it  but  just  touches  us  with  a  taste  of  revelation, 
John  9,  And  hence  the  Redeemer  at  His  coming  mixed  the  spittle 
with  clay,  and  restored  the  eyes  of  him  that  was  born  blind, 
in  that  heavenly  grace  enlightens  the  carnal  bent  of  our 
hearts,  by  a  mixture  of  the  contemplation  of  Itself,  and  from 
his  original  blindness  restores  man  anew  to  perception.  For 
whereas  nature  henceforth  brought  him  forth  in  this  place 
of  exile,  since  he  was  banished  from  all  the  joys  of  Paradise, 
man  was  produced  from  his  birth,  as  it  were,  without  eyes. 
But,  as  the  holy  man  teaches,  this  spittle  runs  into  the  mouth 
indeed,  but  that  it  should  not  reach  into  the  belly,  it  is  not 
swallowed  down,  in  that  the  contemplation  of  the  Divine 
Being  grazes  the  sense,  but  does  not  perfectly  refresh  the 
mind,  because  the  soul  is  unable  perfectly  to  behold  what 
as  yet,  the  mist  of  corruption  impeding  the  view,  it  sees  by 
a  hasty  glimpse. 

50.  For  see  how  the  soul  of  the  Elect  already  bears  down 
all  earthly  desires  beneath  itself,  already  mounts  above  all 
the  objects  that  it  sees  are  of  a  nature  to  pass  away,  is  already 
lifted  up  from  the  enjoyment  of  external  delights,  and  closely 
searches  what  are  the  invisible  good  things,  and  in  doing  the 
same  is  carried  away  into  the  sweetness  of  heavenly  contem- 
plation ;  already  very  often  it  sees  something  of  the  interior 
world  as  it  were  through  the  mist,  and  with  burning  desire 
strives  to  the  utmost  to  be  admitted  to  the  spiritual  ministries 


IVJten  God  '  spares,^  we  take  it  in  more  fully.       457 

of  the  Angels,  feeds  on  the   taste   of  the  Light  Incompre-  Book 
hensible,  and  being  carried  out  of  self  disdains  to  sink  back  ^^^^' 
again  into  self;  for  forasmuch  as  the  body,  which  is  in  the 
way  to  corruption,  still  weighs  down  the  soul,  it  has  not  power -vvisd.p 
to  attach  itself  to  the  Light  for  long,  which  it  sees  in  a  mo- 1^- 
menlary   glimpse.     For  the  mere  infirmity  of  the   flesh  by 
itself  drags  down  the  soul,  as  it  mounts  above  itself,  and 
brings  it  down,  as  it  aspires,  to  provide  for  low  cares  and 
wants.     And  so  spittle  flowing  from  the  head  touches  the 
mouth,  but  never  reaches  to  the  belly ;  in  that  our  under- 
standing indeed  is   henceforth    watered   with    the    dews    of 
heavenly  contemplation,  but   the    soul    is  not    at   all  fully 
satisfied.     For  in  the  mouth  is  the  taste,  but  fulness  in  the 
belly;  and  so  we  cannot  '  swallow  down  our  spittle,'  in  that 
we  are  not  suff'ered  to  fill   ourselves  with  the  excellency  of 
heavenly  brightness,  which  we  taste  as  yet  but  in  a  sip.     But 
whereas  this  very  same  that  we  are  already  in  some  slight 
degree  made    acquainted    with    above  us,  comes    from   the 
pitifulness  of  One  that  spareth,  while  that  we  cannot  as  yet 
obtain  a  perfect  perception  of  it  is  of  the  punishment  of  the 
old  curse  still,  it  is  rightly  said  now.  How  long  dost  Thou  not 
spare  me,  nor  let  me  alone,  till  I  swallow  down  my  spittle  ? 
As  if  it  were  in  plain  words;  '  Then  Thou  dost  perfectly 
spare  man,  when  Thou  admittest  Him  to  the  perfect  measure 
of  the  contemplation  of  Thee;  that  being  transported  he  may 
behold  Thy  brightness  in  the  interior,  and  no  corruption  of 
his  flesh  without  should  hold  him  back.  Then  *  thou  lettest  me 
alone  till  I  swallow  down  my  spittle,  when  Thou  replenishest 
me  with   the    savour  of  Thy  brightness  even   to   the  very 
overflow   of  fulness,  that  I    should    never  henceforth  go  a 
hungered,  with  but  a  taste  of  the  mouth,  through  lack  of  food, 
but  be  stedfastly  stayed  in  Thee,  the  belly  of  my  interior 
being  watered.'     But  whoso  would  obtain  the  good  that  he 
desires  must  acknowledge  the  evil  that  he  has  done.     The 
account  goes  on. 

Ver.  20.  /  have  sinned;  what  shall  I  do  unto  Thee,  O 
Thou  Preserver  of  7nen? 

51.  Observe  how  he  confesses  the  ill  that  he  has  done,  but  ^^^\ 
the  good  that  he  should  present  to  God  in  compensation,  he 
no  where  can  find,  in   that  all   virtue  whatever  of  human 


458  Man  cannot  remedy  his  own  sin  and  fall. 

Job  7  practice  is  without  power  to  wash  out  the  guilt  of  sin,  except 

^^-  ^  His  mercifulness  in  sparing  foster  it,  and  not  His  justice  in 

judging  press  hard  upon  it.     Whence  it  is  well  said  by  the 

Ps.63,3.  Psalmist,  Because  Thy  mercy  is  better  than  the  life;  in  that 
howsoever  innocent  it  may  seem  to  be,  yet  with  the  strict 
Judge  our  life  doth  not  set  us  free,  if  the  lovingkindness  of 
His  mercy  loose  not  to  it  the  debt  of  its  guilt.  Or  indeed 
when  it  is  said.  What  shall  I  do  unto  Thee?  it  is  plainly 
shewn  us  that  those  very  good  things,  which  we  are  com- 
manded to  practise,  are  not  a  gain  to  Him  that  imposes  the 
command,  but  to  ourselves.     Whence  it  is  said  again  by  the 

Ps.16,2.  Psalmist,  My  goodness  extendeth  not  unto  Thee.  Now  the 
abjectness  of  our  destitution  is  set  forth,  when  God  is  called 
the  '  Preserver  of  men,'  in  that  if  His  preserving  hand  defend 
us  not  in  the  face  of  the  snares  of  the  secret  adversary,  the 
eye  of  our  heedfulness  sleeps  on  watch,  as  the  Psalmist  again 

Ps.  127,  bears  record,  who  saith,  Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the 

^'  watchman  tcaketh  hut  in  vain.     For  it  is  through  ourselves 

that  w^e  have  been  brought  to  the  ground,  but  to  rise  again 
by  our  own  strength  is  beyond  our  ability.  The  fault  of  our 
own  will  laid  us  low  once,  but  the  punishment  of  our  fault  sinks 
us  worse  day  by  day.  We  strive  by  the  efforts  of  our  earnest 
endeavours,  to  lift  ourselves  to  the  uprightness  we  have  lost, 
but  we  are  kept  down  by  the  weight  of  our  just  dues.  And 
hence  it  is  fitly  added.  Why  hast  Thou  set  me  opposite  to 
Thee,  so  that  I  am  a  burthen  to  myself? 

xxxii.  52.  Then  did  God  '  set  man  opposite  to  Him,'  when  man 
forsook  God  by  sinning.  For  being  taken  captive  by  the 
persuasions  of  the  Serpent,  he  became  the  enemy  of  Him, 
Whose  precepts  he  despised.  But  the  righteous  Creator 
'  set  man  opposite  to  Himself,'  in  that  He  accounted  him  an 
enemy  by  pride.  And  this  very  oppositeness  of  sin  is  itself 
made  a  weight  of  punishment  to  man,  that  he  being  wrongly 
free,  might  serve  his  own  corruption,  who  while  serving 
rightly  exulted  in  the  freedom  of  incorruption.  For  quitting 
the  healthful  stronghold  of  humility,  he  was  brought  by 
growing  proud  to  the  yoke  of  infirmity,  and  in  erecting  only 
bowed  down  ihe  neck  of  the  heart,  in  that  he  who  refused  to 
submit  to  the  behests  of  God,  prostrated  himself  beneath  his 
own  necessities ;  which  we  shall  shew  the  better,  if  we  set 


Our  present  state  a  perpetual  sickness.  459 

forth  those  burthens,  first  of  the  flesh  and  afterwards  of  the  Book 
spirit,  which  he  is  made  subject  to  after  being  cast  down  to 
the  ground. 

53.  For  to  say  nothing  of  this,  that  he  is  hable  to  pains, 
that  he  gasps  with  fever ;  the  very  state  of  our  body,  which 
is  called  health,  is  straitened  by  its  own  sickness.  For 
it  wastes  with  idleness,  it  faints  with  work;  failing  with 
not  eating,  it  is  refreshed  by  food  so  as  to  hold  up;  going 
heavily  with  sustenance,  it  is  relieved  by  abstinence,  so  as 
to  be  vigorous;  it  is  bathed  in  water,  not  to  be  dry;  it  is 
wiped  with  towels,  not  by  that  very  bathing  to  be  too  wet; 
it  is  enlivened  by  labour,  that  it  may  not  be  dulled  by  re- 
pose; it  is  refreshed  by  repose,  that  it  faint  not  under  the 
exertion  of  labour;  worn  with  watching,  it  is  recruited  by 
sleep ;  oppressed  with  sleep,  it  is  roused  to  activity  by  watching, 
lest  it  be  worse  wearied  by  its  own  rest;  it  is  covered  with 
clothing,  lest  it  be  pierced  by  the  hardship  of  cold;  fainting 
under  the  heat  it  sought,  it  is  invigorated  by  the  blowing  of 
the  air.  And  whereas  it  meets  with  annoyances  from  the 
very  quarter  whence  it  sought  to  shelter  itself  from  annoy- 
ances, being  badly  wounded,  so  to  say,  it  sickens  by  its  own 
cure.  Therefore  fevers  set  aside  and  pains  not  in  action,  our 
very  breath  itself  is  sickness,  whereunto  there  is  never 
wanting  the  necessity  of  administering  a  cure.  Since  what- 
ever the  comforts  we  seek  out  for  occasion  of  life,  we  as  it 
were  meet  with  so  many  medicines  of  our  sickness;  but  the 
very  medicine  itself  too  is  turned  into  a  sore,  in  that  attach- 
ing ourselves  a  little  too  long  to  the  remedy  we  sought,  we 
are  more  brought  down  in  that  which  we  prudently  provide 
for  our  refreshment.  Thus  was  presumption  to  be  amended, 
thus  was  pride  to  be  laid  low.  For  whereas  we  once  took  to 
us  a  high  spirit,  so  every  day  we  carry  the  mud  that  runneth 
down. 

54.  Our  very  mind  too  itself  being  banished  from  the 
secure  delight  of  interior  secresy,  is  now  beguiled  by  hope, 
now  tormented  by  fear;  one  while  cast  down  by  grief,  at 
another  time  made  light  by  a  false  mirth ;  it  obstinately 
attaches  itself  to  transitory  objects,  and  is  continually  afflicted 
by  the  loss  of  them,  in  that  it  is  also  continually  undergoing 
change  by  a  course  that  carries  it  away;  and  being  made 


460  Perplexed  state  of  the  soul  in  fallen  man. 

Job  7,  subject  to  things  changeable,  it  is  also  made  to  be  at  odds 

'■ — with   its   own    self.     For   seeking   what   it   has  not  got,  it 

anxiously  obtains  it,  and  so  soon  as  it  has  begun  to  possess 
the  same,  is  sick  of  having  obtained  what  it  sought  after. 
Oftentimes  it  loves  what  it  once  despised,  and  despises  what 
it  used  to  love.  It  learns  by  dint  of  pains  what  are  the 
things  of  eternity,  but  it  forgets  them  in  a  moment,  if  it  cease 
to  take  pains.  It  takes  a  long  time  to  seek,  that  it  may  find 
but  a  little  concerning  the  things  above,  but  speedily  falling 
back  into  its  wonted  ways,  not  even  for  a  little  space  does  it 
hold  on  in  the  things  it  has  found.  Desiring  to  be  instructed, 
with  difficulty  it  gets  the  better  of  its  ignorance,  and  being 
so  instructed  it  has  a  harder  contest  against  the  pride  of 
knowledge;  with  difficulty  it  subjects  to  itself  the  usurping 
power  of  its  fleshly  part,  yet  it  is  still  subject  to  the  images 
of  sin  within,  the  works  whereof  it  has  already  in  vanquishing 
bound  down  without.  It  raises  itself  in  quest  of  its  Creator, 
but  being  thrown  back,  it  is  bewildered  by  the  beguiling 
mist  of  corporeal  attachments^.  It  desires  to  survey  itself, 
and  to  see  how  being  incorporeal  it  bears  rule  over  the  body, 
and  it  cannot.  It  asks  in  a  wonderful  way  what  it  is  unable 
to  answer  itself,  and  remaining  ignorant  is  at  a  loss  under 
that,  which  it  inquires  with  a  wise  purpose.  Viewing  itself 
as  large  and  scanty  at  once,  it  knows  nothing  how  to  form 
a  true  estimate  of  itself,  in  that  if  it  were  not  large  it  would 
not  be  seeking  matters  of  so  deep  enquiry,  and  again  if  it 
were  not  little,  it  would  at  least  find  that  which  it  asks  of 
itself. 

55.  Well  therefore  is  it  said,  Thou  hast  set  me  opposite  to 
Thee^  so  that  I  am  a  burthen  to  myself,  in  that  whilst  man 
being  banished  is  both  subject  to  annoyances  in  the  flesh, 
and  to  perplexities  in  the  mind,  surely  he  carries  about 
his  own  self  as  a  grievous  burthen.     On  every  side  he  is 

•*  '  Arnica    caligo.'      The    meaning         The  homely  nurse  does  all  she  can 

seems  to  be  what  is  thus  beautifully  To  make  her  foster-child,  her  inmate 
expressed  by  a  living  Poet.  Man, 

*  Earth  fills  her  lap  with  pleasures  of        I^'orget  the  glories  he  has  known 

her  own  ^^^  *^^^  imperial  Palace  whence  he 
Yearnings  she  hath  in  her  own  natural  came. 

.,^^'.,,  I   A    r         *i     f       Intimations  of  Immortality  from  recol- 

And  evenwithsomew/mt  of  a  mothers    jections  of  Early   Childhood,   Poems, 

And  no  unworthy  aim, 


Job  longs  io  have  his  sin  clean  take?i  away.        461 

beset  with  sicknesses,  on  every  side  he  is  hard  bestead  with  Book 

infiimities,  that  he  who,  having  abandoned  God,  thought  to '- 

suffice  to  himself  for  his  repose,  might  find  nought  in  him- 
self but  a  turmoil  of  disquietude,  and  might  tr}^  to  fly  from 
himself  so  found,  but  having  set  his  Creator  at  nought, 
might  not  have  where  to  fly.  The  burthens  of  which  state 
of  infirmity  that  wise  man  rightly  regarding,  exclaims. 
An  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  sons  of  Adam,Jrom  the  day  Ecdns. 
that  they  go  out  of  their  mother''s  womb,  till  the  day'^^^^' 
that  they  return  to  the  mother  of  all  things.  But  blessed 
Job  regarding  these  things,  and  seeking  with  groans  where- 
fore they  were  so  ordered,  does  not  reproach  justice, 
but  interrogates  mercy;  that  in  asking  he  may  himself  in 
self-abasement  deal  a  blow  to  that,  which  the  Divine  pity 
might  in  sparing  alter.  As  if  he  said  in  plain  words; 
*  Wherefore  dost  Thou  despise  man  set  as  in  opposition 
to  Thee,  Who,  I  am  assured,  wouldest  not  that  even  he 
should  perish  whom  Thou  art  thought  to  despise?'  Whence 
he  proceeds  in  a  right  way  both  to  express  humility  in 
confession,  and  to  subjoin  the  voice  of  free  inquiry  in  the 
words, 

Ver.  21.  And  why  dost  Thou  not  take  away  my  trans- 
gression, and  remove  mine  iniquity? 

56.  By  which  same  words,  what  else  is  intimated  but  the  xxxiii. 
desire  of  the  expected  Mediator,  concerning  Whom  John 
saith.  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  Which  taketh  away  the  sin  John  i, 
of  the  world.     Or  rather  sin  is  then  completely  taken  away  ^^* 
from  mankind,  when  our  corruption  is  changed  in  the  glory 

of  incorruption.  For  we  can  never  be  free  fiom  sin  so  long 
as  we  are  held  fast  in  a  body  of  mortality,  and  therefore  he 
longs  for  the  grace  of  the  Redeemer,  i.  e.  for  the  ^ wholeness^  solidi- 
of  the  Resurrection,  who  is  looking  to  have  his  iniquity  *^^®°^ 
entirely  '  taken  away.'  Hence  immediately  after  adding 
both  the  punishment  which  was  his  due  by  birth,  and  the 
Judgment  which  he  dreads  in  consequence  of  his  own  doings, 
he  proceeds. 

For  now  shall  I  sleep  in  the  dust,  and  if  TIiou  shalt  seek 
me  in  the  morning,  I  shall  not  abide. 

57.  It  was  said  to  the  first  man  on  his  sinning,  Dust  thou  xxxiv. 
art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return.     Now  by  the  '  mornings  ?Jf  °"  ^' 


462     The  Righteous  fear  the  ^  Morning''  of  Judgment. 

Job  8,  is  meant  that  manifestation  of  sonls,  which,  when  the  thoughts 
are  laid  bare  at  the  coming  of  the  Judge,  is  as  it  were  brought 


Lit. 

to  light  after  the  darkness  of  night.     Of  which  same  morning 

Ps.  5, 3.it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  In  the  morning  I  shall  stand 
'^  ^'  before  Thee  and  shall  see  '\  Now  God's  '  seeking'  is  His 
searching  man  with  a  minute  inquest,  and,  in  searching, 
judging  him  with  rigorous  strictness.  Therefore  let  blessed 
Job,  surveying  the  miseries  of  man's  fallen  condition,  see 
how  that  he  is  both  already  closely  pressed  by  a  present 
punishment,  and  in  yet  worse  plight  as  concerns  the  future, 
and  let  him  say.  For  now  shall  I  sleep  in  the  dust,  and  if 
Thou  shalt  seek  me  in  the  morning,  I  shall  not  abide.  As  if 
he  openly  lamented,  saying,  '  In  the  present  life  indeed  I 
already  undergo  the  death  of  the  flesh,  and  yet  still  further 
from  the  Judgment  to  come  I  dread  a  worse  death,  even  the 
doom  of  Thy  severity.  I  suffer  destruction  for  sin,  yet  further 
on  coming  to  Judgment  I  dread  my  sins  being  brought  up 
again  even  after  my  dissolution.  Therefore  looking  at  the 
external  death,  let  him  say,  For  now  shall  I  sleep  in  the 
dust,  and  dreading  the  interior  let  him  add,  And  if  Thou 
shalt  seek  me  in  the  morning,  I  shall  not  abide.  For  how- 
ever strong  in  righteousness,  even  the  very  Elect  by  no 
means  suffice  to  themselves  for  innocency,  if  they  be  strictly 
examined  in  Judgment.  But  they  find  it  now  for  an  allevia- 
tion of  their  withdrawal  hence,  that  they  know  in  their 
humility  that  they  never  can  suffice.  Therefore  they  shelter 
themselves  under  the  covering  of  humility  from  the  sword  of 
such  a  grievous  visitation,  and  in  proportion  as  awaiting  the 
terribleness  of  the  Judge  to  come,  they  tremble  with  continual 
alarm,  so  there  is  an  unceasing  progress  in  their  becoming- 
better  prepared.     It  goes  on, 

C.  viii.  1,  *2.   Then  answered  Bildad,  the  Shuhite,  and  said, 
How  long  wilt  thou  speak  these  things  ?   and  how  long  shall 

*  V.  so.  the  breath^  of  the  words  of  thy  mouth  be  multiplied? 

XXXV.  58.  To  the  unrighteous  the  words  of  the  righteous  are  ever 
gi'ievous,  and  such  as  they  hear  spoken  for  edification,  they 
bear  as  a  burthen  put  upon  them.  As  Bildad,  the  Shuhite, 
plainly  indicates  in  his  own  case,  when  he  says.  How  long 
wilt  thou  speak  these  things  ?    For  he  that  says  how  long, 

*  E.  V.  Jn  the  morning  nnll  I  direct  {my prayer)  unto  Ttiee,  and  will  look  vp. 


Job  charged  wiili  much  talking.    Four  kinds  of  speakers.  463 

shews  that  he  cannot  any  lonoer  bear  words  of  edification.  Book 

.  VIII 

But  whereas  unfair  men  are  too  proud  to  be  set  right,  they  '- 

find  fault  with  the  things  that  are  spoken  well ;  and  hence 
he  immediately  adds,  And  how  long  shall  the  breath  of  the 
words  of  thy  mouth  be  multiplied  ?    When  multiplicity  is 
blamed  in  the  speech,  surely  it  is  thereby  denied  that  there 
is  weight  of  meaning  in  the  sense.     For  the  power  of  speakers 
on  the  highest  matters  is  distinguished  by  a  fourfold  quality. 
For  there  be  some  whom  fulness  in  speaking  and  thinking 
combined  give  width  and  compass,  and  there  be  some  whom 
meagreness  both  of  thought  and  utterance  reduces  to  small 
dimensions ;    and   there  are  some   who   are  furnished  with 
ability  in   speaking,  but  not  with  penetration  in  thinking ; 
and   there  are  some,  who   have  penetration   of  thought   to 
support  them,  but  from  barrenness  of  expression  are  made 
silent.     For  we  discover  the  same  in  man  that  we  often  see 
in  things  without  sense.     Thus  it  very  often  happens  that 
both  an  abundant  supply  of  water  is  obtained  from  the  deep 
of  the  earth,  and  that  it  is  conveyed  by  ample  channels  upon 
the  surface ;  and  very  often  a  scanty  quantity  lies  concealed 
in  the  heart  of  the  earth,  and   hardly  finding  a  crevice  to 
issue  by,  strains  itself  out  in   scanty    dimensions    without. 
Very  often  too  the  smallest  quantity  springs  up  out  of  reach 
of  the  eye,  and  when  it  finds  an  outlet  gaping  wide  whereby 
it  may  issue  forth  from  an  ample  opening,  it  swells  out  in  a 
thin  stream,  and  the  big  channels  open  themselves  wide,  but 
there  is  not  aught  for  them  to  pour  forth ;  and  very  often  an 
ample  store  springs  up  out  of  sight,  but  being  confined  by 
narrow  channels,  it  dribbles  out  in   the  smallest  quantities. 
Just  so   in  one   sort  the    ample    mouth    delivers  what   the 
copious  fountain   of  the  wit  supplies;   in   another,  neither 
does  thought   furnish   sense,  nor  the  tongue  pour  it  forth. 
In  others,  the  mouth  indeed  is  wide  to  speak,  but  for  the 
giving   out   that   which    thought   has   provided   for  it,    the 
tongue  gets  nothing  at  all;   whilst  in  others,  a  fvdl  fountain 
of  thought  abounds   in    the    heart,  but   a   disproportionate 
tongue,  like  a  scanty  channel,  confines  it.     In  which  same 
four  sorts  of  speaking,  the  third  only  is  obnoxious  to  blame, 
which    appropriates   to  itself  by  words   that,  to  the  level 
whereof  it  doth  not  rise  in  wit.     For  the  first  is  worthy  of 


464  Bad  men  can  praise  God's  justice  while  they  prosper. 

Job  8,  praise,  in  that  it  is  powerful  and  strong  in  both  particulars. 
The  second  deserv^es  commiseration,  which  in  its  httleness 


lacks  both.  The  fourth  calls  for  aid,  in  that  it  has  not 
power  to  embody  what  it  thinks.  But  the  third  is  worthy  to 
be  despised  and  ought  to  be  restrained,  in  that  while  it  lifts 
itself  high  in  speech  it  is  grovelling  in  sense  ;  and  like  limbs 
swoln  with  inflation,  it  goes  forth  to  the  ears  of  the  hearers 
big  but  void.  And  it  is  this  which  Bildad  hurls  as  an 
accusation  against  blessed  Job,  saying.  And  how  long  shall 
the  words  of  the  breath  of  thy  mouth  he  multiplied  ?  For 
he  that  attributes  multiplicity  of  words  to  the  mouth, 
doubtless  finds  fault  with  the  barrenness  of  the  heart. 
As  if  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  Thou  art  raised  by  abundance 
of  breath  in  word  of  mouth,  but  thou  art  stinted  by  scanti- 
ness of  sense.'  But  when  bad  men  blame  right  things,  lest 
they  should  themselves  appear  not  to  know  what  is  righteous, 
the  good  things  that  are  known  of  all  men,  and  which  they 
have  learnt  by  hearsay,  they  deliver  as  unknown.  And  hence 
Bildad  adds  directly, 

Ver.  3.  Doth  God  pervert  judgment  ?  Or  doth  the 
A Im  igh  ty  pervert  justice  ? 
xxxvi.  59.  These  things  blessed  Job  had  neither  in  speaking 
denied,  nor  yet  was  ignorant  of  them  in  holding  his  tongue. 
But  all  bold  persons,  as  we  have  said,  speak  with  big  words 
even  well  known  truths,  that  in  telling  of  them  they  may 
appear  to  be  learned.  They  scorn  to  hold  their  peace  in  a 
spirit  of  modesty,  lest  they  should  be  thought  to  be  silent 
from  ignorance.  But  it  is  to  be  known  that  they  then  extol 
the  rectitude  of  God's  justice,  when  security  from  ill  uplifts 
themselves  in  joy,  while  blows  are  dealt  to  other  men;  when 
they  see  themselves  enjoying  prosperity  in  their  affairs,  and 
others  harassed  with  adversity.  For  whilst  they  do  wickedly, 
and  yet  believe  themselves  righteous,  the  benefit  of  prosperity 
attending  them,  they  imagine  to  be  due  to  their  own  merits ; 
and  they  infer  that  God  does  not  visit  unjustly,  in  proportion 
as  upon  themselves,  as  being  righteous,  no  cloud  of  misfor- 
tune falls.  But  if  the  power  of  correction  from  above  touch 
their  life  but  in  the  least  degree,  being  struck  they  directly 
break  loose  against  the  policy  of  the  Divine  inquest,  which  a 
little  while  before,  unharmed,  they  made  much  of  in  express- 


Heretics  think  the  Church  condemned  by  calamities.  465 

ing  admiration  of  it,  and  they  deny  that  judgment  to  be  just,  Book 

which  is  at  odds  with   their  own   ways  ;  they  canvass  the 

equity  of  God's  deahngs,  they  fly  out  in  words  of  contra- 
diction, and  being  chastened  because  they  have  done  wrong, 
they  do  worse.  Hence  it  is  well  spoken  by  the  Psalmist 
against  the  confession  of  the  sinner.  He  will  confess  /oPs.  49, 
Thee,  when  Thou  doest  well  to  him.  For  the  voice  of  con- 
fession is  disregarded,  when  it  is  shaped  by  the  joyfulness  of 
prosperity.  But  that  confession  alone  possesses  merit  of 
much  weight,  which  the  force  of  pain  has  no  power  to  part 
from  the  truth  of  the  rule  of  right,  and  which  adversity,  the 
test  of  the  heart,  sharpens  out  even  to  the  sentence  of  the 
lips.  Therefore  it  is  no  wonder  that  Bildad  commends  the 
justice  of  God,  in  that  he  experiences  no  hurt  therefrom. 

60.  Now  whereas  we  have  said  that  the  friends  of  blessed  Alleg. 
Job  bear  the  likeness  of  heretics,  it  is  well  for  us  to  point 

out  briefly,  how  the  words  of  Bildad  accord  with  the  whee- 
dling ways  of  heretics.  For  whilst  in  their  own  idea  they 
see  Holy  Church  corrected  with  temporal  visitations,  they 
swell  the  bolder  in  the  bigness  of  their  perverted  preaching, 
and  putting  forward  the  righteousness  of  the  Divine  probation, 
they  maintain  that  they  prosper  by  virtue  of  their  merits;  but 
they  avouch  that  she  is  rewarded  with  deserved  chastisements, 
and  thereupon  without  delay  they  seek  by  beguiling  words  a 
way  to  steal  upon  her,  in  the  midst  of  her  sorrows,  and  they 
strike  a  blow  at  the  lives  of  some,  by  making  the  deaths  of 
others  a  reproach,  as  if  those  M^ere  now  visited  with  deserved 
death,  who  refused  to  hold  worthy  opinions  concerning  God. 
Hence  Bildad  the  Shuhite,  after  he  pleaded  the  justice  of 
God,  thereupon  adds, 

Ver.  4 — 6.  Even  if  thy  children  have  sinned  against 
Him,  and  He  have  left  them  in  the  hand  of  their  trans- 
gression; yet  if  thou  ivilt  seek  to  God  at  dawn,  and  make  thy 
supplication  to  the  Almighty;  if  thou  wilt  walk  pure  and 
upright;  surely  now  He  will  awake  for  thee,  and  make  the 
habitation  of  thy  righteousness  at  peace. 

61.  As  if  the  preachers  of  falsities  were  to  say  to  aflBictedxxxvii. 
Catholics,  *  Provide  for  your  lives,  and  learn  what  wrong 
things  ye  maintain  from  the  condemnation  of  those  that  are 

dead  from  among  you.     For  except  your  misbelief  were  dis- 

•2  H 


466      Heretics  promise  rewards  of  earihly  iirosperiUj. 

Job  8,  pleasing  to  the  Creator  of  all  things,  He  would  never  take  from 
— — ^ —  you  such  numbers  ^  by  destruction  let  loose  to  rage  against 
them.'  For  he  says,  If  thy  children  have  sinned  against 
Him,  and  He  have  left  them  in  the  hand  of  their  transgres- 
sion. As  though  he  said  in  plain  speech,  '  They  are  left  in 
the  hand  of  their  own  wickedness,  that  refused  to  follow  the 
.  life  of  our  right  rule.'  Yet  if  thou  icilt  arise  to  God  at  dawn, 
and  make  thy  supplication  to  the  Almighty.  For  inas- 
much as  heretics  think  that  the  light  of  truth  rests  with 
themselves,  they  bid  and  summon  Holy  Church,  as  being 
in  the  night  of  error,  to  come  to  the  dawning  of  the  truth, 
that  in  the  knowledge  of  God  it  may  be  led  to  rise,  as  in  the 
dawning  light,  and  by  the  prayer  of  penitence  wash  off  past 
misdeeds.  If  thou  wilt  walk  pure  and  upright ;  that  is  to 
say,  pure  in  thought,  upright  in  practice.  Surely  now  He 
will  awake  for  thee.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  that  He, 
Who  now  forbears  to  put  forth  the  power  of  His  protecting 
hand  to  thy  tribulations,  is  as  if  asleep  to  the  succouring  of 
one  going  wrong.'  And  make  the  habitation  of  thy  riglite- 
ousness  at  peace,  i.  e.  '  does  away  with  the  crosses  of  the 
present  life,  and  vouchsafes  without  delay  security  in  repose.' 
For  because  men  that  are  bad  reckon  temporal  enjoyment 
as  a  special  blessing  of  Divine  recompensing,  what  they 
themselves  go  after  with  solicitous  concern,  they  promise 
to  others  as  something  great.  Hence  it  very  often  happens 
that  they  either  pledge  themselves  to  regain  them  when  lost, 
or  draw  on  the  minds  of  their  hearers  after  still  greater  rewards 
of  this  world.  Which  Bildad  openly  expresses,  when  he 
adds  upon  that, 

Ver.  7.  Insomuch  that  though  thy  beginning  was  small, 
yet  thy  latter  end  shall  greatly  increase. 
xxxviii.  62.  But  if  it  is  counsel  within  the  soul  that  he  calls  ^  the 
habitation  of  righteousness,'  the  leaders  of  false  opinions 
promise  afflicted  Catholics  '  the  habitation  of  their  righ- 
teousness at  peace,'  in  that  if  they  draw  them  to  their  own 
views,  then  indeed  they  hold  their  peace  from  opposition. 
For  those  who  have  let  themselves  be  drawn  into  that  which 
is  wrong,  arc  the  more  lulled  to  rest  in  temporal  peace,  in 

■*  '  Tarn  nuiaerosos  populos,'  clearly  alluding  to  some  of  the  calamities  of  his 
own  and  late  times. 


They  talk  of  Fathers,  and  give  out  old  Truths  as  unknotvu.  467 

proportion  as  they  are  parted  the  wider  from  eternal  peace.  Book 
Moreover  they  promise  that  the  riches  of  understanding  shall  ^"^- 
be  increased  to  all  that  follow  them.  And  hence  it  is  added, 
Insomuch  that  though  thy  beginning  was  small,  yet  thy 
latter  end  shall  greatly  increase.  Then  because  they  do  not 
easily  obtain  credit  to  their  words,  in  that  their  life  is  often 
shewn  to  be  worthy  of  contempt,  they  put  forward  the 
opinions  of  the  Fathers  of  old,  and  turn  the  right  line  they 
take  into  a  proof  of  their  own  erring  way.  Hence  it  is 
added, 

Ver.  8.  For  inquire,  T  jrray  thee,  of  the  former  age,  and 
diligently  search  into  the  memory  of  the  fathers. 

63.  They  give  us  notice  that  '  the  former  generation'  and  xxxix. 
'  the  memory  of  the  fathers'  are  not  seen  but  '  searched,'  be- 
cause they  will  not  have  that  to  be  seen  therein,  which  lies 
open  before  the  eyes  of  all  men.  But  sometimes,  like  good 
men,  they  give  some  instruction  of  a  moral  kind,  and  shew 
how  the  present  may  be  gathered  from  the  past ;  and  from 

the  things  which  are  even  now  withdrawn  from  our  eyes  by 
passing  away,  they  shew  how  little  there  is  in  the  things 
that  are  seen  before  our  eyes.  Whence  it  is  yet  further 
added, 

Ver.  9.  For  we  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  know  nothing, 
because  our  days  upon  earth  are  but  a  shadow. 

64.  And  so  the  generation  of  old  is  set  before  us  to  be     xl. 
inquired  of,  that  the  period  of  the  present  life  may  be  shewn 

to  pass  away  like  a  shadow ;  in  this  way,  that  if  we  recall  to 
mind  the  things  that  have  been  and  are  now  over,  we  clearly 
see  how  swiftly  that  also  will  be  gone  which  we  have  in  our 
hands.  But  it  often  happens  that  heretics  go  along  with  us 
in  extolling  the  same  fathers  whom  we  venerate ;  but  their 
sense  being  perverted,  they  strike  at  us  by  those  very  com- 
mendations of  them.     Hence  it  is  yet  fiirther  added, 

Ver.  10.  Shall  tiot   they  teach    thee,  and  tell   thee,  and 
utter  words  out  of  their  heart  ? 

Q^.  We   must  mark   what  he  had  said  before,   And  the    xli. 
inspiration^  of  the  words  of  thy  mouth  is  multiplied.     Buti .,  .i^. 
now  when  the  fathers  are  brought  to  mind,  he  says,  They^^' ^^ 
shall  utter  words  out  of  their  heart.     As  though  heretics  ^^^°'^' 
abhorring  the  life  of  Holy  Church  said, '  Thou  hast  abundance 

2  H  2 


468        Bildad,  who  censures  hj/pocrlteS)  a  pretender. 

Job  8,  of  inspiration  in  thy  mouth,  in  lliy  heart  thou  hast  none  of 
—I — .'  it.  But  they  are  to  be  heard  in  opposition,  who,  in  uttering 
'words  from  the  heart,  have  taught  the  right  thing  by  living 
like  it.'  But  oftentimes  the  wicked,  whereas  the  evil  of  their 
own  crookedness  is  unknown  to  them,  boldly  pull  in  pieces 
the  uprightness  of  others,  and  while  they  usurp  to  themselves 
authority  of  pronouncing  rebukes  against  good  men,  they 
either  deliver  those  good  senthnents,  which  they  have  im- 
bibed not  by  seeing  but  by  hearing  them,  or  else  with  lying- 
lips  lay  that  evil  to  the  charge  of  others,  which  they  are 
themselves  guilty  of  committing.  But  when  they  give 
utterance  to  good  thoughts,  which  they  scorn  to  observe,  it 
is  to  be  remarked  that  very  frequently  Truth  so  speaks  by  the 
lips  of  her  adversaries,  that  in  putting  their  tongue  in  motion 
it  smites  their  life.  So  that  in  telling  of  the  highest  perfec- 
tion of  righteousness  while  they  know  nothing  of  it,  they 
themselves  are  rendered  at  once  both  judges  by  their  words 
Hist,  and  accusers  by  their  deeds.  Hence  Bildad  subjoins  words 
of  wondrous  truth  against  hypocrites,  but  he  is  running 
himself  through  with  the  point  of  his  discourse.  For  unless 
he  were  himself  in  some  slight  degree  aj^retender  of  righteous- 
ness, he  would  never  venture  to  teach  a  good  man  with  so 
much  temerity.  And  indeed  they  are  words  of  singular 
force  that  he  speaks,  but  they  ought  to  have  been  addressed 
to  fools,  not  to  a  wise  man;  to  the  wicked,  not  to  a  good 
person;  in  that  he  proclaims  himself  no  less  than  insane, 
who,  when  the  gardens  are  parched,  pours  water  into  the 
river.  But  in  the  mean  lime,  laying  aside  the  question  to 
whom  the  thing  is  said,  let  us  weigh  well  and  minutely  what 
it  is  that  is  said,  that  the  sentiments  delivered  may  edify 
ourselves,  even  though  they  assail  the  character  of  their 
Author.     It  goes  on, 

Ver.  11.  Can  the  rush  grow  up  without  moisture?  can  the 
flag  grow  without  water  ? 
Moral.      To  whom  Bildad  compares  *  the  rush'  and  '  the  flag,'  he 
himself  immediately  discloses,  when  he  adds; 

Ver.  12,  13.  Whilst  it  is  yet  in  his  greenness .^  and  not 
cut  down,  it  withereth  before  any  other  herb.  So  are  the 
paths  of  all  that  forget  God,  and  the  hypocrite's  hope  shall 
perish. 


Hypocrites  work  by  grace,  but  for  ilieir  own  yiory.    469 

QQ.  So  that  by  the  name  of '  a  rush'  or  '  a  flag,'  he  denotes  B.  ok 
the  life  of  the  hypocrite,  which  has  an  appearance  of  green- 


xhi. 


ness,  but  has  no  fruit  of  usefulness  for  the  services  of  man, 
which  continuing  dry  in  barrenness  of  practice,  is  green  with 
only  the  colour  of  sanctity  alone.  But  neither  does  a  rush 
grow  without  moisture,  nor  a  flag  without  water,  in  that  the 
life  of  hypocrites  receiv^es  indeed  the  infused  grace  of  the 
heavenly  gift  for  the  doing  of  good  works,  but  in  whatsoever 
it  does  seeking  praises  without,  it  proves  void  of  fruit  of 
the  infused  grace  vouchsafed  it.  For  they  often  perform 
wonderful  deeds  of  miraculous  power,  they  expel  demons 
from  bodies  possessed,  and  by  the  gift  of  prophecy,  by 
knowing  anticipate  things  to  come,  yet  they  are  separated 
from  the  Giver  of  so  many  blessings  in  the  bent  of  the  thought 
of  their  heart.  For  through  His  gifts  they  seek  not  His  glory, 
but  their  own  applause.  And  whereas  by  the  benefits 
vouchsafed  them  they  raise  themselves  in  their  own  praise, 
they  are  assailing  their  Benefactor  with  the  very  gifts  of  His 
bounty.  For  they  behave  themselves  proudly  against  Him 
that  gave  them,  from  the  very  circumstance  whereby  they 
should  have  been  rendered  the  more  thoroughly  humble 
towards  Him.  But  a  judgment  the  more  unsparing  smites 
them  hereafter,  in  proportion  as  heavenly  Goodness  now 
pours  upon  them  even  in  their  ingratitude  the  dew  of  His 
blessing  in  larger  measure.  And  the  fulness  of  the  gift  turns 
to  the  increase  of  condemnation  to  them,  because  when  they 
are  watered  they  bear  no  fruit,  but  under  a  hue  of  green 
rear  themselves  on  high  in  barrenness.  These  '  Truth'  well 
describes  in  the  Gospel,  saying.  Many  shall  say  to  3Ie  in  Matt.  7, 
that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  Thy 
Name?  and  in  Thy  Name  have  cast  out  devils?  and  in 
Thy  Name  done  many  wonderful  works  ?  Aiid  then  will 
I  prof  ess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you;  Depart  from  3Ie,  ye 
that  work  iniquity.  Thus  neither  the  rush  nor  the  flag  lives 
without  w^ater,  because  hypocrites  do  not  take  the  greenness 
of  good  works,  save  by  gift  from  above ;  but  because  they 
appropriate  it  to  the  use  of  their  own  applause,  they  grow 
green  indeed  in  the  water,  but  barren. 

67.  Now  it  is  well  added,  Whilst  it  is  yet  in  his  flower, 
nor  plucked  with  the  hand,  it  withereth  before  any  other 


470  Hypocrites  hate  and  slander  those  who  rebuke  them. 
Job  8,  herb.     '  The  rush  in  his  flower'  is  the  hypocrite  in  esteem. 

i^Jtm     ±S»       ^—  _  _  ,  , 

MoHAL  ^^  ^^  springing  up  with  sharp  edges  is  not  plucked 
with  the  hand,  in  that  the  hypocrite,  having  his  feelings 
sharpened  by  presumption,  disdains  to  be  rebuked  for  his 
wickedness.  In  his  flower  he  gashes  the  hand  that  plucketh 
him,  in  that  the  hypocrite  in  the  midst  of  applause,  that  no 
one  may  dare  to  rebuke  him,  by  his  cutting  tongue  wounds 
the  life  of  the  rebuker  without  delay.  For  he  desires  not  to 
be  holy,  but  to  be  called  holy;  and  when  he  may  chance 
to  be  rebuked,  it  is  as  if  he  were  lopped  off"  in  the  full  bloom 
of  his  reputation.  He  is  enraged  to  be  found  out  in  his 
wickedness,  he  forbids  the  man  that  brings  his  guilt  home 
to  him  to  address  him,  in  that  he  is  as  it  were  pained  by 
being  touched  in  a  secret  wound.  Such  as  he  was  known  to 
the  ignorant,  he  would  wish  to  be  accounted  of  all  men,  and 
readier  to  lay  down  his  life  than  to  be  reprimanded,  he  is 
made  worse  by  censure,  because  he  accounts  the  word  of 
disinterested  goodness  as  the  dart  of  deadly  smiting.  Hence 
in  exasperated  passion  he  directly  rises  in  abuse,  and  looks 
about  for  all  the  evil  he  can  rake  together  against  the  life 
of  his  rebuker.  He  longs  to  prove  him  beyond  all  com- 
parison guilty,  that  he  may  make  himself  out  innocent,  not 
by  his  own  doings,  but  by  the  guilt  of  others;  so  that  often 
the  person  repents  that  he  has  uttered  a  word  of  censure, 
and  that  just  as  from  the  hand  of  one  plucking  any  thing, 
so  from  the  mind  of  the  person  chiding,  there  runs  out  as  it 
were  the  blood  of  sorrow,  if  I  may  say  so.  Hence  it  is  well 
Prov.  9,  said  by  Solomon,  Reprove  not  a  scorner^  lest  he  hate  thee, 
^'  For  it  is  not  proper  for  the  good  man  to  fear,  lest  the  scorner 

should  utter  abuse   at   him  when   he   is  chidden;   but  lest 
being  drawn  into  hatred,  he  should  be  made  worse. 

68.  And  here  it  is  necessary  to  be  known,  that  the  excel- 
lencies of  good  men,  as  they  begin  from  the  heart,  go  on 
increasing  to  the  very  end  of  the  present  life;  but  the  practices 
of  hypocrites,  seeing  that  they  are  not  rooted  in  secret,  often 
come  to  nought  before  the  present  life  is  ended.  For  very 
frequently  they  devote  themselves  to  the  study  of  sacred 
scholarship,  and  because  they  prosecute  it  not  for  providing 
a  store  of  merits,  but  for  procuring  commendations,  the 
moment   that   they    get    hold    of  the    sentence    of    human 


Hypocrites  high-grown,  hut  ill-rooted.  471 

applause,  aud  thereby  secure  the  boon  of  transitory  success,  Book 
they  give  themselves  witli  all  their  heart  to  worldly  concerns, '- 


^nd  are  completely  emptied  of  sacred  scholarship,  and  by  their 
way  of  acting  afterwards,  they  shew  how  much  they  love  the 
things  of  time,  who  before  only  had  those  of  eternity  alone  on 
their  lips.  But  it  is  very  often  the  case  that  they  exhibit  an 
appearance  of  maturity  put  on,  they  shew  fair  by  the  com- 
posure of  silence,  by  the  forbearance  of  long  suffering,  by 
the  virtue  of  continence;  but  when  by  means  of  these  they 
have  reached  the  height  of  the  honour  that  they  aimed 
at,  and  when  respect  is  henceforth  bestowed  on  them  by 
all  men,  they  immediately  begin  to  let  themselves  out  in 
wantonness  of  self-gratification,  and  they  are  their  own 
witnesses  against  themselves  that  they  held  none  of  their 
good  derived  from  the  heart,  in  that  they  parted  with  it  so 
soon. 

But  sometimes  there  are  persons  found  who  give  all  they 
possess,  and  lavish  all  their  goods  upon  the  needy,  yet  before 
the  end  of  their  life,  inflamed  with  the  itch  of  avarice,  they 
covet  the  goods  of  others,  who  seemed  to  be  giving  their  own 
with  a  lavish  hand;  and  afterwards  with  determined  cruelty 
they  go  after  that,  which  they  had  given  up  before  with  pre- 
tended piety.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  said  in   this  place, 
Whilst  it  is  yet  in  his  Jloicer,  and  not  yet  plucked  uiih  the 
hand,  it  icithereth  before  any  other  herh.     For  as  to  their 
fleshly  part   even   the   righteous  are   herbs,  as  the   Prophet 
bears  witness,  who  saith,  Alljiesh  is  grass.     But  '  the  rush'  is  Is.40, 6. 
said  to  '  wither  before  all  other  herbs;'   in    that   while   the 
righteous  continue  in  their  goodness,  the  life  of  hypocrites  is 
dried  up  from  the  greenness  of  assumed  uprightness.     Even 
the  rest  of  the  herbs  wither,  because  the  deeds  of  the  righteous 
come  to  an  end  together  with  the  life  of  the  flesh.     But  the 
'  rush'   precedes  the  withering  of  the  herbs,  for  before  the 
hypocrite  passes  out  of  the  flesh,  he  giv^es  over  the  deeds 
of"  virtuous    habits    which    he    had    manifested    in    himself. 
Concerning  which  same  it  is  also  well  said  by  the  Psalm.ist, 
Let  iJiem  be  as  the  grass  upon  the  housetop,  which  withereth  Ps.  12D 
afore  it  be  iilucked  itp.     For  '  the  grass  upon  the  housetop'  ^* 
springeth  up  aloft,  but  it  is  never  set  firm  with  a  rich  soil, 
forasmuch  as  the  hypocrite  is  seen  practising  the  highest 
acts,  but  he  is  not  slablished  therein  in  purity  of  intention. 


472       Hypocrites  lose  lasting  rewards  for  transitory. 

Job  8,  Which  same  grass  even  when  not  plucked  up  soon  withereth, 
for  this  reason,  that  the  hypocrite  at  one  and  the  same  time 


Moral.      .„  .  .        ,  -,./>  i  i         i  •  i 

still  exists  m  the  present  life,  and  yet  already  parts  with 
the  practices  of  holiness  as  with  the  appearance  of  gi'eenness. 
For  because  he  went  about  to  do  good  works  without  the 
purpose  of  a  right  heart,  by  losing  these  he  shews  that  he 
flourished  without  a  root. 

69.  But  as  we  have  before  said,  who  he  is  to  whom  Bildad 
likens  *  a  rush'  or  '  a  flag,'  he  makes  plain  at  the  moment, 
ver  13.  where  he  adds,  So  are  the  paths  of  all  that  forget  God,  and 
the  hypocrite'' s  hope  shall  2ycrish.     For  what  does  the  hypo- 
crite hojoe  for  from  all  his  deeds,  saving  the  observance  of 
honour,  the    reputation    of  applause,  to   be    feared   by  his 
betters,  to  be  called  a  Saint  by  all  men.^    But  the  hope  of  the 
hypocrite  can  never  endure,  for,  from  not  making  eternity 
his  aim,  he  hastes  away  from  all  that  he  holds  in  his  hand. 
For  the  bent  of  his  mind  is  not  fixed  in  that  glory  which  is 
possessed  without  end;    but  while  he  gapes  after  transient 
applause,  he  loses  in  the  getting  the  thing  that  he  toils  for. 
Matt, 6,  as  '  Truth'    testifieth,  Who   saith.    Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
^'  they  have  had  their  reward.     Now  this  hope  of  being  vouch- 

safed a  reward  cannot  be  maintained  for  long,  seeing  that 
honour  is  bestowed  for  the  works  exhibited,  but  life  is  press- 
ing on  to  its  close;   praises   are  reechoed,  but  then  along 
with  them  the  periods  of  time  are  speeding  to  an  end.     And 
because  the  soul  is  in  no  wise  rooted  in  the  love   of  the 
eternal  world,  it  slips  away  together  with  the  very  objects 
that  it  is  centered  in.     For  no  one  can  attach  himself  to  the 
moveable,  and  remain  himself  unmoved.     For  he  that  em- 
braces transitory  things  is  drawn  into  transition  by  the  mere 
circumstance,  that  he  is  entangled  with  things  running  out 
their  course.     Therefore  let  him  say,   A^id  the  hypocrite's 
hope  shall  perish.     For   the   applause    of  man,   which   he 
seeks  with  mighty  pains,  being  driven  on  by  the  items  of 
time,  does  run  to  nought.     And  it  is  well  added, 
Ver.  14.  His  own  folly  shall  not  satisfy  him. 
xliii.       70.  For  it  is  infinite  folly  to  labour  painfully,  and   pant 
after   the   breath    of  applause,   to    apply  one's    self  to   the 
heavenly  precepts  with  hard  toil,  but  to  aim  at  the  reward  of 
an  earthly  kind  of  recompense.     For  that  I  may  so  express 
myself,  he  that  in  return  for  the  good  that  he  practises  looks 


Their  had  bargain  f  and  waste  of  rich  fruit.  473 

for  the  applause  of  his  fellowcreatures,  is  carrying  an  article  Book 
of  great    worth   to   be    sold    at   a  mean  price.     From  that - 


whereby  he  might  have  earned  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  he 
seeks  the  coin  of  passing  talk.     His  practice  goes  for  little, 
in   that  he   spends   a  great  deal,   and    gets  back  but  very 
little.     Whereunto  then  are  hypocrites  like  but  to  luxuriant 
and  untended  vines,  which  put  forth  fruit  from  their  fertility, 
but  are  never  lifted  from  the  earth  by  tending  ?     All  that 
the  rich  branches  bud  forth,  stray  beasts  tread  under  foot, 
and  the  more  fruitful  they  see  it  is,  the  more  greedily  they 
devour  it,  thus  cast  away  and  laid  low,  in   that  the  works 
of  hypocrites  while  they  shew  fair,  come  forth  as  if  rich, 
but  whilst  they  aim  at  human  praises,  it  is  as  if  they  were 
left   forsaken    upon   the  ground.      And  the    beasts  of  this 
world,  i.  e.  the  evil  spirits,  devour  them,  because  they  turn 
them   to  account  to   the   end   of  perdition,   and  they  seize 
upon  them  with  greater  avidity,  in  proportion  as  great  things 
are  more    clearly   known.      Hence   it   is   well    said   by  the 
Prophet,  The  standing  stalk,  there  is  no  hud  in  them,  aiid  YLos.  8, 
they  shall  yield  no  meal;  if  so  he  it  yield,  the  strangers       "  ^' 
shall  swallow  it  up.     For  the  stalk  is  without  a  bud,  when 
the  life  lacks  the  merit  of  virtuous  habits.     The  stalk  yieldeth 
no   meal,  when  he  that  thrives  in   this  world  understands 
nothing  refined,  and  yields  no  fruit  of  good  practice. 

71.  But  very  often  even  vvhen  it  has  yielded  meal,  strangers 
eat  it  up,  in  that  even  when  hypocrites  do  shew  forth  good 
works,  the  wishes  of  evil  spirits  are  satisfied  therewith.     For 
those  who  do  not  aim  to  please  God  by  them,  do  not  feed 
the  Owner  of  the  land,  but  strangers.     Thus  the  hypocrite, 
like   a  fruitful  and   neglected    vine,  cannot   keep  his   fruit, 
because   the    cluster    of  good    works    lies    prone    upon    the 
ground.     Yet  he  is   fed  by  his  veiy  own  insanity  itself,  in 
that  on  the  score  of  good  practice  he  is  esteemed  of  all  men, 
he  is  set  before  others,  he  holds  the  minds  of  men  in  sub- 
jection, he  is  raised  to  the  higher  posts;    he  is  fed  high 
with  applause.     Now  this  folly  of  his  satisfies  him  in  the 
mean  season,  but  it  shall  not  satisfy  him,  in  that  when  the 
season  of  retribution  comes,  it  displeases  him  under  punish- 
ment that  he  was  foolish.     Then  he  will  perceive  that  he 
did   foolishly,  when,   for   the  gratification   of  applause,  he 


474   Best  works  done  for  man^s  praise  but  spiders^  webs. 

Job  8,  receives  the  sentence  of  God's  rebuke.     Then  he  sees  that 
r^ — '—  he  has  been  senseless,  when  for  the  transitory  glory  that 
he  obtained,  everlasting  torments  are  his  bitter  portion.    Then 
punishments  disclose  the  true  knowledge  to  light,  in  that 
by  them  it  must  at  once  be  concluded  that  all  was  nought 
that  could  pass  away;  and  hence  it  is  rightly  added, 
A?id  whose  trust  shall  be  a  spider'' s  web. 
xliv.        72.  The  assurance  of  the  hypocrite  is  rightly  called  like 
the  webs  of  spiders,  in  that  all  the  pains  and  labour  they 
spend  to   acquire   glory,  the   wind  of  the   life   of  mortality 
blows   to    shreds.     For   as  they  never   seek   the    things   of 
eternity,  they  lose  together  with  time  all  temporal  good  things. 
Moreover   it  is   to  be   considered   that  spiders   draw    their 
threads  in   a  regular  order,  for  that  hypocrites  as  it  were 
regulate  their  works  by  the  rule  of  discernment.    The  spider's 
web  is  woven  with  pains,  but  it  is    scattered  by  a  sudden 
blast,  in  that  whatsoever  the  hypocrite  does  with  laborious 
effort,  the  breath  of  man's  regard  carries  off;  and  whilst  in 
the  ambition  of  applause  his  work  comes  to  nought,  it  is  as 
if  his  labour  went  to  the  wind.     For  it  often  happens  that 
the  works  of  hypocrites  last  even  to  the  veiy  end  of  the 
present  life,  but,  forasmuch  as  they  do  not  thereby  seek  the 
praise    of  their    Creator,   they    were   never  good   works   in 
the  sight  of  God.     Thus  it  is  very  often  the  case,  as  we 
have  said  above,  that  they  are  upheld  by  scholarship  in  the 
sacred  Law,  that  they  deliver  lessons  of  instruction,  that  they 
fortify  by  testimonies  every  notion  that  they  entertain;  but 
they  do  not  hereby  seek  the  life  of  their  hearers,  but  applause 
for  themselves.     For  neither  do  they  know  how  to  put  forth 
any  thing  else  but  what  may  stir  the  hearts  of  their  hearers 
to  the  quick,  to  pay  the  recompense  of  praise,  not  what  may 
kindle  them  to  shed  tears.     For  the  heart  being  preoccupied 
with  external  desires,  is  not  hot  with  the  iirc  of  divine  love, 
and  so  words  that  issue  from  a  cold  heart,  can  never  warm 
their  hearers  to  heavenly  affection.     For  neither  can  any  one 
thing  that  is  not  itself  alight  in  itself  kindle  any  other  thing. 
Hence  it  is  very  often  brought  to  pass,  that  at  one  and  the 
same  time  the  sayings  of  hypocrites  fail  to  instruct  the  hearers, 
and  make  the  very  persons  themselves  that  utter  them  worse 
by  being  exalted  with  praises.     For  as  Paul  bears  witness. 


Mortification  for  earthly  ends  counts  as  compulsory.  475 

Knowledge  piiffeth  iip^  hut  charity  edifieth.     Thus,  whereas  Book 
charity  setteth  not  up  in  '  edifying,'  knowledge  in  puffing  up-rr^ — '-k- 
overthrows.     Very  often  hypocrites  chasten  themselves  with  i. 
extraordinary  mortification,  wear  down  all  the  strength  of  their 
body,  and  as  it  were  while  living  in  the  flesh  utterly  kill  the  life 
of  the  flesh,  and  so  by  abstinence  verge  upon  death,  that  they 
live  well  nigh  dying  every  day ;  but  they  seek  the  eyes  of  men 
for  all  this,  they  look  for  the  renown  of  admiration,  as  *  Truth' 
testifieth.  Which  saith,  jpor  they  disfigure  tJieir  faces,  that^la.it.6j 
they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast.     For  their  faces  become 
pallid,  the  body  is  made  to  shake  with  weakness,  the  breast 
labours  with  hard  and  broken  breathings.    But  amidst  all 
thivS,  talk  of  admiration  is  looked  for  from  the  lips  of  neigh- 
bours, and  nothing  else  is  aimed  at  by  such   great  pains, 
saving  human  esteem.     Which  same  are  well  represented  by 
that  Simon,  who  in  the  season  of  our  Lord's  Passion  bore 
the  Cross  in  compulsion,  of  whom  it  is  written.  And  as  theyMa.tt. 

27   32 

came  out  they  found  a  man  of  Cyrene,  Simon  by  name,  him  ' 
they  compelled  to  hear  His  cross.  For  what  we  do  by  com- 
pulsion, we  do  not  practise  from  a  heartfelt  devotedness  of 
love.  And  so  for  him  to  bear  the  Cross  of  Jesus  in  compul- 
sion, is  to  submit  to  the  mortification  of  abstinence  for  some 
other  aim  than  needs  to  be.  Does  he  not  bear  the  Cross  of 
Jesus  under  compulsion,  who  as  after  the  commandment  of 
the  Lord  subdues  the  flesh,  yet  does  not  love  the  spiritual 
Country  ?  And  hence  the  same  Simon  bears  the  Cross,  but 
doth  not  die  ;  in  that  every  hypocrite  chastens  his  body  in 
abstinence,  but  yet,  in  the  love  of  glory,  lives  on  to  the 
world. 

73.  Contrariwise  it  is  well  said  by  Paul  of  the  Elect  •  For  Gal.  5, 
they  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  uith  the  vices^^' 
and  lusts.  For  we  *  crucify  the  flesh  with  the  vices  and 
lusts,'  if  we  so  restrain  our  appetite,  that  henceforth  we  look 
for  nothing  of  the  glory  of  the  world.  Since  he  that  mace- 
rates the  flesh,  but  pants  after  honours,  has  inflicted  the 
Cross  on  his  flesh,  but  from  concupiscence  lives  the  worse  to 
the  world,  in  that  it  often  happens  that  in  the  semblance  of 
holiness,  he  unu^orthily  obtains  the  post  of  rule,  which 
except  he  displayed  something  of  merit  in  himself,  he  would 
never  attain   to  receive  by  any  pains  whatever.     But  that 


476  What  we  live  in  is  our  house;   the  hypocrite's  stands  ?iot. 

Job  8,  which  he  gains  for  enjoyment  is  passing,  and  what  ensues  in 
punishment  is  enduring.     Now  his  assurance  of  sanctity  is 


MOR    _  ,  , 

placed  in  the  hps  of  man,  but  when  the  inward  Judge  tries 
the  secrets  of  the  interior,  no  witnesses  of  the  life  are  sought 
from  without.  Therefore  it  is  well  said,  IVhose  trust  shall 
be  a  spider^s  web ;  since  on  the  witness  of  the  heart  appear- 
ing, all  passes  by  wherein  his  confidence  consists,  founded 
without  in  human  applause.  And  hence  it  is  yet  further 
's^       added  with  justice, 

Ver.  15.  He  leaneth  upon  his  house,  but  it  shall  not  stand; 

he  shall  prop  it,  but  it  shall  not  rise  up. 

xlv.        74.  As  the  house  of  our  exterior  life  is  the  building  which 

the  body  lives  in,  so  the  house  of  our  thought  is  any  thing 

whatever  that  the  mind  is  centered  in  by  affection.    For  every 

thing  that  we  love,  we  as  it  were  make  our  dwelling-place  by 

reposing  in   it.     Whence   Paul,   because  he   had   fixed   his 

heart  in  things  above,  being  still  upon  earth  indeed,  yet  a 

Phil.  3,  stranger  to  earth,  said.  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven.     So 

^^*         the  mind  of  the  hypocrite  in  whatever  it  does  minds  nothing 

else  but  the  fame  of  its  own  reputation,  nor  cares  where  it 

1  '  duci-is  carried  ^  after  by  its  deserts,  but  what  it  is  called*  in  the 

J^"!' J. /"  mean  season.     Therefore  his  house  is  delight  of  popularity, 

which  he  as  it  were  dwells  in  at  rest,  in  that  in  all  his  works 

he    throws  himself  back  thereupon   within   his  mind.     But 

this   house    can    never    stand,    because    praise    fleeth    away 

with  life,  and   the  applause   of  man   does  not  hold  in  the 

Judgment.     Hence  the  foolish  virgins  too,  who  took  no  oil 

in  their  vessels,  because  their  glory  was  in  the  voices  of  others 

and  not  in  their  own  consciences,  confounded  by  the  presence 

Matt,     of  the  Bridegroom,  say.  Give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps 

'    '     are  going  out.     For  to  seek  oil  from  our  neighbours  is  to 

beseech    the    fame    of  good   works   from    the    testimony  of 

another  man's  mouth.     For  the  empty  soul,  when  it  finds 

that  it  has  retained  nothing  within  by  all  its  labours,  looks 

about  for  testimony  from  without.     As  if  the  foolish  Virgins 

said  plainly,  '  When  ye  behold  us  cast  away  without  reward, 

say  ye  what  ye  have  seen  in  our  practice.' 

75.  But  the  hypocrite  leans  in  vain  then  upon  this  house 
of  applause,  since  no  human  testimony  stands  him  in  stead 
in  the  Judgment ;   for  the  same  praise,  which  he  afterwards 


Men  listen  tojlaliery  till  they  deceive  themselves.    477 

claims  in  testimony,  he  before  received  in  reward.    Or  surely  Book 

the  hypocrite  leans  upon  his  house,  when  beguiled  by  vain '- 

caresses,  he  is  as  it  were  lifted  up  in  assurance  of  his  holi- 
ness ;  for  hypocrites  do  many  things  evil  in  secret,  but  a  few 
things  good  in  public.     And  when  they  receive  praises  from 
the  good  that  appears,  they  turn  away  the  eyes  of  observation 
from  the  concealed  ill,  and  they  esteem  themselves  such  as 
they  hear  without,  not  such  as  they  know  themselves  within. 
Whence  it  very  often  happens  that  they  also  come  to  the 
Judgment  of  the  Most  High  with   confidence,  becajise  they 
imagine  themselves  such  in  the  sight  of  the  Interior  Judge, 
as  they  were  held  to  be  by  men  without.     Yet  '  the  house  of 
the  hypocrite  cannot   stand,'  for  in  the   terror   of  a  sifting 
search,  all  the  foregoing  assurance  of  holiness  falls  to  the 
ground.     And  when  he  knows  that  the  testimony  of  another 
man's  lips  is  wanting  to  him,  he  betakes  himself  to  reckoning 
up  his  own  works.     Hence  it  is  still  further  added.  He  shall 
prop  it,  but  it  shall  not  I'ise  up.     For  that   which  cannot 
stand  by  itself,  is  propped  to  make  it  stand ;  for  when  the 
hypocrite  sees  his  life  tottering  in   the  Judgment,  he  sets 
himself  to  make  it  stand  in  propping  it,  by  the  enumeration 
of  his  deeds.     Do  not  they  prop  the  dwelling-place  of  their 
own  praise  on  every  hand,  who  in  reckoning  up  their  own 
deeds  in  the  Judgment,  as  we  said  before,  say.  Lord,  Lord,  Matt.  7, 
have  we  not  prophesied  in  Thy  Name  ?  and  in  Thy  Name     ' 
have  cast  out  devils  ?   and  in  Thy  Name  done  many  marvel- 
lous works  ?    But  the  house  of  praise,  stayed  up  by  all  these 
statements,  cannot  rise,  because  the  Judge  saith  directly,  / 
never  knew  you  ;  deptart  from  Me,  ye  that  work  iniquity. 
And  it  is  to  be  had  in  mind  that  any  thing,  that  rises,  lifts 
itself  from  below  to  a  higher  elevation,  and  so  *  the  house  of 
the  hypocrite  cannot  rise,'  in  that  in  all  that  he  may  have 
done  after  the  heavenly  precepts,  he  never  lifted  his   soul 
from  off*  the  earth,  so  that  with  justice  he  is  not  then  lifted 
up  to  the  meed  of  recompense,  who  in  that  which  he  sets 
forth  now,   lies  prostrate  in    the  desire  of  temporal  glory. 
But  whereas  we  have  heard  how  the  life  of  the  hypocrite, 
represented  by  the  name  of*  a  rush,'  is  rejected  in  the  Judg- 
ment, let  us  hear  what  sort  of  person  he  is  held  by  men 
before  the  strict  Judge  appeareth.     It  proceeds, 


478  Hypocrites  Jiourinh  while  the  Light  of  Judgment  is  hid* 
Job  8,       Ver.  16.  It  is  seen  moist  before  the  sun  cometh. 

16 

- — '- —  76.  Oftentimes  in  Holy  Writ  the  Lord  is  represented  by 
-^yi^  the  title  of  the  Sun,  as  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  But  unto 

Mai.  4,  you  that  fear  My  Name  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise. 
And  as  the  ungodly  that  are  cast  away  in  the  Judgment,  are 

"^isd.  described  in  the  book  of  Wisdom,  as  saying.  We  have  erred 
from  the  way  of  truth,  and  the  light  of  righteousness  hath 
not  shined  unto  us,  and  the  Sun  rose  not  upon  us;  there- 
fore, ^  before  the  sun  the  rush  is  seen  moist,'  in  that  before 
God's  severity  burns  hot  in  the  Judgment,  every  hypocrite 
shews  himself  bedewed  with  the  grace  of  holiness.  He  is 
seen  as  it  were  flourishing,  because  he  is  accounted  righteous, 
he  wins  the  post  of  honour,  he  is  strong  in  his  high  repute 
for  sanctity,  reverence  is  awarded  to  him  by  all  men,  his 
credit  for  praise  is  magnified.  Thus  this  rush  is  full  of 
moisture  in  the  night,  but  on  the  coming  of  the  sun  it  is  dried 
up,  in  that  the  hypocrite  is  accounted  holy  by  all  men  in  the 
darkness  of  the  present  life,  but  when  the  searching  Judge 
cometh,  he  will  appear  as  wicked  as  he  is.  So  then  let  him 
say,  He  appears  moist  before  the  sun,  because  now  he  shews 
himself  flourishing  to  the  eyes  of  men,  but  then  he  shall 
wither  up  in  the  scorching  heat  of  the  Divine  Judgment. 
The  account  goes  on ; 

'germen      And  his  produce^  issueth  fo)'th  in  his  springing  up. 

xlvii.  77.  For  every  herb  in  general  is  first  raised  out  of  the 
ground  by  springing  up,  it  is  subject  to  the  influences  of  the 
air  and  heat,  it  is  fed  by  the  sun  and  showers,  and  then  at 
length  it  is  made  to  open  itself  to  put  forth  the  produce  of 
its  seed.  But  the  rush  is  produced  along  with  its  flower, 
and  so  soon  as  it  springs  out  of  the  earth,  it  puts  forth  its 
produce  of  seed  with  itself.  Therefore  by  the  rest  of  the 
herbs  the  Saints  in  general  are  well  denoted,  but  the  hyjiocrite 
by  '  the  rush,'  because  the  righteous,  before  they  spring  up  ' 
in  the  practice  of  holy  conversation,  undergo  the  winter 
season  of  this  life,  and  the  heats  of  bitter  persecutions  press 
them  hard ;  and  then,  when  they  do  what  is  right,  they  never 
look  here  for  the  reward   of  their  righteousness,  but  when 

'  A.  B.  D.  onr.it  '  quam,'  making  the     of  solid  attainments,  and  suits  the  next 
sense  '  first  spring  up.'     The  common     sentence  best, 
reading  refers  to  the  gradual  maturing 


Produce  best  late.     Trees  take  root  slowly.  479 

thev   depart   forth  from  the  labours    of  the   present  world,  Book 

.  VIII 

on    coming   to  their  eternal  Country,  they  enter  upon  the 


enjoyment  of  their  looked-for  reward.  But  contrariwise 
the  hypocrite,  in  that  he  springs  up  in  good  practice  at 
once,  goes  about  to  win  the  glor}^  of  the  present  world. 
As  it  were  like  a  rush  he  springs  up  with  his  produce,  who 
in  return  for  this,  that  he  is  beginning  to  live  well,  aims 
at  the  outset  to  be  held  in  honour  by  all  men.  So  that  the 
*  produce  in  the  springing  up,'  is  a  reward  at  the  outset. 
For  often  there  are  those  that  abandon  the  paths  of  overt 
wickedness,  and  put  on  the  garb  of  holiness,  and  the  moment 
they  have  touched  the  bare  threshold  of  good  living,  forgetting 
what  they  were,  they  will  not  be  henceforth  chastened  by 
penance  for  the  iniquities  they  have  committed,  but  they 
long  to  be  commended  for  goodness  begun;  they  are  eager 
to  get  above  the  rest,  even  though  better  men  than  themselves. 
And  for  the  most  part  whilst  present  prosperity  follows  them 
to  their  wish,  they  become  infinitely  worse  than  they  were  by 
the  wearing  of  sanctity;  but  being  busied  with  countless 
concerns,  and  distracted  by  that  same  busying,  th'ey  not 
only  never  bewail  the  things  that  they  have  done,  but  still 
fill  up  more  that  should  be  bewailed. 
)  78.  For  they  that  quit  the  world,  ought  not  to  be  promoted 
to  externaP  offices,  unless  in  humility  they  be  for  some  long^  i.  e. 
time  established  in  the  contempt  of  that  world.  For  the^ 
good  soon  comes  to  an  end,  which  is  made  known  to  the 

'  world  before  the  time.  Thus  with  shrubs  too  that  have 
been  planted,  if,  before  they  are  fastened  with  a  firm  root, 
the  hand  touch  and  shake  them,  it  causes  them  to  wither 
away,  but,  if  the  root  be  fixed  deep,  and,  being  sprinkled 
with  the  dews  of  the  earth,  be  set  fast,  such  as  these  the 
hand  may  even  push,  and  not  hurt:  these  even  blasts  of 
wind  may  buffet  and  wave,  yet  not  overthrow.  Thus, 
that  the  life  of  practice  we  have  entered  upon  may  not  be 
uprooted,  the  root  of  the  heart  must  be  fixed  long  and 
vigorously  in  the  deep  of  humility,  that  when  from  the 
mouths  of  men  the  breath  of  calumny  or  of  applause  blows 

i    strong,  though  it  bend  it  a  little  either  way,  it  may  not  root  up 
the  mind  from  its  seat,  but  that  after  such  bending  it  may 

^   return  to  its  own  upright  standing,  if  it  but  hold  strong  in 


480      Beginnings  of  good  living  should  he  kept  secret. 
Job  8,  the  root  in  its  own  self.   What  among  things  in  course  of  growth 

16. 
Moral. 


1  fi 

is  stronger  than  a  rising  wall?  yet  if,  while  it  is  in  the  act  of 


erecting,  it  is  pushed,  it  is  at  once  destroyed  without  an 
effort;  but  if  for  a  space  of  time  it  be  allowed  to  dry  from  its 
wetness,  often  it  is  never  a  jot  moved  even  by  the  strokes  of 
the  battering  rams.      In  this   way,  in   this   self-same   way, 
our  goodness  on  the  one  hand  being  unseasonably  displayed 
comes  to  nought,  and  on  the  other  hand  being  longer  kept 
hidden,  is  fairly  secured ;  in  that  when  the  hand  of  human 
employment  touches  the  recent  life  of  our  conversation,  as  it 
were  it  pushes  the  fresh  brick  wall,  and  easily  destroys  it, 
because  it  has  not  as  yet  got  rid  of  the  moisture  of  its  own 
weakness.     But   when  in  its  long   lying  at  rest,  the    soul 
holds  itself  in,  as  it  were    like   a  dry   wall,  it  grows  hard 
against  blows,  and  every  thing   that    strikes  it,  now   it   is 
solid,  bounds  off  it   at   once   shattered.     It   is  hence   that 
Moses  forbade   the  Hfe  of  aught  that  made  the  beginning 
Deut.     to  be  employed  in  services  for  men,  saying.  Thou  shall  do 
^'     *   no  work  with  the  firstling  of  thy  hiillock,  nor  shear  the  first- 
ling of  thy  sheep.     For  to  '  do  work  with  the  firstling  of  the 
bullock'  is  to  display  the  beginning  of  a  good  conversation 
;  in  the  employment  of  public  business.     Moreover  '  to  shear 
[  the  firstlings  of  sheep,'  is  to  lay  bare  of  the  covering  of  its 
concealment  the   good  we  have  begun   before  the   eyes  of 
men.     And  so  we  are  forbidden  to  '  work  with  the  firstling 
of  the  bullock,'  and  we  are  hindered  from  '  shearing  the 
\    firstlings  of  our  sheep,'  in  that  even  if  we  begin  any  thing 
strong,  we  ought  not  to  be  too  ready  to  execute  it  in  public. 
And  when  our  life  commences  something  simple  and  harm- 
less, it  is  meet  that  it  quit  not  the  coverings  of  its  secresy, 
that  it  may  not  bare  that  thing  naked  to  the  eyes  of  the 
world,  the  fleece  being  as  it  were  withdrawn. 

79.  So  let  the  firstlings  of  the  bullocks  and  the  sheep  avail 
for  the  Divine  sacrifices  alone,  that  whatsoever  we  begin 
strong  and  harmless,  we  may  sacrifice  in  honour  of  the 
Judge  of  the  interior  upon  the  altar  of  our  hearts.  Which 
same  we  may  be  sure  is  accepted  the  more  gladly  by  Him, 
in  proportion  as  being  kept  concealed  from  men  it  is 
stained  by  no  desire  of  applause.  But  it  often  happens  that 
the  beginnings  of  a  new  method  of  life  have  still  a  mixture  of 


c 


I 


First-fruits  of  well  doing  not  to  he  held  clean,        481 

the  carnal  life,  and  therefore  they  ought  not  to  be  too  ready  Book 
to  make  themselves  known,  lest  while  the  good  that  pleases  ^^^^- 
IS  applauded,  the  soul  being  beguiled  by  the  praises  of  itself 
have  no  power  to  discover  in  itself  the  evil  that  lies  concealed. 
Hence  it  is  rightly  said  by  Moses  again.  And  when  ye  shalll^ey.  19, 
have  come  into  the  land  that  I  shall  give  you,  and  shall^^' 
have  planted  all  manner  of  trees  bearing  fruit,  then  ye  shall 
take  oj"  their  foreskins.     The  fruits  that  are  put  forth  shall  be 
unclean  unto  you:  ye  shall  not  eat  of  them.     For  '  the  trees 
bearing  fruit'  are  works  fruitful  in  virtue,  and  so  we  '  take 
off  the  foreskins  of  the  trees,'  when  suspecting  ourselves  of 
the  mere  weakness  of  a  beginning  in  itself,  we  do  not  give 
our  approval  to  the  beginnings  of  our  good  practices,  but 
the  fruits  that  are  put  forth,  we  count  unclean,  and  do  not 
make  them  answer  for  good  for  us,  in  that  when  the  beginnings 
of  good  practice  are  applauded,  it  is  meet  that  the  mind  of 
the  doer  should  not  be  fed  thereby;  lest  whilst  the  praise 
bestowed  is  plucked  with  delight,  the  fruit  of  good  works  be 
eaten  prematurely.     He,   then,  that  receives    the  praise   of 
virtue  in  its  beginning  from  the  mouths  of  men,  as  it  were 
eats  the  fruit  of  the  tree  that  he  has  planted  before  the  time. 

80.  Hence  '  Truth'  saith  by  the  Psalmist,  //  is  vain  for  you  Ps.  127 
to  rise  up  before  the  light:   rise  up  after  ye  have  sat,     For^-^^lg' 
'  to  rise  up  before  the  light'  is  to  take  one's  pleasure  in  the 
night-time  of  the  present  life,  before  the  shining  of  Eternal 
Retribution  is  revealed.     So  we  are  to  sit  first,  that  we  may 
rise  afterwards  m  a  right  way.     For  whoever  doth  not  now 
humble  himself  by  his  own  act  and  deed,  the  glory  to  ensue 
does  not  exalt  such  an  one.     Therefore  what  it  is  there  to 
rise  before  the  light,  it  is  here  for  the  hypocrite  to  put  forth 
the  produce  in  his  springing  up,  for  in  "^setting  his  heart  on 
human  applauses,  in  the  self-same  place,  where  he  springs 
up   to  good  works,  there  he  desires  directly  to  obtain   the 
glorying  of  his  recompense.     Had  not  they  '  put  forth  their 
produce  in  their  springing  up,'  of  whom  '  Truth'  said,  They  Matt, 
love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts,  and  the  chief  seats  ^>^^'^•^• 
the  synagogues,   and  greetings  in   the  7narkets,  and   to  be 
called  of  7nen  Rabbi?    Therefore  seeing  that  for  this  reason, 
viz.  because  they  are  beginning  to  do  wt'll,  they  endeavour 
to  obtain  honour  of  men,  as  it  were,  like  a  rush,  '  in  their 

2  I 


48*2     Seekmg  praise  of  men  now,  forfeits  that  of  God, 

Job  8,  springing  up  they  rise  with  their  produce.'     These   same, 
— - —  whilst  they  aim  to  practise  riffht  thines,  first  anxiously  look 

Moral.  />•  ^     ^  I  -  ^ 

about  for  witnesses  of  those  same  works,  and  canvass  with 
secret  calculation,  if  there  be  persons  to  see  the  things  they 
are  about  to  do,  or  if  those  who  see  them  can  report  them 
in  a  proper  way.  But  if  it  chance  to  happen  that  no  one 
witnesses  their  doings,  then,  surely,  they  reckon  them  to  be 
lost  to  them,  and  they  account  the  eyes  of  the  interior  Um- 
pire as  off  them,  because  they  have  no  mind  to  receive 
at  His  hands  the  reward  of  their  works  hereafter.  And 
whereas  when  the  hypocrite  does  any  thing,  he  aims  to  be 
seen  by  many  eyes,  it  is  yet  further  added  with  truth  con- 
cerning this  same  '  rush/ 

Ver.  17.  His  roots  will  he  wrapped  about  the  heap  of 
rocks,  and  he  will  dwell  among  the  stones. 

xlviii.  81.  For  what  do  we  understand  by  the  name  of  '  roots' 
save  the  hidden  thoughts,  w^hich  issue  forth  out  of  sight, 
but  rise  up  in  the  display  of  works  in  open  day?    as  it  is  also 

Is.  37,  said  by  the  Prophet  concerning  the  seed  of  the  Word,  And 
the  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  house  of  Judah  shall 
again  take  root  downward  and  hear  fruit  upward.  For 
to  '  take  root  downward,'  is  to  multiply  good  thoughts  in 
the  secret  depths,  but  '  to  bear  fruit  upward,'  is  to  shew^ 
forth  by  the  doing  of  practice  what  one  has  thought  that  is 
right.     Now  by  the  title  of '  stones'  in  Holy  Writ  men  are 

Is.  54,  denoted,  as  it  is  said  to  Holy  Church  by  Isaiah,  And  I  will 
make  thy  hattlemetits  jasper,  and  thy  gates  of  carved  stones. 
And  he  made  it  plain  what  it  was  that  he  called  those  stones, 
where  he  added.  All  thy  children  taught  of  the  Lord.     As  it 

1  Pet.  2,  is  also  expressed  by  Peter  in  giving  admonition,  Ye  also,  as 
lively  stones,  are  huilt  up  a  spiritual  house.  Here  therefore, 
whereas  they  are  called  '  stones,'  but  are  not  in  any  wise 
called  ^  living  stones,'  by  the  bare  appellation  of  stones  may 
be  set  forth  the  lost  and  the  Elect  mixed  together.  There- 
fore this  rush, '  which  abideth  in  the  place  of  stones,  wi-appeth 
his  roots  about  the  heap  of  rocks,'  in  that  every  hypocrite 
multiplies  the  thoughts  of  his  heart,  in  seeking  out  the  ad- 
miration of  men;  for  in  all  that  hypocrites  do,  seeing  that  in 
their  secret  thoughts  they  look  out  for  the  applauses  of  their 
fellow-creatures,  like  rushes  as  it  were  they  '  send  out  roots 


Vain  duj)lai/  exposes  us  to  evil  spirits.  483 

into  the  heap  of  the  rocks.*      For  on  the  point  of  acting  Book 
they  imagine  their  praises,  and  when  applauded,  they  dwell '- 


upon  them  secretly  with  themselves  in  the  thoughts  of  their 
heart.  They  rejoice  that  they  have  distinguished  themselves 
first  and  foremost  in  the  esteem  of  men;  and  while  they 
are  puffed  up  and  swoln  in  themselves  by  their  applause, 
they  often  themselves  secretly  wonder  at  what  they  are. 
They  long  to  appear  day  by  day  higher  than  themselves, 
and  gi'ow  to  a  height  by  extraordinary  arts  in  practice.  For 
as  habits  of  virtue  enfeeble  every  thing  bad,  so  presumption 
strengthens  the  same.  For  it  forces  the  mind  to  grow  quick, 
and  to  be  in  high  condition  at  the  expense  of  strength,  in 
that  what  the  prime  quality  of  health  withholds,  the  love  of 
applause  enjoins.  Whence  too,  as  we  said,  they  look  out  for 
witnesses  of  their  deeds ;  but  if  it  chance  that  witnesses  of 
the  thing  are  wanting,  they  themselves  relate  what  they  have 
done,  and  when  they  begin  to  be  elated  with  applause, 
they  add  a  little,  by  lying,  to  these  works  of  theirs,  which 
they  describe  themselves  to  have  done.  But  even  when 
they  do  give  true  accounts,  by  the  act  of  telling  them  they 
are  making  them  alien  to  them,  in  that  when  they  are  re- 
warded with  the  desired  acknowledgments  of  esteem,  they 
are  dispossessed  of  their  inward  recompensing  of  them. 

82.  For  in  this,  that  they  publish  their  good,  they  point  out 
to  the  evil  spirits,  like  enemies  plotting  against  them,  what  to 
make  spoil  of.  Whose  life,  truly,  is  represented  by  that  sin 
of  Hezekiah,  which  is  well  known  to  every  one,  who  after  that 
by  a  single  prayer,  and  in  the  space  of  a  single  night,  he  had 
laid  low  an  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand  of  his 
enemies,  by  an  Angel  smiting  them,  after  that  he  had  brought 
back  the  sun  close  to  its  setting  into  the  higher  regions  of  the 
heavens,  after  that  he  had  spun  out  the  web  of  life  to  longer 
dimensions,  now  already  narrowed  by  the  end  approaching, 
shewed  to  the  welcomed  messengers  of  the  king  of  Babylon 
all  the  good  treasures  that  he  possessed,  but  directly  heai'd 
from  the  voice  of  the  Prophet,  Behold^  the  days  come,  that  all  2  Kings 
that  is  in  thine  hoicse  shall  be  carried  away  into  Babylon i'^^^  ^^' 
nothing  shall  be  left,  saith  the  Lord.  In  this  way,  in  this 
self-same  way,  do  hypocrites,  after  they  are  grown  to  a  height 
by  great  attainments  in  virtue,  because  they  are  indiflerent 

•2  I  -2 


484        What  we  take  from  God,  He  leaves  to  Satan. 

Job  8,  to  guard  against  the  plots  of  evil  spirits,  and  will  not  remain 

-T — '—  hidden  in  those  attainments,  by  displaying  their  good  things, 
make  them  over  to  the  enemy;  andbybetrayingitto  view,  they 
lose  in  a  moment  whatsoever  they  perform  by  taking  pains 
in  a  long  course  of  time.     Hence  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist, 

Ps.  78,  Aiid  He  delivered  their  strength  into  captivity,  and  their 
glory  into  the  enemy'^s  hand.  For  the  '  strength'  and  '  glory' 
of  presumptuous  men  is  '  given  over  into  the  enemy's  hand,'  in 
that  every  good  thing,  that  is  exhibited  in  the  desire  of  praise, 
is  made  over  to  our  secret  adversary's  right  of  possession; 
for  he  calls  his  enemies  to  the  spoil,  who  reveals  his  treasures 
to  their  knowledge;  since  so  long  as  we  are  severed  from 
the  safety  of  the  Eternal  Land,  we  are  walking  along  a  way 
with  robbers  lying  in  wait.  He  then  that  dreads  to  be 
robbed  on  the  road,  must  of  necessity  hide  the  treasures 
that  he  carries.  O  wretched  beings,  who  by  going  after  the 
praises  of  men,  waste  to  themselves  all  the  fruits  of  their 
labours,  and  whilst  they  aim  to  shew  themselves  to  the  eyes 
of  others,  blast  all  that  they  do.  Which  same  when  the 
evil  spirits  prompt  to  boastfulness,  taking  them  for  a  prey 
they  strip  bare  their  works,  as  we  have  said.  Whence  '  Truth' 
in  setting   forth    by  the  Prophet   the   rancour    of   our   old 

Joel  1,7.  enemies,  under  the  form  of  a  particular  people,  saith.  He 
hath  laid  my  vineyard  waste,  and  harked  my  Jig-tree:   he 

1  V.  so  hath  made  it  clean  bare,  and  -  despoiled  it;  the  branches 
thereof  are  made  white.  For  by  spirits  lying  in  wait  the 
vineyard  of  God  is  made  a  desert,  when  the  soul  that  is 
replenished  with  fruits  is  wasted  with  the  longing  after  the 
praise  of  men.  That  people  barks  the  fig-tree  of  God,  in 
that  carrying  away  the  misguided  soul  in  the  appetite  for 
applause,  in  the  degree  that  it  draws  her  on  to  ostentation, 
it  strips  her  of  the  covering  of  humility,  and  '  making  it 
clean  bare  despoils  it,'  in  that  so  long  as  it  is  withdrawn 
from  sight  in  its  goodness,  it  is  as  it  were  clothed  with  the 
bark  of  its  own  covering.  But  when  the  mind  longs  for 
that  it  has  done  to  be  seen  by  others,  it  is  as  though  '  the 
fig-tree  despoiled'  had  lost  the  bark  that  covered  it.  And  it 
is  properly  added  there.  The  branches  thereof  are  made 
while;  in  that  his  works  being  displayed  to  the  eyes  of  men, 
turn  white;  a  name  for  sanctity  is  gotten,  when  right  practice 


Glory  of  the  Church  within.    Glory  of  God  to  be  our  rule*  48-S 

is  made  appear,  but  whereas  upon  the  bark  beinor  removed,  Book 

the  branches  of  this  fig-tree  wither,  it  is  to  be  observed  with - 

due  discrimination  that  the  deeds  of  presumptuous  men,  when 
they    are    paraded   before   human    eyes,    by  the    same    act 
whereby   they    aim    to    win    favour,   are    rendered    dry  and 
sapless.      Therefore    the   mind    that    is    shewn    to    view    in 
boasting  is  rightly  called  a  fig-tree  barked,  in  that  it  is  at 
once  white,  in  so  far  as  it  is  seen,  and  within   a  little   of 
withering,  in  so  far  as  it  is  denuded  of  the  covering  of  the 
bark.     The  things  we  do,  therefore,  are  to  be  kept  within,  if 
we  expect  to  receive  from  the  Umpire  within  the  recompense 
of  our  work.     It  is  hence  that  '  Truth'  saith  in  the  Gospel, 
But  when  thou  doest  alms^  let  not  thy  left  hand  know  ivhat}^^^-  6> 
thy  right  hand  doeth,  that  thine  alms  may  he  in  secret;  and 
thy  Father^  which  seeth  in  secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly. 
It  is  hence  that  it  is  said  of  the  Church  of  the  Elect  bv  the 
Psalmist,  The  kinrfs  daughter  is  all  glorious  within.     Hence  ^■"^-  ^^' 
Paul    saiih.   For  our  glory  ^  is    this,   the  testimony  of  our -2  Cor.  \, 
conscience.     For  the  king's  daughter  is  the  Church,  which  J  y 
is  begotten  in  good  practict^  by  the  preaching  of  spiritual 
Princes.     But  '  her  glory  is  within,'  in  that  what  she  does 
she  holds  not  for  the  boasting   of  outward  display.     Paul 
describes  his  '  glory'  as  '  the  testimony  of  his  conscience,'  in 
that  not  aiming  at  the  applause  of  another's  man's  lips,  he 
knows  no  such  thing  as  placing  the  satisfactions  of  his  life 
out  of  himself. 

83.  Therefore  the  things  that  we   do  must  be  kept  con- 
cealed, lest  by  carrying  them  negligently  on  the  journey  of 
the  present  life,  we  lose  them,  through  the  invasion   of  the 
spirits  that  hunt  for  spoil.     And  yet  '  Truth'  saith.  Lei  them  Matt.  5, 
see  your  good  works,  that   they  may  glorify  your  Fattier 
which  is  in  heaven.     But  assuredly  it  is  one  thing  when  in 
the  display  of  our  works  the  glory  of  the  Giver  is  our  aim, 
and  quite  another  when  our  own  praise  is  the  thing  sought  for 
in  the  gift  of  His  bounty.     And  hence  again  in  the  Gospel 
the  same  *  Truth'  saith.  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  works  Matt.  6, 
before  men,  to  be  seen  of  them.     Therefore  when  our  works 
are  displayed  to  men,  we  must  first  weigh  well,  in  entering 
into  the  heart,  what  is  aimed  at  by  the  prosecution  of  such 
display.     For  if  we  make  the  glory  of  the  Giver  our  end, 
even  our  works  that  are  made  public  we  keep  hidden  in  His 


486     Human  praise  may  j^ervert  our  first  good  intent. 

Job  8,  sight.     Bat  if  we  desire  to  win  our  own  applause  by  them, 
they  are   thenceforth  cast  out  of  His  sight  without,  even 


though  they  be  known  nothing  of  by  numbers. 

84.  Now  it  belongs  to  those  that  are  exceeding  perfect,  so 
to  seek  the  glory  of  their  Maker  by  the  works  shewn,  as  not 
to  know  what  it  is  to  exult  in  self-congratulation  upon  the 
praise  bestowed  upon  them.  For  then  only  is  a  praiseworthy 
work  displayed  to  men  without  harm,  when  the  praise 
awarded  is  genuinely  trodden  under  in  the  mind's  contempt. 
Which  same  as  the  \^'eak  sort  do  not  perfectly  get  above  in 
contemning  it,  it  remains  of  necessity  that  they  keep  out 
of  sight  the  good  that  they  do.  For  often  from  the  very 
first  beginning  of  the  display,  they  seek  their  own  praise. 
And  often  in  the  displaying  of  their  works,  they  desire  to 
publish  the  gloriousness  of  the  Creator,  but  being  received 
with  applause,  they  are  carried  off  into  desire  of  their  own 
praise.  And  whilst  they  neglect  to  call  themselves  to 
account  within,  being  dissipated  without,  they  do  not  know 
what  they  do,  and  their  work  ministers  to  their  pride,  and 
they  fancy  that  they  are  rendering  it  in  the  service  of  the 
Giver.  Thus  '  a  rush  abideth  among  the  stones,'  in  that  the 
hypocrite  stands  there,  where  he  sets  fast  the  purpose  of  his 
mind.  For  whilst  he  goes  about  to  get  the  testimony  of 
numbers,  he  takes  his  stand,  as  it  were,  in  the  heap  of 
stones.  But  the  same  hypocrite  that  is  represented  by 
the  designation  of  '  a  rush,'  whilst  he  brings  his  body 
under  by  abstinence,  whilst  by  bestowing  in  alms  all  that  he 
possesses,  he  spends  himself  in  efforts  of  pity,  whilst  he  gets 
instruction  in  the  knowledge  of  the  sacred  La^w,  whilst  he 
employs  the  word  of  preaching;  who  that  beheld  him  so 
filled  with  bounty,  would  account  him  a  stranger  to  the 
grace  of  the  Giver  ?  And  yet  the  Hand  of  heavenly  Dis- 
pensation vouchsafes  to  him  the  gifts  of  works,  and  withholds 
the  lot  of  the  inheritance.  It  lavishes  endowments  for  w^ork- 
ing,  yet  disowns  the  life  of  the  worker.  For  when,  the  gift 
vouchsafed  is  applied  toward  his  own  praise,  in  the  eye  of 
the  interior  Light,  he  is  darkened  by  the  shadow  of  pride. 
Hence  it  is  well  added, 

Ver.  18.  If  He  destroy  him  from  his  place,  then  He  shalt 
deny  him,  saying,  I  have  not  known  thee. 
xlix.       85.  The  hypocrite  is  *  destroyed  from  liis  place,'  when  he 


Hypocrites  punished  for  making  others  like  themselves.  487 

is  parted  from  the  applause  of  the  present  life,  by  death  Book 
intervening.     But  the  interior  Witness  '  denieth'  him,  thus - 


destroyed,  and  asserts  that  He  knows  him  not,  in  that  in 
justly  condemning  the  life  of  the  pretender,  '  Truth'  knows 
him  not,  nor  recognises  the  good  works  he  has  done,  in  that 
he  never  put  them  forth  in  a  right  purpose  of  mind.  And 
hence  when  He  cometh  to  Judgment,  He  will  say  to  the 
foolish  virgins,  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  1  know  you  not.  In  Matt. 
which  same  whilst  He  sees  corruptness  of  mind.  He  condemns  ^'  * 
even  incorruptness  in  the  flesh.  But  would  that  their  own  ruin 
alone  were  enough  for  hypocrites,  and  that  their  wicked  pains 
did  not  vehemently  urge  others  to  a  life^  of  duplicity.  For  it  •  al. '  a 
is  the  way  with  every  one,  to  wish  that,  such  as  he  is  himself,  ^^^ 
others  of  a  like  sort  shoidd  be  joined  with  him,  and  to  avoid 
difterence  in  life,  and  to  inculcate  as  a  pattern  for  imitation 
the  thing  that  he  loves.  Whence  also  according  to  the  view 
of  hypocrites  every  degree  of  simplicity  of  character  is 
criminal.  For  they  sit  in  judgment  on  open  characters,  and 
purity  of  heart  they  term  stupidity;  and  all  whom  they  desire 
to  be  attached  to  themselves,  they  turn  out  of  the  path  of 
simplicity,  and  then,  as  though  their  folly  were  cast  out, 
they  reckon  that  they  have  enlightened  those  persons,  in 
whom  they  force  to  a  sun'ender  that  fortress  of  wisdom, 
purity  of  heart.  But  forasmuch  as  the  hypocrite  is  con- 
demned not  for  his  own  frowardness  alone,  but  for  the  added 
ruin  of  his  followers  also,  after  that  he  is  said  not  to  be 
known  by  the  Judge,  the  words  are  rightly  brought  in  upon 
that; 

Ver.  19.  Behold,  this  is  the  joy  of  his  way^,  that  out  o/'^al.  <of 
the  earth  others  also  should  grow.  '^ 

86.  As  though  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  When  the  Judge  1. 
cometh,  he  is  not  acknowledged,  but  receives  punishment  a 
thousand  fold,  because  he  rejoiced  in  his  wickedness  more 
amply  in  proportion  as  he  spread  evil  among  others  also.' 
For  he  that  is  not  satisfied  with  being  wicked  himself  here, 
must  be  tormented  There  with  the  due  of  the  guilt  of  others 
also.  Now  then  let  the  hypocrites  rejoice,  and  triumph  to 
have  gotten  the  suffrages  of  their  fellow-creatures.  Let  the 
simplicity  of  good  men  be  looked  down  upon,  and  be  called 
foolishness  by  the  craft  of  the  double-dealing.    Speedily  doth 


488  Douhle-mindedness  forfeits  God*s  help. 

Job  8,  the  contempt  of  the  single-minded  pass,  speedily  the  glorying 
^^'  ^^'  of  the  double-dealing  run  to  an  end.     And  hence  it  is  fitly 
added, 

Ver.  20.  Behold,  God  trill  not  cast  out  a  perfect  man, 
7ieither  will  He  stretch  out  His  hand  to  the  evil. 
li,  87.  In  that  assuredly  when  the  Strict  One  appeareth  in  the 

Judgment,  He  will  at  once  lift  up  the  despisedness  of  the 
simple  by  glorifying  them,  and  break  in  pieces  the  greatness 
ima  g-of  the  evil-minded^  by  condemning  them.     For  hypocrites 
are  called  evil-minded,  who  do  good  acts  but  not  well,  and 
practise  every  thing  right    only  in   eagerness  after  praise. 
Now  any  one,  to  whom  we  stretch  out  our  hand,  we  plainly 
lift  up   from  below.     Thus  God  does  not  stretch   out  His 
hand  to  the  evil-minded,  in  that  all  that  seek  earthly  glory 
He  leaves  below,  and  how  right  soever  the  things  that  they  do 
may  seem   to   be.   He  doth  not  advance  them  to  the  joys 
above.     Or,  as  may  well  be,  hypocrites  are  for  this  reason 
called  evil-minded,  because  they  make  a  shew  of  being  well- 
minded  toward  their  neighbours,  and  cover  over  the  arts  of 
their  wicked  designs.     For  in  all  that  they  either  do  or  say, 
they  shew  simplicity  externally,  but  they  are  inwardly  con- 
ceiving in  the  subtleties  of  double-mindedness;  they  counter- 
feit purity  on  the  outside,  but  they  conceal  an  evil  heart  at  all 
times  under  the  semblance  of  purity.     In  respect  of  whom  it 
Deut.     is  well  spoken  by  Moses,  Thou  shalt  not  wear  a  garment 
^^'  ^^"   woven  of  woollen  and  linen  together.     For  by  *  woollen'  is 
denoted  simplicity,  by  *  linen'  subtlety.     And  it  is  the  fact 
that  a  garment  made  of  *  wool  and   linen'  hides  the  linen 
within  and  shews  the  wool  on  the  outside.     And  so  he  '  puts 
on  a  garment  of  woollen  and  linen  together,'   who  in  the 
mode  of  speech  or  behaviour  that  he  adopts  conceals  within 
the  artfulness  of  an  evil  purpose,  and  exhibits  without  the 
simplicity  of  an  innocent  mind.     For  whereas  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  detect  craftiness  under  the  semblance  of  purity,  it  is 
as  if  linen  were  hidden  under  the  thickness  of  wool.     But 
after  the  condemnation  of  the   double-minded,  the  recom- 
pensing of  the  righteous  is  duly  exhibited,  when  it  is  added 
thereupon, 

Ver.  21.  Till  He  Jill  thy  mouth  with  laughing,  and  thy 
lips  with  shouting. 


Laughter  and  shouting  of  the  Righteous  at  the  last.  489 

88.  For  the  '  mouth'  of  the  righteous  will  then  be  ^  filled  Book 
with  laughing'  when  the  tears  of  their  pilgrimage  being  done,  — - — ^"- 
their   hearts   shall   be   filled    to   the   full    with    exulting   in 
eternal  joy.     Concerning  this  laughing  '  Truth'  saith  to  His 
disciples,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  weep  John 
and  lament,  hut  the  world  shall  rejoice;  and  ye  shall  be     '"  ' 
sorrowful,  hut  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy.     And 
again,  But  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  ^er.  23. 
and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from   you.     Concerning  this 
laughing  of  Holy   Church,   Solomon    saith,  And  she  shall^^^^'^ 
laugh  in  the  last  day.     Of  this   it   is    said   again.    Whoso  Y.cchxs. 

feareth  the  Lord,  it  shall  go  well  with  him  at  the  last.  ^'  ^^* 
Not  that  there  shall  be  laughter  of  the  body,  but  laughter  of 
the  heart.  For  now  from  rioting  in  dissipation  there  springs 
a  laughter  of  the  body,  but  then  from  joy  in  security  there 
will  arise  a  laughter  of  the  heart.  Therefore  when  all  the 
Elect  are  replenished  with  the  delight  of  open  vision,  they 
spring  forth  into  the  joyousness  of  laughter  in  the  mouth  of 
the  interior.  But  we  call  it  shouting'*,  when  we  conceive ^jubilum 
such  joy  in  the  heart,  as  we  cannot  give  vent  to  by  the  force 
of  words,  and  yet  the  triumph  of  the  heart  vents  with  the 
voice  what  it  cannot  give  forth  by  speech.  Now  the  mouth 
is  rightly  said  to  be  filled  with  laughter,  the  lips  with  shout- 
ing, since  in  that  eteraal  land,  when  the  mind  of  the  righteous 
is  borne  away  in  transport,  the  tongue  is  lifted  up  in  the 
song  of  praise.  And  they,  because  they  see  so  much  as  they 
are  unable  to  express,  shout  in  laughter,  because  without 
compassing  it  they  resound  all  the  love  that  they  feel. 

89.  Now  it  is  said  *  till,'  not  that  Almighty  God  so  long 
forbears  to  raise  up  the  evil  until  he  take  to  Him  His  Elect 
to  the  joys  of  their  jubilee,  as  if  afterwards  He  saved  from 
the  punishment  those  whom  first  leaving  in  sin  He  sentences 
to  damnation,  but  that  He  never  does  it  even  before  the 
Judgment,  when  it  may  seem  doubtful  to  men,  whetlier  it  is 
to  be  done.  For  that  after  the  jubilee  of  His  Elect  people 
He  does  not  stretch  out  His  hand  to  the  evil-minded,  is 
already  plain  from  tl.e  mere  severity  of  the  final  reckoning 

by  itself.     As  the  Psalmist  also  spake  in  this  manner,  TheVs.no, 
Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  Thou  on  My  right  hand,  until  ' 
I  make   Thine  enemies  Thy  footstool.     Not  that  the  Lord 


490   God  helps  not  wicked  men  now,  much  less  hereafter. 

Job  8,  never  sat  ou  the  Lord's  right  hand,  after  that  by  smiting  His 
— — — enemies  He  made  them  subject  to  His  power,  but  that  He  is 
*  set  over  all  things  in  eternal  blessedness,  even  before  He 
treads  under  His  feet  the  hearts  of  those  that  rebel  against 
Him.  Wherein  it  is  made  plain  that  His  enemies  being 
brought  under,  He  still  rules  without  end  even  afterwards. 
Matt.  1,  Thus  it  is  said  in  the  Gospel  of  the  espoused  of  Mary,  And 
^^'  knew  her  not,  till  she  had  brought  forth  her  first-born  Son. 
Not  that  he  did  know  her  after  the  birth  of  the  Lord,  but 
that  he  never  touched  her  even  when  he  did  not  know  her  to 
be  the  Mother  of  his  Creator.  For  because  it  was  impossible 
that  he  could  have  touched  her  after  he  knew  that  the 
Mystery  of  our  Redemption  was  transacted  from  her  womb, 
plainly  it  was  necessary  that  the  Evangelist  should  bear 
witness  of  that  time,  of  which  there  might  be  misgivings 
entertained  by  reason  of  Joseph's  ignorance.  And  so  it  is  ex- 
pressed here  in  like  manner.  Behold,  God  will  not  cast  away 
a  perfect  man,  neither  will  He  stretch  out  His  hand  to  the 
evil-minded;  till  He  fill  thy  mouth  with  laughter,  and  thy 
lips  with  shouting.  As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain  speech; 
^  Not  even  before  the  Judgment  does  He  abandon  the  life  of 
the  faithful,  nor  even  before  He  appears  does  He  forbear 
from  smiting  the  minds  of  the  evil-disposed  by  abandoning 
them.'  For  that  the  sons  of  perdition  He  torments  without 
end,  and  that  after  that  He  shall  have  appeared  His  Elect 
reign  for  evermore,  assuredly  there  is  no  doubt.  It  goes  on; 
Ver.  2-2.  They  that  hate  thee  shall  be  clothed  with  con- 
fusion, 
liii.  90.  '  Confusion  cloihes'  the  enemies  of  the  good  in  the 
final  Judgment;  for  when  they  see  before  the  eyes  of  their 
mind  their  past  misdeeds  running  over  in  excess  to  them, 
their  own  guilt  clothes  them  on  every  side,  weighing  them 
dowm.  For  they  then  bear  the  memory  of  their  doings  in 
punishment,  who  now,  as  though  strangers  to  the  faculty  of 
reason,  sin  with  hearts  full  of  joy.  There  they  see  how 
greatly  they  should  have  eschewed  all  that  they  loved. 
There  they  see  how  woful  that  was,  which  they  now  hug 
themselves  for  in  their  sin.  Then  guilt  spreads  a  cloud  over 
the  mind,  and  conscience  pierces  itself  with  the  darts  of  its 
rcmcmliranccs.      Who    then    can   adequately    estimate  how 


The  wicked  build  dwellings  to  fall  on  them.         491 

exceeding  great  will  be  the  confusion  of  the  wicked  Then,  Book 
when  both  the  Judge  Eternal  is  discerned  without,  and  sin  is - 


set  in  review  before  the  eyes  within  ?  who  are  on  this  account 
brought  to  such  a  pass,  because  they  loved  transient  things 
alone.     And  hence  it  is  rightly  added  upon  that; 
And  the  tents  of  the  icicked  shall  not  abide, 

91.  For  a  tent  is  put   together   that  the    body  may  be    liv. 
preserved  from  heat  and  cold.     What  then  is  here  set  forth 

by  the  name  of  a  dwelling-place,  save  the  building  of  earthly 
prosperity,  whereby  the  wicked  are  multiplying  above  their 
heads  things  to  fall,  that  they  may  shelter  themselves  from 
the  exigencies  of  the  present  life  as  from  heat  and  rain. 
Thus  they  go  about  to  rise  in  honours,  lest  they  should 
appear  contemptible.  They  pile  up  the  good  things  of 
earth,  and  heap  them  high,  lest  they  ever  come  to  pine  with 
the  cold  of  want.  They  scorn  to  take  thought  of  what  is  to 
come,  and  busy  themselves  with  all  their  heart,  that  nought 
may  be  lacking  in  the  present  scene  of  things.  They  aim  to 
spread  their  name,  that  they  may  not  live  unknown,  and  if  every 
thing  is  forthcoming  to  their  hearts'  content,  they  regard 
themselves  as  proof  in  all  things,  and  blessed  in  their  con- 
dition. Thus  in  the  place  where  they  rear  a  dwelling-place 
of  the  interior,  there  surely  they  have  their  tents  fixed.  They 
bear  crosses  with  impatience,  they  rejoice  in  prosperity 
without  restraint.  They  mind  alone  the  things  that  are 
before  them,  nor  do  they  draw  their  breath  by  the  yearning 
after  their  heavenly  home  in  the  remembrance  thereof.  They 
are  glad  that  the  good  things  are  theirs,  which  their  heart  is 
bent  on  having;  and  there,  where  they  rest  in  the  body,  they 
bury  the  soul  too,  making  it  a  thing  extinct,  in  that  being  slain 
with  the  instrument  of  worldly  solicitude,  that  pile  of  earthly 
things,  which  they  heap  together  hunting  for  them  without, 
they  are  always  cai'rying  on  them  within  in  thought. 

92.  But  contrariwise  the  good  neither  take  the  blessings 
ofiered  them  here  below  as  any  thing  great,  nor  xery  much 
dread  the  ills  brought  upon  them.  But  both  whilst  they  use 
present  advantages,  they  forecast  inconveniences  to  come, 
and  when  they  lament  for  present  evils,  they  are  comforted 
in  the  love  of  the  good  things  to  follow.  And  they  are 
cheered  by   temporal   support,  just  as  a  wayfarer  enjoys  a 


492  The  righteous  build  not,  no?'  settle,  here. 

Job  8,  bed  in  a  stable;  he  stops  and  hurries  to  be  off;  he  rests  slill 

22.  .  . 

in    the    body,  but   is   going   forward  to  something  else   in 


Moral.  ,.         , 

imagination.  But  sometimes  they  even  lon^  to  meet  with 
afflictions,  they  shrink  from  finding  all  go  well  in  transient 
things,  lest  by  the  delightfulness  of  the  journey,  they  be 
hindered  in  arriving  at  their  home;  lest  they  arrest  the  step 
of  the  heart  on  the  pathway  of  their  pilgrimage,  and  one  day 
come  in  view  of  the  heavenly  land  without  a  recompense. 
They  delight  to  be  little  accounted  of,  nor  do  they  grieve 
to  be  in  affliction  and  necessity.  Thus  they  that  never 
fortify  themselves  against  the  adversities  of  the  present 
time,  as  it  were  will  not  have  a  tent  against  the  heat  and 

Matt.  rain.  And  hence  Peter  is  justly  rebuked,  because  when  he 
''  '  was  not  yet  confirmed  in  perfectness  of  heart,  upon  the 
brightness  of  '  Truth'  being  made  known,  he  goes  about  to 
set  up  a  tent  upon  earth.  And  thus  the  righteous  are 
indifferent  to  build  themselves  up  here  below,  where  they 
know  themselves  to  be  but  pilgrims  and  strangers.  For 
because  they  desire  to  have  joy  in  their  own,  they  refuse 
to  be  happy  in  w^hat  belongs  to  another.  But  the  unrigh- 
teous, the  further  they  are  removed  from  the  inheritance  of  the 
etenial  Country,  fix  the  foundations  of  the  heart  so  much  the 
deeper  in  the  earth.     It  is  hence  that  in  the  very  beginning 

Gen.  4,  of  man's  creation  Enoch  is  born  seventh  in  the  elect  family. 
'*  It  is  hence  that  Cain  calls  his  firstborn  son  Enoch,  and 
names  the  city  that  he  built  after  him.  For  '  Enoch'  is 
rendered  '  Dedication.'  And  so  the  wicked  dedicate  them- 
selves in  the  beginning.  For  in  this  life,  which  is  first,  they 
plant  the  root  of  the  heart,  that  they  may  flourish  here  to 
their  content,  and  wither  root  and  branch  to  the  Country 
that  follows  after.  But  to  the  righteous,  Enoch  is  born  the 
seventh,  in  that  the  festal  dedication  of  their  lives  is  kept  for 

Heb.ii,the  end.     It  is  hence,  as  Paul  testifies,  Abraham  dwells  in 

^' ,,  ,    tents^.  for  he  looked  for  a  city  which    hath  foundations, 

>soVulg.  '  "^  .  . 

Gen. 33  i^'hose  huHder  and  maker  is  God.     It  is  hence  that  Jacob 

]ti        goes  ^humbly  following  the  flocks  of  sheep,  and  Esau  coming 

like  E.  to  meet  him  lords  it  with  a  throng  of  numerous  attendants, 

latin^"^^^  that  here  both  the  Elect  are  without  pride,  and  the  lost 

swell   with    satisfaction    in    the    good    things    of  the    flesh. 

Deut.     Hence   the   Lord   saith  to  Israel,  //*  thou  shall  choose  one 

17,  15.  '    ^ 

16, 


What  is  built  in  this  world  will  not  stand.  493 

from  the  people  of  the  land  and  set  him  for  a  king  over  thee,  Book 
he  shall  not  multiply  horses  and  horsemen  to  himself.     And - 


yet  the  first  king  '  chosen  from  among  his  brethren,'  so  soon 
as  he  had  attained  the  height  of  power,  chose  for  himself  i  Sam. 
three  thousand  horsemen;  he  immediately  launched  into  pride,  ^^'  ^* 
burst  forth  in  the  building  up  of  the  height  he  had  attained, 
in  that  without  he  could  not  keep  under  on  a  level  of  equality 
all  that  made  his  spirit  within  rise  high  above  the  level  of 
others.     That  rich  man  had  as  it  were  erected  for  himself  a 
fenced  dwelUng  place,  who  said.  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  Luke 
laid  up  for  many  years:  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  he  ^^'  ^  * 
merry.     But  because  that  dwelling  is  not  bottomed  upon  the 
foundation  of  Truth,  he  heard  at  the  same  moment,  TIiou  rer.  20. 
fooli  this  night   thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee:    then 
whose  shall  these  things  be,  which    thou   hast  prepared? 
Therefore  it  is  well    said.  And  the   dwelling-place  of  the 
wicked  shall  come  to  nought.     In  that  the  lovers  of  this  fleet- 
ing life,  whilst  they  diligently  build  themselves  up  in  present 
things,  are  suddenly  liurried  into  eternity. 


BOOK  IX. 

He  explains  the  ninth  Chapter,  together  with  the  whole  of  the  tenth. 

i.  1.  Bad  minds,  if  they  have   once   broken  out  into   the 

Hist,  eagerness  of  opposition,  whether  what  they  hear  from  those 
that  withstand  them  be  right  or  wrong,  assail  it  with  con- 
tradictory replies;  for  whereas  the  speaker  is  unwelcome 
from  being  ii^  opposition,  not  even  what  is  right  is  welcome 
when  he  utters  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  hearts  of  the 
good,  whose  dishke  rises  not  at  the  speaker  but  at  the 
offence,  in  such  sort  pass  sentence  on  what  is  amiss,  as  to 
adopt  still  any  right  things  that  are  said.  For  they  sit  the 
most  even  umpires  in  deciding  the  sense  of  their  opponents' 
words,  and  they  so  reject  what  is  put  forth  amiss,  that  not- 
withstanding they  set  the  seal  upon  what  they  recognise  to 
be  delivered  in  truth.     For  among  a  wilderness  of  thorns 

•  spica  the  ear  ^  is  generally  to  be  found  growing  up  from  seed  good 
for  fruit.     Therefore  it  must  be  managed  with  care  by  the 

2  spina  hand  of  the  tiller,  that,  whilst  the  thorn-  is  removed,  the  ear 
be  cherished,  so  that  he,  who  is  eager  to  root  up  what  pricks, 
may  have  sense  to  preserve  what  gives  nourishment.  Hence 
in  that  Bildad  the  Shuhite  had  said  well  in  enquiry,  Dotlt 
God  pervert  judgment^  or  doth  the  Almighty  jwrvert  justice  ? 
in  that  he  had  delivered  true  and  forcible  sentiments  against 
hypocrites,  blessed  Job,  seeing  that  they  were  delivered 
against  the  wicked  in  general,  admirably  treads  under  foot 
the  prosecution  of  his  own  defence,  and  at  once  sanctions 
the  truths  he  had  heard,  saying, 

Ver.  2.  /  know  it  is  so  of  a  truth,  and  that  man  put  with 
God  is  not  justijied. 
ii«  2.  For  man  being  put  under  God  receives  righteousness ; 

being  put  with  God  he  loses  it :  for  every  one  that  compares 


Man  cannot  answer  God  in  '  one  of  a  tlioiisand.'     495 

himself  willi  the  Author  of  all  good  things,  bereaves  hiroself  Book 
of  the  good  which  he  had  received.     For  he  that  ascribes — ^-^ 


to  himself  blessings  vouchsafed  to  him,  is  fighting  against 
God  with  His  own  gifts.  Therefore  by  whatsoever  means  he 
being  in  contempt  is  lifted  up,  it  is  meet  that  being  so  set 
up  he  be  brought  to  the  ground  by  the  same.  Now  because 
he  sees  that  all  the  worth  of  our  goodness  is  evil  if  it  be 
strictly  accounted  of  by  the  Judge  of  the  interior,  the  holy 
man  rightly  subjoins; 

Ver.  3.  1/  thou  wilt  contend  with  Him,  thou  shalt  not 
he  able  to  answer  Him  one  of  a  thousand. 

3.  In  Holy  Scripture,  the  number  a  thousand  is  wont  to  be  iii- 
taken  for  totality.  Hence  the  Psalmist  saith.  The  word  Ps./Os'^; 
which  He  commanded  to  a  thousand  generations;  when  it 
is  sufficiently  plain  that  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  world 
up  to  the  coming  of  our  Lord  no  more  than  seventy-seven 
generations  are  reckoned  up  by  the  Evangelist.  What  then 
is  represented  in  the  number  a  thousand,  save,  until  the 
bringing  forth  of  the  new  offspring,  the  complete  whole  of 
the  race  foreseen.  Hence  it  is  said  by  John,  And  shall ^ey.20j 
reign  with  Him  a  thousand  years;  for  that  the  reign  of^* 
Holy  Church  is  made  complete  by  being  perfected  in  entire- 
ness.  Now  forasmuch  as  a  unit  being  multiplied  is  brought 
to  ten,  and  ten  being  taken  into  itself  is  expanded  to  one 
hundred,  which  again  being  multiplied  by  ten  is  extended 
to  a  thousand,  since  we  set  out  with  one  to  get  to  one 
thousand,  what  is  here  denoted  by  the  designation  of  '  one' 
but  the  commencement  of  good  living }  what  by  the  fulness 
of  the  number  '  a  thousand,'  but  the  perfection  of  that  good 
life  ?  Now  to  contend  with  God  is  not  to  ascribe  to  Him 
but  to  take  to  one's  self  the  glory  of  one's  goodness.  But 
let  the  holy  man  consider  that  the  man  who  has  already 
received  even  the  chiefest  gifts,  if  he  is  lifted  up  for  what 
has  been  vouchsafed  him,  parts  with  all  that  he  had 
received,  and  let  him  say,  If  he  will  contend  with  Him,  he 
cannot  answer  Him  one  of  a  thousand.  For  he,  that 
'  contends'  with  his  Maker,  is  unable  to  '  answer  Him  one  of 
a  thousand,'  in  that  the  man  that  sets  himself  up  on  the  score 
of  perfection,  proves  that  he  lacks  the  very  beginning  of 
good  living.    For  we  cannot  ^  answer  Him  one  of  a  thousand,' 


496  Awe  due  to  God's  Wisdom  and  Might. 

J'^B  9,  since  when  we  are  lifted  up  for  perfection  of  good  life,  we 
--— —  shew  that  we  have  not  so  much  as  begun  this.     Now  we  are 

Lit.  " 

then  more  really  moved  by  our  weakness,  when  by  reflection , 
we  are  led  to  form  an  estimate  how  infinite  is  the  power  of 
the  Judge. 

Ver.  4.  He  is  wise  in  hearty  and  mighty  in  strength. 

1^.  4.  What  wonder  is  it,  if  we  call  the  Maker  of  the  wise, 
'  wise,'  Whom  we  know  to  be  Wisdom  itself?  and  what 
wonder  is  it  that  he  describes  Him  to  be  '  mighty,'  Whom 
there  is  none  that  doth  not  know  to  be  this  very  Mightiness 
itself.?  But  the  holy  man,  by  the  two  words  set  forth  in 
praise  of  the  Creator,  conveys  a  meaning  to  us,  whereby  to 
recall  us  in  ti'embling  to  the  knowledge  of  ourselves.  For 
God  is  called  '  wise,'  in  that  He  exactly  knows  our  secret 
hearts,  and  it  is  added  that  He  is  '  mighty,'  in  that  He 
smites  them  forcibly,  so  known.  And  so  He  can  neither  be 
deceived  by  us,  because  He  is  wise,  nor  be  escaped,  because 
He  is  strong.  Now,  as  wise.  He  beholds  all  things,  Himself 
unseen,  then,  as  strong,  without  let  or  hindrance.  He  punishes 
those  whom  He  condemns.  Who  ordains  this  likewise  here 
with  mightiness  of  wisdom,  that  when  the  human  mind  exalts 
itself  against  the  Creator,  it  should  confound  itself  by  that 
very  self-exaltation.  And  hence  it  is  added. 
Who  hath  resisted  Him,  and  had  peace? 

V.  5.  For  He  that  creates  all  things  marvellously.  Himself 

regulates  them,  that  after  having  been  created,  they  should 
agree  with  themselves;  and  thus  whereinsoever  there  is 
resistance  made  to  the  Creator,  that  agreement  in  peace  is 
broken  up,  in  that  those  things  can  never  be  well  regulated, 
which  lose  the  management  of  regulation  above.  For  whatso- 
ever things  if  subjected  to  God  might  have  continued  at  peace, 
being  left  to  themselves  by  their  own  act  work  their  own 
confusion,  in  that  they  do  not  find  in  themselves  that  peace, 
which  coming  from  above  they  contend  against  in  the 
Creator.  Thus  that  highest  Angelical  Spirit,  who  being  in  sub- 
jection to  God  might  have  stood  at  the  height,  being  banished, 
has  to  bear  the  burthen  of  himself,  in  that  he  roams  abroad  in 
disquietude  in  his  own  nature.  Thus  the  first  parent  of  the 
human  race,  in  that  he  went  against  the  precept  of  his 
Creator,  was  thereupon  exposed  to  the  insolence  of  the  flesh, 


No  peace  to  opjjosers  of  God.     Instance  of  the  Jews.      497 

and  because  he  would  not  be  subject  to  His  Maker  in  Book 
obedience,  being  laid  low  beneath  himself,  even  the  peace  of — 
the  body  was  forthwith  lost  to  him.  Thus  it  is  well  said, 
Who  hath  resisted  Him,  and  had  peace?  In  that  by  the 
same  act,  whereby  the  froward  mind  lifts  itself  against  its 
Maker,  it  works  its  own  confusion  in  itself.  Now  we  are 
said  to  resist  God,  when  we  try  to  oppose  His  dispensations. 
Not  that  our  frailty  does  resist  His  unchangeable  decree, 
but  what  it  has  not  the  power  to  accomplish,  it  yet  attempts. 
For  often  human  weakness  knows  in  secret  the  power  of  His 
dispensation,  and  yet  aims,  if  it  might  be  able,  to  reverse  it. 
It  sets  to  work  to  resist,  but  shivers  itself  to  pieces  by  the 
very  sword  of  its  opposition.  It  struggles  against  the  interior 
disposition  of  things,  but,  being  overcome  by  its  own  efforts, 
is  bound  fast.  Therefore  to  have  peace  whilst  resisting  can 
never  be;  for  whereas  confusion  follows  after  pride,  that 
which  is  foolishly  done  in  sin  is  marvellously  disposed  to 
the  punishment  of  the  doer;  but  the  holy  Man,  being  filled 
with  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  prophecy,  while  he  regards 
in  general  the  confounding  of  human  pride,  thereupon  directs 
the  eyes  of  the  mind  to  the  special  fate  of  the  Jewish  people, 
and  shews  by  the  ruin  of  a  single  people  the  punishment 
that  awaits  all  that  are  lifted  up.  For  he  immediately  adds 
in  these  words, 

Ver.  5.   Which  removed  the  mountains^  and  they  knew  not 
ivhom  He  overturned  in  His  anger. 

(j.  Oftentimes  in  Holy  Writ  by  the  title  of  '  mountains,'  alleg. 
the  loftiness  of  Preachers  is  set  forth.    Of  whom  it  is  said  by     vi. 
the    Psalmist,   The  7nountains  shall  receive  peace  for  Thy  p^  ^^  ^ 
people.     For  the  Elect  Preachers  of  the  eternal  Land  are  not 
unjustly  called  '  mountains,'  in  that  by  the  loftiness  of  their 
lives  they  leave  the  low  bottoms  of  earthly  regions,  and  are 
brought  near  to  heaven.    Now  '  Tnith'  *  removed  the  moun- 
tains' when  He  withdrew  the  holy  Preachers  from  the  stubborn- 
ness of  Judaea.     Whence  too  it  is  rightly  said  by  the  Psalmist, 
The  mountains  shall  be  carried  into  the  heart  of  the  sea.  p^  ^g  ^ 
For  '  the  mountains  were  removed  into  the  heart  of  the  sea,' 
when  the  Apostles   in   their   preaching,  thrust   off  by    the 
faithlessness  of  Judaea,  came   to  the  understandiug  of  the 
Gentiles.     Hence  they  themselves  say  in  their  Acts,  It  tt'^^Actsis 

2  K  46. 


498  '  Mountains'  removed  from  JudcBa  arid  her  ^pillars'  shaken. 

Job  9,  necessary  that  the  word  should  first  have  been  spoken  to  you: 
^^^^q\  but  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you,  and  Judge  yourselves  unworthy 
of  everlasting  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles.  Now  this 
same  *  removing  of  the  mountains'  they  themselves  '  knew 
nothing  of,  who  were  overthrown  in  the  wrath  of  the  Lord;'  for 
when  the  Hebrew  people  drove  the  Apostles  from  their  coasts, 
they  supposed  that  they  had  made  gain,  in  that  they  had 
parted  with  the  light  of  preaching,  since  as  their  deserts 
demanded,  being  stiiick  with  a  just  visitation,  they  were 
blinded  by  so  great  a  delusion  of  the  understanding,  that 
their  losing  the  light  they  accounted  to  be  joy;  but  upon 
the  rejection  of  the  Apostles,  Judaea  is  at  once  brought  to 
destruction  by  the  hands  of  the  Roman  Emperor  Titus,  and 
she  is  dispersed  and  scattered  abroad  among  all  nations.  And 
hence  it  is  rightly  added  to  the  removing  of  the  mountains, 

Ver.  6.    Which  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place,  and  the 
pillars  thereof  shall  tremble. 
vii.         7.  For  '  the  earth  was  shaken  out  of  her  place,'  when  the 
Israelitish  people,  rooted  out  of  the  borders  of  Judaea,  sub- 
mitted the  neck  to  the  Gentiles,  because  she  would  not  be 
subjected  to  the  Creator.     Which  same  earth  had  pillars,  in 
that  the   erection   of  her    stubbornness,    which   was  to    be 
destroyed,  rose  upon  the  Priests  and  Rulers,  the  Teachers  of 
the  Law  and  the  Pharisees.     For  in  these  she  held  in  her 
the  edifice  of  the  letter,  and  in  her  season  of  peace,  carried 
the  burthen  of  carnal  sacrifices  like  a  fabric  overlaid.     But 
when   '  the    mountains    were    removed,'   the   '  pillars    were 
shaken,'  in    that    when    the  Apostles  were  withdrawn  from 
Judaea,  they  were  no  more  themselves  allowed  to  live  therein, 
who  drove  out  from  thence  the  proclaimers  of  life.    For  it  was 
meet  that  they  being  brought  into   subjection  should  lose 
that   earthly  country,  for  the    love  of  which  they  had  not 
been  afraid  to  assail  the  soldiers  of  the  heavenly  country.   But 
upon   the    holy  Teachers   being   drawn  out,  Judaea  waxed 
altogether  gross,  and  by  the  righteous  inquest  of  Him  That 
judgeth,  she  shut  the  eyes  of  the  mind  in  the  darkness  of  her 
delusion.     Hence  it  is  yet  further  continued; 

Ver.  7.    Which  commandeth  the  sun,  and  it  riseth  not,  and 
shutteth  up  the  stars  as  under  a  seal. 
^i"-        8.  Now  sometimes  in  Holy  Writ  by  the  title  of  *  sun,*  we 


Sun  hidden  and  stars  sealed  up  from  those  who  reject  Truth.  499 

have  the  brightness  of  the  Preachers  represented,  as  it  is  Book 
said  by  John,   And  the  sun   became  black  as  sackcloth  of '— 

.  Rev.  6 

hair.  For  at  the  end  of  time  the  sun  is  exhibited  'likea2. 
sackcloth  of  hair,'  in  that  the  shining  life  of  them  that  preach 
is  set  forth  before  the  eyes  of  the  lost  as  hard  and  contempti- 
ble. And  they  are  represented  by  the  brightness  of  stars 
also,  in  that  whilst  they  preach  right  doctrines  to  sinners, 
they  enlighten  the  darkness  of  our  night.  And  hence  upon 
the  removal  of  the  Preachers  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  The  Sex.  3^ 
stars"  of  the  rain  are  uithholden.  Now  whereas  the  sun^' 
shines  in  the  day  time,  the  stars  illumine  the  shades  of 
night.  And  very  often  in  Holy  Writ  by  the  designation  of 
day  is  denoted  the  eternal  Country,  and  by  the  name  of 
night.,  the  present  life.  Holy  preachers  become  like  the  sun 
to  our  eyes,  inasmuch  as  they  open  to  us  the  view  of  the 
true  light;  and  they  shine  like  stars  in  the  dark,  when  for 
the  purpose  of  helping  our  necessities  they  manage  earthly 
things  in  an  active  life.  They,  as  it  were,  shine  as  the  sun 
in  the  day,  whilst  they  raise  the  eye  of  our  mind  to  con- 
template the  land  of  interior  brightness,  and  they  glitter 
like  stars  in  the  night,  in  that  even  whilst  they  are  engaged 
in  earthly  action,  they  guide  the  foot  of  our  practice,  every 
moment  on  the  point  of  stumbling,  by  the  example  of  their 
own  uprightness.  But  because  when  the  Preachers  were 
driven  out,  there  was  none  who  might  either  shew  the  bright- 
ness of  contemplation,  or  disclose  the  light  of  an  active  life 
to  the  Jewish  people  continuing  in  the  night  of  their  unbelief, 
(for  the  Truth,  which  being  cast  off  abandoned  them,  when 
the  light  of  preaching  was  removed,  blinded  them  in  reward 
of  their  wickedness,)  it  is  rightly  said.  Which  commandeth 
the  sun,  andit  riseth  not,  and  shutteth  up  the  stars  as  under  a 
seal.  For  He  would  not  let  the  sun  rise  to  that  people,  from 
whom  He  turned  away  the  heart  of  the  Preachers,  and  He 
*  shut  up  the  stars  as  under  a  seal,'  in  that  while  He  kept 
His  Preachers  to  themselves  in  silence,  He  hid  the  heavenly 
light  from  the  darkened  perceptions  of  the  wicked. 


*  '  The  word  is  not '  stars' but '  drops,'  neither  word  occurs,  yet  it  is  clear  that 

both  in  the  Hebrew  original,  as    also  S.  Gregory  read  in  this  way.'  (note  in 

in  the  Vulgate  and  other  Versions  or  Eened.   Edit.)     The  text  of  Hugo  de 

Paraphrases.     In  the  Greek  rendering  St.  Char,  &c.  reads  'stellse.' 

2  K  2 


500       Elijah  and  St.  John  as  stars  sealed  up  till  the  End. 

Job  9,       9.  But  it  is  to  be  considered,  that  we  shut  np  any  thing 

'.^  '  ^  under  seal  with  this  view,  that  when  the  thne  suits,  we  may 
bring  it  out  to  the  light.  And  we  have  learnt  by  the  testi- 
mony of  Holy  Writ,  that  Judaea,  which  is  now  left  desolate, 
shall  be  gathered  into  the  bosom  of  the  Faith  at  the  end. 

Is.  10,  Hence  it  is  declared  by  Isaiah,  For  though  thtj  people  Israel 
he  as  the  sand  of  the  sea^  yet  a  remnant  of  them  shall  be 

I^om.     saved.     Hence  Paul  saith,  Until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles 

11    25.  ' 

26.'  should  come  in,  and  so  all  Israel  should  he  saved.  There- 
fore He  That  removes  His  Preachers  now  from  the  eyes  of 
Judsea,  and  afterwards  exhibits  them,  has  as  it  were  ^  shut 
up  the  stars  under  a  seal,'  that  the  rays  of  the  spiritual  stars 
being  first  hidden  and  afterwards  beaming  forth,  she  both 
being  now  cast  off  may  not  see  the  night  of  her  misbelief, 
and  then  by  being  enlightened  may  find  it  out.  It  is  hence 
that  those  two  illustrious  Preachers  were  removed,  but  their 
death  delayed,  that  they  might  be  brought  back  in  the  end 
for  the  purpose  of  preaching ;  of  whom  it  is  said  by  John, 

Rev.  11,  77/^56  are  the  two  olive  frees  and  the  two  candlesticks 
standing  before  the  Lord  of  the  earth.  One  of  whom  '  Truth' 
by  His  own  lips  gives   promise   of  in   the  Gospel,  saying, 

Matt.  ^  j^iifig  truly  shall  Jirst  come,  and  restore  all  things.  They 
then  are  as  if  the  '  stars'  were  '  shut  up  under  a  seal,'  who 
both  at  this  present  are  concealed  that  they  appear  not,  and 
hereafter  shall  appear  that  they  may  stand  Him  in  good 
stead.  Yet  the  Israelitish  people,  which  shall  be  gathered 
in  full  measure  in  the  end,  in  the  immediate  infancy  of  Holy 
Church  is  pitilessly  hardened.  For  it  rejected  the  Preachers 
of  the  Truth,  it  spurned  the  message  of  succour.  Yet  this  is 
effected  by  the  marvellous  contrivance  of  the  Creator  with 
this  view,  that  the  glory  of  the  persons  preaching,  which  if 
received  might  have  lain  hid  in  one  people,  being  rejected 
might  be  spread  abroad  among  all  the  nations.  Hence  too 
it  is  fitly  added  immediately  afterwards  ; 

Ver.  8.    Which  alone  spreadeth  out  the  heavens. 
ix.         10.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  name  of  *  the  heavens,' 
but   this   very  heavenly  life    of  the   persons   preaching,  of 

Ps.  19,1.  whom  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist,  The  heavens  declare  the 
glory  of  God.     Thus  the  same  persons  are  recorded  to  be 

*»  Vide  Corn,  a  Lap.  in  1. 


God  spread  out  the  spiritual  Heavens,  and  trade  down  the  sea.  501 

the  heavens,  and  the  same  to  be  the  sun;  the  heavens  indeed.  Book 

TX 

in    that   by   interposing  ^   they   shield  ;  the   sun,  in  that  by 


intST" 

preaching  they  display  the  power  of  light.  And  so,  upon  cedendo 
the  ^  earth  being  shaken'  '  the  heavens  were  spread  out,'  in 
that  when  Judaea  ravened  in  the  violence  of  persecution,  the 
Lord  spread  wide  the  life  of  the  Apostles,  for  all  the  Gentiles 
to  acquaint  themselves  withal.  And  whilst  she  in  judgment 
being  made  captive  is  scattered  over  the  world,  they  by  grace 
are  every  where  amplified  in  honour.  For  '  the  heavens' 
were  of  small  compass,  so  long  as  one  people  contained  so 
many  mighty  preachers.  For  to  which  of  the  Gentiles  would 
Peter  have  been  known,  if  he  had  continued  in  the  preaching 
to  the  Jewish  people  alone?  Who  would  have  known  of 
Paul's  virtues,  unless  Judaea  by  persecuting  him  had  trans- 
mitted him  to  our  knowledge  .?  See  how  already  they,  that 
were  thrust  off  with  scourges  and  with  insults  by  the  Iraelitish 
people,  are  held  in  honour  throughout  the  length  and  breadth 
of  the  world.  The  Lord  alone  then  '  has  spread  out  the 
heavens,'  Who,  by  the  wondrous  ordering  of  His  secret 
counsel,  from  the  very  cause,  that  He  let  His  Preachers  be 
persecuted  in  one  people,  caused  them  to  spread  out  even  to 
the  comers  of  the  world.  But  yet  neither  did  this  Gentile 
folk  itself,  which  was  devoted  to  the  present  world,  when  the 
tongues  of  the  Apostles  rebuked  its  iniquities,  gladly  welcome 
the  words  of  life.  For  it  forthwith  swelled  up  in  the  pride  of 
opposition,  and  roused  itself  to  the  cruelty  of  persecution. 
But  she  that  sets  herself  to  gainsay  the  words  of  preaching, 
is  speedily  subdued  in  wondennent  at  miraculous  signs. 
Hence  too  the  words  are  fitly  added  in  praise  of  the  Creator, 

A?hI  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the  sea. 

IL  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  title  of*  the  sea,'  but  this     x. 
world's  bitterness  raging  in  the  destruction  of  the  righteous  ?  Ps.33  7. 
Concerning  which  it  is  said  by  the  Psalmist  too.  He  gathereth  ^""^^* 
tJie  waters  of  the  sea  together  as  in  a  skin.     For  the  I^ord 
*  gathereth  the  waters  of  the  sea  together  as  in  a  skin,'  when, 
disposing  all  things  with   a  wonderful   governance,   He  re- 
strains the  threats   of  the  carnal  pent  up  in   their   hearts. 
Thus  *  the  Lord  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the  sea.'     For 
when  the  storms  of  persecution  lift  up  themselves,  they  are 
dashed  in  pieces  in  astonishment  at  His  miracles.     Since  He 


502        The  poor  of  the  loorld  set  as  sand  to  hind  the  sea. 

Job  9,  That  brings  down  the  swellings  of  man's  madness,  as  it  were 

- — '—  treads  the  waters  standing  up  in  a  heap.  Thus  when  the 
(jrentile  world  saw  that  her  form  and  fashion  was  undone 
through  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles,  when  the  rich  sons  of 
this  world  beheld  poor  men's  deeds  arrayed  against  their 
arrogance,  when  the  wise  men  of  this  generation  marked  that 
the  words  of  unlettered  men  were  set  in  opposition  to  them, 
they  swelled  thereupon  in  a  storm  of  persecution.  Yet  they 
who,  being  moved  by  the  opposition  of  words,  burst  out  in 
storms  of  persecution,  are  calmed,  as  we  have  said,  by 
wonder  at  the  miraculous  signs.  So  the  Lord  set  as  many 
steps  upon  these  waves,  as  He  exhibited  miracles  to  the 
persecutors  in  their  pride.     Whence  it  is  well  said  again 

Ps.  93,  \^y  |.[jg  Psalmist,  Marvellously  the  floods  lift  up  their 
waves;  marvellous  is  the  Lord  on  high.  For  against  the  life 
of  the  Elect  the  world  has  lifted  itself  wonderfully  in 
waves  of  persecution,  but  the  Creator  of  things  above  has 
still  more  marvellously  put  these  down  in  the  exalta- 
tion of  the  Preachers'  power ;  for  He  shewed  that  His 
ministers  prevailed  more  in  miracles  above  all  that  the 
powers  of  the  earth  had  swelled  unto  in  anger.  Which  the 
Lord  moreover  well  delivered  by  the  lips  of  Jeremiah, 
while    relating   outward    things,    telling    of   inward    ones; 

Jer.  5,  /  have  placed  the  sand  for  the  hound  of  the  sea,  by 
a  perpetual  decree  that  it  cannot  pass  it;  and  though  the 
waves  thereof  toss  themselves,  yet  can  they  not  prevail: 
though  they  roar,  yet  can  they  not  pass  over  it.  For  '  the 
Lord  has  placed  the  sand  for  the  bound  of  the  sea;'  in  that 
He  has  made  choice  of  the  despised  and  poor  to  dash  in 
pieces  the  glory  of  the  world.  '  The  waves  of  which  same 
sea  toss  themselves,'  when  the  powers  of  the  world  leap 
forth  in  the  uproar  of  persecution.  Yet  they  cannot  pass 
over  the  sand,  in  that  they  are  broken  in  pieces  by  the 
miracles  and  the  humility  of  the  despised  and  scorned. 
But  whilst  the  sea  rages,  while  it  is  lifted  up  in  the  waves  of 
its  madness,  yet  whereas  it  is  trodden  upon  by  the  manifest- 
ation of  interior  Power,  Holy  Church  makes  way,  and  by  the 
accessions  of  time  she  rises  to  the  station  of  her  own  rank*. 
Hence  it  is  rightly  added  immediately  afterwards, 

*■  Or  *•  the  establishing  of  lier  own  order.' 


Common  names  of  Arcturus  Src  used /or  distinctness.     503 

Ver.  9.    Which  maketh  Arcturus^  Orion ^  and  Hyades,  and  Book 
the  chambers  of  the  south.  ^^' 


12.  The  word  of  Truth  never  follows  the  vain  fables  of    xi. 
-JSesiod,  Aralus,  or  Callimachus,  that  in  naming  Arcturus  it 

should  take  the  last  of  the  seven  stars  for  the  tail  of  the  bear, 
or  as  if  Orion  were  holding  a  sword  as  a  mad  lover;  for  these 
names  of  the  stars  were  invented  by  the  votaries  of  carnal 
wisdom,  but  Holy  Scripture  for  this  reason  makes  use  of 
these  words,  that  the  things  which  it  aims  to  convey  instruc- 
tion about,  may  be  represented  by  the  customariness  of  their 
usual  designation.  For  if  he  had  spoken  of  any  stars  he 
might  wish  by  names  unknown  to  us,  man,  for  whom  this  very 
Scripture  was  made,  would  assuredly  have  known  nothing 
what  he  heard.  Thus  in  Holy  Writ  the  wise  ones  of  God 
derive  their  speech  from  the  wise  ones  of  the  world,  in  like 
sort  as  therein  God  the  very  Creator  of  man,  for  man's  benefit, 
takes  in  Himself  the  tones  of  human  passion,  i.  e.  so  as 
to  say.  It  repenteth  3fe  that  I  have  made  man  upon  the  Gen.  6, 
earth;  whereas  it  is  plain  and  undoubted  that  He,  AVho^*"* 
beholds  all  things  before  they  come,  after  He  has  done 
any  thing,  never  repents  by  feeling  regret.  What  wonder  is  it, 
then,  if  spiritual  men  use  the  words  of  carnal  men,  when  the 
Ineffable  Spirit  Himself,  Which  is  the  Creator  of  all  things, 
in  order  to  draw  the  flesh  to  the  understanding  of  Him,  in 
His  own  case  frames  His  speech  of  the  flesh  ?  Thus  in  Holy 
Writ,  when  we  hear  the  familiar  names  of  the  stars,  we  learn 
what  stars  the  discourse  runs  on.  And  after  we  have  well 
weighed  what  stars  are  described,  it  remains  that  from  their 
motions  we  be  led  to  raise  ourselves  to  the  mysteries  of  the 
spiritual  meaning.  For  not  even  after  the  letter  is  there 
any  thing  strange,  in  that  it  is  said  that  God  created  Arcturus, 
and  the  Orions,  and  the  Hyades,  concerning  Whom  it  is  an 
acknowledged  truth,  that  there  is  nothing  of  any  sort  in  the 
world  but  He  Himself  made  it.  But  the  holy  man  declares 
that  the  Lord  made  these,  by  which  he  means  properly  to 
denote  things  that  are  done  in  a  spiritual  way. 

13.  For  what  is  represented  by  the  name  of  Arcturus, 
which  being  set  in  the  polar  region  of  the  heavens  shines 
bright  with  the  rays  of  seven  stars,  except  the  Church 
universal,  which  is  represented  in  the  Apocalypse  of  John  Rev.  i, 

12—20. 


504  Arcturus,  the  Church.      The  stormy  Oriones,  Her  Martyrs. 

Job  9,  by  the  seven  Churches  and  the  seven  candlesticks  ?    Which 
9. 

same,  while  She  contains  in  Herself  the  ffifts  of  seven-fold 


Alleg. 

grace,  beaming  with  the  brightness  of  highest  virtue,  as  it 

were  gives  light  from  the  polar  region  of  Truth.     And  it  is 

'  furthermore  to  be  considered,  that  Arcturus  is  ever  turned 

about,  and  never  sunk  from  sight,  in  that  Holy  Church  ever 

undergoes  the  persecutions  of  the  v/icked  without  ceasing, 

j  and  yet  endures  without  failing  '  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world.'  For  oftentimes  because  the  sons  of  perdition  have 
persecuted  her  even  to  the  death,  they  have  been  persuaded 
that  they  had  as  it  were  utterly  extinguished  her,  but  she 
returned  with  manifold  increase  to  the  rearing  of  her  full 
growth,  in  proportion  as  she  travailed  in  dying  amidst  the 
hands  of  Her  persecutors.  Thus  while  Arcturus  is  turned 
about,  he  is  set  on  high,  for  Holy  Church  is  then  more 
strongly  reinvigorated  in  the  Truth,  when  she  spends  herself 
more  fervently  for  the  Truth. 

j  14.  Hence  too  after  Arcturus  he  immediately  subjoins  the 
'  Oriones'  with  propriety.  For  they  arise  in  the  very  heaviest 
of  the  winter  season,  and  they  stir  up  storms  by  their  rising, 
and  put  sea  and  land  in  commotion.  What  then  is  denoted 
by  '  the  Oriones,'  after  '  Arcturus,'  saving  the  Martyrs  ?  who, 
while  Holy  Church  is  set  on  high  to  take  her  stand  of 
preaching,  destined  to  undergo  the  weight  of  the  persecutors 
and  harassing  treatment,  came  into  the  face  of  heaven,  as  it 
were,  in  the  winter  season.  For  when  they  were  born,  the 
sea  and  the  land  were  troubled,  in  that  when  the  Gentile 
world  grieved  that  its  method  of  life  was  undone,  on  their 
courage  appearing,  it  set  up  for  their  destruction  not  only 
the  fiery  and  turbulent,  but  the  mild  among  men  also.  And 
thus  the  winter  lowered  in  *  the  Oriones,'  in  that  when  the 
constancy  of  the  Saints  shone  out,  the  frozen  soul  of  the 
unbelievers  lashed  itself  into  a  tempest  of  persecution.  And 
so  '  the  heavens'  gave  forth  the  Oriones,  when  Holy  Church 
sent  out  her  Martyrs,  who  whilst  they  had  boldness  to  speak 
what  is  right  to  the  uninstructed,  brought  upon  themselves 
every  thing  most  heavy  from  the  adverse  bitterness  of  cold. 

15.  Now  he  justly  subjoins  the  Hyades  directly,  which, 
when  the  springtide  is  waxing,  go  forth  into  the  face  of 
heaven,  and,  when  the  sun  is  now  })utting  out  the  power  of 


The  rainy  Hyades,  the  Doctors  of  Her  spring-time.     50  5 

his  heat,  are  given  to  sight.     For  they  are  attached  to  the  Book 
bearinninors  of  that  siorn,  which   the  wise  of  this  world  call — ^-^ 


'  the  Bull,'  at  which  the  sun  begins  to  increase,  and  arises 
with  more  fervent  heat,  to  lengthen  out  the  periods  of  the 
day.  Who,  then,  after  '  the  Oriones,'  are  denoted  by  the 
title  of '  the  Hyades,'  saving  the  Doctors  of  Holy  Church,  who, 
when  the  Martyrs  were  taken  away,  came  at  that  period  to  the 
world's  knowledge,  when  faith  now  shines  forth  the  brighter, 
and  the  winter  of  infidelity  being  forced  back,  the  sun  of 
truth  flows  deeper  through  the  hearts  of  the  faithful.  These, 
when  the  storm  of  persecution  was  overpast,  and  the  nights 
of  long  infidelity  consummated,  then  arose  to  Holy  Church, 
when  the  year  now  opens  brighter  in  the  venial  season  of 
belief.  Nor  are  the -holy  Doctors  improperly  denoted  by  the 
designation  of  '  Hyades,'  for  in  the  Greek  tongue  rain  is 
called  *  Hyetus;'  and  the  *  Hyades'  have  received  their 
name  from  the  rains,  surely  because  at  their  rising  they  bring 
showers.  Thus  they  are  well  represented  by  the  title  of  the 
Hyades,'  who,  brought  out  in  the  settled  frame  of  Holy 
Church,  as  it  were  into  the  face  of  heaven,  upon  the  parched 
earth  of  the  human  heart  poured  down  the  showers  of  holy 
preaching.  For  if  the  word  of  preaching  were  not  rain, 
Moses  would  never  have  said,  Let  my  doctrine  be  ivaited  for 'Dent, 
as  the  rain.  '  Truth'  would  never  have  said  by  the  lips  of  '  ' 
Isaiah,  /  will  also  command  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no  Is.  5,  6. 
rain  upon  it;  and  that  which  we  brought  forward  a  little 
above.  Therefore  the  stars'^  of  the  showers  are  icithholden.  3^x^3,3. 
Thus  while  the  Hyades  come  bringing  showers,  the  sun  is 
led  on  to  the  higher  regions  of  heaven;  in  that,  when  the 
knowledge  of  the  Doctors  appears,  while  our  minds  drink  in 
the  showers  of  preaching,  the  heat  of  faith  increases.  And 
the  earth  being  irrigated  is  rendered  productive  in  fruit, 
when  the  light  of  the  sky  is  fired;  in  that  we  yield  the  fruit  of 
good  works  the  more  plentifully,  the  brighter  we  burn  within 
our  breasts  through  the  flame  of  sacred  instruction.  And 
while  heavenly  lore  is  dis]3layed  to  view  by  them  more  and 
more  da}'  by  day,  it  is  as  if  the  springtide  of  interior  light 
were  opened  upon  us,  that  the  new  Sun  may  glow  bright! v 
in  our  souls,  and  being  by  their  words  made  known  to  us, 

«l  see  note  a,  p.  499.  Vulg.  has  stillse  for  stellsp. 


506  Revelation  opens  as  the  End  approaches. 

Job  9,  may  daily  surpass  itself  in  brilliancy.     For  the  end  of  the 

: world  being  close  at  hand,  the  knowledge  from  above  ad- 

*  vances,  and  waxes  bigger  with  the  progress  of  time.    For  hence 

Dan. 12,  it  is  said  by  Daniel,  Many  shall  run  to  andfro^  and  knowledge 
shall  be  increased.     Hence  the  Angel  saith  to  John  in  the 

Kev.  10,  former  part  of  the  Revelation,  Seal  up  those  things^  which  the 
seven  thunders  uttered;  and  yet  at  the  end  of  that  Revelation 

lb.  22,  ]^g  i^i^g  j^^jjj^  saying,  Seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of 
this  book.  For  the  first  part  of  the  Revelation  is  com- 
manded to  be  sealed,  but  the  end  not  to  be  sealed ;  for 
whatever  was  hidden  in  the  beginnings  of  Holy  Church,  the 
end  clears  up  day  by  day.  But  some  imagine  that  '  the 
Hyades'  are  named  from  the  Greek  letter  which  is  rendered 
by  '  y;'  which,  if  it  be  so,  is  not  opposed  to  the  sense 
which  we  have  given:  the  Doctors  are  not  unsuitably  re- 
presented by  those  stars  which  have  their  name  from  letters; 
but,  though  '  the  Hyades'  are  not  unlike  the  look  of  that 
letter,  yet  it  is  a  fact  that  a  shower  is  called  '  Hyetus,'  and 
that  those  at  their  rising  bring  with  them  rain. 

16.  Therefore  let  the  holy  man,  viewing  the  order  of  our 
redemption,  feel  wonder,  and  wondering  let  him  cry  out,  in  the 
words,  Which  alone  spreadeth  out  the  heavens,  and  treadeth 
upon  the  waves  of  the  sea.  Which  maketh  Arcturus,  the 
Oriones,  and  Hyades,  For,  when  the  heavens  were  spread 
out,  the  Lord  made '  Arcturus,'  in  that,  when  the  Apostles  were 
brought  to  honour.  He  stablished  the  Church  in  heavenly 
conversation,  and  when  Arcturus  was  made,  He  framed  '  the 
Oriones,'  in  that  the  faith  of  the  Church  Universal  ])eing 
established.  He  launched  forth  the  Martyrs  against  the  storms 
of  the  world.  And  when  '  the  Oriones'  were  launched  in 
heaven.  He  set  forth  '  the  Hyades,'  in  that  when  the  Martyrs 
proved  strong  against  adversities.  He  vouchsafed  the  teaching 
of  Masters,  to  water  the  drought  of  human  hearts.  These 
then  are  the  ranks  of  the  spiritual  stars,  which  while  they 
stand  out  conspicuous  by  the  highest  virtues,  are  ever 
shining  from  above. 

17.  But  what  remains  after  these  things,  saving  that  Holy 
Church,  receiving  the  fruit  of  her  toils,  should  attain  to  behold 
the  inner  depths  of  the  Country  above.''  And  hence,  whereas 
he  had  said.  Which  maketh  Arcturus,  the  Oriones,  and  the 


Chambers  of  the  south,  depths  of  the  Holy  Spirit.        507 

Hyades;  he  rightly  added  directly,  and  the  chambers  of  the  Book 
South.     For   what   is   here   denoted   by  the   name   of  the - 


South,'  saving  the  fervour  of  the  Holy  Spirit?  with  which 
he  that  is  replenished,  kindles  to  the  love  of  the  spiritual 
Country.  And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  the  vSpouse 
in  the  Song  of  Solomon,  Arise,  0  north  wind,  and  come  thou  Cr-nt.  4, 
south,  blow  upon  my  garden,  that  the  spices  thereof  may  flow 
out.  For  upon  the  '  south  wind'  coming,  the  '  north  wind' 
arising  departs,  when  our  old  enemy,  who  had  bound  up  our 
soul  in  inactivity,  being  expelled  by  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  takes  himself  away.  And  '  the  south  wind  blows  upon 
the  garden'  of  the  Spouse,  that  '  the  spices  thereof  may  flow 
down;'  in  that,  whensoever  the  Spirit  of  Truth  has  filled 
Holy  Church  with  the  excellences  of  His  gifts.  He  scatters 
far  and  wide  from  her  the  odours  of  good  works.     And  thus 

*  the  chambers  of  the  South'  are  those  unseen  orders  of  the 
Angels,  and  those  unfathomed  depths  of  the  heavenly  Countiy, 
which  are  filled  with  the  heat  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  For  thither 
are  brought  the  souls  of  the  Saints,  both  at  this  present 
time  divested  of  the  body,  and  hereafter  restored  to  the 
same  anew,  and  like  stars  they  are  concealed  in  hidden 
depths.  There  all  the  day,  as  at  midday,  the  fire  of  the 
sun  bums  with  a  brighter  lustre,  in  that  the  brightness 
of  our  Creator,  which  is  now  overlaid  with  the  mists  of  our 
mortal  state,  is  rendered  more  clearly  visible ;  and  the  beam 
of  the  orb  seems  to  raise   itself  to   higher  regions,  in  that 

*  Truth*  from  Its  own  Self  enlightens  us  more  completely 
through  and  through.  There  the  light  of  interior  contem- 
plation is  seen  without  the  intervening  shadow  of  mutability; 
there  is  the  heat  of  supreme  Light  without  any  dimness  from 
the  body ;  there  the  unseen  bands  of  Angels  glitter  like  stars  in 
hidden  realms,  which  cannot  now  be  seen  by  men,  in  propor- 
tion as  they  are  deeper  bathed  in  the  flame  of  the  true  Light. 
Thus  it  is  altogether  marvellous  that,  in  the  sending  of  the 
Apostles,  the  Lord  stretched  out  the  Heavens;  that,  in  moderat- 
ing the  swellings  of  persecution  He  trode  the  waves  of  the  sea, 
and  kept  them  down;  that  in  the  stablishing  of  the  Church, 
He  set  '  Arcturus'  in  his  place  ;  that  in  making  the  Martyrs 
proof  against  aflflictions,  He  sent  forth  '  the  Oriones  ;'  that  in 
the  Doctors  being  replenished  in  peace,  He  gave  forth  '  the 


508  The  hidden  qlories  exceed  all  we  know. 

Job  9,  Hyades ;'  but  after  these  it  is  beyond  all  comparison  marvel- 
- — ^ —  lous,  that  He  should  have  provided  for  us  the  haven  of  the 
heavenly  Land,  as  '  the  chambers  of  the  South.' 

18.  All  this  is  beautiful,  that  is  seen  as  it  were  in  the  face 
of  heaven  of  God's  ordering;  but  infinitely  and  incomparably 
more  beautiful  is  that,  to  which  we  are  brouj^ht  without  its 
being  able  to  be  seen.     Hence  the  Spouse  justly  repeats  a 
Cant.  4,  second  time  in   the  commendation   of  His  Bride ;  Behold 
^'  thou   art  fair,   my  love;  hehold  thou  art  fair;    thou  hast 

doves'  eyes,  besides  that   which   lieth   hidden   witldn.     He 
describes  her  '  fair,'  and  says  again  '  fair,'  in  that  there  is 
one  sort  of  beauty  of  life  and  conduct,  wherein  she  is  now 
seen,  and  another  beauty  of  rewards,  wherein  she  will  then 
be  lifted  up  in  the  likeness  of  her  Creator ;  and  because  her 
members,  which  are  all  the  Elect,  go  about  all  things  with 
simplicity,  her  eyes  are  called  '  doves'  eyes ;'   which  shine 
with  extraordinary  light,  for  that  they  glitter  even  with  the 
si^ns  of  miraculous  power.     But  how  great  is  all  this  marvel, 
which  is  able  to  be  seen !  That  marvel  relating  to  things  of  the 
interior  is  more  wonderful,  which  is  not  now"  able  to  be  seen, 
concerning  which  it  is  fitly  added  in  that  place.  Besides  that 
which   lieth  hidden  within.     For   the  glory   of  the  visible 
work  is  great,  but  the  glory  of  the  secret  recompensing  far 
beyond  comparison.     That,  then,  which  is  denoted  by  the 
name  of  stars'  by  blessed  Job,  is  in  the  words  of  Solomon 
represented  by  the  title  of '  eyes ;'  and  wdiat  is  described  by 
Solomon,  Besides  that  which  lieth  within,  blessed  Job  conveys 
to  us,  when  he  extols  '  the  chambers  of  the  South.'    But  see; 
the  holy  man  in  admiring  things  without,  and  contemplating 
those  of  the  interior,  telling  of  things  manifest,  and  diving 
into  things  secret,  aims  to  describe  all  that  is  done  both  within 
and  without;  but  vvhen  shall  the  tongue  of  flesh  unfold  the 
works  of  the  Supreme  Greatness  ?    And  hence  with  just  \)yo- 
priety  directly  afterwards,  by  giving  up  the  attempt,  he  measures 
the  compass  of  these  same  works  the  more  effectually,  saying, 
Ver.  10.   Which  doeth  great  things  past  finding  out;  yea^ 
and  wonders  without  number. 
xii.         li).  For  then  we  more  thoroughly  compass  the  deeds  of 
Divine  Might,  when  we  acknowledge  that  we  can  never  com- 
])ass  them  ;  we  then  speak  with  greater  eloquence,  when  wc 


Silence  best  speaks  infinite  praise.     Man*s  ignorance.     509 

are  silent  on  these,  beino;  struck  dumb  with  astonishment.   Book 

•  •  •  IX 

Since  for  the  describing  of  God's  works  our  insufficiency 


xni. 


finds  in  itself  how  it  may  put  forth  its  tongue  sufficiently, 
that  what  it  cannot  suitably  understand,  it  may  suitably  extol 
by  being  dumb.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  the  Psalmist, 
Praise  Him  in  His  migJity  acts;  praise  Him  according  to^^  jgQ 
His  excellent  greatness.  For  He  '  praises  God  according  to  2. 
His  excellent  greatness,'  who  sees  that  he  breaks  down  in 
the  fulfilling  of  His  praise.  Therefore  let  him  say.  Which 
doeth  great  things  past  Jinding  out;  yea,  and  wonders  with- 
out number:  viz.  'great,'  in  power,  'past  finding  out,'  in 
reason, '  without  number,'  in  multitude.  Therefore  the  works 
of  God  which  he  could  not  compass  by  speaking,  he  more 
eloquently  defined  by  proving  deficient.  But  in  the  review 
of  things,  why  are  we  carried  so  far  without  ourselves,  con- 
sidering that  we  know  nothing  of  the  very  thing  that  is 
done  to  our  own  selves  .?    Hence  it  is  fitly  added, 

Ver.  11.  Zo,  if  He  come  to  me,  I  see  Him  not:    if  He 
passeth  on,  I  perceive  Him  not. 

20.  For  the  human  race  being  shut  out  from  the  interior 
joys,  in  due  of  sin,  lost  the  eyes  of  the  mind;  and  whither  it 
is  going  with  the  steps  of  its  deserts,  it  cannot  tell.  Thus, 
often  that  is  the  gift  of  grace  which  it  takes  to  be  wrath,  and 
often  that  is  the  wrath  of  God's  severity,  which  it  supposes  to 
be  grace.  For  very  commonly  it  reckons  gifts  of  virtue  as 
grace,  and  yet  being  uplifted  by  those  gifts  is  brought  to  the 
ground  ;  and  very  often  it  dreads  the  opposition  of  tempta- 
tions as  wrath,  and  yet  being  bowed  down  by  those  tempta- 
tions, arises  the  more  solicitous  to  the  safe  keeping  of  its  vir- 
tuous attainments.  For  who  would  not  reckon  himself  to  be 
nigh  to  God,  when  he  sees  that  he  is  magnified  with  gifts  from 
on  high,  when  either  the  gift  of  prophecy  or  the  mastership  of 
teaching  is  vouchsafed  him,  or  when  he  is  empowered  to 
exercise  the  grace  of  healing  ?  Yet  it  often  happens  that 
whilst  the  mind  is  made  to  sit  loose  by  self-security  in  its 
virtues,  fi-om  the  adversary  plotting  against  it,  it  is  pierced 
with  the  weapon  of  unexpected  sin,  and  is  for  ever  put 
far  away  from  God  by  the  very  means  whereby  for  a  time 
it  was  brought  near  to  Him  without  the  caution  of  heedful- 
ness.      And    who    would    not   look   upon    himself  as   now 


;"310  fVe  may  take  Mercy  for  Wrath,  and  Wrath  for  Mercy. 

Job  9,  abandoned  by  Divine  grace,  when  after  experiencing  purity, 
ALLE  T  ^^^  ^^^^  *^^^  ^^  ^^  sorely  pressed  by  the  temptations  of  the 
flesh,  that  things  unbefitting  crowd  on  the  mind,  and  before 
the  eyes  of  fancy  there  pass  things  disgraceful  and  impure  ? 
Yet,  when  such  things  as  these  harass  but  not  subdue,  they 
do  not  slaughter  by  the  effect  of  corrupting,  but  preserve  by 
their  effect  of  humbling,  that  the  mind,  finding  itself  weak 
under  temptation,  may  wholly  betake  itself  to  the  assistance 
of  the  Divine  Being,  and  completely  give  over  all  confidence 
in  itself;  and  thus  it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  it  attaches  itself 
to  God  the  deeper  by  the  same  thing,  by  which  it  was  made 
to  lament  its  having  fallen  away  the  lower  from  God.  There- 
fore the  coming  and  going  of  God  are  not  at  all  discoverable 
by  our  faculties,  so  long  as  the  issue  of  alternating  states  is 
hidden  from  our  eyes ;  in  that  there  is  no  certainty  concern- 
ing the  trial,  whether  it  be  a  test  of  virtue  or  an  instrument 
of  our  destruction ;  and  concerning  gifts  we  never  find  out 
whether  they  are  the  reward  here  of  such  as  are  given  up,  or 
whether  they  are  a  support  on  the  road  to  bring  men  to 
their  native  Country.  Thus  let  man,  once  banished  from  the 
interior  j  oys,  view  the  doors  of  the  secret  place  of  the  Spirit 
shut  against  him,  and  cast  forth  to  himself  without,  let  him 
groan  in  the  flesh,  and  seeing  the  losses  which  his  blindness 
entails  upon  him,  exclaim,  Zo,  if  He  come  to  me,  I  see  Him 
not;  if  He  passeth  on,  I  perceive  Him  not.  As  if  he 
lamented  openly,  saying,  ^  Since  I  have  once  lost  my  eyes 
by  my  own  act  and  deed,  as  I  am  bearing  the  darkness  of  a 
self-sought  night,  now  I  neither  know  the  rising  nor  the  setting 
of  the  sun.'  Yet  man,  who  is  pressed  down  by  the  infliction 
of  infirmity,  and  heavy  laden  with  the  darkness  of  his  blind 
estate,  is  going  forward  to  the  Judgment  of  the  Light  above, 
that  he  may  render  an  account  of  his  actions.  And  hence 
it  is  added  immediately  afterwards, 

Ver.  12.  //'  He  question  on  a  sudden,  who  will  answer 
Him  i 
xiv.  21.  God  *  questions  suddenly'  when  He  calls  us  unex- 
pectedly to  the  strict  searching  of  His  scrutiny.  But  man 
cannot  answer  to  His  questioning,  for  that,  if  he  be  then 
sifted,  all  pity  laid  aside,  even  the  life  of  the  righteous  sinks 
under   tlic    scrutiny.     Or,   surely,   He   questions,   when  He 


None  can  answer  God.     None  may  question  Him.       5 1 1 

deals  us  hard  blows,  that,  when  the  mmd  entertains  great  Book 
thoughts  of  itself  in  peace  and  quiet,  it  may  find  itself  out  in L_ 


trouble,  what  sort  it  really  is  of.  And  very  commonly  because 
it  is  smitten,  it  utters  groans  ;  but  it  is  unable  to  make  answer, 
because  the  very  distastefulness  of  his  stroke  is  displeasing  to 
him,  yet  looking  to  himself  man  holds  his  peace,  and  dreads 
to  scrutinize  the  Divine  decrees,  because  he  knows  himself 
to  be  but  dust.  Hence  it  is  said  by  Paul,  Nay,  hut,  O  man.,Uom.  9, 
who  art  thou  that  repHest  against  God  ?  He  that  is  called 
by  the  name  of  '  man'  (homo)  is  proved  to  be  unable  to  '  reply 
against  God.'  For  by  this  circumstance,  that  he  was  taken 
from  the  dust  of  the  earth  %  he  is  not  worthy  to  scrutinize 
the  judgments  of  the  Most  High.  Hence  too  it  is  fitly  sub- 
joined here, 

Or,  who  will  say  unto  Him,  JVliat  doesl  TJiou  ? 
22.  The  acts  of  our  Maker  ought  always  to  be  reverenced  xv. 
without  examining,  for  they  can  never  be  unjust.  For  to 
seek  a  reason  for  His  secret  counsel  is  nothing  else  than  to 
erect  one's  self  in  pride  against  His  counsel.  So  when  the 
motive  of  His  acts  cannot  be  discovered,  it  remains  that  we 
be  silent  under  those  acts  in  humility,  for  the  fleshly  sense 
is  not  equal  that  it  should  penetrate  the  secrets  of  His 
Majesty.  He  then  who  sees  no  reason  in  the  acts  of  God, 
on  considering  his  own  weakness  does  see  reason  wherefore 
he  sees  none.  Hence  also  it  is  added  by  Paul  afterwards, 
Shall  the  tiling  formed  say  to  Him  that  formed  it,  Whyliast 
Thou  made  me  so  ?  For  in  proportion  as  it  sees  itself  to  be 
*  a  thing  formed'  by  God's  workmanship,  it  rebukes  itself  so 
as  not  to  kickback  against  the  hand  of  Him  that  wrought  it; 
for  He,  Who  in  loving-kindness  exalted  what  was  not,  never 
in  injustice  abandons  that  which  is.  So  let  the  mind  be 
brought  to  itself  under  the  stroke,  and  what  it  cannot  com- 
prehend, let  it  cease  to  require,  lest  if  the  cause  of  God's 
wrath  be  searched  out,  It  be  called  forth  in  larger  measure 
for  being  searched  out,  and  lest  wrath,  which  humility  might 
have  pacified,  pride  kindle  to  an  unextinguishable  height. 
Hence  it  is  moreover  fitly  added  concerning  this  same  Wrath, 
Ver.  13.  God,  Whose  wrath  none  can  resist,  and  under 
Whom  they  that  bear  the  world  are  bowed  down, 

«  Lat.  '■  de  humo/  whence  '  homo,'  '  man.' 


512    Saints  vnthsfand  GocVs  Wrath  when  He  sustains  them. 

Job  9,       23.  Tt  is  very  strange  that  it  is  declared  that  none   can 

. — '—resist  God's   wrath,  seeing  that  the  divine  Oracles  witness 
Alleg.  .  ... 

xvi.    that  many  have  withstood  the  wrathfulness  of  the  visitation 

of  Heaven.    Did  not  Moses  resist  God's  wrath,  when  standing 

up  for  the  fallen  people,  He  restrained  the  very  impulse  of 

the  stroke  from  above,  by  the  oblation  of  his  own  death, 

Exod.    saying,  Yet  now  if  Thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin: — and  if  not ^ 

??'  ^\'  blot  me,  I  pray   Thee,  out  of  the  book,  which   Thou  hast 

Numb.  •>         s       J  3  ^  7 

16,  47.  written  ?  Did  not  Aaron  resist  God's  wrath,  when  between 
the  living  and  the  dead  he  took  a  censer,  and  assuaged  the 

lb.  25,  fire  of  visitation  with  the  fumes  of  incense .?  Did  notPhinees 
resist  God's  wrath,  when  slaughtering  them  that  went  a  whoring 
with  strange  women  in  the  very  act^  he  offered  his  zeal  to  the 

2  Sam.  Divine  wrath,  and  pacified  fury  with  the  sword?    Did  not 

^  '  *  David  resist  God's  wrath,  who  by  presenting  himself  to  the 
Angel,  as  he  dealt  destruction,  won  the  grace  of  propitiation, 

1  Kings  even  before  the  appointed  time.^  Did  not  Elijah  resist  God's 
'  *  wrath,  who  when  the  earth  was  now  for  long  dried  up, 
brought  back  by  a  word  the  showers  withdrawn  from  the 
heavens.?  In  what  sense  then  was  it  said  that  none  can 
resist  the  wrath  of  God,  when  it  is  proved  by  existing 
examples  that  numbers  have  resisted  it.?  However,  if  we 
minutely  consider  both  these  words  of  blessed  Job,  and  the 
deeds  of  those  persons,  we  both  find  it  to  be  true  that  there 
is  no  resisting  the  Divine  Wrath,  and  also  true  that  many 
have  often  resisted  it.  For  all  Saints  that  encounter  the 
wrath  of  God,  obtain  it  from  Himself,  that  they  should  be 
thus  set  in  the  way  to  meet  the  force  of  His  stroke;  and  so  to 
say  having  Him  with  them,  they  lift  up  themselves  against 
Him,  and  the  Divine  Power  arms  them  in  alliance  with  Itself 
against  Itself.  Since  in  that  which  they  achieve  against  the 
wrath  of  Him  dealing  cruelly  without,  the  grace  of  Him  so 
angered  encourages  them  within,  and  He  bears  up  those 
serving  Him  inwardly,  whom  He  submits  to  resisting  Him 
outwardly.  Thus  He  bears  the  supplicant's  contradiction 
which  He  inspires,  and  that  is  forced  upon  Him  as  though 
He  were  unwilling,  which  is  by  Himself  commanded  to  be 

Ex.  32,  done.     For  He  saith  to  Moses,  Now  therefore  let  Me  alone, 

^^'  that  My  wrath  may  icax  hot  against  them,  and  that  I  may 
consume  them,  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation. 


If  God  is  fully  wroth,  none  can  change  His  purpose.  513 

What  is  it  to  say  to  His  servant,  Let  3Ie  alone;  but  to  give  Book 
him  boldness  to  supplicate  ?    As  if  He  said  in  plain  words, 


'  Consider  how  thou  prevailest  with  Me,  and  know  that  thou 
mayest  obtain  whatsoever  thou  beseechest  for  the  People.' 
And  that  the  thing  is  done  with  this  mind,  is  witnessed  by 
the  pardon  which  is  immediately  subjoined.  But  when  the 
Wrath  above  moveth  Itself,  so  to  say,  from  the  heart's  core, 
human  opposition  cannot  stay  It;  and  no  man's  entreaty 
presents  itself  to  any  purpose,  when  once  God  ordains 
any  thing  whilst  angered  from  His  inward  Deep.  For  it  is 
hence  that  Moses,  who  blotted  out  by  his  entreaties  the  guilt 
of  the  whole  People  in  God's  sight,  and  whilst  he  offered 
himself  in  the  way,  appeased  the  force  of  the  Divine  indigna- 
tion, when  he  came  to  the  rock  Horeb,  and  for  the  bringing 
forth  the  water  gave  way  to  distiiist,  could  never  enter  the 
Land  of  Promise  from  the  Lord  being  wroth.  And  oftentimes 
he  is  distressed  on  this  score,  often  he  is  troubled  by  his 
regret  making  itself  felt,  and  yet  he  could  never  remove  from 
himself  the  anger  of  an  ordained  retribution,  who  by  God's 
good  pleasure  removed  it  even  from  the  very  people.  Hence 
David,  who  afterwards  by  prayer  held  back  the  sword  of  the  2  Sam. 
Angel  from  the  fallen  People,  first  fled  from  his  son  with^^'^^' 
bare  feet  howling  and  lamenting,  and  until  he  received  to 
the  full  the  cup  of  vengeance  for  the  transgression  he  had 
done,  he  could  never  abate  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  for  himself. 
Hence  Elijah,  that  as  a  mortal  man  he  might  as  it  were  feel 
some  little  of  God's  visitation,  he,  who  opened  the  heavens 
with  a  word,  fled  in  terror  through  the  wilderness  fi'om 
a  woman's  indignation;  and  he  proves  weak  for  himself  in 
his  dismay,  who  appeases  God's  fury  for  others  through  his 
intercession.  Thus  there  is  both  a  possibility  of  resisting 
the  wrath  of  God,  when  He,  That  is  wroth  Himself,  vouchsafes 
aid;  and  there  is  no  possibility  at  all  of  resisting  it,  when  He 
both  rouses  Himself  to  deal  vengeance,  and  doth  not  Himself 
inspire  the  prayer  that  is  poured  forth  to  Him.  Hence  it  is 
said  to  Jeremiah,  Therefore  pray  not  thou  for  this  people,  Jer.  7, 
neither  take  to  thee  praise  and  prayer  for  them;  for  I  mill 
not  hear  in  the  time  of  their  crying  to  Me;  and  again.  Though  Jer.  15, 
Moses  and  Samuel  sic 
be  toward  this  people^ 


Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before  Me,  yet  My  mind  could  not 


2l 


514  Power  in  prayer  of  those  who  pray  for  their  enemies. 

Job  9,       24.  Wherein  it  may  be  usefully  enquired  wherefore,  so 

— j — ^many   more   ancient   fathers   being   set   aside,   Moses    and 

Samuel  alone  are  preferably  and  preeminently  singled  out 

for   the    utterance    of  prayer?     Which   however   we    easily 

learn,  if  we  weigh  well  the  claims   of  that  charity  which  is 

bidden  to  love  even  enemies.     For  that  prayer  comes  with 

a  special  recommendation  to  the  ears  of  our  Creator,  which 

exerts  itself  to  make  intercession  for  our  enemies  too;  and 

Matt.  5,  hence  '  Truth'  saith  by  His  own  lips,  Pray  for  them  that 

Mark     despitefully  use  you,  and  persecute  you.     And  again.  When 

11,25.  ye  stand  praying,  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  any. 

Now  when  we  revolve  the  deeds  of  the  fathers  of  old  time 

as  Holy  Writ  describes  them,  we  find  that  it  was  Moses  and 

Samuel,  who  prayed  for  their  adversaries.     For  one  of  them 

had  to  fly  from  the  persecution  of  that  infuriated  People,  and 

yet  he  interceded  for  the  persecutor's  life:  the  other  being 

deposed  from    the   rule    of  the   People,    saith   to   his    own 

1  Sam.  adversaries  themselves,  God  forbid  that  I  shoidd  sin  against 

'     '  the  Lord  in  ceasing  to  pray  for  you.     Therefore  in   the 

difficult   work   of   deprecating    wrath,  what   is  it  to  bring 

forward  Moses  and  Samuel,  but  to  shew  the  more  plainly 

that  not  even   they  if  they  stood  forward  would   stay  His 

wrath,  who  might  for  this  reason  have  interceded  the  sooner 

for  their  friends,  that  they  were  used  to  intercede  with  Him 

even  for  their  enemies.     Hence  it  is  said  to  that  same  Judaea, 

Jer.  30,  /  have  wounded  thee  with  the  wound  of  an  enemy,  with  the 

^^'  ^^'   chastisement  of  a  cruel  one.     And  again.  Why  criest  thou 

for  thine  ajfiiction?    Thy  sorrow  is  incurable.     Let  the  holy 

man  then  regard  how  the  wrath  of  God  is  restrained  by  no 

man"'s  intercession,  when  once  it  is  inexorably  called  forth, 

and  let  him  say,  God,  Whose  wrath  none  can  resist.    And 

this  we  rightly  reduce  to  a  particular  sense,  if  we  reflect  on 

the  woes  of  that  same  Israelitish  People,  which  the  Saviour, 

Who   was  made  manifest  in  the  mystery  of  His  economy, 

abandoned  in  their  pride,  and  called  the  Gentiles  to  the 

grace  of  the  knowledge  of  Him.     And  hence  it  is  rightly 

subjoined  directly,  Under  Whom  they  that  bear  the  world 

are  bowed  down, 

25.  For  they  do  bear  the  world,  who  sustain  the  cares  and 
concerns  of  the  prCvSent  world.  Since  every  one  is  necessitated 


Rulers,  or  Angels,  bear  the  world,  but  bend  to  God.  515 

to  bear  the  burthens  of  as  great  things  as  he  is  a  leader  of  Book 
in  this  world;  and  hence  a  ruler  of  the  earth  is  not  unsuitably  — ^-^ 


designated  in  the  Greek  tongue  '  basileus.'  For  '  laus'  means 
'  people.'  Basileus  therefore  is  the  title  '  basis  laou,'  which  in 
the  Latin  tongue  is  rendered  '  basis  populi,'  or,  '  the  base  of 
the  people;'  since  it  is  he  that  bears  up  the  people  upon 
himself,  in  that  he  controls  its  motions,  himself  steadied  by 
the  weight  of  power.  For  in  proportion  as  he  bears  the 
burthens  of  his  subjects,  like  a  base  he  supports  a  column 
raised  upon  it.  Let  blessed  Job,  then,  full  of  the  power  of 
the  prophetic  Spirit,  see  how  Judaea  is  forsaken,  and  the 
rulers  of  the  Gentiles  are  bowed  to  the  worship  of  the  Divine 
Being,  and  let  him  say,  God,  Whose  wrath  none  can  resist, 
under  Whom  they  that  bear  the  world  are  bowed  down.  As 
though  he  plainly  owned,  saying,  '  Both  the  People,  that  was 
once  subject  to  Thee,  Thou  forsakest  in  Thy  severity,  and 
the  powers  of  the  Gentiles,  that  set  up  their  heads,  Thou 
bendest  low  in  Thy  mercy.' 

26.  Though  hereby,  that  it  is  said.  Under  Whom  they  that 
bear  the  world  are  bowed  down;  we  may  also  understand  the 
Angelical  powers;  for  these  bear  the  world,  in  that  they 
execute  the  charges  of  the  governing  of  the  universe,  as  Paul 
bears  witness,  when  he  says,  Are  they  not  all  ministering  Heh.  i. 
spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  that  shall  be  heirs  of^^' 
salvation.  Thus  he  says,  God,  Whose  wrath  none  can  resist, 
under  Whom  they  that  bear  the  world  are  bowed  down.  As 
if  he  beheld  the  humiliation  of  every  created  being,  and  said 
in  fear  and  trembling,  '  Which  of  frail  mortals  resists  Thy 
nod,  before  Whose  might  the  Angelic  Powers  themselves 
bow  down  themselves?'  Or,  surely,  since,  when  we  are 
bowed  down,  we  see  nothing  of  things  above  us,  those 
subtlest  spirits  must  needs  have  been  erect,  if  they  completely 
reached  the  power  of  His  Majesty;  but '  they  that  bear  the 
world,  are  bowed  down  under  God,'  for  though  when  they 
are  lifted  up  they  behold  the  loftiness  of  the  Divine  Nature, 
yet  not  even  the  Angelic  Powers  attain  to  comprehend  It. 
Which  Same  the  righteous  man  failing  from  infirmity  to  fathom, 
and  yet  in  some  degree  estimating  It  from  the  ministrations 
of  the  most  exalted  spirits  being  subject  to  Him,  falls  back  to 
the  consideration  of  himself  with  heedful  humility,  and  makes 

2  L-2 


516  Man's  very  righteousness  needs  mercy. 

Job  9,  himself  little  in  his  own  eyes  compared  with  the  omnipotence 
iiii^of  the  Supreme  Majesty;   saying, 

^^*  Ver.  14.  Hoio  great  am  I  that  I  should  answer  Him,  and 
talk  with  Him  in  my  words? 
xvii.  27.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words,  '  If  that  created 
being  is  unable  to  take  thought  of  Him,  which  is  not  burthened 
by  the  flesh,  in  what  spirit  do  I  dispute  about  His  judgments, 
who  am  straitened  by  the  burthen  of  corruption.?'  But  as 
God's  words  to  us  are  oftentimes  His  judgments,  declaring 
the  sentence  of  our  actions,  so  our  words  to  God  are  the 
deeds  which  we  set  forth ;  but  man  *  cannot  reason  with  God 
in  his  words,'  in  that,  in  the  eye  of  His  exact  judgment,  he 
maintains  no  assurance  in  his  actions.  Hence  it  is  fitly 
added, 

Ver.  15.   Who,  though  I  possessed  any  thing  righteous,  yet 
would  I  not  answer,  but  I  would  make  supplication  to  my 
Judge, 
xv^i.       28.  For,  as  we  have  often  said,  all  human  righteousness 
is  proved  unrighteousness,  if  it  be  judged  by  strict  rules. 
And  so  there  is  need  of  prayer  following  after  righteousness, 
that   this,  which  if  sifted  to   the  bottom  might  be   brought 
down,  may  be  firmly  established  in  the  mere  pitifulness  of 
the  Judge.     And  when  this  is  possessed  fully  by  the  more 
perfect   sort,  it   is   said  that  they  possess   a   something   of 
it.     In   that  the  human  mind  both   with  difficulty  puts   in 
practice  the  truths  apprehended  by  it,  and  the  things  which 
it  apprehends  are  the  merest  outskirts.     Therefore  let  him 
say.    Who,  though    I  possessed    any    thing  righteous,   yet 
would  I  not  answer,  hut  I  would  make  supplication  to  my 
Judge.     As  if  he  owned  in  plainer  words  ;  *  And  if  I  should 
grow  to  the  practising  of  virtue,  I  am  made  vigorous  to  life, 
not  by  merit,  but  of  pardoning  grace.'     Therefore  we  must 
be   strenuous  in  prayer,  when  we  do  right,  so  that  all  the 
righteous  ways  we  live  in  we  may  season  by  humihty;  but 
very  often  it  happens  that  our  very  supplication  is  tost  to 
and   fro  by  such  a  multitude  of  temptations,  that  it  seems 
almost  cast  off  from  the  presence  of  tlie  Judge.     And  often 
our  pitiful   Creator  receives  it,   but  because   it  cannot  put 
forth  itself  undefiled,  as  it  is  minded,  it  dreads  the  sentence 
of  condemnation  upon  its  head.     Hence  it  goes  on, 


Saiufs  can  scarce  think  their  injirmities  allow  of  grace.  517 

Ver.  16.  And  when  I  have  called  and  He  hath  answered  Book 
me^  yet  do  I  not  believe  that  He  hath  hearkened  unto  my  voice. 


29.  For  very  often  the  mind  is  set  on  fire  with  the  flame   ^i^- 
of  Divine  love,  and  is  uplifted  to  behold  heavenly  things  and 
secret  mysteries.     It  is  now  transported  on  high,  and  pierced 
with  full  affection,  is  made   strange  to   things  below  ;    but 
being  struck  with  sudden  temptation,  the  soul   which  with 

set  purpose  had  been  established  erect  in  God,  pierced 
with  arising  temptations  is  bowed  low ;  so  that  it  cannot 
discern  itself,  and  being  held  fast  between  good  and  evil 
practices,  cannot  tell  on  which  side  it  is  strongest.  For  very 
often  it  is  brought  to  this  pass,  to  wonder  how  it  so  lays  hold 
of  the  highest  truths,  when  unlawful  thoughts  defile  it ;  and 
again  how  it  admits  unlawful  thoughts,  when  the  fervour  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  with  power  transports  it  above  itself. 
Which  alternate  motions  of  thought  in  the  mind  being 
viewed  aright  by  the  Psalmist,  he  exclaims,  Tliey  mount  upFs.  107, 
to  the  heaven,  they  go  down  again  to  the  depths.  For  we 
mount  up  to  the  heaven,  when  we  enter  into  the  things 
above,  but  we  go  down  to  the  depths,  when  we  are  suddenly 
cast  down  from  the  height  of  contemplation  by  grovelling 
temptations.  Thus  whilst  the  motions  of  the  mind  alternate 
between  vows  and  vices,  too  truly  they  cloud  for  themselves 
the  certainty  of  their  being  heard.  Therefore  it  is  rightly 
said.  When  I  have  called  and  He  hath  answered  me,  yet  do 
I  not  believe  that  He  hath  hearkened  unto  my  voice.  In 
that  the  mind  is  rendered  fearful  from  its  mere  changeable- 
ness,  and  by  that  which  it  is  unwillingly  subject  to,  imagines 
itself  cast  off  and  rejected. 

30.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  with  what  exactness  the 
holy  man  passes  judgment  on  himself,  that  the  judgments  of 
God  may  find  nought  in  him  to  take  hold  of.  For  having 
an  eye  to  his  own  frailty,  he  says.  How  much  less  shall  1 
answer,  and  talk  in  my  words  with  Him  ?  Not  relying  upon 
the  claims  of  his  own  righteousness,  but  betaking  himself  to 
the  hope  alone  of  entreating,  he  adds,  fVho,  though  I  had 
any  tJmig  righteous,  yet  would  I  not  answer,  hut  I  would 
make  supplication  to  my  Judge.  But  apprehensive  for  the 
very  entreaty  itself,  he  adds,  And  when  I  have  called,  and 
He  hath  answered  me,  yet  do  I  not  believe  that  He  hath 


518  Tempest  of  Judgment.     God  punishes  even  original  sin. 

Job  9,  Jtearkened  unto  my  voice.     Why  does  he  shrink   with   so 

''     great  apprehension,  why  does  he  tremble  with  such  sore 

misgiving  ?  but  that  his  eye  is  fixed  on  the  dreadfulness  of 

the  Judge,  in  the  last  strict  reckoning,  and  not  supporting 

the  power  of  His  searching  eye,  all  that  he  does  seems  little 

worth  in  his  account  ?    Whence  he  adds  thereupon, 

Ver.  17.  For  He  shall  break  me  with  a  tempest. 

XX.         31.  In  every  case  that  sinner  is  '  broken  with  a  tempest,' 

who  seemed  to  be  stablished  in  tranquillity,  in  that  the  man 

whom  the  long-suffering  Above  bears  with  for  long,  the  last 

strict  Judgment    destroys.      And   this   is   rightly   called  '  a 

tempest,'   because  it  is   manifested  in  a  commotion  of  the 

Ps.50,3.  elements,  as  the  Psalmist  witnesses,  when  he  says,  God  shall 
come  manifest,  and  He  shall  not  keep  silence;  a  fire 
shall   devour   before  Him,   and  a   mighty   tempest    round 

Nahum  about  Him.     And  hence  another  Prophet  also   says,    TJie 

'  *  Lord,  His  way  is  in  the  tvhirlwind  and  in  the  storm.  In 
which  same  w^hirlwind  the  righteous  man  is  never  broken,  for 
this  reason,  because  here  he  is  ever  in  fear  and  anxiety,  lest 
he  should  be  broken.  For  whilst  still  set  in  the  journey  of 
the  present  life,  he  bethinks  himself  how  severe  towards  the 
actions  of  men  the  Kequirer  of  works  will  appear,  Who  then 
condemns  even  without  works  some  that  are  only  bound  with 
the  guilt  of  original  sin.  Whence  the  holy  man  rightly  adds 
thereupon  in  the  voice  of  mankind, 

Jnd  multiplieth  my  wounds  even  without  cause. 
xxi.  32.  For  there  be  some  that  are  withdrawn  from  the  present 
light,  before  they  attain  to  shew  forth  the  good  or  evil 
deserts  of  an  active  life.  And  whereas  the  Sacraments  of 
salvation  do  not  free  them  from  the  sin  of  their  birth,  at  the 
same  time  that  here  they  never  did  aright  by  their  own  act, 
There  they  are  brought  to  torment.  And  these  have  one 
vvomid,  viz.  to  be  born  in  corruption,  and  another,  to  die  in 
the  flesh.  But  forasmuch  as  after  death  there  also  follows 
death  eternal,  by  a  secret  and  righteous  judgment  *  wounds 
are  multiplied  to  them  without  cause.'  For  they  even 
receive  everlasting  torments',  who  never  sinned  by  their  own 

Job  14,  wi]],      4i^(j  hence  it  is  written,  Eve?i  ^ihe  ii\fant  of  a  single 

4.  5. 

l^XX.        ^  See  note  a,  p.  179.  on  the  passage,  but  it  is  so  quoted  by 

8  The   reference   in  Ed.  IJen.  is  a     St.  Aug.  Serni.  clxx.  §.  2. 
misprint.     St.  Greg,  does  not  read  thus 


Job  suffered,  in  one  sense,  *  without  cause.'  519 

day  is  not  inire  in  His  sight  iipon  earth.     Hence  ^  Truth'  Book 
says  by  His  own  lips.  Except  a  man  he  horn  of  water  and 


of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  5.  ' 
Hence  Paul  says,  We  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath^^^^'  ^' 
even  as  others.  He  then  that  adding  nothing  of  his  own  is 
ruined  by  the  guilt  of  birth  alone,  how  stands  it  with  such 
an  one  at  the  last  account,  as  far  as  the  calculation  of  human 
sense  goes,  but  that  he  is  '  wounded  without  cause  ?'  And 
yet  in  the  strict  account  of  God  it  is  but  just  that  the  stock 
of  mortality,  like  an  unfruitful  tree,  should  preserve  in  the 
branches  that  bitterness  which  it  drew  from  the  root. 
Therefore  he  says.  For  He  shall  hreak  me  with  a  tempest, 
and  multiply  my  tcounds  without  cause.  As  if  reviewing 
the  woes  of  mankind  he  said  in  plain  words;  '  With  what  sort 
of  visitation  does  the  strict  Judge  mercilessly  slay  those, 
whom  the  guilt  of  their  own  deeds  condemns,  if  He  smites 
for  all  eternity  even  those,  whom  the  guilt  of  deliberate 
choice  does  not  impeach  ?' 

33.  Now  that  these  same  sayings  are  not  inconsistent  with 
the  case  of  blessed  Job  in  a  special  sense,  we  shall  acquaint 
ourselves,  if  we  pursue  the  enquiry,  how  truly  they  were 
delivered.  For  considering  himself  with  exactness,  and 
judging  himself  in  every  action,  he  tells  us  with  what  great 
dread  and  apprehension  he  views  the  force  of  the  seventy  of 
the  Most  High,  adding,  For  He  will  hreak  me  with  a 
tempest.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  For  this  reason  I 
ever  fear  Him  even  in  time  of  quiet,  because  I  cannot  but 
know  how  He  may  come  in  the  whirlwind,  by  His  scourges:' 
which  same  scourges  he  both  in  fearing  forecast,  and  in 
forecasting  underwent.  Whence  he  adds,  And  will  ?nultiply 
my  liounds  even  without  cause.  For  as  we  have  often  said 
already,  blessed  Job  was  never  stricken  that  the  stroke 
might  blot  out  sin  in  him,  but  that  it  might  add  to  his  meiit. 
Therefore  in  asserting  himself  wounded  without  cause,  he 
declares  that  concerning  himself  openly,  which  '  Truth*' 
witnesses  of  him  in  secret,  saying,  Although  thou  movedst 
Me  against  him,  to  destroy  him  without  cause.  The  holy 
man  then  does  not  say  from  pride  that  which  he  says  only  in 
truth.  Nor  is  he  out  of  proportion  with  the  rule  of  righ- 
teousness by  those  words,  by  which  he   is   not  at  variance 


5*20       Inward  trials.     God  both  Judge  and  Witness. 

Job  9,  with  the  Judge.     Who  goes  on  to  set  forth  the  continuance 

-V — "  of  those  wounds,  when  he  adds, 
Lit.  _  '  ' 

He  liill  not  suffer  me  to  take  my  breath,  but  filleth  me 
with  bitterness. 
xxu.  34^  It  is  often  an  exercise  of  virtue  to  the  just,  to  be 
subject  to  ills  from  without  by  themselves;  but  that  the  con- 
flict of  a  complete  trial  may  discipline  their  powers,  some- 
times at  one  and  the  same  time  they  are  rent  with  torments 
without,  and  chastened  with  temptations  within.  Hence  the 
holy  man  declares  himself  to  be  full  of  bitterness,  in  that 
whilst  he  is  bearing  scourges  outwardly,  there  is  a  heavier 
weight,  which  from  the  adversary's  tempting  he  carries  in 
his  interior ;  but  withal  the  force  of  his  sorrow  is  abated  by 
considering  the  equity  and  the  power  of  the  Smiter.  Whence 
he  adds, 

Ver.  19.  If  T  speak  of  strength,  lo,  He  is  strong;   if  of 

equity  in  judgment,  none  dareth  bear  witness  for  me, 

xxiii.       35.  For  He  tries  the  counts  of  our  lives,  Who  does  not 

make  them  out  by  the  testimony  of  another;    in  that  He, 

Who  is  one  day  revealed  as  a  strict  inflicter  of  punishment, 

Himself  was  for  long  the  silent  witness  of  the  sin.     For  it  is 

Jer.  29,  on   this  account  that  the  Prophet  says,  /  am  judge   and 

Is.  42      witness.     Hence  he  saith  again,   /  Itave  long  time  holden 

^^'        My  peace;    I  have  been  still,  and  refrained  Myself;  now 

will  I  cry  like  a  travailing  woman.    For  a  woman  in  travail 

casts  forth  with  pain,  what  she  has  long  borne  in  her  womb 

with  burthensomeness.     And  so  after  a  long  silence,  like  a 

travailing  woman,  the   Lord  utters  His  voice,  in  that  what 

He  now  bears  silently  in  Himself,  He  one  day  as  it  were 

reveals  with  pain  in  the  avenging  of  the  Judgment.     But  it 

deserves  our  enquiry;  this  righteous  man,  if  any  had  ventured 

to  give  testimony  in  his  behalf,  would  he  have  cleared  him  of 

guilt .''    And  if  no  other  gave  testimony  to  him,  then,  at  least, 

is  he  himself  at  all  events  of  strength  to  offer  testimony  in 

his  own  behalf.?    It  follows, 

Ver.  20.  If  I  desire  to  justify  myself,  mine  own  mouth 

shall  condemn  me  ;  if  I  say  I  am  perfect,  it  shall  also  prove 

me  perverse. 

xxiv.       86.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words ;  '  Why  should  I  speak 

about  others,  when  I  cannot  bear  testimony  concerning  my- 


Sin  so  subtle  that  we  cannot  make  sure  of  goodness.  521 

self?'     But  whereas  thou  art  not  competent  to  witness  to  Book 

thine  own  innocencj,  dost  thou  know  the  fact  that  thou  art ^^— 

innocent  ?    He  proceeds, 

Ver.  21.   TJiough  I  were  perfect,  even  this  my  soul  shall 
not  know. 

37.  Most  commonly  if  we  know  the  good  things  that  we  xxv. 
do,  we  are  led  to  entertain  pride;  if  we  are  ignorant  of  them, 
we  cannot  keep  them.  For  who  would  not,  in  however  slight 
degree,  be  rendered  proud  by  the  consciousness  of  his  virtue? 
or  who,  again,  would  keep  safe  within  him  that  good,  which 
he  does  not  know  of?  what  then  remains  as  a  provision 
against  either  of  these  evils,  saving  that  all  the  good  things 
that  we  do,  in  knowing  we  should  not  know  ;  so  that  we 
both  look  upon  them  as  right  things,  and  as  a  mere  nothing, 
that  thus  the  knowledge  of  their  rightness  may  quicken  the 
soul  to  a  good  guard,  and  the  estimation  of  their  littleness 
may  never  exalt  it  in  pride  ?  But  there  are  some  things 
which  are  not  easy  to  be  ascertained  by  us,  even  when  they 
are  doing.  For  often  we  are  inflamed  with  a  right  earnest- 
ness against  the  sins  of  transgressors,  and  when  we  are 
transported  by  passion  beyond  the  bounds  of  justice,  we 
account  this  the  warmth  of  just  severity.  We  often  take 
upon  ourselves  the  office  of  preaching,  that  we  may  in  this 
way  minister  to  the  service  of  our  brethren  ;  but  unless  we 
be  acceptable  to  the  person,  whom  we  address,  nothing  that 
we  preach  is  received  with  welcome ;  and  while  the  mind  aims 
to  please  on  useful  grounds,  it  lets  itself  out  after  the  love  of 
its  own  praise  in  a  shameful  way,  and  the  soul  vrhich  was 
busied  in  rescuing  others  fi'om  captivity  to  bad  habits,  being 
itself  made  captive,  begins  to  drudge  to  its  own  popularity. 
For  the  appetite  for  the  applause  of  our  fellow-creatures  is 
like  a  kind  of  footpad,  who  as  people  are  going  along  the 
straight  road  joins  them  from  the  side,  that  the  wayfarer's 
life  may  be  barbarously  taken  by  the  dagger  drawn  out  of 
sight.  And  when  the  intention  of  purposed  usefulness  is 
drawn  off' to  our  own  interests,  in  a  way  to  make  one  shudder, 
sin  accomplishes  that  identical  work,  which  goodness  began. 
Oftentimes  even  from  the  very  beginning  the  thought  of  the 
heart  seeks  one  thing,  the  deed  exhibits  another. 

38.  Often  not  even  the  thought   itself  proves   faithful  to 


21. 
"LrFr 


5*22     Vanity^  covetoiisness,  pride,  curiosity,  deceive  iis. 

Job  9,  itself,  in  that  it  sets  one  object  before  the  raind's  eye,  and  is 
hurrying  far  from  it  after  another  in  real  purpose.  For  very 
often  we  find  persons  who  covet  earthly  rewards,  and  stand 
up  in  defence  of  justice,  and  these  account  themselves  inno- 
cent, and  exult  in  being  the  vindicators  of  right ;  who  if  the 
prospect  of  money  be  withdrawn,  instantly  cease  from  their 
defence  of  justice ;  and  yet  they  look  upon  themselves  as 
defenders  of  justice,  and  maintain  themselves  right  to  them- 
selves, who  the  while  aim  not  at  rightness  but  money.  In 
Deut.  opposition  to  whom  it  is  well  said  by  Moses,  T7iat  which  is 
^^'^^'  just,  thou  shalt  follow  justly.  For  he  followeth  unjustly 
that  which  is  just,  who  is  moved  to  the  defence  of  just  deal- 
ing not  by  his  feeling  for  virtue,  but  by  his  love  of  temporal 
rewards.  He  '  followeth  unjustly  that  which  is  just,'  who  is 
not  afraid  to  drive  a  trade  with  that  justice,  which  he  makes 
his  plea.  And  so  '  justly  to  follow  what  is  just'  is  in  the 
vindication  of  justness  to  make  that  same  justness  our  end 
and  aim.  We  often  do  right  things,  and  are  far  from  looking 
for  rewards,  far  from  seeking  applause  from  our  fellow- 
creatures,  yet  the  mind  being  set  up  in  self-confidence, 
scorns  to  please  those  from  whom  it  seeks  nothing,  sets  at 
nought  their  opinions,  and  drives  itself  miserably  free  along  the 
precipices  of  pride,  and  is  the  worse  overwhelmed  beneath 
sin  from  the  same  source,  whence  it  boasts,  its  sins  as  if 
subdued,  that  it  is  subject  to  no  covetous  desires. 

39.  Often  while  we  sift  ourselves  more  than  is  meet,  by 
our  very  aim  at  discernment  we  are  the  more  undiscerningly 
led  wrong,  and  the  eye  of  our  mind  is  dimmed,  in  propor- 
tion as  it  strives  to  perceive  more ;  for  he  too,  who  deter- 
minately  looks  at  the  sun's  rays,  turns  darksighted,  and  is 
necessitated  to  see  nothing  from  the  very  thing  in  which 
he  striv^es  to  see  too  much.  Therefore  whereas,  if  we  are 
backward  in  our  examination,  we  know  nothing  at  all  of  our- 
selves, or,  if  we  search  ourselves  with  an  exact  scrutiny,  we 
are  very  often  dimsighted  to  distinguish  between  virtue  and 
vice,  it  is  rightly  said  here ;  Tliough  I  were  perfect,  my 
soul  shall  not  know  it.  As  if  it  were  expressed  plainly, 
'  With  what  foolhardiness  do  I  find  fault  with  God's  judg- 
ments upon  me,  who  do  not  know  mine  own  self  by  reason 
of  the  darkness  of  my  weak  condition  ?'     Whence  it  is  well 


Wem'hiess  of  uncertainty.     Men  brought  to  nothing.  523 

said  by  the  Prophet,   The  deep  uttered  his  voice  from  the  Book 
height  of  his  imagining.     For  the  deep  sustains  a  height  of  --^- 
imagining,  when  the  human  mind,  dim  with  the  immensity  ofio.lxx.' 
thought,  even  in  its  very  searching  does  not  penetrate  itself, 
but  to  '  utter  his  voice  from  the  height'  is  that  whilst  it  is 
unable  to  fathom  itself,  it  is  constrained  to  rise  up  in  admira- 
tion, so  that  it  never  should  venture  to  dive  into  that  which 
is  above  it,  in  proportion  as,  in  taking  thought  itself  of  its 
own  incomprehensible  being,  it  cannot  make  out  what  it  is. 
But  the  hearts  of  the  righteous,  because  they  cannot  examine 
themselves  to   perfection,  with   difficulty  bear  this  exile  of 
dimsightedness;  and  hence  it  is  added,  and  I  shall  he  weary 
of  my  life.    The  righteous  man  is  weary  to  live,  in  that  both  by 
doing  works  he  does  not  cease  to  seek  after  life,  and  yet  can- 
not discover  the  merits  of  that  same  life  ;  since  he  draws  the 
balances   of  trial   out  from  the   bosom  of  interior  Justice, 
and  in  himself  is  disabled  for  the  effecting  of  discovery  from 
the  very  cause  that,  being  transported  above  himself,  he  is 
enlarged  in  the  power  of  inquiring.     But  the  alleviation  of 
our  darkness  lies  in  the  just  and  incomprehensible  power  of 
the  Creator  being  recalled  to  mind,  which  both  never  leaves 
the  wicked  without    taking   vengeance,    and    surpasses    the 
righteousness  of  the  just  by  the  boundlessness  of  its  incom- 
prehensibility; and  hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined, 

Ver.  22.  TJtis    is   one    thing,    that   I    have   spoken,   He 
destroyeth  both  the  perfect  and  the  wicked. 

40.  The  ^  perfect  man  is  destroyed'  by  the  Creator,  in  xxvi. 
\  that  whatever  his  pureness  may  have  been,  it  is  swallowed 
up  by  the  pureness  of  the  divine  immensity.  For  though  we 
take  heed  to  preserve  pureness,  yet  by  consideration  of  the 
interior  Perfection  it  is  shewn,  that  this  which  we  practise  is 
not  purity;  '  the  wicked'  likewise  is  '  destroyed'  by  the 
Creator,  in  that  whilst  God  ordereth  all  things  marvellously, 
his  wickedness  is  caught  in  the  noose  of  his  own  artifices. 
For  he  is  even  unwittingly  involving  himself  in  punishment 
on  the  same  grounds  whereon  he  wittingly  exults  in  doing 
any  thing.  Whereas  therefore  Almighty  God  at  once  sur- 
passes the  perfection  of  the  righteous  by  pureness,  and  pene- 
trating the  craft  of  the  wicked  condemns  it,  it  is  rightly  said, 
This  is  one  thing,  therefore  I  said  it ;  He  destroyeth  the 


524  Both  righteous  and  wicked  die  in  the  flesh. 

Job  9,  perfect  and  the  wicked.     As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain 
words ;  *  I  have  spoken  this  word  of  reflection  to  myself, 


that  neither  being  perfect,  shall  I   appear  perfect,  if  I  be 

strictly  examined ;  nor  being  wicked,  if  1   would  lie  hid  in 

myself,  am    I   withdrawn    from   the    piercings    of  heavenly 

probing,  in  that  the  strict  Judge  in  comprehending  all  things, 

penetrates  the   subterfuges   of  wickedness   in   a   marvellous 

way ;  and  in  ordering  for  the  best,  condemns  the  same  by  its 

own  devices.'     Or,  indeed,  He  is  Himself  said  to  destroy 

both  the  perfect  and  the  wicked,  in  that  though  they  be 

separated  in  the  life  of  the  soul,  yet  in  due  of  the  first  sin, 

they  are  alike  dragged  to  the  death  of  the  flesh.     And  hence 

Eccl.  2,  it  is  said  by   Solomon ;    The  learned  dieth   equally  as  the 

jL    J      unlearned.      x4.nd  again.  All   things  are  subject  to  vanity^ 

20.        and  all  go  to  one  place ;  all  are  of  the  dust,  aud  all  turn  to 

dust  again.     It  proceeds  : 

Ver.  23.  If  He  scourge,  let  Him  slay  once  for  all,  and  not 
laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  innocent. 
xxvii.  41.  Who  would  not  suppose  that  this  was  uttered  in  pride, 
unless  he  heard  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  Who  pronounces, 
Job42,7.  j^o^  yQ  ])fii-Q  fiot  spoken  of  Me  the  thing  that  is  right,  as  My 
servant  Job  hath.  Therefore  it  follows,  that  no  one  dare  to 
find  fault  with  the  author's  words,  which  it  appears  the  Judge 
commends.  But  they  must  be  sifted  in  their  inner  sense 
with  the  greater  wariness  and  nicety,  in  proportion  as  they 
sound  the  harder  on  the  outside.  Thus  the  holy  man 
surveying  the  woes  of  mankind,  and  considering  whence  they 
came,  how  that  man,  in  consequence  of  the  promise  of  his 
enemy,  desiring  to  obtain  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil, 
lost  his  very  self  too,  so  that  he  may  say  with  truth.  Though 
I  were  perfect,  yet  my  soul  shall  not  know  it ;  how  that 
after  the  punishment  of  exile  he  is  further  subject  to  the 
scourges  of  corruption,  and  even  after  being  tormented  is 
still  tending  to  the  death  of  the  bod\^,  or  indeed  to  the  death 
of  the  soul,  so  that  he  may  well  say,  He  destroyeth  the  per- 
fect and  the  wicked;  in  opposition  to  tliis  he  begs  the  grace 
of  the  Mediator,  saying,  If  he  scourge,  let  him  slay  once  for 
all.  For  in  that  we  have  both  in  spirit  departed  from  God; 
and  that  in  flesh  we  return  to  dust,  we  are  obnoxious  to  the 
punishment  of  a  double  death.     Hut  there  came  unlo  us  One, 


The  Death  Job  longed  for,  that  of  the  Redeemer,     525 

Who  in  our  stead  should  die  the  death  of  the  flesh  only,  and  Book 

join  His  smgle  Death  to  our  twofold  death,  and  set  us  free 1- 

from  either  kind.     Concerning  which  it  is  said  by  Paul,  /orl^om.  6, 

.  10 

in  that  He  died,  He  died  unto  sin  once.     Thus  let  the  holy 

man  survey  the  ills  of  our  state  of  corruption,  and  let  him 
seek  the  one  Death  of  the  Mediator,  which  should  cancel  our 
two  deaths,  and  in  longing  for  this,  let  him  say,  If  He 
scourge,  let  Him  slay  once  for  all. 

42.  But  mark  how  that  seems  as  though  it  were  at  war 
with  humility,  which  is  immediately  introduced,  And  not 
laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  innocent.  And  yet  we  shall  easily  per- 
ceive this  to  be  a  very  great  piece  of  humility,  if  we  consider 
it  in  a  humble  spirit.  For  it  is  plain  to  all  persons  that 
desire,  when  deferred,  is  in  every  case  a  pain;  as  Solomon 
bears  witness,  who  says,  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  Pror. 
sick.  Now  for  God  to  'laugh,'  is  His  refusing  to  take  pity  ^^'  "' 
upon  the  suffering  of  man.  Hence  the  Lord  saith  again,  by 
Solomon,  to  the  children  of  perdition  continuing  in   sin,  /Prov.  J, 

26 

also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity  ;  i.  e.  *  I  will  not  com- 
passionate you  in  your  distress  with  any  pity.'  Thus  before 
the  coming  of  our  Redeemer,  the  Elect  had  all  of  them  their 
pain,  in  that  with  ardent  longing,  they  desired  to  behold  the 
mystery  of  His  Incarnation,  as  He  Himself  bears  record, 
when  He  says.  For  I  tell  you  that  many  Prophets  a;?f/Lukeio, 
Kings  have  desired  to  see  these  things  ichich  ye  see,  and  have  ' 
not  seen  them;  and  so  the  'pains  of  the  innocent' are  the  desires 
of  the  righteous.  For  so  long  then  as  the  Lord,  taking  no 
pity,  deferred  the  wishes  of  His  Elect,  what  did  He  else, 
but  '  laugh  at  the  pains  of  the  innocent  ?'  Therefore  let  the 
holy  man,  considering  the  gifts  of  the  Redeemer  that  should 
come,  and  enduring  with  pain  the  delay  of  his  wishes, 
express  himself  in  the  words.  If  He  scourge^  let  Him  slay 
once  for  all,  and  not  laugh  at  the  pains  of  the  innocent. 
As  if  he  besought  in  plain  words,  saying,  *  Whereas  our 
life  is  every  day  bruised  with  the  scourge  of  vengeance  on 
account  of  sin,  let  Him  now  appear,  W^ho  for  our  sake  may 
undergo  death  once  for  all,  without  sin,  that  God  may  no 
more  '  laugh  at  the  pains  of  the  innocent,'  if  He  Himself  come 
subject  to  suffering  in  the  flesh,  in  desire  of  Whom  our  soul 
chastens  itself.' 


5'26  ChrisC s  flesh  given  up  to  the  '  hands'  of  the  wicked  one. 

Job  9,  43.  Or  indeed  if  He  uses  the  expression  of  God's  *  laughing' 
__^ — for  His  joy,  the  Lord  is  said  '  to  laugh  at  the  pains  of  the 
innocent,'  in  that  the  more  ardently  He  is  sought  of  us,  the 
more  graciously  He  rejoices  over  us.  For  we  as  it  were 
cause  a  kind  of  joy  to  Him  by  our  pain,  when  by  holy  desires, 
we  chasten  ourselves  for  the  love  of  Him.    Hence  the  Psalmist 

Ps.  118,  saith.  Appoint  a  solemn  day  in  frequency^  even  unto  the 
"  ^'  horns  of  the  altar.  For  he  '  appointeth  a  solemn  day  to 
the  Lord  in  frequency,'  whosoever  is  continually  chastening 
himself  in  the  desire  of  Him;  and  it  is  enjoined  that  this 
same  day  of  solemnity  be  carried  even  to  the  horns  of  the 
altar,  in  that  it  is  necessary  that  every  man  chasten  himself 
for  so  longtime,  until  he  attains  to  the  height  of  the  heavenly 
sacrifice,  i.  e.  unto  eternal  bliss.  Thus  the  holy  man,  for 
that  he  longs  to  have  his  desire  fulfilled  and  no  longer 
deferred,  says  with  humility,  Nor  laugh  at  the  pains  of  the 
innocent.  As  if  he  said,  '  Let  Him,  gladly  welcoming  our 
petitions,  no  longer  defer,  but  by  manifesting  bring  to  light 
Him,  Who  chastens  us  in  the  expecting  of  Himself.'  Now 
that  blessed  Job  prayed  that  He  in  particular  might  be  slain 
once  for  all,  Who  at  the  end  of  the  world  underwent  for  our 
sake  the  death  of  the  flesh  alone,  he  immediately  makes  appear, 
in  that  he  at  the  same  time  subjoins  the  very  course  of  His 
X.       Passion;  saying, 

Ver.  24.   The  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked. 
He  cover  eth  the  faces  of  the  judges  thereof 

xxviii.  44.  For  what  is  denoted  by  the  designation  of  *  the  earth,' 
saving  the  flesh?  who  by  the  title  of  the  wicked,'  save  the 
devil?  The  '  hands'  of  this  wicked  one  were  they,  who  were 
the  aggressors  in  the  death  of  our  Redeemer.  Thus  '  the 
earth  is  given  into  the  hands  of  the  wicked,'  in  that  our 
Redeemer's  Soul  our  old  enemy  could  never  corrupt,  by 
himself  tempting  Him.  But  His  Flesh  he  being  permitted 
did  by  means  of  his  ministers  deprive  of  life  for  three  days; 
and  unknownto  himself,  by  that  very  permission,  he  ministered 
to  the  dispensation  of  God's  pitifulness.  For  assailing  our 
Redeemer  with  three  temptations,  he  had  no  power  to  defile 
the  heart  of  God.  15ut  when  he  set  on  the  mind  of  Judas 
to  bring  about  the  death  of  His  fleshly  part,  and  when  he 
gave   him    a   band  of  soldiers    and  officers  from  the  Chief 


Job  grieves  that  his  days  pass  away  before  his  time.    5-27 

Priests  and  Pharisees,  llien  that  wicked  one  stretched  forth  Book 

.  .  IX. 

his  hands  upon  '  the  earth.'     The  judges  of  this  earth  were 


the  Priests  and  Rulers,  Pilate  and  the  scoffing  soldiers ;  and 
so  this  wicked  one  '  covered  the  faces  of  the  judges  thereof,' 
in  that  he  veiled  the  mind  of  the  persecutors,  that  they 
should  not  know  their  Maker,  with  a  cloud  of  wickedness. 
Whence  it  is  said  by  Paul,  But  even  unto  this  day,  ^t'Ae?^  2  Cor.  3, 
Moses  is  read,  the  vail  is  upon  their  heart;  and^ie  says 
again.  For  had  they  known  it,  they  would  not  have  crucified^  ^or.  2^ 
the  Lord  of  glory.  And  so  the  face  of  the  judges  proved  to 
be  covered,  in  that  the  mind  of  the  persecutors  not  even  by 
His  miracles  ever  knev/  Him  to  be  God,  Whom  it  had  power 
to  hold  fast  in  the  flesh.  But  forasmuch  as  our  old  enemy 
is  one  person  with  all  the  wicked,  Holy  Scripture  very  often 
so  speaks  of  the  head  of  the  wicked,  i.  e.  the  devil,  that  it 
suddenly  goes  off  to  his  body,  i.  e.  to  his  followers.  Therefore 
it  may  be  that  by  the  name  of '  the  wicked  one,'  the  faithless 
and  persecuting  People  is  denoted,  with  which  this  also  which 
is  added  accords  -, 

If  it  is  not  he,  who  then  is  it? 

45.  Who  then  shall  any  where  be  accounted  wicked,  ifx,xix. 
that  People,  which  persecuted  Pity  Itself,  be  not  wicked? 

But  the  holy  man,  after  regarding  the  faithlessness  of  the 
Jewish  People,  calls  back  the  eye  of  his  mind  to  himself, 
grieves  that  he  cannot  behold  Him  Whom  he  loves,  is  sad 
and  sorrowful  that  he  is  withdrawn  from  the  present  world, 
before  the  Saving  Health  of  the  world  is  manifested;  and 
hence  he  adds, 

Ver.  25.  Now  my  days  are  swifter  than  a  post :  they  are 
fled  away,  they  have  seen  no  good. 

46.  For  the  business  of  a  post  is  to  tell  what  is  coming  xxx. 
after;   and   so    all   of  the  Elect  that  were  born  before  the 
coming  of  the  Redeemer,  in  that  either  by  mode  of  life  only, 

or  by  word  of  mouth  likewise,  they  bore  tidings  of  Him, 
were  like  a  kind  of  post  in  the  world.  But  whereas  they 
foresee  themselves  withdrawn  before  the  wished  for  season  of 
Redemption,  they  mourn  that  they  pass  away  '  swifter  than 
a  post,'  and  they  lament  that  their  days  are  short,  because 
they  are  never  extended  so  far  as  to  see  the  light  of  the 
Redeemer;  whence  it  is  justly  said.  They  flee  away^  they  see 


528    The  Fathers  hut  smelted  the  fruits  they  carried  for  us. 
Job  9,  710  good.      All  things  that  have  been  created  are  good,  as 

26 

Moses   bears  record,  who  says,  A?id  God  saw  evei'y  thing 


JMyst. 
Gen.  1,  that  He  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good.     But  that 

^^'  good  alone  is  primarily  good,  whereby  all  those  are  good, 
which  are  not  primarily  good,  and  of  this  good, '  Truth'  saith 
Lukeis,  in  the  Gospel,  None  is  good  save  one,  that  is,  God.  Therefore 
because  the  days  of  the  former  fathers  were  ended  before  ever 
God  was  manifested  to  the  world  in  the  flesh,  it  is  rightly 
said  of  those  days,  that  they  fled  away,  and  saw  no  good. 
As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  They  have  passed  away  before 
the  looked-for  season,  because  they  might  not  attain  to  the 
present  appearing  of  the  Redeemer.'  Whence  it  is  yet 
further  added; 

Ver,  26.  They  are  passed  away  as  the  ships  carrying 
fruits. 
xxxi.  47.  They  that  traverse  seas  transporting  fruits,  do  them- 
selves indeed  enjoy  the  smell  of  the  same,  but  the  food 
thereof  they  convey  to  others.  What  else  then  did  the 
ancient  Fathers  shew  themselves,  saving  ships  carrying  fruits? 
They  indeed  in  foretelling  the  mystery  of  God's  Incarnation, 
themselves  enjoyed  the  sweet  odour  of  hope,  but  to  ourselves 
they  brought  down  the  fruit  by  the  completion  of  that  hope. 
For  what  they  but  smelled  at  in  expecting,  we  are  replenished 
with  in  seeing  and  receiving.  And  hence  That  same  Re- 
John  4,  deemer  saith  to  His  disciples.  Other  men  laboured,  and  ye 
^^'  are  entered  into  their  labours.  And  their  days  are  likened 
to  ships,  because  they  pass  by  on  their  way,  and  very  properly 
to  those  bearing  fruits,  for  all  the  Elect  severally,  whom  they 
carried  before  the  Redeemer's  coming,  through  the  Spirit  of 
prophecy,  they  were  enabled  to  refresh  with  the  expectation, 
but  not  to  feed  with  the  manifest  appearing.  Or,  surely, 
whereas  when  ships  carry  fruits,  they  mix  chaff  with  them, 
in  order  that  they  may  transport  them  to  land  without 
injury,  the  days  of  the  Fathers  of  yore  are  rightly  described 
as  like  to  ships  bearing  fruits,  for  in  that  the  sayings  of  the 
Ancients  tell  of  the  mysteries  of  the  spiritual  life,  they 
preserve  these  by  means  of  the  intermingled  chaff  of  the 
history,  and  they  bring  down  to  us  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
under  a  covering,  when  they  speak  to  us  carnal  things.  For 
often  whilst  they  relate  circumstances  proper  to  themselves, 


The  eagles  of  contemplation  feed  on  the  Incarnation.      559 

they  are  exalted  to  the  secrets  of  the  Divine  Nature.     And  Br  ok 
often  while  they  gaze  at  the  loftiness  of  the  Divine  Nature, 


\ 


they  are  suddenly  plunged  into  the  mystery  of  the  Incarna- 
tion.    Hence  it  is  still  further  added  with  fitness, 

As  the  eagle  that  haste th  to  the  prey. 

48.  For  it  is  of  the  habits  of  the  eagle  to  gaze  at  the  sun's  xxxii. 
rays  with  unrecoiling  eye;  but  when  it  is  pressed  by  need  of 
sustenance,  it  turns  the  same  pupil  of  the  eye,  which  it  had 
fixed  on  the  rays  of  the  sun,  to  the  ken  of  the  carcase,  and 
though  it  flies  high  in  air,  it  seeks  the  earth  for  the  purpose 
of  getting  flesh.  Thus,  surely,  thus  was  it  with  the  old 
fathers,  who  as  far  as  the  frailty  of  human  nature  permitted 
it,  contemplated  the  sight  of  the  Creator  with  uplifted  soul, 
but  foreseeing  Him  destined  to  become  incarnate  at  the  end 
of  the  world,  they  as  it  were  turned  away  their  eyes  to  the 
ground  from  gazing  at  the  rays  of  the  sun;  and  they  as  it 
were  descend  from  highest  to  lowest,  whilst  they  see  Him  to 
be  God  above  all  things,  and  Man  among  all  things;  and 
whilst  they  behold  Him,  Who  was  to  suffer  and  to  die  for 
mankind,  by  which  same  Death  they  know  that  they  are 
themselves  restored  and  fashioned  anew  to  life,  as  it  were  like 
the  eagle,  after  gazing  at  the  rays  of  the  sun,  they  seek  their  food 
upon  the  dead  Body.  It  is  good  to  view  the  Eagle  gazing 
at  the  rays  of  the  Sun,  which  saith,  The  mighty  God^  The  u.  9,  6. 
Everlasting  Father^  the  Prince  of  Peace.  But  let  him  come 
down  from  the  high  flight  of  his  lofty  range  to  earth,  and 
seek  below  the  food  of  the  carcase.  For  he  adds  a  little 
while  after,  saying.  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  ib.53,5. 
Him,  and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed.  And  again,  AndJer.  i7, 
He  is  man,  and  who  shall  know  Him  ?  Thus  the  mind  of 
the  righteous  man  being  lifted  up  to  the  Divine  Nature, 
when  it  sees  the  grace  of  the  Economy  in  His  Flesh,  as  it  were 
*  hasteth'  suddenly  from  on  high  like  an  *  eagle  to  the  prey.' 
But  mark;  that  Israelitish  People,  which  was  for  long  watered 
with  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  above  measure,  lost  those  same 
gifts  of  prophecy,  and  never  continued  in  that  faith,  which 
in  foreseeing  it  had  proclaimed,  and,  by  disowning,  put 
away  from  itself  that  Presence  of  the  Redeemer,  which,  by 
foretelling,  it  clearly  delivered  to  all  its  followers.  Hence, 
immediately,  his  speech  is  suitably  made  to  turn,  in  sympathy, 

2  m 


530   The  Jews  changed.     Mans  days  pass  without  seeing  God. 

Job  9,  to  their  obduracy,  and  it  is  shewn  how  the  Spirit  of  prophecy 

——^ — is  taken  away  from  them.     For  it  is  subjoined, 

Ver.  27.  If  I  say^  I  will  never  speak  thus;  I  change  my 
countenance^  and  am  tormented  with  grief. 

xxxiii.  49.  For  the  Jewish  People  would  not  speak  as  before, 
in  that  it  denied  Him,  Whom  it  had  foretold;  but  with  changed 
countenance  it  is  tormented  with  grief,  in  that  while  it  defiled 
with  the  foulness  of  imbelief  the  aspect  of  its  inward  man, 
by  which  it  might  have  been  known  by  the  Creator,  setting 
out  with  present  evils,  it  brought  itself  under  the  sentence 
of  everlasting  vengeance.  For  its  face  being  as  it  were 
changed,  it  is  not  known  by  the  Creator,  in  that  upon  faith 
in  a  good  conscience  being  gone,  it  is  condemned.  But 
doubtless  it  remains  for  her,  that  the  pain  of  punishment 
torment  her,  whom  her  Creator  knowing  not  disowns. 

Seeing,  then,  that  we  have  gone  through  these  points  under 
the  signification  of  our  Redeemer,  now  let  us  go  over  them 
again,  to  make  them  out  in  a  moral  sense. 

Ver.  25.  Now  my  days  have  been  swifter  than  a  post, 
they  are  fled  away,  they  have  seen  no  good. 

Moral.  50.  For  as  we  have  already  said,  the  first  man  w^as  so 
created  that  by  the  accessions  of  time  his  life  could  only  be 
extended,  but  not  spun  to  an  end ;  but  because  by  his  own 
act  and  deed  he  fell  into  sin,  in  that  he  touched  that  which 
was  forbidden,  he  was  made  subject  to  a  transitory  career, 
which  man  now,  oppressed  by  fondness  for  the  present  life, 
both  undergoes  and  longs  for  without  ceasing.  For,  that  he 
may  not  come  to  an  end,  he  longs  to  live  on,  yet  by  the 
accessions  to  life,  he  is  daily  advancing  to  his  end,  nor  does 
he  well  discover  the  added  portions  of  time,  what  nothings 
they  are,  when  those  things  are  done  and  over  in  a  moment 
which  seemed  to  be  long  in  coming.  Let  the  holy  man  then 
view  the  grounds  of  his  position,  and  in  the  voice  of  mankind 
bewail  the  woes  of  a  transitory  career,  saying,  Now  my  days 
have  been  swifter  than  a  post ;  they  are  fled  away,  they  have 
seen  no  good.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  *  Man  was 
created  for  this  end,  that  he  might  see  '  good,'  which  is  God; 
but  because  he  would  not  stand  in  the  light,  in  flying 
therefrom  he  lost  his  eyes;  for  in  the  same  degree  that  by  sin 
he  began  to  let  himself  run  out  to  things  below,  he  subjected 


Man  bears  untaded  fndts  across  this  life's  sea.  53 1 

himself  to  blindness,   that  he   should   not   see   the  interior  Book 

T  X^ 

light/   And  of  those  days  it  is  farther  added  with  fitness,  They  — 1_1- 
are  passed  away  as  the  ships  carrying  fruits.     For  ships, 
when  they  '  carry  fruits,'  convey  the  produce    of  the  land 
through  the  waves.     Now  the  land   of  man  was  Paradise, 
which  might  have  kept  him  unshaken,  if  by  force  of  innocency 
he  could  have  stood  fast,  but,  because  by  sin  he  fell  into  the 
waves  of  a  changeful  state,  after  the  land  he  came  into  the  seas 
of  the  present  life.    Furthermore  the  fruits  of  the  land  were  the 
word  of  commandment,  the  power  of  good  works  vouchsafed 
him,  the  perception  of  his  Creator  implanted  in  his  nature. 
But  these  fruits,  which  we  refused  to  eat  on  the  land,  we 
cany  through  the  seas,  in  that  we  would  not  keep  unmoved 
in  Paradise  the  blessings  of  so  many  benefits  vouchsafed  to 
us,  and  now  we  endeavour  to  preserve  them  in  the  midst  of 
temptations.     Hasting  to  our  bourn,  we  are  driven  forward 
by  the  breath  of  the  present  life,  we  are  worn  out  with  the 
tossing   of  our   mutable    condition.     But   whereas   by   the 
mystery  of  the  Cross  we   are  made  fast  to  the   good  gifts 
implanted  in  our  nature,  it  is  as  if  we  carried  fruits  by  means  of 
wood.     And  yet  this  may  also  be  understood  in  another  sense. 
For  ships  that  carry  fruits  have  sweetness  of  smell,  but  have 
no  gravity  of  weight ;  and  man,  when  he  became  an  outcast 
from  the  joys  of  Paradise,  lost  the  power  of  contemplation, 
and  parted  with  the  vigour  of  his  native  strength ;  and  when 
he  lifts  up  himself  to   seek  anew  the  things  above,  he  is 
sweetened   indeed   by   the    perfume    of   the    memory,   but 
yields  no  weight  of  life  in  meet  proportion.     Thus  he  is 
filled  with  the  odours  of  fruits,  and  yet  the  vessel  of  our 
soul  is  lightly  driven  hither  and  thither  without  steadiness, 
in  that  we  both  call  to  mind  the  high  state  of  Paradise  with 
a  remembrance   of  a  sweet  smell,  and   are  subject  to   the 
troublesome   waves    of  temptation   arising   from    the    flesh. 
Hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  As  the  eagle  that  hasteth  to  the 
prey.     For  the  eagle  is  suspended  in  an  exceeding  lofty 
flight,  and  poised  in  swift  speeding  skywards,  but  from  the 
hunger  of  the  belly,  he   seeks   the   ground,  and    suddenly 
plunges  himself  do^\Tiward  from  on  high.     Thus,  thus  the 
race  of  man  in  our  first  parent  fell  from  on  high  deep  down 
below,  whereas  the  dignity  of  its  state  by  creation  had  hung 

2  M  -2 


532     Fall  of  man.     Pain  of  perplexity .     Sin  of  questioning. 

Ji)B  9,  it  aloft  in  the  high  region  of  reason  as  in  the  freedom  of  the 
skies :    but   because,    contrary    to    the    cominandment,   he 


touched  the  forbidden  fruit,  he  descended  to  the  earth, 
through  the  lust  of  the  belly  ;  and  it  is  as  if  he  fed  upon 
flesh  after  flying,  for  that  he  lost  those  free  inhahngs  of 
contemplation,  and  now  solaces  himself  with  corporeal 
delights  below.  Thus  '  as  the  eagle  that  hastethto  the  prey,' 
our  days  pass  swiftly  by ;  for  in  proportion  as  we  seek 
things  below,  we  are  hindered  from  maintaining  ourselves  in 
life. 
)       51.  But  when  we  revolve  such  things  in  our  mind  by  con- 

itinual  reflection,  we  are  silently  pressed  with  the  hard 
questions,  why  did  Almighty  God  create  one,  who  He 
foresaw  would  perish  ?  Why  was  He,  Who  is  chief  in  power 
and  chief  in  goodness,  not  so  minded  as  to  make  man  such 
that  he  could  not  perish  ?  But  when  the  mind  silently  asks 
\  these  questions,  it  fears  lest,  by  its  very  audacity  in  question- 
I  ing  thus,  it  should  break  out  into  pride,  and  holds  itself  in  with 
^1  humility,  and  restrains  the  thoughts  of  the  heart.  But  it  is 
/  the  more  distressed,  that  amid  the  ills  that  it  suffers  it  is 
j  over  and  above  tormented  concerning  the  secret  meaning  of 
its  condition.  Hence  here  too  it  is  fitly  added ;  If  I  shall 
say,  I  will  never  speak  thus;  I  change  my  countenance, 
and  am  tormented  with  grief.  For  we  say,  that  '  we  never 
ought  to  speak  thus,'  when  transgressing  the  limits  of  our 
frail  nature  in  pushing  our  enquiries,  we  reproach  ourselves 
in  dread,  and  are  withheld  by  bethinking  ourselves  of  hea- 
venly awe,  in  which  same  withholding,  the  face  of  our  mind 
is  altered,  in  that  the  mind,  which  in  the  nrst  instance,  fail- 
ing to  comprehend  them,  boldly  investigated  things  above, 
afterwards,  finding  out  its  own  infirmity,  begins  to  entertain 
awe  for  what  it  is  ignorant  of.  But  in  this  very  change  there  is 
pain,  for  the  mind  is  very  greatly  afflicted  that,  in  recom- 
pense of  the  first  sin,  she  is  blinded  to  the  understanding  of 
things  touching  her  own  self  All  that  she  undergoes  she 
sees  to  be  just.  She  dreads  lest  in  her  pain  she  be  guilty 
of  excess  from  liberty  of  speech,  she  imposes  silence  on  the 
lips,  but  the  awakened  grief  is  increased  by  the  very  act  by 
which  it  is  restrained.  liCt  him  say  then ;  If  I  shall  say, 
I  nill  never  speak  thus ;   I  change  my  countenance,   and 


fVith  how  many  (jood  works.  Job  Ml  feared.  533 

am  tormented  icitli  qrief.     For  we  are  then  for  the  most  part  Book 

.                                     .                                          •           IX. 
most  grievously  afflicted,   when,   as  it  were    by  a    studied '— 


endeavour  after  consolation,  we  try  to  lighten  to  ourselves 
the  ills  of  our  afflicted  condition;  but  whoever  once  considers 
with  minute  attention  the  ills  of  man  propagated  by  the  con- 
demnation of  our  first  parent,  it  follows  that  he  must  be 
afraid  to  add  his  own  deeds  thereto.  Hence  after  the  holy 
man  had  brought  in  matters  of  common  concern,  he  at  once 
subjoins  those  of  special  interest,  saying, 

Ver.  28.  /  was  afraid   of  all  my  works,  knowing  that 
Thou  wottldest  not  spai'e  me,  when  guilty  of  transgression, 

52.  What  were  the  works  that  blessed  Job  practised,  thexxxiv. 
text  of  this  sacred  history  makes  plain.     For  he  studied  to 
propitiate  his  Maker  by  numberless  burnt  offerings ;  in  that 
according  to  the  number  of  his  sons,  as  it  is  written,  rising 
up  early  in  the  morning,  he  offered  burnt  offerings  for  each, 
and  purified  them  not  only  from  impure  actions,  but  likewise 
from  bad  thoughts.     Of  whom  it  is  recorded,  by  the  witness 
of  Scripture,  For  Job  said,   It  may  be  that  my  sons  have  johi,o. 
sinned,  and  cursed  ^  God  in  their  hearts.     He  exercised  the  ^  Lat 
feeling  of  sympathy,  in  that  he  declares  of  himself,  when  he 
was  importuned  by  the  interrogations  of  his  friends,  Did  wo/ Job  30, 
I  weep  for  him  that  was  in  trouble?     He  discharged  the 
office  of  pity,  as  he  says,  /  was  an  eye  to  the  blind,  and  a  Job  29, 
foot  was  I  to  the  lame.     He  kept  pureness  of  chastity  in 
heart,  in  that  he  discovers  himself  openly  with  adjuration, 
saying,  If  mine  heai't  have  been  deceived  by  a  woman.    He  ^o^^^) 
held  the  very  topmost  point  of  humility,  from  the  grounds  of 
his  heart,  who  saith,  //"  /  did  despise  to  be  judged  with  my^er.is. 
manservant  or  my  maidservant ,  when  they  contended  with 
me.      He  bestowed  the  bounties  of  liberality,   who    saith. 
Or  have  eaten  my  morsel  myself  alone,  and  the  fatherless^'^'^'^''- 
hath  not  ealen  thereof?     And  again;  //  his  loins  have  not"^^^-^^- 
blessed  me,  and  if  he  were  not  teamed  with  the  fleece  of  my 
sheep.     He  displayed  the  kindness  of  hospitality,  who  says, 
The  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  street ;  but  I  opened  my^^^'^"^- 
doors  to  the  traveller.     And  in  the  midst  of  the.  e  things,  for 
the  consummation  of  his  virtues,  by  that  more  excellent  way 
of  charity,  he  even  loved  his  very  enemies,  in  that  he  says, 
If  I  rejoiced  at  the  destruction  of  him  that  hated  me.     And^^'*  ^^• 
again,  Neither  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  sin,  by  wishing  ^er.  so. 


534  After  repentance^  sloth  and  false  aims  to  be  feared. 

Job  9,  a  curse  to  his  soul.  Why  then  was  the  holy  man  '  afraid  for 
j^j^  ^  his  works,'  in  that  he  ever  practised  these,  by  which  God  is 
wont  to  be  softened  towards  transgressions?  How  then  is  it, 
that  while  doing  works  to  be  admired,  he  even  fears  for  these 
same,  being  in  alarm,  when  he  says,  I  was  afraid  of  all  my 
works^  save  that  we  gather  from  the  deeds  and  the  words  of 
the  holy  man,  that  if  we  really  desire  to  please  God,  after  we 
overcome  our  bad  habits,  we  must  fear  the  very  things  them- 
selves that  are  done  well  in  us  ? 

53.  For  there  are  two  particulars  which  must  of  necessity 
be  seriously  apprehended  in  our  good  works,  viz.  sloth  and 
deceit.     And  hence  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet,  as  the  old 

Jer.  48,  translation  has  it.  Cursed  be  he  that  doeth  the  work  of  the 
10.  '  *^ 

Lord  deceitfully  and  negligently.     Now  it  is  to  be  carefully 

noted,  that  sloth  comes  of  insensibility,  deceit  of  self-love, 
for  over  little  love  of  God  gives  magnitude  to  the  first, 
while  self-love,  miserably  possessing  the  mind,  engenders 
the  other.  For  he  is  guilty  of  deceit  in  the  work  of  God, 
whosoever  loving  himself  to  excess,  by  that  which  he  may 
have  done  well,  is  only  making  the  best  of  his  way  to  transi- 
tory good  things  in  compensation.  We  must  bear  in  mind 
too  that  there  are  three  ways  in  which  deceit  itself  is  prac- 
tised, in  that,  surely,  the  object  aimed  at  in  it  is  either 
the  secret  interest  of  our  fellow  creatures'  feelings,  or  the 
breath  of  applause,  or  some  outward  advantage ;  contrary  to 
which  it  is  rightly  said  of  the  righteous  man  by  the  prophet. 
Is.  33,  Blessed  is  he  that  shaketh  his  hands  clear  of  every  favour. 
For  as  deceit  does  not  consist  only  in  the  receiving  of 
money ;  so,  no  doubt,  a  favour  is  not  confined  to  one  thing, 
but  there  are  three  ways  of  receiving  favours  after  which 
deceit  goeth  in  haste.  For  a  favour  from  the  heart,  is 
interest  solicited  in  the  opinion,  a  favour  from  the  mouth  is 
glory  from  ap])lause,  a  favour  from  the  head  a  reward  by 
gift.  Now  every  righteous  man  '  shaketh  his  hands  clear  of 
every  favour,'  in  that  in  whatever  he  does  aright,  he  neither 
aims  to  win  vainglory  from  the  affections  of  his  fellow- 
creatures,  nor  applause  from  their  lips,  nor  a  gift  from  their 
hands.  And  so  he  alone  is  not  guilty  of  deceit  in  doing 
God's  work,  who  while  he  is  energetic  in  studying  riglit 
*  *^"'!'    conduct,  neither  pants  after  the  rewards  of  earthly  substance ', 

poralis  '  *  ^  .  . 

rei.'       nor  after  words  of  applause,  nor  after  favour  in  man's  judg- 


God  chastises  even  repented  sin^for  us,  or  with  us.  535 

ment.     Therefore  because  our  very  good  actions  themselves  Book 
cannot  escape  the  sword  of  ambushed  sin,  unless  they  be 


guarded  every  day  by  anxious  fear,  it  is  rightly  said  in 
this  place  by  the  holy  man,  /  was  afraid  of  all  my  works. 
As  if  he  said  with  humble  confession,  '  What  I  have  done 
publicly,  I  know,  but  what  I  may  have  been  secretly  subject 
to  therein,  I  cannot  tell.'  For  often  our  good  points  are 
spoilt  by  deceit  robbing  us,  in  that  earthly  desires  unite 
themselves  to  our  right  actions ;  oftentimes  they  come  to 
nought  from  sloth  intervening,  in  that,  love  waxing  cold,  they 
are  starved  of  the  fervour  in  which  they  began.  And  so 
because  the  stealth  of  sin  is  scarcely  got  the  better  of  even  in 
the  very  act  of  virtue,  what  safeguard  remains  for  our  security, 
but  that  even  in  our  virtue,  we  ever  tread  with  fear  and 
caution .? 

54.  But  what  he  adds  after  this  presents  itself  as  a  very 
great  difficulty  to  the  mind ;  /  know  that  Thou  icouldest  not 
spare  one  that  offendeth.     For  if  there  be  no  '  sparing  of 
one  that  offendeth,'  who  can  be  rescued  from  death  eternal, 
seeing  that  there  is  no  one  to  be  found  clear  of  sin  ?  Or  does 
He  spare   a  penitent,   but  not  one  that   offendeth,  in  that 
whilst  we  bewail  our  offences  we  are  no  longer  offending  ? 
Yet  how  is  it  that  Peter  is  looked  at,  while  he  is  denying, 
and  that  by  the  look  of  his  denied  Redeemer  he  is  brought 
to  tears 't    How  is  it  that  Paul,  when  he  was  bent  to  do  out 
the  name  of  our  Redeemer  upon  earth,  was  vouchsafed  to 
hear  His  words  from  heaven  ?    Yet  was  sin  punished  both  in 
the  one  and  in  the  other.     In  that  of  Peter  on  the  one  hand 
it  is  written,  as  the  Gospel  is  witness.  And  Peter  remembered  ^^^^'i'^y 
the  word  of  Jesus,  and  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly.     And  of    '     ' 
Paul,  that  very  same  '  Truth'  Which  called  him,  saith.  For  /Acts  9, 
2C'ill  shew  him  how  great  things  he  m  ust  suffer  for  My  Name^s 
sake.     Therefore  God  never  doth  *  spare  him  that  ofiendeth,' 
in  that  He  never  leaves  his  sin  without  taking  vengeance  on 
it.     For  either  man  himself  in  doing  penance  punishes  it  in 
himself,  or  God  in  dealing  ^  with  man  in  vengeance  for  it, 
visits  it  with  His  rod,  and  thus  there  is  never  any  sparing  of 
sin,  in   that  it  is   never  loosed  without  vengeance.     Thus 
David  after  his  confession  obtained  to  hear.  The  Lord  «/«0  2Sam 
h  or  '  along  with  man  avenging  it,'  (speaking  only  of  sins  forsaken.)  ' 


536  Saints  fear,  lest  their  labour  be  in  vain. 

Job  9,  Jiath  put  away  thy  sin.  And  yet  being  afterwards  scourged 
— — — ^with  numberless  afflictions,  and  a  fugitive,  he  discharged  the 
obligation  of  the  sin  which  he  had  been  guilty  of.  So  we 
by  the  water  of  salvation  are  absolved  from  the  sin  of  our 
first  parent;  and  yet  in  clearing  off  the  obligations  of  that 
same  sin,  although  absolved,  we  still  undergo  the  death  of 
the  flesh.  Therefore  it  is  well  said,  /  know  that  thou 
wouldest  not  spare  one  that  offendeth.  In  that  either  by 
ourselves  or  by  His  own  self  He  cuts  off  even  when  He  lets 
off  our  sins.  For  from  His  Elect  He  is  studious  to  wipe  off 
by  temporal  affliction  those  spots  of  wickedness,  which  He' 
would  not  behold  in  them  for  ever.  But  it  oftentimes  happens 
that  when  the  mind  is  fearful  more  than  behoves,  when  it  is 
shaken  with  alarm,  vvhen  it  is  pressed  with  ill-omened  misgiv- 
ings, it  feels  weary  that  it  should  live,  in  that  it  questions  the 
attaining  to  life  even  through  pains  and  labour.  And  hence 
it  is  thereupon  added, 

Ver.  29.  But  if  even  so  I  be  wicked,  why,  then,  have  I 
laboured  in  vain  ? 
XXXV.  ^^'  For  if  we  be  examined  pity  set  aside,  our  work  which 
we  look  to  have  recompensed  with  a  reward  is  deserving  of 
punishment.  Therefore  the  holy  man  shrinking  under  secret 
judgment,  says.  But  if  even  so  I  he  wicked,  why,  then,  have 
I  laboured  in  vain  ?  Not  that  he  repents  of  having  laboured, 
but  that  it  grieves  him  even  amidst  labours  to  be  in  uncer- 
tainty about  the  reward.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that 
the  Saints  so  doubt  that  they  trust,  and  so  trust  that  notwith- 
standing they  do  not  slumber  in  security.  Therefore  because 
it  is  very  often  the  case  that  the  mind,  even  when  bent  upon 
right  courses,  is  full  of  fears,  it  follows  that  after  the  good 
deed  is  done,  deprecating  tears  be  had  recourse  to,  in  order 
that  the  humility  of  entreaty  may  bear  up  the  deserts  of  right 
practice  to  eternal  rewards.  But  yet  we  must  bear  in  mind 
that  neither  our  life  nor  our  tears  have  power  to  make  us 
perfectly  clean,  so  long  as  the  mortal  condition  of  our  state  of 
corruption  holds  us  last  bound.  And  hence  it  is  rightly 
added, 

Ver.  30,  31.  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and  if 
my  hands  shine  as  if  never  so  clean  ;  yet  shalt  Thou  stain 
me  with  frithiness,  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor  me. 


'  Snow  water'  means  humility,  or  heavenly  penitence.      537 

56.   For  '  snow  water'  is  the  weeping  of  humility ;  which  Book 
same,  in  that  it  excels  all  other  virtues  in  the  eyes  of  the 


strict  Judge,  is  as  it  were  white  by  the  colour  of  preeminent  ^^^^^* 
merit.     For  there  are  some  to  whom  there  is  lamenting  but 
not  humility,  in  that  when  they  are  afflicted  they  weep,  yet 
in   those  very  tears,   they   either  set  themselves  in   disdain 
against  the  life  of  their  neighbours,   or  they  are  lifted  up 
against  the  dispensation  of  their  Maker.     Such  have  water, 
but  not  '  snow  water,'  and  they  can  never  be  clean,  because 
they  are  not  washed  in  the  tears  of  humility.     But  he  had 
washed  himself  clean  from  sin  with  snow  water,  who  said 
with  confidence,  A  hroken  and  a  humbled  Jieart,  O  God,  Thou  Ps.  51, 
wilt  not  despise.     For  they  that  afflict  themselves  with  tears 
but  turn  rebels  by  murmuring,  '  break'  their  heart  indeed, 
but  disdain  to  be  '  humbled.'     Though  '  snow  water'  may  also 
be  understood  in  another  sense.     For  water   of  the  spring 
and  stream  issues  out  of  the  earth,  but  snow^  water  is  let  fall 
from    the    sky.      And   there    are    very   many,   who   torment 
themselves  in  the  wailings  of  supplication,  yet  with  all  their 
pains   in    bewailing   they    spend    themselves   upon    earthly 
objects  of  desire  alone.     They  are  pierced  with  anguish  in 
their  prayers,  but  it  is  the  joys  of  transitory  happiness  that 
they  are  in  search  of.     And  so  these   are  not  washed  with 
'snow  water,'  because  their  tears  come  from  below.     For  it  is 
as  if  they  were  bathed  in  water  of  earth,  who  are  pierced 
with  giief  in  their  prayers,  on  account  of  earthly  good  things. 
But  they  who  lament  for  this  reason,  because  they  long  for 
the   rewards    on   high  ^,  are   washed  clean   in    snow    water,  >  or 
in   that  heavenly  compunction  overflows  them.     For  when ! ?°j°^,°° 
they  seek  after  the  everlasting  land  by  tears,  and  inflamed 
with  longing  for  it  lament,  they  receive  from  on  high  that 
whereby  they  may  be  made  clean.     Now  by  '  the  hands' 
what  else  is  denoted  saving  '  works  ?'    Whence  it  is  said  to 
certain  persons   by  the  Prophet;   Your  hands  are  full  o/'Is.i,i5. 
blood,  i.  e.  '  your  works  are  full  of  cruelty.' 

57.  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the   holy  man  does  not 
say,  And  make  my  hands  shine  ever  so  clean,  but   as^  ij'^  so 
never  so  clean.     For  so  long  as  we  are  tied  and  bound  by^^^^' 
the  penalty  of  a  corrupt  state,  we  never  by  whatsoever  right 
works   appropriate    real    cleanness    to   ourselves,   but   only 


588         Our  '•  clothes,'  this  body,  v:/dch  is  to  be  kept  pure. 

Job  9,  imitate  it.     And  hence  it  is  fitly  added,  Yet  Thou  shalt  slain 
— ^ — -vte  with  iilth.     For  God  ^  to  stain  us  with  filth'  means  His 

Moral.  .         ^  . 

shewing  us  to  be  stanied  with  filth  ;  in  that  in  proportion  as 
W8  more  truly  rise  up  to  Him  by  good  works,  the  more 
exactly  we  are  made  to  know  the  filthiness  of  our  life,  by 
which  we  are  rendered  at  variance  with  His  pureness.  Thus 
he  saith,  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and  make  my 
hands  shine  as  if  never  so  clean;  yet  shalt  Thou  stain  me 
with  Jilthinesses.  As  if  it  were  expressed  in  plain  words, 
'  Though  I  be  steeped  in  tears  of  heavenly  compunction, 
though  I  be  exercised  in  the  courses  of  good  works,  yet  in 
Thy  pureness  I  perceive  that  I  am  not  pure.'  For  the  flesh 
itself,  which  is  still  subject  to  corruption,  beats  off  the  spirit 
when  it  is  intent  on  God,  and  stains  the  beautv  of  the  love  of 
Him  by  foul  and  unhallowed  movements  of  thought. 

58.  Hence  too  it  is  added,  And  mine  own  clothes  shall 

abhor  me.     For  what  is  denoted  by  the  name  of  ^  clothes' 

saving  this  earthly  body,  with  which  the  soul  is  endued  and 

covered,  that  it  may  not  be  seen  naked  in   the  subtleness  of 

Eccl. 9,  its  substance?    For  hence  Solomon  saith.  Let  thy  garments 

be  always  white,  i.  e.  the  members  of  the  body  clean  from 

^•^»^' filthy  acts.     Hence  Isaiah  saith,  A  garment  mixed  in  blood 

shall  be  for  burning.     For  to  '  mix  garments  in  blood'  is  to 

defile  the  body  with  fleshly  desires;  which  same  the  Psalmist 

Ps.51,  dreaded  to  be  defiled  with,  when  he  said.  Deliver  me  from 

bloodguiltiness,  O  God,  Thou  That  art  the  God  of  my  health. 

Hence  it  is  delivered  to  John  by  the  voice  of  the  Angel, 

Rev.  3,  Thou  hast  a  few  names  in  Sardis,  which  have  not  defiled 

their  garments.     But  according  to  the  way  of  Holy  Writ, 

our  clothes  are  said  '  to  abhor  us,'  in  that  they  make  us  to  be 

abhorred;  in  like  manner  as  it  is  also  said  of  Judas  by  Peter, 

Acts  1,  Now  this  man  purchased  afield  with  the  reward  of  iniquity. 

For  Judas   never  could  have   purchased  the  potter's  field, 

which  was  bought  with  the  price  of  blood,  in  that  restoring 

the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  he  straightway  punished  the  guilt 

of  the   betrayal  by  a  death  with  greater  guilt  inflicted  on 

himself,  but  '  he  purchased'  is  rendered,  he  *  was  the  cause 

of  purchasing.'     So  in  this  place.  Mine  own  garments  shall 

abhor  me,  means, '  shall  make  me  to  be  abhorred.'    For  whilst 

the    members   set   themselves   up   against   the    s])irit,  whilst 


Corruption  of  nature  keeps  us  from  perfect  purity.         539 

they  break  in  upon  the  engagements  of  holy  desh'e,  by  the  Book 
tumult  of  temptations  that  are  caused   by  them,  the   soul 


being  set  in  its  own  conflict  learns  how  meanly  it  is  still 
regarded  by  the  Divine  Being,  in  that  while  it  fully  desires 
to  go  through  with  the  chastising  of  self  and  is  not  able, 
it  is  defiled  by  the  dust  of  filthy  thoughts.  He  felt  this 
'  abhorrence  of  the  clothes,'  who  said,  But  I  see  another  law  Rom.  7, 

23 

in  my  members  warring  against  tite  law  of  my  mind,  and 
bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  laiv  of  sin,  which  is  in  my 
members.  These  very  garments,  in  which  he  could  not  be 
entirely  pleasing,  he  anxiously  desired  to  lay  aside,  one  day 
to  be  resumed  much  better,  savin j?,  O  wretched  man  that  /Rom.  7, 

.  24. 

am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death? 
Therefore  let  the  righteous  man  say,  If  I  wash  myself  as 
with  snow  water,  and  make  my  hands  shine  as  if  never  so 
clean,  yet  shall  Thoii  stain  me  with  filthin ess,  and  mine  own 
clothes  shall  abhor  me.  In  that  howsoever  he  might  have 
been  transported  on  high  in  the  compunctious  visitings  of 
contemplation,  however  he  might  have  braced  himself  in 
practice  by  the  exercise  of  pains,  yet  he  is  still  sensible  of 
somewhat  unmeet  derived  from  a  body  of  death,  and  sees 
himself  to  be  abominable  in  many  things,  which  he  bears 
about  him  from  his  load  of  conuption.  And  this  too  becomes 
a  worse  afiliction  to  him,  that  he  often  cannot  make  out  by 
what  means  he  is  an  off'ender.  He  undergoes  scourges,  but 
knows  nothing  what  in  him  is  greater,  or  what  less,  that 
displeases  the  severe  Judge.     And  hence  it  is  added, 

32.  For  He  is  not  a  man,  such  as  I  am,  that  I  should 
answer  Him,  or  that  He  can  be  heard  with  me  in  Judgment 
on  an  equal  footing. 

59.  When  we  *  contend  with  another  in  judgment  on  anxxxvii. 
equal  footing,'  we  both  learn  what  is  urged  against  us,  and  in 
all  we  allege  we  are  heard,  and  in  proportion  as  we  appre- 
hend the  points  openly  objected,  we  reply  with  boldness  to 
the  points  propounded.  In  this  way  forasmuch  as  the  in- 
visible Judge  sees  all  that  we  do,  it  is  as  if  He  hears  things 
that  we  say.  But  because  we  never  know  fully  the  thing 
that  displeases  Him,  it  is  as  if  what  He  Himself  says,  we 
know  not.  Thus  the  holy  man.  considering  the  '  abhorrence 
of  his  own  clothes,'  is  the  more  filled  with  fears,  that  he  can- 


540  No  man  can  urge  reason  against  GocTs  Wrath. 

Job  9,  not  '  be  heard  with  Him  in  judgment  on  an  equal  fooling.' 
-— ^'—  In  that  so  long  as  he  is  burthened  with  the  load  of  his  cor- 

MOUAL,  .  ,  .  .  .... 

ruption,  he  meets  with  this  worst  evil  in  his  punishment,  that 
he  does  not  even  know  the  view  that  liis  Reprover  takes. 
As  though  he  said  in  plain  words ;  '  Herein  I  am  not  heard 
on  an  equal  footing,  in  that  while  all  that  I  do  is  open  to 
view,  yet  I  myself  cannot  tell  under  what  liabilities  I  am 
arrested.'     It  goes  on, 

Ver.  32.  Neither  is  there  any  that  is  able  to  convict  hath 
oftis,  and  to  lay  his  hand  upon  us  both. 

xxxviii  60.  It  sounds  hard  that  any  should  be  sought  who  might 
convict  God,  but  it  will  not  be  hard,  if  we  recall  to  mind 
what  He  Himself  says  by  another  Prophet;  for  He  charges 

Isa.  1,    us  by  Isaiah,  Cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well.     Seek  judg- 
~    '  ment,  relieve  the  oppressed,  judge  the  fathtrless,  plead  for 

'  '  ar-     the  widow.    Come,  and  convict^  Me,  saith  the  Lord.   For  one 

^^^  ^  whom  we  convict,  we  encounter  with  the  authority  of 
reason.  And  what  is  this,  that  when  the  Lord  bids  us  do 
holy  actions,  He  adds.  Come,  and  convict  Me,  but  that  He 
plainly  intimates  the  great  assurance  He  vouchsafes  to  good 
works  ?  As  if  it  were  said  in  plain  words,  '  Do  right,  and 
then  no  longer  meet  the  motions  of  My  displeasure  by  the 
groan  of  entreaty,  but  by  the  confident  voice  of  authority.' 

1  John   For  it  is  hence  that  John  saith,  If  our  heart  condemn  us  not, 

'     '     then  have   we   confidence    toward    God.     It  is  hence   that 

Moses,  in  that  he  is  acceptable  in  rendering  service,  is  heard 

while  keeping  silence,  where  it  is  said  to  him  when  he  was 

Ex.  14,  silent,  Wherefore  criest  thou  unto  Me?  It  is  hence  that  he 
withholds   Him   waxing    wrath,  when  he   hears  the  words, 

Ex.  32,  Now  therefore  let  Me  alone,  tit  at  My  wrath  may  wax  hot 
against  this  people.  It  is  hence  that  the  Lord  complains 
that   He  had  no  one  to  convict   Him,  where  it  is  said  by 

Ez.  22,  the   Prophet,  And  I  sought  for  a  man  among  them   that 

^^'  should  make  up  the  hedge,  and  stand  in  the  way  against 
Me  for  the  land,  that  I  should  not  destroy  it,  but  I  found 

Ifl.  64,   none.     It  is  hence  that  Isaiah  laments  bitterly,  saying,  And 

^'  '^'       we  all  do  Jade  as  a  leaf,  and  our  iniquities  like  the  wind 
have  taken  us  away.     And  there  is  none  that  calleth  upon 
Thy  Name,  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of  Thee. 
01.  Now  any  of  the  righteous  may  sometimes  be  able  to 


Christ  a  Mediator  able  to  meet  God.  541 

resist  the  ^^sitations  of  a  present  judgmeot,  by  the  merits  of  Book 
a  derived  innocency,  but  they  have  no  power  by  their  own  — i-l- 
goodness  to  rid  mankind  of  the  woes  of  the  death  to  come. 
Therefore  let  the  holy  man  bethink  himself  whereunto  the 
human  race  has  run  out,  let  him  cast  his  eye  on  the  woes  of 
eternal  death,  which  it  is  plain  that  human  righteousness  can 
never  withstand,  let  him  see  how  frowardly  man  has  offended, 
let  him  see  how  severely  the  wrath  of  the  Creator  is  directed 
against  man,  and  let  him  call  for  the  Mediator  between  God 
and  man,  God  and  Man  in  one,  forasmuch  as  he  beholds 
Him  destined  to  come  long  after;  let  him  lament  and  say, 
Neither  is  there  any  that  is  able  to  convict  both  of  ks,  and  to 
lay  his  hand  upon  us  both.  For  the  Redeemer  of  Mankind, 
who  was  made  the  Mediator  between  God  and  Man  through 
the  flesh,  because  that  He  alone  appeared  righteous  among 
men,  and  yet,  even  though  without  sin,  was  notwithstand- 
ing brought  to  the  punishment  of  sin,  did  both  convict  man, 
that  he  might  not  sin,  and  withstand  God,  that  He  might 
not  smite ;  He  gave  examples  of  innocency  that  He  took  upon 
Him  the  punishment  due  to  wickedness.  Thus  by  suffering 
He  convinced  both  the  One  and  the  other,  in  that  He  both 
rebuked  the  sin  of  man  by  infusing  righteousness,  and  mode- 
rated the  wrath  of  the  Judge  by  undergoing  death;  and  He 
'  laid  His  hand  upon  both,'  in  that  He  at  once  gave  exam- 
ples to  men  which  they  might  imitate,  and  exhibited  in  Him- 
self those  works  to  God,  by  which  He  might  be  reconciled 
to  men.  For  before  Him  there  never  was  forthcoming  One, 
Who  interceded  for  the  guiltinesses  of  others  in  such  wise, 
as  not  to  have  any  of  His  own.  Therefore  none  could 
encounter  eternal  death  in  the  case  of  others,  in  the  degree 
that  he  was  bound  by  the  guilt  of  his  own.  There- 
fore there  came  to  men  a  new  Man,  as  to  sin  a  rebuker,  as  to 
punishment  a  befriender.  He  manifested  miracles.  He 
undei'went  cruel  treatment.  Thus  He  laid  His  hand  upon 
both,  for  by  the  same  steps  by  which  He  taught  the  guilty 
good  things,  He  appeased  the  indignant  Judge.  And  He 
did  this  too  the  more  marvellously  by  His  very  miracles 
themselves,  in  that  He  reformed  the  hearts  of  offenders  by 
mildness  rather  than  by  terror.     Hence  it  is  added. 


542  The  Law  ineffectual,  as  Eiisluis  staff. 

Job  9,      Ver.  34.  Let  Him  take  au:ay  His  rod  from  Me.  and  let 

34.  35  .7  »/  ' 

-T^^  not  His  fear  terrify  ine, 

xxxix.  62.  For  in  the  Law  God  held  the  rod,  in  that  He  said, 
'  If  any  man  do  this  or  that,  let  him  die  the  death.'  But  in 
His  Incarnation  He  removed  the  rod,  in  that  He  shewed  the 
paths  of  life  by  mild  means.     Whence  it  is  said  to  Him  by 

Ps.45,3.  the  Psalmist,  Set  forward,  go  forth  prosperously  arid  rejoice^ 
because  of  truths  and  meekness,  and  righteousness.  For  He 
had  no  mind  to  be  feared  as  God,  but  put  it  into  our  hearts 
that  as  a  Father  He  should  be  loved ;  as  Paul  clearly  delivers ; 

Kom.  8,  Pqjt  ye  have  not  received  the  Spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear, 
but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption  of  sons,  whereby 
we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  Hence  too  it  is  fitly  added  here, 
Ver.  35.  Then  would  I  speak,  and  not  fear  Him., 
'^'  63.  For  the  holy  man,  because  he  beholds  the  Redeemer 
of  the  world  coming  in  meekness,  does  not  assume  fear 
towards  a  Master,  but  affection  towards  a  Father.  And  he 
loots  down  on  fear,  in  that  through  the  grace  of  adoption  he 

1  John  j.jseg  up  t^Q  love.     Hence  John  savs ;   There  is  no  fear  in 

4  18.  .<     '  «^ 

love,  but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear.     Hence  Zachariah 

Luke  1,  says,  That  we  being  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  out  enemies 

'  *        might  serve   Him    without  fear.     Therefore    fear   had    no 

power  to  raise  us  from  the  death  of  sin,  but  the  infused  grace 

of  meekness  erected  us  to  the  seat  of  life.     Which  is  well 

2  Kings  (denoted  by  Elisha  when  he  raised  the  child  of  the  Shunamite. 

He,  when  he  sent  his  servant  with  a  staff,  never  a  whit 
restored  life  to  the  dead  child;  but  upon  coming  in  his  own 
person,  and  spreading  himself  upon  the  dead  body,  and  con- 
tracting himself  to  its  limbs,  and  walking  to  and  fro,  and 
breathing  seven  times  into  the  mouth  of  the  dead  body,  he 
forthwith  quickened  it  to  the  light  of  new  life  through  the 
ministering  of  compassion.  For  God,  the  Creator  of  man- 
kind, as  it  were  grieved  for  His  dead  son,  when  He  beheld 
us  with  compassion  killed  by  the  sting  of  iniquity.  And 
whereas  He  put  forth  the  terror  of  the  Law  by  Moses,  He  as 
it  were  sent  the  rod  by  the  servant.  But  the  servant  could 
not  raise  the  dead  body  with  the  staff;  because,  as  Paul 
Heb.  7,  bears  witness,  The  Law  made  nothing  perfect.  But 
when  He  came  in   His  own  Person,  and  spread  Himself  in 


Christ*s  Person  and  Breath  give  life.     Fear  '  responds^  not.  543 

humility  upon   the   dead  body,   He   contracted  Himself  to   Book 
match  the  limbs  of  the  dead  body  to  Himself.      Who^  being  p^:^  '^- 
in  the  form  of  God.,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  withQ—^. 
God;   but  made  Himself  of  no  reputation^  and  took  upon 
Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness 
of  men ;  and  found  in  fashion  as  a  man.     He  '  walks  to 
and   fro'   also,  in   that  He  calls   Juda3a  nigh   at  hand,  and 
the  Gentiles  afar  off.     He  breathes  upon  the  dead  body  seven 
times,   in   that  by   the   publishing   of   the  Divine    gift,   He 
bestows  the   Spirit  of  sevenfold  grace   upon  those   that   lie 
prostrate    in    the     death    of    sin.      And    afterwards    it    is 
raised  up  alive,  in   that   the   child,  whom  the   rod  of  terror 
could  not  raise  up,  has  been  brought  back  to  life  by  the 
Spirit  of  love.     Therefore  let  him  say  in  himself,  and  in  the 
voice  of  mankindj  Let  Him  take  His  rod  away  from  me,  and 
let  not  His  fear  terrify  me.     Then  would  I  speak,  and  not 
fear  Him,     Where  it  is  fitly  added,  ' 

For  I  cannot  respond  whilst  I  fear. 

64.  We  are  said  to  respond  to  any  one,  when  we  pay  back  xli. 
deeds  worthy  of  his  doings.  Therefore  to  ^respond'  to  God,  is 
to  render  back  our  services  in  return  for  His  previous  gifts. 
And  hence  it  is  that  certain  of  the  Psalms,  in  which  holy  Vid.  ^ 
practice  is  set  forth  for  imitation,  are  prenoted  as  written  ^  to  y^ig. ' 
respond.'  Thus  God  created  man  upright,  and  bore  with  him 
in  long-suffering,  when  he  let  himself  out  to  do  froward  deeds. 
Every  day  He  beholds  sin,  and  yet  does  not  quickly  cut  off  the 
periods  of  life.  He  lavishes  His  gifts  in  loving-kindness,  and 
exercises  patience  towards  evildoers.  Man  ought  to  respond 
to  so  many  benefits,  yet  '  he  is  not  able  to  respond  whilst  he 
fears,'  in  that  every  one  that  continues  to  dread  with  a  slavish 
fear  the  Creator  of  mankind,  assuredly  does  not  love  Him. 
For  we  then  only  render  real  services  to  God,  when  we  have 
no  fear  of  Him  through  the  confidence  of  our  love,  when 
affection,  not  fear,  directs  us  to  good  works,  when  sin  is  now 
no  longer  pleasing  to  our  mind,  even  if  it  were  allowed  us. 
For  every  one  that  is  restrained  by  fear  alone  from  the  prac- 
tice of  evil,  would  gladly  do  evil  things  if  liberty  were  given 
him.  He  then  is  in  no  whit  really  righteous,  who  is  still 
not  free  from  the  hankering  after  evil ;  and  so  it  is  w^ell  said, 
For  I  cannot  respond  while  1  fear.     In  that  we  do  not  render 


544  Weariness,  self-accusation,  hitter  repentance. 

Job  10,  real   service    to    God,  so   long  as  we  obey  His  command- 

-— -^ —  ments  from  fear,  and  not  much  rather  from  love.     But  when 
Lit. 

the  love  of  His  sweetness  is  kindled  in  our  mind,  all  desire 

of  the  present  life  goes  for  little,  fondness  is  turned  into  wea- 
riness, and  the  mind  endures  with  sorrow  this  same,  which 
she  formerly  served,  under  the  dominion  of  an  accursed  love. 
Hence  it  is  added  with  propriety. 

Chap.  X.  1.  My  soul  is  weary  of  my  life. 
xlii.  Qo.  Now  whensoever  the  present  life  has  once  begun  to 
grow  tasteless,  and  the  love  of  the  Creator  to  become  sweet, 
the  soul  inflames  itself  against  self,  that  it  may  accuse  self 
for  the  sins,  wherein  it  formerly  vindicated  itself,  being- 
ignorant  of  the  things  above.  Whence  he  yet  further  adds 
with  propriety, 

/  will  let  my  speech  go  against  myself 
xliii  ^^*  -^^  ^^  ^^  were  employs  his  speech  in  behalf  of  himself, 
who  tries  to  defend  by  excuses  the  evil  things  he  has  done. 
But  he  '  lets  his  speech  go  against  himself,'  who  begins  to 
accuse  himself  of  that  which  he  has  done  amiss.  Now  very 
frequently  even  when  we  commit  sin,  we  go  on  to  try  the 
things  we  have  done.  The  mind  of  itself  brings  what  it 
does  to  trial ;  but  forasmuch  as  it  does  not  at  all  forsake  this 
in  the  desire,  it  is  ashamed  to  acknowledge  what  it  has  done; 
but  when  it  now  comes  down  upon  the  indulgence  of  the 
flesh  with  the  whole  weight  of  its  judgment,  it  lifts  itself 
with  a  bold  voice  in  the  acknowledgment  of  that  self-accusing. 
Whence  it  is  rightly  said  here,  /  ivill  let  my  speech  go  against 
myself;  in  that  the  resolute  mind  begins  to  let  loose  against 
itself  words  of  abhorrence,  which  aforetime  from  a  feeling  of 
shame  it  kept  to  itself  through  weakness.  But  there  be 
some  that  confess  their  sins  in  explicit  words,  but  yet  know 
nothing  how  to  bewail  in  confessing  them.  And  they  utter 
things  with  pleasme,  that  they  ought  to  bewail.  Hence  it  is 
further  added  with  propriety  ; 

/  will  speak  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul. 
xliv.  67.  He  that  tells  his  sins  abhorring  them,  must  needs  likewise 
^ speak  of  them  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul,'  that  that  very  bit- 
terness may  punish  whatsoever  the  tongue  accuses  of  in  the 
warrant  of  conscience.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind,  that  from 
the  pains  of  penitence,  which  the  mind  inflicts  upon  itself,  it 


Judgment  here  saves  not  from  fuhire  icithout  penitence.    545 

derives  a  certain  degree  of  security,  and  rises  with  the  greater  Book 
confidence  to  meet  the  inquest  of  the  heavenly  Judge,  that  it  — ^— 


may  make  itself  out  more  thoroughly,  and  ascertain  how  each 
particular  is  appointed  towards  it.  Hence  it  is  forthwith 
added ; 

Ver.  12.  I  will  say  unto  God,  Do  not  condemn  me;  shew 
me  wherefore  Thou  so  judgest  me. 

68.  Whereas  he  declares  himself  a  sinner  '  in  the  bitter-   Ixv, 
ness  of  his  soul,'  what  else  does  he  say  to  God,  but  that  he 
may  not  be  condemned,  in  that  the  bitterness  of  his  present 
penance  does  away  with  the  pains  of  ensuing  wrath  }    Now 
God  judgeth  man  in  this  life  in  two  ways,  seeing  that  either 

by  present  ills  He  is  already  beginning  to  bring  upon  him 
the  torments  to  come,  or  else  by  present  scourges  He  does 
away  with  the  torments  to  come.  For  except  there  were 
some  whom  the  just  Judge,  as  the  due  of  their  sins,  did  both 
now  and  hereafter  visit,  Jude  would  never  have  said.  The  Jude  5. 
Lord  afterwards  destroyed  them  that  believed  not.  And  the 
Psalmist  would  not  say  of  the  wicked.  Let  them  cover  them-  ps.  109 
selves  with  their  own  confusion  as  icith  a  lined  cloak^.     For??.' ,  . , 

'^  *diploide 

we  mean  by  '  a  lined  cloak'  a  double  garment.     And  so  they 
are  '  clothed  with  confusion  as  with  a  double  garment,'  who 
according  to  the  due  reward  of  their  sin  are  at  once  visited 
with   both   a  temporal  and   an   everlasting  judgment.     For 
chastisement  delivers  those  alone  fi'om  woe,  whom  it  alters. 
For  those  whom  present  evils  do  not  amend,  they  conduct 
to  those  which  are  to  ensue.     But  if  there  were  not  some 
whom  present  punishment  preserves  from  eternal  woe,  Paul 
would   never  have  said.   But  ichen  ice  are  Judged  we  are  1  Cor. 
chastened  of  the  Lord,  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  ^^'  ^^' 
the  world.     Hence  it  is  spoken  to  John  by  the  voice  of  the 
Angel,  As  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten.     Hence  Rev.  3, 
also  it  is  written.  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth,  jj^^  ^^ 
and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  He  receiveth.  6. 

69.  Therefore  it  often  happens  that  the  mind  of  the 
righteous  man,  in  order  to  be  made  more  secure,  is  the 
more  penetrated  with  fear,  and  when  he  is  beset  with  scourges, 
he  is  troubled  with  misgivings  about  the  Judgment  of  the 
Most  High.  He  fears  lest  all  that  he  suffers  should  be  the 
forerunner  of  the  doom  to  ensue,  and  in  his  heart  he  questions 

2  N 


546         One  may  long  to  know  wherefore  Ood  afflicts. 

Job  10,  the  Judge,  in  that  under  His  visitation  he  is  full  of  doubts 
j^^J^  about  the  merit  of  his  life.  But  when  the  goodness  of  his 
life  is  brought  before  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  it  is  as  if  comfort 
were  given  in  answer  by  the  Judge,  in  that  He  never  strikes 
to  destroy  him,  whom  by  so  striking  He  keeps  in  innocency 
of  life  and  conduct.  Therefore  it  is  justly  said  here.  Shew 
me  wherefore  TJiou  so  judgest  me.  As  if  it  were  expressed 
in  plain  words,  '  Whereas  Thou  exercisest  judgment  upon 
me  by  scourging  me,  shew  me  that  by  these  scourges  Thou 
art  making  me  secure  against  the  Judgment.'  Which  same 
however  may  also  be  understood  in  another  sense.  For  very 
often  the  righteous  man  receives  scourges  for  trial,  and 
examining  his  life  mth  the  keenest  eye  of  enquiry,  though 
he  both  feel  and  own  himself  to  be  a  sinner,  yet  for  what 
particular  sin  he  is  smitten  he  cannot  at  all  make  out,  and 
he  trembles  the  more  under  the  rod,  in  proportion  as  he 
knows  nothing  the  reasons  of  his  being  smitten.  He  pra^s 
that  the  Judge  would  shew  him  to  himself,  that  what  He  in 
striking  aims  at,  he  may  himself  also  chastise  in  himself  by 
weeping.  For  he  is  well  assured  that  That  most  just  Avenger 
never  afflicts  any  one  of  us  unjustly,  and  he  is  moved  with 
excessive  alarm,  in  that  he  is  both  put  to  pain  under  the 
lash,  and  cannot  entirely  discover  in  himself  what  there  is  for 
him  to  lament.     Hence  it  is  further  added; 

Ver.  3.  Is  it  good  unto  Thee  that  Thou  shouldest  calumniate 

*  ^^B'  and  oppress  the  poor  ^,  and  the  work  of  Thine  hands,  and  help 
the  counsel  of  the  wicked^ 
xlvi.  70.  This  same  is  so  said  by  way  of  interrogation,  that  it  is 
denied.  As  though  it  were  in  plain  terms;  '  Thou,  That  art 
supremely  good,  I  know  dost  not  hold  it  good  to  oppress  the 
poor  man  by  calumny.  And  therefore  I  know  that  that  is 
not  unjust  that  I  am  suffering,  and  I  am  the  more  grieved, 
that  I  cannot  tell  the  causes  of  its  justness.'  But  observe  that 
he  does  not  say,  That  Thou  shouldest  oppress  the  innocent, 
but,  the  poor  vian.  For  he  who  doth  not  represent  his 
innocency,  but  his  poorness  to  the  severity  of  the  Judge, 
does  not  now  put  on  a  bold  front  on  the  ground  of  his  own 
life,  but  shews  of  how  little  strength  he  sees  himself  to  be. 
Where  also  he  fitly  subjoins,  The  work  of  Thine  hands.  As 
if  he  said  plainly,  '  Thou  canst  not  ever  unfeelingly  oppress 


God  helps  not  the  permitted  counsel  of  the  wicked,       547 

liim,  whom  Thou  rememberest  Thyself  to  have  made  of  Thy  Book 
mere  grace.'  — l-l- 


71.  Now  the  words  are  excellently  put  in,  And  help  the 
counsel  of  the  wicked.  For  whom  does  he  here  call  wicked, 
save  the  malignant  spirits,  who  as  they  cannot  themselves 
return  back  to  life,  mercilessly  look  out  for  fellows  in  destruc- 
tion. Whose  '  counsel'  it  was  that  God's  stroke  should  visit 
blessed  Job,  that  he  who  shewed  himself  righteous  while  at 
peace,  might  at  all  events  commit  sin  under  the  scourge. 
Now  the  Lord  did  not  '  help  the  counsel  of  the  wicked,' 
in  that  whilst  He  gave  up  the  flesh  of  the  righteous  man  to 
their  arts  of  temptation.  He  withheld  his  soul.  It  is  this 
counsel  that  the  evil  spirits  incessantly  persevere  in  against 
the  good,  that  those,  whom  they  see  serving  God  in  innocency 
while  at  rest,  on  being  stricken  by  misfortune  may  go  head- 
long into  a  whirlpool  of  sin.  But  the  sharpness  of  their 
counsel  is  brought  to  nought,  in  that  our  pitiful  Creator 
qualifies  the  strokes  in  accordance  with  our  powers,  that  the 
infliction  may  not  exceed  our  virtue,  and  by  the  craftiness  of 
the  strong  ones  man's  weakness  be  thrown  out  of  course. 
Hence  it  is  well  said  by  Paul,  But  God  is  faithful.  Who  willi  Cor. 
not  suffer  you  to  he  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able,  hut  will^^^  ^^' 
with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  escape^  that  ye  may 

he  able  to  bear  it.  For  except  the  merciful  God  tempered 
His  trials  to  correspond  with  our  powers,  there  is  surely  no 
man  who  could  sustain  the  cunning  plots  of  evil  spirits 
without  being  brought  to  the  ground,  in  that  excepting  the 
Judge  assign  a  measure  to  our  temptations,  by  this  alone  He 
at  once  throws  down  one  standing,  in  that  He  puts  upon 
him  a  burthen  too  much  for  his  strength.  Now  blessed  Job, 
in  the  way  of  denying,  so  put  in  a  question  the  things  which 
be  uttered,  even  as  in  asking  he  denies  the  things  which  he 
thereupon  subjoins,  saying, 

Ver.  4 — 7.  Hast  Thou  eyes  of  flesh  ?  or  shall  Thou  see  as 
man  seeth  ?  Are  Thy  days  as  the  days  of  man  ?  Are  TJiy 
years  as  the  time  of  man,  that  Thou  inquirest  after  mine 
iniquity,  and  searchest  after  my  sin?  To  know  that  I  have 
done  nothing  ungodly. 

72.  Eyes  of  flesh  see  not  the  deeds  of  the  periods  of  time,  xlvii. 
save  in  time,  in  that  both  they  themselves  came   out  with 

2  N  2 


548  God  needs  not  search  to  see.     Man  pleads  His  workmanship. 

Job  10,  time  to  see,  and  are  closed  with  time,  and  man's  sight  follows 
jj^ '  any  deed  and  does  not  prevent  it,  seeing  that  it  but  just 
glimpses  at  things  existing,  and  sees  nothing  at  all  of  things 
to  come.  Moreover  the  days  and  years  of  men  differ  from  the 
days  and  years  of  Eternity,  in  that  our  life,  which  is  begun  in 
time  and  ended  in  time,  Eternity,  whilst  it  frames  it  within  the 
boundlessness  of  its  bosom,  doth  swallow  up.  And  whereas 
the  immensity  of  the  same  extends  beyond  us  on  this  side 
and  on  that  side,  His  '  to  be  eternally'  spreads  without 
beginning  and  without  end:  whereunto  neither  things  gone 
by  are  past,  nor  things  still  to  come,  as  though  they  did  not 
appear,  are  absent;  in  that  He,  Who  hath  it  always  to  be, 
seeth  all  things  present  to  His  eyes,  and  whereas  He  doth 
not  stretch  Himself  by  looking  behind  and  before.  He 
changes  with  no  varieties  of  sight.  And  so  let  him  say; 
Hast  thou  eyes  of  jiesh '?  or  shalt  Thou  see  as  man  seeth  ? 
Are  my  days  as  the  days  of  man  ?  Are  Thy  days  as  the  days 
of  man,  that  TJtou  inquirest  after  mine  iniquity , and  sear  chest 
after  my  sin  ?  To  know  that  I  have  done  nothiny  ungodly.  As 
if,  humbly  inquiring,  he  said,  ^  Wherefore  dost  Thou  search  me 
by  scourges  in  time,  when  even  before  time  was  Thou  didst 
know  me  perfectly  in  Thine  own  self?  Wherefore  dost 
Thou  make  inquest  concerning  my  sins  by  smiting,  whom  by 
the  mightiness  of  Thine  eternity  Thou  didst  never  but  know 
before  Thou  fashionedst  me  V  The  weight  of  Whose  power 
he  immediately  goes  on  to  describe,  where  he  adds; 
And  there  is  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  Thine  hand. 

xlviii.  73.  As  if  he  expressed  it  in  plain  words;  '  What  is  left  to 
Thee,  saving  to  spare.  Whose  power  no  man  can  resist }  For 
in  proportion  as  there  is  none  who  might  stay  Thy  visitation 
by  the  merits  of  his  own  excellence,  let  Thy  pitifulness  the 

1  lit.      more  easily  obtain  from  Thee^  to  spare.'     But  because  being 

if  °lf '  conceived  in  sin,  and  born  in  wickedness,  we  either  do  evil 
things  of  malice,  or  even  in  doing  good  things  go  wrong  out 
of  heedlessness,  we  have  not  wherewith  the  strict  Judge  may 
be  rendered  propitious  towards  us;  but  while  we  arc  unable 
-  to  present  our  work  as  worthy  of  His  regard,  it  remains  that 
for  the  propitiation  of  His  favour  we  offer  to  Him  His  own 
work.     Hence  it  is  added ; 

Ver.  8.    Thine  hands   have    made  me    and  fashioned  me 


Man  framed  of  GocVs  special  counsel,  in  His  Image.     549 

altogether  round  about:  and  dost  Thou  thus  suddenly  cast  Book 
me  down  ?  ^^' 

74.  As  if  He   said   to  Him  in   humility;  '  Wliereas  that  xlix. 
which  I  have  done  being  submitted  to  a  just  examination  is 

not  meet  for  the  propitiating  of  Thee,  consider  in  Thy  mercy 

lest  that  should  perish  which  is  Thy  doing ^'     By  which  i '  quod 

same    words   too    the    wicked    doctrine    of   Manichaeus"^  is  f^*^^^^'* 

*=  some 

destroyed,  who  feigning  that  there  are  two  Principles,  strives  Mss.'  of 
to  maintain  that  the  spirit  was  made  by  God,  but  the  flesh 
by  Satan.     For  the  holy  man,  being  full  of  the  grace  of  the 
prophetic  Spirit,  views  events  to  come  long  afterwards,  and 
foreseeing  the  shoots  of  divers  errors,  treads  them  underfoot, 
saying,    Thine   hands   have    made   me   and  fashioned   me 
altogether  round  about.     For  he,  who  declares  himself  both 
'  made   and    fashioned    altogether   round    about'    by    God, 
leaves  to  the  race  of  darkness  no  part  either  in  his  spirit  or 
in  his  flesh.     For  he   described  himself  as   '  ^moulded'  inspias- 
virtue  of  the  interior  image,  but  he  spoke  of  being  '  fashioned  ™^*^"^' 
together  round  about'  in  so  far  as  he  consists  of  a  covering  of 
flesh. 

75.  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  herein  that  he  declares 
himself  made  by  the  hands  of  God,  he  is  setting  before  the  Divine 
Mercy  the  dignity  of  his  creation;  for  though  all  things  were 
created  by  the  Word,  Which  is  coeternal  with  the  Father,  yet 
in  the  very  account  of  the  Creation,  it  is  shewn  how  greatly 
man  is  prefeiTed  above  all  animals,  how  much  even  above 
things   celestial,  yet   without  sense.      For,   He   commanded^-ps  148 
and  they  all  were  created.     But  when  He   determines  to^- 
make  Man,  this  which  is    to   be    thought  of  with    awe    is 
premised;  Let    Us   make  man   in  Our  Image,  after    Our q^^  j 
Likeness,     Nor  yet  is  it  written  concerning  him  as  it  is  of26. 
the  rest  of  things  created ;  Let  there  be,  and  it  was  so.     Xor  ^^^  «  - 
as  the  waters  the  fowl,  so  did  the  earth  produce  Man ;  but 
before  he  was  made  it  was  said,  Z^/  Us  make;  that  whereas  ver.  20 
it  was  a  creature  endowed  with  reason  that  was  being  made, 

it  mij^ht  seem  as  if  it  were  made  with  counsel.  As  if  bv 
design  he  is  formed  out  of  earth,  and  by  the  inspiration  of 
his  Creator  set  erect  in  the  power  of  a  vital  spirit  in  this  way, 
that  he  who  was  made  after  the  image  of  his  Creator,  might 
have  his  being  not  by  word  of  command,  but  by  the  greater 
eminence  of  action.     That,  then,  which  Man  in   the  work  of 


560       Weakness  of  our  Clay^  [body  moistened  iviih  soul.) 

Job  10,  his  creating  received  preeminently  upon  earth  above  all  other 
-=-^ —  creatures,  this,  being  laid  under  the  scourge,  he  represents 
to  the  pitifulness  of  his  Artificer,  saying,  T/nneha?idshave  made 
me  and  fasliioned  me  altogether  round  about:  and  dost  Thou 
thus  suddenly  cast  me  down?  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words; 
'  Why  dost  Thou  despise  me  with  such  light  esteem,  w^hen 
Thou  createdst  me  with  such  circumstances  of  dignity  ?  and 
him  whom  by  reason  Thou  settest  above  all  other  things,  why 
dost  Thou  by  sorrow  set  below  them  ?'  Yet  this  preeminence, 
that  we  possess,  shines  bright  by  reason  of  the  '  Likeness,' 
but  is  very  far  removed  from  the  perfection  of  blessedness  by 
reason  of  the  flesh,  in  that  whilst  the  spirit  mixes  with  dust, 
it  is  in  a  certain  measure  united  with  weakness.  Which 
weakness  blessed  Job  presents  to  the  pitifulness  of  the  Judge, 
when  he  subjoins; 

Ver.  9.  Remember,  I  pray  Thee,  that  Thou  hast  made  me 

as  the  clay. 

1.  \       76.  The  spirits  of  the  Angels  did  for  this  reason  sin  without 

i  forgiveness,  because  they  might  have  stood  the  stronger  in 

proportion  as  no  mixture   with  flesh  held  them  in  bonds. 

But  man  for  this  reason  obtained  pardon  after  sin,  that  in  a 

body  of  flesh  he  got   that  wherein   he   should  be  beneath 

himself     And  hence  in  the  eye  of  the  Judge  this  frailty  of 

the  flesh  alone  is  a  ground  for  shewing  pity;  as  where  it  is 

said  by  the  Psalmist,  But  He  is  full  of  compassion,  and  will 

Ps.  78,  forgive  their  iniquity,  and  not  destroy  them;  yea,  many  a  time 

*     *   turned  He  His  anger  away  from  them,  and  did  not  stir  up 

all  His  wrath,  and  remembered  that  they  were  but  flesh. 

And  so  man  was  '  made  as  the  clay'  in  that  he  was  taken  out 

of  clay,  for  the  making  of  him.     For  clay  is  made,  when 

» se con- water  is  sprinkled^  in  with  earth.    Therefore  man  is  made  as 

spergi  .  (.|g^y^  jjj  \}^2ii  it  is  as  if  water  moistened  dust,  while  the  soul 

waters  the  flesh.     Which  name  the  holy  man    excellently 

represents  to  the  pitifulness  of  the  Judge,  when  he  beseeches 

saying.  Remember,  1  pray  Thee,  that  Thou  hast  made  me 

as  the  clay.     As  if  he  said  in  plain  words;  '  Consider  the 

frailty  of  the  flesh,  and  remit  the  guilt  of  my  sin.*     Where 

moreover  the  death  of  that  flesh  is  openly  added,  in  that  the 

^*x^       words  are  immediately  brought  in ; 

^         And  wilt  Thou  bring  me  unto  dust  again? 

li.         77.  As  if  he  begged  openly,  saying,  ^  Remember,  I  pray 


MarCs  natural  generation.     His  spiritual  creation.      551 

Thee,  that  by  the  flesh  I  came  from  earth,  aod  by  the  death  Book 
thereof,  I  tend  to  earth.     Thus  regard  the  substance  of  my '— 


origin,  and  the  penalty  of  my  end,  and  be  the  readier  to 
spare  the  sin  of  a  transient  being;'  but  as  he  has  given  out 
the  sort  and  kind  of  man  as  created,  he  now  subjoins  the  order 
of  man  as  propagated,  saying, 

Ver.  10,  11.  Hast  Thou  not  poured  ine  out  like  milk.,  and 
curdled  me  like  cheese  ?  Thou  hast  clothed  me  iviih  skin 
andjlesh,  and  hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  sinews. 

78.  For  man  when  fashioned  was  moulded  like  clay,  but     lii. 
being  propagated  he  is  '  poured  out  like  milk'  in  the  seed,  and 

is  '  curdled  like  cheese'  in  the  flesh,  and  he  is  '  clothed  with 
skin  and  flesh,'  and  is  rendered  firm  by  bones  and  sinews. 
Therefore  by  clay  we  have  set  forth  to  us  the  character  of 
the  first  creating,  but  by  milk  the  order  of  the  subsequent 
conception,  in  that  by  the  stages  of  curdling,  it  goes  on  little 
by  little  to  be  wrought  strong  into  bones.  But  the  account  of 
the  body  as  it  was  created  is  but  slender  praise  of  God, 
unless  at  the  same  time  there  be  afterwards  set  forth  the 
marvellous  inspiration  of  its  quickening.  Hence  it  is  added. 
Thou  hast  granted  me  life  and  mercy. 

79.  But  the  Creator  vouchsafes  to  us  blessings  in   vain,    liii. 
except  He  Himself  keep  safe  all  whatsoever  He  giveth.     It 
follows,  And  Thy  visitation  hatli  preserved  my  spirit.     Now 

all  this  that  we  have  spoken  of  the  exterior  man,  in  what 
sense  it  may  accord  with  the  interior  man,  it  is  well  to 
unfold  and  exhibit  in  few  words. 

Remember,  I  beseech  Thee,  that  Thou  hast  made  me  as 
the  clay. 

80.  For  our  interior  man  proves  like  clay,  in  that  the  grace  Moual. 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  infused  into  the  earthly  mind,  that  it 

may  be  lifted  up  to  the  understanding  of  its  Creator.  For 
the  thinking  faculty  in  man,  which  is  dried  up  by  the  barren- 
ness of  its  sin,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  grows 
green,  like  land  when  it  is  watered.  Now  it  very  often  happens 
that  whilst  we  use  without  let  or  hindrance  the  endowments 
of  virtue  by  gift  from  above,  by  being  used  to  such  uninter- 
rupted prosperity  we  are  lilted  up  to  self-confidence. 
Whence  it  very  often  happens  that  the  same  Holy  Spirit, 
Which  had  exalted  us,  leaves  us  for  a  time,  in  order  to  shew 
mere  man  to  himself     And  this  is  what  the  holy  man  im- 


55*2   Ttie  inner  man  begins  as  mllk^  grows  to  bone  and  sinew. 

Job  10,  mediately  sets  forth,  when  he  adds,  And  icilt  Thou  bring  me 

'- —  into  dust  aqain  ?    For  as  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  Spirit  the 

soul  IS  leit  lor  a  space  under  temptation,  it  is  as  it  the  grouna 
were  dried  of  its  former  moisture ;  that  by  being  so  forsaken 
it  may  be  made  sensible  of  its  weakness,  and  learn  how  man 
was  dried  up  without  the  infusion  of  heavenly  grace.     And 
he  is  fitly  described  as  being  '  brought  into  dust  again,'  in 
that  when  he  is  left  to  himself  he  is  caught  up  by  the  breath 
of  every  temptation.     But   whereas   on    being   left  we   are 
exposed  to  shocks,  those  gifts  which  we  knew  when  we  were 
inspired,  we  now  think  of  more  nicely.     Whence  he  adds, 
Hast  Thou  )w(  poured  me  out  like  milky  and  curdled  me 
like  cheese?     For  when  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  our 
mind  is  withdrawn  from  the  way  of  its  former  conversation, 
it  is  as  if  ^  milk  poured  out,'  in  that  it  is  formed  in  the  sort 
of  tenderness  and  delicacy  of  a  new  beginning.     And  it  is 
'  curdled  like  cheese,'  in  that  it  is  bound  up  in  the  consist- 
ency of  consolidating  thought,  never  from  henceforth  to  let 
itself   go    loose   in    desires,    but    concentrating  itself    in    a 
single   affection,  to  rise   up  into   a   substantial  remoulding. 
But  it  very  often   happens   that  the   flesh,   from    old  habit, 
murmurs  against  this  spiritual  embryo,  and  the  soul  meets 
with  war   from   the   man   which  it  bears   about   without  it. 
And  hence  he  adds,  TJiou  hast  clothed  me  icith  skin  and 
flesh.     For  the  interior  man  is  '  clothed  with  skin  and  flesh,' 
since  wherein  it  is  raised  up  to  things  above,  it  is  straitly 
blockaded  with  the  besieging  of  fleshly  motions.    Now  one  that 
is  going  on  to  righteousness  our  Creator  never  forsakes  under 
temptation,  Who  by  the  inspiration  of  His  Grace  preventeth 
even  him  that  is  sinning  ;  but  the  soul  that  is  lifted  up  He 
both  lets  loose  to  wars  without,  and  endues  with  strength 
within.     And  hence  it  is  yet  further  fitly  subjoined,  ^//<i/j«.9< 
fenced  me  witli  bones  and  sine/is.     With  ^ flesh  and  skin  we 
are  clothed,'  but  we  are  ^  fenced  with  bones  and  sinews,'  in 
that  though  ue  receive  a  shock  by  temptation  assaulting  us 
from  without,  yet  the  hand  of  the   Creator  strengthens  us 
within,  that  we  should  not  be   shattered.     And   so  by  the 
promptings  of  the  flesh.  He  abases  us  in  respect  of  His  gifts, 
but  by  the  bones  of  virtue  He  strengthens  us  against  tempta- 
tions.    Therefore  he  says,  Thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin 
and  flesh,  and  hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  sinews.    As  if 


God*s  mercy  needed  after  the  gift  of  life.  553 

it  were  in  plain  words,  '  Without  Thou  dost  abandon  me  to  Book 

.  IX 

undergo   trial,   yet    within,    that   I    may   not   perish,  Thou  — ^-^ 

keepest  me  by  bracing  me  with  virtue.'     And  for  this  reason 

He  gives  us  righteousness  to  live  as  we  ought,  because  in 

His  loving-kindness  He  spares  the  past  misdeeds  whereby 

we  have  done  amiss.     And  hence  it  is  further  added  with 

propriety, 

Thou  hast  granted  me  life  and  mercy. 

81.  For  '  life'  is  granted,  when  goodness  is  inspired  into 
evil  minds,  but  '  life'  cannot  be  had  without  '  mercy,'  in  that 
the  Lord  does  not  aid  us  to  obtain  the  endowments  of  righ- 
teousness, unless  He  first  in  mercy"  remit  our  past  iniquities. 
Or  surely.  He  '  grants  us  life  and  mercy,'  in  that  by  the 
same  mercy,  with  which  He  prevents  us  that  we  may  lead  a 
good  life,  continuing  on  afterwards  He  keep  us  safe.     For 
except  He  add  mercy,  the  life  which  He  vouchsafes  cannot 
be  preserved ;   since  we  are  daily  growing  old  by  the  mere 
custoraariness  of  our  human  life,  and  by  the  impulse  of  the 
outward  man   we   are  carried  out  of  interior  life  by  loose 
thought;  so  that  unless  heavenly  visiting  either  by  piercing 
our  hearts   quicken   us  in  love,  or  by  scourging  us  renew 
us  in  fear,  the  soul  is  wholly  and  entirely  ruined  by  a  sudden 
downfall,  when  it  seemed  to  be  made  new  by  a  long  course 
of  devotion  to  virtue.     Hence  he  subjoins,  And  Thy  visita- 
tion  hath  preserved  my  spirit.     For    the  visitation  of  the 
Most   High    preserves    man's    spirit,  when,    it  being  richly 
endowed  with  graces,  He  does  not  cease  either  to  scourge  it 
with  the  rod,  or  to  pierce  it  with  love.     For  if  He  bestows 
gifts,  but  does  not  raise  it  up  by  continually  restoring  it,  the 
blessing  is  speedily  lost,  which  is  not  preserved  by  the  Giver. 
But  mark  how  the  holy  man,  whilst  he  views  himself  in  a 
humble  light,  discovers  the  secrets  of  Divine  mercy  destined 
to  be  universally  bestowed,  and  whilst  he  truly  confesses  his 
own  weakness,  he  is  suddenly  transported  on  high  to  learn 
the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.     For  he  forthwith  adds, 

\  er.  13.   Though  Thou  hide  these  things  in  Thine  heart; 
yet  I  know  that  Tliou  reniemherest  all. 

82.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words ;  '  Why  do  I  tremble  for    liv. 
myself,  who  know  that  Thou   dost   gather  in  one   even  all 
nations  ?    Which  nevertheless  Thou  '  hidest  in  Thine  heart,' 


554  Sins  forsaken  leave  traces  of  iindeanness. 

Job  10,  in  that  Thou  dost  not  yet  make  it  known  by  open  revelation, 
but  Thou,  That  '  rememberest  all,'    giv^est   me,    doubtless. 


assurance  of  pardon.'  But  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  in 
certain  deeds  we  are  both  made  certain  of  pardon,  and  after 
the  commission  of  the  sins  are  strengthened  to  have  con- 
fidence oT  our  absolution  by  subsequent  chastisement  and 
penance,  yet  we  are  still  touched  with  the  remembrance  of 
the  wickedness  we  have  committed,  and,  unwilling  and 
abhorring  it,  are  preyed  upon  by  unlawful  thoughts.  And 
hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined, 

Ver.  14.  If  I  have  sinned,  and  Thou  spare dst  me  at  the 
hour,  wherefore  dost  Thou  not  let  me  be  clean  from  mine 
iniquity  ? 
Iv.         83.  The  Lord  '  spareth  sin  at  the  houi,'  when  the  moment 
that  we  yield  tears.  He  does  away  with  the  guilt  of  sin.    But 
He  doth  not  '  let  us  be  clean  from  our  iniquity,'  in  that  of 
fi:ee  will  indeed  we  committed  the  sin,  but  sometimes  against 
our  will  we  undergo  the  remembrance  of  it  with  a  sense  of 
pleasure ;  for  often  that,  which  has  been  put  away  from  the 
sight  of  the  just  Judge  by  tears  intervening,recurs  to  mind,  and 
the  conquered  habit  strives  to  insinuate  itself  again  for  the 
entertaining  of  delight,  and  is  renewed  again  in  the  former 
contest  with  revived  assault,  that  what  it  once  did  in  the  body,  it 
may  afterwards  go  through  in  the  mind  by  intruding  thought; 
which  same  that  spiritual  wrestler  knew  how  to  regard  with 
Ps.38,5.  heedful  eye,  who  said.  My  scars^  stink,  and  are  corrupt 
cairice}i^^'''ough  my  fooUshness.     For  what  are  '  scars'  but  the  heal- 
ings of  wounds  ?     And  so  he  who  lamented  his  scars,  beheld 
his  pardoned  wickednesses  return  to  his  remembrance  for  the 
entertaining  of  delight.     Since  for  scars  to  grow  corrupt  is 
for  wounds  of  sins,  already  healed,  again  to  insinuate  them- 
selves in  the  tempting  of  us,  and  at  their  suggestions,  after 
the  skin  of  penitence  has  grown  over,  to  be  sensible  of  the 
stench  and  pain  of  sin  again.     Wherein  there  is  at  once  both 
nothing  done  outwardly  in  deed,  and  sin  is  committed  within 
in  the  thought  alone,  and  the  soul  is  laid  under  a  close  bond 
of  guilt  except  it  do  away  with  it  by  heedful  lamentation. 
Deut.         84.  Whence  it  is  well  said  by  Moses,  If  there  be  among 
Yi      '  you  any  man  that  is  not  clean  by  reason  of  a  dream  that 
chanceth  him  by  niyht,  then  shall  he  go  abroad  without  the 


Legal  uncleanness  of  the  night,  type  oj  evil  thoughts.     555 

camp,  he  shall  fwt  come  within  the  camp :   but  it  shall  be  Book 
when  evening  cometh  on  he  shall  wash  himself  with  water 


and  when  the  sun  is  down  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 
again.  For  '  the  dream  that  chanceth  by  night'  is  the  secret 
tempting,  whereby  there  is  something  foul  conceived  in  the 
heart  in  dark  thought,  which  nevertheless  is  not  fulfilled  in 
the  deed  of  the  body.  Novv,  if  there  be  any  that  is  '  not  clean 
by  reason  of  a  dream  that  chanceth  him  by  night,'  he  is 
bidden  to  go  abroad  without  the  camp,  in  that  it  is  meet  that 
he  that  is  defiled  with  impure  thought,  should  look  upon 
himself  as  unworthy  the  society  of  the  faithful,  that  he  should 
set  before  his  eyes  the  deserts  of  his  sin,  and  look  down 
upon  himself  in  the  scale  of  good  men.  And  so  for  '  one 
unclean  to  go  abroad  out  of  the  camp'  is  for  one  hard 
bestead  by  the  assaults  of  impurity,  to  look  down  upon 
himself  by  comparison  with  men  of  continency.  And 
*  when  evening  cometh  on  he  washes  himself  with  water,' 
in  that  seeing  his  offence  he  has  recourse  to  tears  of 
penitence,  that  by  weeping  he  may  wash  out  every  thing 
that  hidden  defilement  biings  home  to  the  soul's  charge. 
'  And  when  the  sun  is  down  he  shall  come  into  the  camp 
again,'  in  that  when  the  heat  of  temptation  has  subsided,  it 
follows  that  he  should  again  take  confidence  to  join  the 
company  of  the  good.  For  after  washing  with  water,  when 
the  sun  is  set,  he  returns  to  the  camp,  who  after  tears  of 
penance,  when  the  flame  of  unlawful  thought  is  quenched,  is 
restored  to  assume  the  claims  of  the  faithful,  that  he  should  not 
any  longer  account  himself  far  removed  from  others,  who  re- 
joices that  he  is  clean  by  the  departure  of  the  inward  burning. 
But  herein  be  it  known  that  it  is  for  this  reason  that 
we  are  sometimes  driven  to  straits  by  the  impulse  of  un- 
lawful thought,  because  we  are  ready  to  employ  ourselves 
in  certain  courses  of  earthly  conduct,  though  not  unlawful. 
And  when  even  in  the  very  least  things  we  come  in  contact 
with  earthly  conduct  in  desire,  the  might  of  our  old  enemy 
gaining  strength  against  us,  our  mind  is  defiled  by  no  little 
urgency  of  temptation.     And  hence  the  Priest  of  the  Law  is  Lev.  i, 

•        •  RIO 

enjoined  to  consume  with  fire  the  limbs  of  the  victim  cut        * 
into  pieces,  the  head,  and  the  parts  about  the  liver;  but  the 
inwards  and  the  legs  he  is  to  wash  with  water  first.     For  we 


556  Parts  of  the  very  sacrifice  need  washing. 

Job  10,  offer  our  own  selves  a  sacrifice  to  God,  when  we  dedicate  our 
lives  to  the  service  of  God,  and  we  set  the  members  of  the 


Moral.  .^  .  .  n       /.  i  m  ^i 

sacrmce  cut  mto  pieces  upon  the  lire,  when  we  orier  up  the 
deeds  of  our  lives  dividing  them  in  the  virtues.  The  head 
and  the  parts  contained  about  the  liver  we  burn,  when  in 
our  faculty  of  sense,  whereby  all  the  body  is  governed,  and 
in  our  hidden  desires  we  are  kindled  with  the  flame  of  divine 
love.  And  yet  it  is  bidden,  that  the  feet  and  the  inwards  of 
the  victim  be  washed  with  water.  For  with  the  feet  the 
earth  is  touched,  and  in  the  inw^ards  dung  is  carried,  in  that 
it  very  often  happens  that  already  in  the  desire  of  oar  hearts 
we  burn  for  eternity,  already  with  an  entire  feeling  of  devo- 
tion WQ  pant  in  longing  desire  for  the  mortification  of  our- 
selv^es ;  but  w  hereas  by  reason  of  our  frailty  there  is  still  a 
mixture  of  earth  in  what  we  do,  even  some  of  the  things  for- 
bidden which  we  have  already  subdued,  we  are  subject  to  in 
thought,  and  while  unclean  temptation  defiles  our  thoughts, 
what  else  is  this  than  that  '  the  inwards'  of  the  victim  carry 
dung }  But  that  they  may  be  fit  to  be  burnt,  let  them  be 
washed,  in  that  it  is  necessary  that  tears  of  fear  wash  out  the 
impure  thoughts  of  the  heart,  for°  love  from  on  high  to  con- 
sume them  in  acceptance  of  the  sacrifice,  and  whatever  the 
mind  is  subject  to,  proceeding  either  from  untried  conflict,  or 
from  the  remembrance  of  former  practice,  let  it  be  washed, 
that  it  may  burn  with  so  much  the  sweeter  odour  in  the  sight 
of  its  Beholder,  in  proportion  as  when  it  begins  to  draw  near 
to  Him,  it  sets  upon  the  altar  of  its  prayer  along  with  itself 
nought  earthly,  nought  impure.  Therefore  let  the  holy  man 
regard  the  wretchedness  of  the  human  mind,  how  often  it 
defiles  itself  with  unhallowed  thoughts,  and  after  the  Judge's 
remission  of  the  guilt  of  our  doings,  even  whilst  he  bewails 
his  own  case,  let  him  shew  to  us  ours,  for  ourselves  to  bewail, 
saying,  If  I  have  sinned,  and  thou  sparedst  me  at  the  hour^ 
wherefore  dost  thou  not  let  me  he  clean  from  mine  iniquity  9 
As  if  he  said  in  plain  words;  '  If  Thy  forgiveness  has  taken 
away  my  sin,  why  does  it  not  sweep  it  from  my  memory 
also  V  Oftentimes  the  mind  is  so  shaken  from  its  centre  at  the 
recollection  of  sin,  that  it  is  prompted  to  the  commission 

°  Alluding  to  the  Fire  from  heaven     also  a  token  and  method  of  accepting 
that  consumed  the  sacrifice,  which  was     it. 


The  ivicked  suffer  finally ,  and  even  the  Righteous,  here.  557 

thereof  far  worse  than  it  had  been  before  subjected  to  it,  Book 
and  when  entangled  it  is  filled  with  fears,  and  being  driven  ^^' 
with  different  impulses,  throws  itself  into  disorder.  It 
dreads  lest  it  should  be  overcome  by  temptations,  and  in 
resisting,  it  shudders  at  this  very  fact,  that  it  is  harassed 
with  the  long  toils  of  conflict.  Hence  it  is  fitly  sub- 
joined, 

Ver .  15.  If  I  be  wicked,  woe  un  to  m  e;  and  if  I  be  righteous, 
yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my  head:  I  amfidl  of  affliction  and 
misery, 

85.  Yea,  the  wicked  man  has  ^  woe,'  and  the  righteous    lvi> 
man  '  affliction,'  in  that  both  everlasting  damnation  follows 

the  lost  sinner,  and  each  one  of  the  Elect  is  purified  by  the 
pains  of  temporary  aflEliction.  The  wicked  man  lifts  up  his 
head,  yet  when  so  lifted  up  he  cannot  escape  the  woe  that 
pursues  him.  The  righteous  man,  faring  ill  with  the  toils  of 
his  conflict,  is  not  suffered  to  lift  up  his  head,  but  while 
hard  pressed,  he  is  freed  from  everlasting  affliction.  The  one 
sets  himself  up  in  pleasure,  but  is  plunging  himself  into  the  pu- 
nishment that  succeeds.  The  others  sinks  himself  to  the  earth 
in  sorrow,  yet  hides  himselffrom  the  weight  of  eternal  visitation. 
Thus  let  the  holy  man  consider  how  man  either  in  striving 
against  evil,  is  afilicted  with  present  trouble,  or  giving  up  the 
contest,  he  is  delivered  over  to  eternal  anguish,  and  let  him  say, 
If  I  be  wicked,  woe  unto  me;  and  if  1  be  righteous,  yet  will  I 
not  lift  up  my  head:  lam  full  of  affliction  and  misery,  as  if  he 
lamented  openly,  saying,  '  Either  bowed  down  under  the 
desires  of  the  flesh,  I  am  exposed  to  eternal  punishment,  or 
if  I  fight  against  unlawful  impulses,  I  am  tormented  with 
present  woe.  seeing  that  1  am  not  quit  of  the  toils  of  the 
fight.'  But  the  Providence  of  the  Most  High  does  for  this 
reason  suffer  us  who  serve  Him  with  all  the  bent  of  the 
mind,  to  be  buffeted  by  the  assaults  of  our  flesh,  lest  our 
mind,  by  presuming  on  its  own  security,  dare  to  lift  itself  up 
in  pride,  that  whereas,  when  a  shock  comes  it  is  filled  with 
fears,  it  may  set  the  foot  of  hope  the  stronger,  in  the  aid  of 
its  Maker  alone.     Hence  it  is  further  added  fitly, 

Ver.  16.  And  by  reason  of  pride.  Thou  wilt  take  me  like 
a  lioness. 

86.  When  a  lioness  hunts  for  food  for  her  whelps,  she   Ivii. 


558  Man's  soul  taken  like  a  lioness  caged  in  a  pit 

Job  10,  rushes    with    ravening   jaws   into   the   pitfall.     For   as   the 
^, — '- —  account  eoes  from  certain  countries,  they  make  a  pit  in  her 

Moral,  ^  .  .      .  7  j  r 

path,  and  deposit  a  sheep  in  it,  that  the  lioness  in  her  raven- 
ing appetite  may  be  provoked  to  precipitate  herself  into  it, 
and  they  make  it  both  narrow  and  deep  at  the  same  time, 
that  she  may  have  room  to  tumble  into  it  in  circling  round 
it,  but  never  get  out  by  taking  a  leap.     There  is  another  pit 
too   dug,  which  is   to  be  close  to  the  former,  but  which  is 
joined  to  the  one  in  which  the  sheep  is,  by  the  opening  of  the 
part  at  the  bottom.     And  in  this  is  put  a  cage,  that  the 
lioness  tumbling  in,  forasmuch  as  she  is  pressed  by  terrors 
from  above,  when  she  goes  about  as  it  were  to  hide  herself 
in  the  more  secret  part  of  the  pit,  may  of  her  own  will  go 
into  the  cage ;  her  sav^age  temper  being  now  no  longer  an 
object  of  fear,  seeing  that  she  is  lifted  up  enclosed  in  the  cage. 
For  the  beast  that  threw  itself  of  its  own  accord  into  the  pit 
is  brought  back  to  the  regions  above  hedged  round  with  bars. 
Thus,  thus  is  it  that  the  mind  of  man  is  taken,  which  being 
created  in  the  liberty  of  free  will,  whilst  it  craved  to  feed  the 
desires  of  the  flesh,  was  like  a  lioness  seeking  food  for  her  cubs, 
and  fell  into  the  pit  of  self-deception,  in  that  at  the  suggestion 
of  the  enemy  it  stretched  forth  the  hand  to  take  the  forbidden 
food,  but  it  quickly  found  a  cage  in  the  pit,  in  that  coming 
by  its  own  act  to  death,   it  exposed  itself  at  once  to  the 
prison  house  of  its  own  corruption,  and  is  brought  back  to 
the  free  air  by  grace  intervening.     But  whereas  it  tries  to 
do    many    things,  and   has   no   power,  it  is    bound  by  the 
hindrances  of  that  same  corruption,  as  though  by  the  bars  of  a 
cage.    It  is  now  free  of  that  pit  of  damnation  into  which  it  had 
fallen,  in  that  receiving  help  from  the  hand  of  Kedemption, 
in  being  brought  back  to  pardon,  it  has  got  above  the  punish- 
ment of  the  death  to  follow.     But  yet,  being  shut  in  close,  it 
feels  the  cage,  in  that  it  is  encircled  by  the  bands  of  heavenly 
discipline,  that  it  may  not  roam  through  the  desires  of  the 
flesh.     And  she  that  of  her  own  will  went  down  into  the  pit, 
returns  to  the  free  air  in  confinement,  in  that  she  both  fell 
into  sin  by  the  liberty  of  the  will,  and  yet  the  grace  of  the 
Creator  holds  her  in  by  constraint,  and  against  her  will,  from 
following  her  own  motions.     And  so  after  the  pit  she  has  the 
cage  to  bear,  in  that  being  rescued  from  eternal  punishment, 


A  fall  may  bring  us  under  the  bars  of  humility .         559 

she  is  withheld  from  the  motions  of  a  froward  liberty,  under  Book 

'  IX. 

the  controlling  hand  of  the  heavenly  Artificer.     Therefore  he  — ^-^ 

says  alight.  And  by  reason  of  pride^  Thou  wilt  take  me  like 
a  lioness;  in  that  both  when  free,  man  brought  death  upon 
himself  through  food,  and  on  being  brought  back  to  pardon, 
he  lives  shut  up  under  discipline  for  his  greater  good. 
Therefore  like  a  lioness  he  was  taken  by  reason  of  pride,  in 
that  the  discipline,  that  belongs  to  his  corrupt  condition,  now 
keeps  him  down  from  the  very  same  cause,  that  not  fearing 
the  transgression  of  the  commandment  he  boldly  leapt  into 
the  pit. 

87.  But  if  for  a  short  space  we  turn  aside  the  eye  of  our  mind 
from  the  sin  of  our  first  parent,  we  find  that  we  ourselves  are 
every  day  taken  like  the  lioness,  by  the  evil  habit  of  pride. 
For  it  often  happens  that  by  the  virtues  that  have  been 
vouchsafed  him,  man  is  lifted  up  into  the  boldness  of  self- 
presumption,  but  by  a  wonderful  ordering  of  Providence, 
some  object  is  set  before  his  eyes  for  him  to  fall  therein. 
And  whilst  he  seeks  something  in  sin,  what  else  is  this  but 
that  he  longs  for  the  prey  in  the  pit  ?  With  open  mouth  he 
falls  by  his  own  act,  but  has  no  power  to  rise  by  his  own 
strength.  And  whereas  he  sees  that  of  himself  he  is  nothing, 
assuredly  he  learns  Whose  aid  he  must  seek.  Yet  the 
heavenly  Compassion  draws  him,  thus  taken  out  of  the  pit, 
as  it  were,  in  that  as  soon  as  his  weakness  is  known.  It 
restores  hira  to  pardon.  And  so  like  a  lioness,  by  reason  of 
pride  that  man  hastes  back  to  the  upper  regions  within  the 
cage^,  who  when  he  is  Hfted  up  in  the  score  of  virtuous 
attainments,  after  he  has  fallen  into  evil  desires,  is  bound 
fast  in  humility.  For  whereas  he  had  in  the  first  case 
brought  himself  to  destruction  by  his  presuming  on  self,  it  is 
brought  to  pass  by  wonderful  pitifulness,  that  he  now  lives 
walled  in  by  the  knowledge  of  his  own  weakness.  And 
because  the  holy  man  sees  that  this  often  happens  to  his  fellow 
creatures,  he  adopts  in  his  own  person  the  cry  of  peril  that 
belongs  to  us,  that  when  we  read  of  his  lamentations,  we 
may  be  instructed  what  the  things  are  in  ourselves  that  we 
ought  to  lament.     Now  when  pride   uplifts  the  mind,   the 

p  Ben.  '  in  caveam,'  A.  B.  D.  '  in  caveJl.' 


660  God'^s  returning  to  man  gives  a  wholesome  pain. 

Job  10,  piercing  sense  of  love  for  the  Highest  departs  from  us,  but 

' — when  s^race  from  above  descends  upon  us,  immediately  it 

prompts  us  to  longings  tor  itselt  m  tears.     And  hence  it  is 
fitly  subjoined, 

Aiid  retiirniiig,  Thou  dost  torture  me  marvellously. 
Iviii.  gg.  When  we  are  forsaken  by  our  Creator,  we  do  not  at 
all  feel  even  the  very  ills  of  our  abandonment.  For  in  pro- 
portion as  our  Creator  goes  far  off  from  us,  our  mind  becomes 
more  hardened  in  insensibility,  loves  nothing  that  is  of  God, 
entertains  no  longing  for  things  above,  and  because  it  has  no 
warmth  of  interior  love,  it  lies  frozen  towards  the  earth,  and 
in  a  pitiable  way  it  becomes  every  day  the  more  self-secure, 
in  proportion  as  it  becomes  worse;  and  whereas  it  no  longer 
remembers  whence  it  has  fallen,  and  no  longer  dreads  the 
punishments  to  come,  it  knows  nothing  how  deeply  it  is  to 
be  bewailed.  But  if  it  be  touched  by  the  inspiration  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  at  once  it  wakes  up  to  the  thought  of  its  ruin, 
rouses  itself  in  the  pursuit  after  heavenly  things,  glows  with 
the  hot  emotions  of  love  towards  the  Highest,  takes  thought 
of  the  ills  which  every  way  beset  it  round  about,  and  she 
weeps  while  making  progress,  who  before  was  going  to  ruin 
in  high  glee.  Therefore  it  is  well  said  to  the  Creator,  And 
returning  Thou  dost  torture  me  marvellously.  For  by  the 
same  act  whereby  Almighty  God  in  visiting  our  soul  lifts  it 
to  the  love  of  Himself,  He  makes  it  the  more  to  sorrow  in 
tears.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  In  going  from  me  Thou 
dost  not  influence  me,  because  Thou  renderest  me  insensible, 
but  when  Thou  returnest.  Thou  dost  torture  me,  because 
whilst  Thou  dost  cause  Thyself  to  enter  into  me.  Thou 
shewest  to  me  mine  own  self,  and  how  deeply  I  am  to  be 
pitied.'  And  hence  he  never  says  tliat  he  is  tortured 
judicially,  but  '  marvellously,'  since  while  the  mind  is  trans- 
ported on  high  in  weeping,  with  a  feeling  of  joy  it  marvels 
at  the  pains  of  its  piercing  sorrow,  and  it  is  its  joy  to  be  so 
touched,  because  it  sees  that  by  its  anguish  it  is  lifted  up 
on  high.  But  often  when  heavenly  Pity  sees  us  slacken  in 
the  exercising  ourselves  in  holy  desires.  It  presents  to  our 
view  the  example  of  those  that  cleave  to  Itself,  that  the 
mind  whicli  is  unbraced  by  indolence,  in  proportion  as  it 


Tlie  Elect  are  God's  icitnesses  against  all  sin.  06 1 

observes  in  the  case  of  others  the  advancement  of  minds  Book 

well  awake,  may  take  shame  for  the  dulness  of  sloth  in  itself. '— 

Hence  it  is  rightly  added, 

Ver.  17.  Thou  renewest  Tliy  itHnesses  against  me,  and 
miiltipUest  Thy  wrath  :    and  pains  war  in  me. 

89.  For  '  God's  witnesses'  are  they,  who  bear  witness  by   ^ix. 
the  practice  of  holy  works,  what  are  the  rewards  of  Tnith 
that  shall  overtake  the  Elect.    Hence  too  those,  whom  we  see 

to  have  suffered  for  the  sake  of  the  Truth,  we  style  in  the 
Greek  tongue,  '  Martyrs/  i.  e.  witnesses.  And  the  Lord 
says  by  John  in  the  Angel's  voice.  Even  in  those  days,  Eev.  2, 
wherein  Antipas  was  my  faith/id  witness,  who  icas  slain  ^^' 
among  you.  Now  the  Lord '  renews  His  witnesses  against  us' 
when  He  multiplies  the  lives  of  the  Elect  to  confront  our 
wickedness,  for  the  purpose  of  convicting  and  of  instructing 
lis.  And  so  His  *  witnesses  are  renewed  against  us,'  in  that  all 
things  that  they  do  are  opposed  to  the  ends  and  aims  of  our 
wickedness.  Hence  too  the  word  of  Truth  is  called  ^  an 
adversary,'  where  it  is  said  by  the  voice  of  the  Mediator  in 
the  Gospel,  Agree  with  thine  adversary  qidckly,  whiles  thou  ^I^**-  ^> 
art  in  the  way  with  him.  And  the  sons  of  perdition  in  their 
persecutions  say  concerning  that  same  Redeemer,  ^?2c/ i7(?  is^'^^^-'^y 
clean  contrary  to  our  doings;  and  soon  afterwards.  For  His  ih.' 15. 
life  is  not  like  other  men's.  Thus  the  Lord  '  renews  His 
witnesses  against  us,'  in  that  the  good  things  which  we  neg- 
lect to  do  ourselves,  He  shews  us  to  be  done  by  others  to  our 
upbmiding,  that  we  who  are  not  inflamed  by  precepts,  may 
at  least  be  stirred  up  by  examples,  and  that  in  longing  after 
righteousness,  our  mind  may  account  nothing  to  be  difficult 
to  itself,  that  it  sees  to  be  done  perfectly  by  others ;  and  it  is 
very  commonly  brought  to  pass,  that  while  we  behold  the 
good  actions  of  another  man's  life,  we  are  more  anxiously 
afraid  of  the  deficiencies  of  our  own,  and  it  is  made  appear 
the  plainer  by  what  a  weight  of  judgment  we  are  afterwards 
assailed,  in  proportion  as  we  are  now  widely  at  variance  with 
the  ways  of  the  good. 

90.  Hence  after  the  renewal  of  the  witnesses  has  been 
mentioned  it  is  thereupon  fitly  added,  And  muliipliest  Thy 
wrath  upon  me.     God's  wrath  is  said  to  be  '  multiplied  upon 

2  0 


562      JVhat  gladdens  us  in  others  makes  us  fear  for  ourselves. 

Job  10,  us/  in  proportion  as  it  is  shewn  to  be  manifold,  since  by  the 
„  very  lives  and  labours  of  the  good  we  are  instructed,  if, 
whilst  we  have  time,  we  will  not  amend  our  ways  now,  what 
a  terrible  visitation  shall  be  dealt  us  hereafter.  For  w^e  see 
the  Elect  of  God  at  one  and  the  same  time  leading  godly 
lives  and  undergoing  numberless  sore  hardships.  And  there- 
fore we  collect  from  hence  with  what  rigour  the  strict  Judge 
will  There  smite  those  whom  He  condemns,  if  he  so  torments 
1  Peter  here  below^  those  whom  He  loves ;   as  Peter  witnesses,  who 

4    17 

'  '  says.  For  the  time  is  come  tJtat  judgment  must  begin  at  the 
house  of  God,  and  if  it  first  begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end  be 
of  them  that  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  God?  Therefore  Almighty 
God,  when  He  '  renews  His  witnesses'  against  us, '  multiplies 
His  wrath,'  in  that  in  proportion  as  He  sets  before  our  eyes 
the  life  of  the  good,  He  shews  with  what  severity  He  will 
smite  obduracy  in  the  commission  of  sin  at  the  Judgment. 
Now  whereas  He  multiplies  His  gifts  to  those  alone  that 
follow  Him,  He  shews  that  He  has  already  forsaken  those 
that  go  on  in  sloth.  Thus  when  we  see  good  things  in  others, 
it  is  very  necessary  to  mix  exultation  with  the  dread  that  we 
feel,  and  dread  with  our  exultation,  that  both  charity  may 
rejoice  for  the  proficiencies  of  other  men,  and  conscience 
tremble  for  its  own  frailties.  But  when  we  are  gladdened 
with  the  proficiency  of  a  brother,  when  we  calculate  the 
severity  of  the  interior  Judge  against  us  for  our  mere  sloth- 
fulness  by  itself,  what  is  there  left  but  that  the  mind  turn 
back  to  search  into  itself,  and  that  whatever  it  meets  with  in 
itself,  that  is  blameworthy,  whatever  that  is  bad,  it  should 
chastise.^  Hence  it  is  fitly  subjoined,  Pains  fight  in  me. 
For  upon  considering  the  w'itnesses  of  God,  '  pains  fight  in 
us,'  in  that  whilst  w^e  behold  their  deeds,  that  command  our 
admiration,  our  own  life,  which  by  comparison  with  theirs  is 
displeasing  in  our  eyes,  we  visit  with  serious  s"elf-chastening, 
that  whatever  pollution  our  deeds  may  have  caused  in  us, 
our  tears  may  wash  clean,  and  if  the  guilt  of  taking  pleasure 
therein  still  somewhat  defiles  us,  the  chastening  of  a  sorrow- 
ful heart  may  cleanse  away  the  stain.  Therefore  because 
blessed  Job  has  his  eye  fixed  on  the  life  of  the  fathers  of  old 
time,  he  ascertains  more  exactly  what  he  ought  to  bewail  in 


JoU's  ivis/i  before  cxjdained.     It  is  well  to  look  to  the  end.   5(>.3 

himself.    And  by  the  preceptorship  of  extraordinary  sorro-s^',   Book 
whilst  he  bewails  his  own  case,  he  instructs  us  to  lamentation,  — - — 
that  in  proportion  as  we  perceive  excellencies  in  other  men, 
we  may  anxiously  fear  for  our  own  offences  in  the  sight  of 
the  strict  Judge.     It  goes  on, 

Ver.  18.  Wherefore  then  hast  Thou  brought  me  forth  out  of    Ix. 
the  womb.  Oh  that  I  had  been  consumed,  and  no  eye  had  seen  me, 

91.  Which  same  sentiment  he  had  already  uttered  in  his 
first  speech,  saying,  JVJiy  died  I  not  from  the  icomb?    and^°^^' 
whilst  he  subjoins  that  which  he  adds  here,  I  should  have 
been  as  though  I  had  not  been,  I  should  have  been  carried 

from  the  womb  to  the  grave;  he  adds  in  other  words,  but  no 
other  sense,  saying.  Or  as  a  hidden  untimely  birth  J  had 
not  been,  as  infants  which  never  saw  light.  But  forasmuch  ^  ^^^' 
as  we  have  made  out  these  particulars  veiy  much  at  length 
above,  to  avoid  wearying  the  reader  we  forbear  to  unfold  points 
already  explained.     It  goes  on, 

Ver.   20.    Will  not  the  small  number  of  my  days  be  jinished, 
in  a  short  time'? 

92.  He  shews  himself  to  live  with  good  heed  and  circum-    Ixi. 
spection,  who,  in  considering  the  shortness  of  the  present  life 
does  not  look  to  the  furtherance  but  to  the  ending  of  it,  so 

as  to  gather  from  the  end,  that  all  is  nought  that  delights 
while  it  is  passing.     For  hence  it  is  said  by  Solomon,  But  ^yEccles. 
a  man  live  many  years  and  rejoice  in  them  all,  yet  let  him     ' 
remember  the  time  of  darkness,  and  the  days  that  shall  be 
many ;  and  when  they  come,  the  past  shall  be  convinced  of 
vanity.     Hence  again  it  is  written,  Whatsoever  thou  takest  Ecclus. 
in  hand,  remember  thine  end,  and  thou  shall  never  do  amiss.   ' 
Therefore  when  sin  tempts  the  mind,  it  is  requisite  that  the 
soul   should  regard    the  shortness  of  its   gratification,  lest 
iniquity  hurry  it  on  to  a  living  death,  when  it  is  plain  that 
a  mortal  life  is  quickly  speeding  to  an  end.     But  often  the 
eye  of  our  contemplation  is  bewildered,  while  our  pain  is 
heightened  by  thickening  scourges.     It  is  good   to  bewail 
the  exile  of  the  present  life,  yet  for  mere  anguish  alone  the 
mind  cannot  take  account   of  the   ills   of  its   blind   state. 
Hence  he  directly  adds. 

And  let  me  go,  that  I  may  bewail  my  sorrow  a  little. 

93.  For  as  moderate  distress  gives  vent  to  tears,  so  excessive   Ixii. 

2  o  2 


564  Man  cannot  ahcays  duly  bewail  sin  that  he  feels. 

Job  10,  sorrow  checks  them,  since  that  erief  itself  is  as  it  were  made 

20.  .  ... 

TT  void  of  grief,  which  by  swallowing  up  the  mind  of  the  person 
afflicted,  takes  away  the  sense  of  grief.  Therefore  the  holy 
man  shrinks  from  being  stricken  more  than  he  is  equal  to 
bear,  saying,  A?7d  let  me  (/o,  that  I  may  bewail  my  sorrow 
a  little.  As  if  it  were  in  plain  words,  '  Qualify  the  strokes  of 
Thy  scourging,  that,  my  pains  being  made  moderate,  in 
weeping  I  may  have  power  to  estimate  the  miseries  I  endure.' 
Which  same  nevertheless  may  likewise  be  understood  in 
another  sense.  For  oftentimes  the  sinner  is  so  bound  by  the 
chains  of  his  wickedness,  that  he  bears  indeed  the  burthen 
of  his  sins,  and  knows  not  that  he  is  bearing  it.  Often  if  he 
does  know  with  what  an  amount  of  guilt  he  is  burthened,  he 
strives  to  break  loose  and  cannot,  so  as  to  hunt  it  down  in 
himself  with  free  spirit  and  full  conversion.  Thus  he  is 
unable  to  '  bewail  his  sorrow,'  for  at  once  he  sees  the  guilt  of 
his  sinful  state,  and  by  reason  of  the  weight  of  earthly 
business,  is  not  at  liberty  to  bewail  it.  He  is  unable  to 
'  bewail  his  sorrow,'  who  strives  indeed  to  resist  evil  habits, 
yet  is  weighed  down  by  the  still  increasing  desires  of  the 
flesh.      The  presence  of  this  sorrow  had  inflicted  anguish 

Ps.'38,  upon  the  spirit  of  the  Prophet,  when  he  said,  3Iy  sorrow  is 

^'^'^^'  eontinually  before  me;  for  I  will  declare  my  iniquity,  I  will 
he  sorry  for  my  sin ;  but  the  bands  of  his  sin  being  loosed, 
he  knew  that  he  was  '  let  go,'  who  gave  vent  to  his  exultation, 

Ps.  116,  saying.  Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds,  I  will  offer  to  Thee  the 

^^'  ^^*  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving. 

94.  Therefore  God  then  '  lets  us  go'  to  bewail  our  sorrow, 
when  He  both  shews  us  the  evil  things  that  we  have  done, 
and  helps  us  to  bewail  the  same,  when  we  know  them;  He 
sets  our  transgressions  before  our  eyes,  and  with  the  pitying 
hand  of  grace  unlooses  the  bands  of  the  heart,  that  our  soul 
may  lift  itself  up  to  liberty  for  the  work  of  repentance,  and 
loosed  from  the  fetters  of  the  flesh,  may  with  free  spirit 
stretch  out  towards  its  Maker  the  footsteps  of  love.  For  it 
very  commonly  happens  that  we  the  same  persons  blame  our 
course  of  life,  and  yet  readily  do  the  very  thing  that  we 
justly  condemn  in  ourselves.  The  spirit  lifts  us  up  to 
righteousness,  the  flesli  holds  us  back  to  habit;  the  soul 
struggles  against  self-love,  but  quickly  overcome  witli  delight 


Hell,  a  *  land^  for  abiding,  a  '  lake  for  droicning.  565 

is  made  captive.     Thus  it  is  well  said,  Let  me  go  that  I  may  Book 
bewail  my  sorrow  a  little.     For  except  we  be  '  let   go'  in  — ^-^ 
mercy  from  the   guilt   of  sin,  with  which  we  are  tied  and 
bound,    we    cannot   lament   that   which    we   grieve    for   in 
ourselves  being  set  against  ourselves. 

But  the  woe  of  our  guiltiness  is  then  really  bewailed,  when 
that  dark  retribution  of  the  place  below  is  fore-reckoned  with 
lively  apprehension.     Hence  it  is  fitly  added, 

Ver.  21.  Before  I  go  whence  I  shall  not  return,  even  to 
a  land  of  darkness,  and  covered  with  the  shadow  of  death. 

95.  For  what  is  denoted  by  '  the  land  of  darkness'  saving  Ixiii. 
the  dreary  caverns  of  Tartarus,  which  are  covered  by  the 
shadow  of  eternal  death,  in  that  it  keeps  aU  the  damned  for 
evermore   severed  from  the  light  of  life.     Neither   is   the 
place  below  improperly  called  a  land.     For  all  they  that 
have  been  made  captive  by  it,  are  held  fast  and  firm.     As  it 
is  written  ;   One  generation  passeth  away,  and  another  gene-  Eccl.  1, 
ration  conieth,  but  the  earth  abideth  for  ever.     Thus  the 
dungeons  of  hell  are  rightly  designated  '  a  land  of  darkness,' 
for  all,  whom  they  receive  doomed  to  punishment,  they  tor- 
ment with  no  transient  infliction  or  phantasm  of  the  imagin- 
ation, but  keep  in  the  substantial  vengeance  of  everlasting 
damnation.     Y^et  they  are  sometimes  denoted  by  the  title  of 
'  a  lake,'  as  the  Prophet  bears  witness,  when  he  says.  They  Ezek. 
Iiave  borne  their  shame  with  them  that  go  down  into  the  25. 
lake.      Thus  hell  is  both  called  '  a  land,'  because  it  holds 
stedfastly  all  that  it  takes  in,  and  '  a  lake,' because  it  swallows 
up  those  whom  it  has  once  received,  ever  tossing  and  quaking 
in  weltering  floods  of  torment;  but  the  holy  man,  whether  in 
his  own  voice  or  in  the  voice  of  mankind,  beseeches  that  he 
may  be   '  let  go'   before    he  departs,  not   because   he   that 
bewails  his  sin  is  to  '  go  to  the  land  of  darkness,'  but  because 
every  one  that  neglects  to  bewail  it  doth  assuredly  go  thither, 
according  as  the  creditor  says  to  his  debtor,  '  Pay  thy  debt, 
before  thou  art  put  in  bonds  for  the  debt;'    whereas  he  is 
not  put  in  bonds,  if  he  delays  not  to  pay  all  that  he  owes. 
In  which  place  too  it  is  rightly  added.  Whence  I  shall  not 
return,  in  that  His  pity  in  sparing  never  any  more  sets  them 
free,  whom  His  justice  in  judging  once  assigns  their  doom 


566  Hell-Jire  consumes,  but  enliyhtens  not. 

Job  10,  ill  the  places  of  puiiishment,  which  same  places  are  yet  more 
"hI^t"  i^'^'^^^^^^'^y  <^lescribe(1,  where  it  is  said, 

Ver.  22.  A  land  of  misery  and  darkness. 
Ixiv.        96.  *^  Misery'  has  relation  to   pain,  '  darkness'  relates  to 
blindness.     That  land  then  which  holds  all  those  that  are 
banished  the  presence  of  the  strict  Judge,  is  entitled  '  aland 
of  misery   and   darkness,'   for  pain  without  torments  those, 
whom  blindness  darkens  within,  severed  from  the  true  Light. 
Not  but   that  '  the  land   of  misery  and  darkness'   may  be 
understood  in  another  sense  also.     For  this   land  too,  in 
which  we  are  born,  is  indeed  '  a  land  of  misery,'  but  not  *  of 
darkness,'  in  that  we  here  suffer  the  many  ills  of  our  corrupt 
condition,  yet  whilst  we  are  in  it,  we  are  still  brought  back 
to  the  light  through  the  grace  of  conversion ;  as  Truth  coun- 
Johni2,  sels  us,  Wlio  saith.    Walk  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  dark- 
ness  come  upon  you.     But  that  land  is  '  a  land  of  misery 
and  darkness'  together,  for  every  one,  that  has  gone  down  to 
suffer  the  woes  thereof,  never  any  further  returns  to  the  ligbt; 
for  the  describing  of  which  same  it  is  further  added. 
Where  is  the  shadow  of  death,  without  any  order. 
Ixv.        97.  As  external  death  divides  the  flesh  from  the  soul,  so 
internal  death  severs  the  soul  from  God.     Thus  the  '  shadow 
of  death'  is  the  darkness  of  separation,  in  that  every  one  of 
the  damned,  whilst  he  is  consumed  with  everlasting  fire,  is  in 
darkness  to  the  internal  light.     Now  it  is  the  nature  of  fire 
to  give  out  both  light  and  a  property  of  consuming  from  itself, 
but  the  fire  that  is  the  avenger  of  past  sins  has  a  consuming 
property  but  no  light.     It  is  hence  that '  Truth'  saith  to  the 
Mat.  25,  lost.  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  pre- 
^^'       pared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.     And  representing  in  one 
Mat.22,  individual  the  whole  body  of  them  all.  He  saith,  Bind  him 
^'  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and  cast  him  into  outer 

darkness.  Accordingly,  if  the  fire  that  torments  the  lost 
could  have  had  light,  he  that  is  cast  off  would  never  be  said 
to  '  be  cast  into  darkness.'  Hence  too  the  Psalmist  hath  it ; 
Ps.58  8.  -^^^^  hath  fallen  upon  them,  and  they  have  not  seen  the  sun. 
Vulg.  Pgy  (■  ^YQ  fViiig'  upon  the  ungodly,  but  '  the  sun  is  not  seen' 
on  the  fire  falling;  for  as  the  flame  of  hell  devours  them,  it 
blinds  ihcm  to  the  vision  of  the  true  Light,  that  at  the  same 


The  body  that  sinned  tormented.    What  '  order''  is  in  Hell.    567 

time  both  the  pain  of  consuming  fire  should  torment  them  Book 
without,  and  the  infliction  of  bhndness  darken  them  within,  — ^-^— 
so  that  they,  who  have  done  wrong  against  their  Maker  both 
in   body  and   in   heart,  may  at   one  and  the  same  time  be 
punished  in  body  and  in  heart,  and  that  they  may  be  made 
to  feel  pangs  in  both   ways,  who,  whilst   taiey  lived    here, 
ministered  to  their  depraved  gratifications  in  both.     Whence 
it  is  well  said  by  the  Prophet,    Which  are  gone  down  to  hcll^}^'^' 
with  their  weapons  of  war.     For  the  arms  of  sinners  are  the 
members  of  the  body,  by  means  of  which  they  execute  the 
wrong  desires  they  conceive.     Hence  it  is  said  rightly  by 
Paul,   Neither  yield  ye  your   members   as   instruments  o/'l^om.  6, 
unrighteousness  unto  sin.     And  so  to  '  go  down  into  hell 
with  the  weapons  of  war'  is  together  with  those  same  mem- 
bers, with  which  they  fulfilled  the  gratifications  of  self-indulg- 
ence, to  undergo  the  torments  of  eternal  condemnation,  that 
at  that  time  woe  may  every  way  swallow  them  up,  who  being 
now  subjected  to  their  gratifications,  every  way  fight  against 
His  justice,  Who  judgeth  justly. 

98.  But  that  is  very  wonderful  that  is  said,  without  order^ 
since  Almighty  God,  Who  punishes  evil  things  well,  never  per- 
mits even  the  torments  to  be '  without  order;'  because*  the  very  i  j-ead 
punishments  that  proceed  from  the  scales  of  justice,  cannot'  l"^^-' 
in  any  way  be  inflicted  *  without  order.'     For  how  is  it  that 
there  is  no  order  in  His  punishment,  since  according  to  the 
measure  of  his  guilt  is  likewise  the  recompense  of  vengeance 
which  pursues  every  one  of  the  damned.     For  hence  it  is 
written.  But  mighty  men  shall  be  mightily  tormented^  a7id^\isd.6j 
stronger  torment  shall  come  upon  the  stronger  ones.     Hence  ^'  ^' 
it  is  uttered  in  the   sentence  of  Babylon,  How  much  she  ^^y, is 
hath  glorified  herself,  and  lived  deliciously,  so  much  torment  '^• 
aiid  sorrow  give  her.     If  then  the  infliction  is  marked  out 
according  to  the  measure  of  the  sin,  it  is  undeniably  true 
that  there  is  order  preserved  in  the  punishments^  and  except 
the  acts  of  desert  did  distribute  His  aggregate  of  torment, 
the  Judge  that  shall  come  would  never  declare  that  He  will 
say  to  the  reapers.  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares,  «;2f/Mat.i3, 
bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them.     For  if  there  were  no 
order  observed  in  dealing  punishment,  why  are  the  tares  that 
are  to  be  burnt  bound  in  bundles?     But  doubtless  to  bind  up 


5()8  PunishmeiLt,  well  ordered  for  desert^  yet  confounds. 

Job  10,  the  bundles  for  the  biirnino',  is  to  unite  like  to  like  of  those 
-^~ —  that  are  destined  to  be  given  over  to  everlasting  fire,  that  all 
whom  a  like  sin  pollutes,  an  equal  punishment  may  bind  in 
one,  and  that  they  who  were  defiled  by  iniquity  in  no  degree 
dissimilar,  may  suffer  by  torments  not  dissimilar  either,  that 
condemnation  may  dash  to  the  earth  together  those  whom  pride 
uplifted  together,  and  that  all,  whom  ambition  made  to  swell  in 
no  unlike  proportion,  no  unlike  proportion  of  suffering  may 
wring  hard,  and  alike  flame  of  punishment  torment  those  whom 
a  like  flame  of  sin  kindled  in  the  fire  of  lust.  For  as  in  the 
John  14,  house  of  our  Father  there  are  '  many  mansions'  according  to 
the  diversities  in  virtue,  so  a  difference  in  guilt  subjects  the 
damned  to  a  difference  of  punishment  inlhefires  of  hell,  which 
hell,  though  it  be  one  and  the  same  for  all,  by  no  means  bums 
all  men  in  one  and  the  same  sort.  For  as  we  are  all  reached 
by  one  sun,  yet  we  do  not  all  glow  beneath  it  in  one  class, 
for  it  is  according  to  the  kind  of  the  body  that  the  burthen 
of  the  heat  too  is  felt,  in  the  same  way  there  is  to  the  damned 
but  one  hell  that  torments  all,  yet  not  one  that  consumes  all 
men  in  one  kind  of  manner,  for  what  on  the  one  side  an 
unequal  degree  of  healthiness  in  bodies  occasions,  that  same 
on  the  other  an  unequal  case  of  merit  produces.  How  then 
is  it  said  that  there  is  '  no  order'  in  the  punishments,  wherein 
without  doubt  every  man  is  tormented  after  the  measure  of 
his  sin  ? 

99.  But  after  the  holy  man  brought  in  the  shadow  of  death, 
he  adds  what  great  disorder  there  is  in  the  souls  of  the 
damned,  since  the  very  punishments,  which  come  well  ordered 
by  justice,  are  doubtless  far  from  well  ordered  in  the  heart  of 
those  undergoing  death.  For  as  w^e  have  said  above,  whilst 
every  one  of  the  damned  is  consumed  with  flames  without, 
he  is  devoured  by  the  fire  of  blindness  within,  and  being  in 
the  midst  of  woe,  he  is  confounded  both  within  and  without; 
so  that  he  is  worse  tormented  by  his  own  confusion.  Thus 
to  rejected  souls  there  will  be*  no  order'  in  their  punishment, 
because  their  very  confusion  of  mind  torments  most  cruelly 
in  their  death;  which  same  His  equity  in  judging  appoints 
by  His  wonderful  power,  tliat  a  ])unishment  as  it  were 
'  without  order'  may  confound  the  soul.  Or,  verily,  order  is 
said  to  be  wanting  to  His  ])unishments,  in  that  when  things 


Punishments  of  Hell  are  beyond  this  world\s  order.  569 

^        ,    .  .  ,  ,     .  ,  .  Book 

anse    for  their    punishment,   their   proper  character  is   not     ix. 


preserved     to     them.      Whence    the    words    are    forthwith 
introduced; 

And  everlasting  horror  dwells.  ,     . 

100.  In  the  torments  of  this  life  fear  has  pain,  pain  has 
no  fear,  in  that  pain  never  torments  the  mind,  when  it 
has  akeady  begun  to  suffer  what  it  feared.  But  hell  both  '  the 
shadow  of  death'  darkens  and  '  everlasting  hoiTor  inhabits;' 
in  that  they  all,  that  are  given  over  to  its  fires,  both  in  their 
punishments  undergo  pain,  and,  in  the  pressure  of  pain 
coming  upon  them,  they  are  ever  stricken  with  fear,  so  that 
they  both  suffer  what  they  dread,  and  unceasingly  dread 
what  they  are  suffering.  For  it  is  written  concerning  them, 
For  their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  their  fire  he  quenched,]^-  ^^? 
Here  the  flame  that  burns  gives  light;  There,  as  we  have 
shewn  by  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  the  fire  that  torments 
veils  the  light.  Here  fear  is  gone  so  soon  as  the  thing  that 
was  feared  has  begun  to  be  suffered;  There  pain  rends  at  the 
same  time  that  fear  pinches.  Thus  in  a  horrible  manner  there 
will  then  be  to  the  damned  pain  along  with  terror,  a  flame 
together  with  dimness.  Then,  then,  alas!  the  weight  of 
heavenly  equity  must  be  felt  by  the  damned,  that  they  who 
whilst  they  lived  were  not  afi*aid  to  be  at  variance  with  the 
Will  of  the  Creator,  may  one  day  in  their  destruction  find 
their  very  torments  at  variance  with  their  own  properties, 
that  in  proportion  as  they  are  at  strife  with  themselves,  their 
torments  may  be  increased,  and  as  they  issue  in  diverse  lines 
may  be  felt  in  many  ways.  And  these  punishments  both 
torture  those  that  are  plunged  therein  beyond  their  povvers, 
and  at  the  same  time  preserve  them  alive,  extinguishing  in 
them  the  forces  of  life,  that  the  end  may  so  afflict  the  life,  that 
torment  may  ever  live  without  end,  in  that  it  is  both  hastening 
after  an  end  through  torments,  and  failing  holds  on  without 
end.  Therefore  there  is  done  upon  the  wretches  death 
without  death,  an  end  without  ending,  failing  without  failing; 
in  that  both  death  lives,  and  the  end  is  ever  beginning,  and 
the  failing  is  unable  to  fail.  Therefore  whereas  death  at  the 
same  time  slays  and  does  not  extinguish,  pain  torments  but 
does  not  banish  fear,  the  flame  burns  but  does  not  dispel  the 
darkness,  for  all   that   is  gathered  from  a  knowledge  of  the 


570  Hdl  has  liyht  to  shew  companions  in  misery. 

Job  10,  present  life,  the  uiinisliments  are  without  order,  in  that  they 
do  not  retain  their  own  character  through  all  particulars. 


Hist, 

101.  Though  there  the  fire  both  gives  no  light  for  comfort, 

yet,  that  it  may  torment  the  more,  it  does  give  light  for  a 
])urpose.  For  the  damned  shall  see,  by  the  flame  lighting 
them,  all  their  followers  along  with  themselves  in  torment, 
for  the  love  of  whom  they  transgressed,  that  whereas  they 
had  loved  the  life  of  such  in  a  carnal  manner  against  the 
precepts  of  the  Creator,  the  destruction  of  those  very  persons 
may  also  afflict  them  for  the  increase  of  their  condemnation. 
Which  doubtless  we  gather  from  the  testimony  of  the  Gospel, 
wherein,  as  '  Truth'  declares,  that  rich  man,  whose  lot  it  was 
to  descend  into  the  torments  of  eternal  fire,  is  described  as 
remembering  his  five  brethren,  in  that  he  asked  of  Abraham 
that  he  would  send  to  them  for  their  instruction,  lest  a  like 
punishment  should  torment  them  coming  thither  at  some 
future  time.  Therefore  it  is  plain  without  doubt  that  he  who 
remembers  his  absent  kindred  to  the  increase  of  his  pain, 
might  a  little  while  after  even  see  them  present  to  his  eyes 
to  the  augmentation  of  his  punishment.  But  what  wonder  is 
it  if  he  beholds  the  damned  also  burnt  along  with  himself, 
who  to  the  increase  of  his  woe  saw  that  Lazarus  whom  he 
has  scorned  in  the  bosom  of  Abraham.  He,  therefore,  to 
whom  the  very  Elect  Saint  appeared,  that  his  pangs  might 
be  added  to,  why  are  we  not  to  believe  that  he  might  behold 
in  punishment  those,  whom  he  had  loved  in  opposition  to 
God  ?  From  which  it  is  collected,  that  those  whom  the  sons 
of  perdition  now  love  with  inordinate  affection,  by  a  marvel- 
lous disposition  of  judgment,  they  will  then  see  their  fellows 
in  torment ;  that  the  carnal  tie,  which  was  preferred  to  their 
Maker,  may  increase  the  pangs  of  their  own  punishment, 
being  cursed  before  their  eyes  by  a  like  retribution.  Thus 
the  fire  that  torments  in  darkness  must  be  supposed  to  pre- 
serve light  for  torture.  And  if  we  cannot  prove  this  from 
testimonies  by  the  expression  of  the  very  thing,  then  it 
remains  that  we  shew  it  from  the  reverse. 

102.  For  the  Three  Children  of  the  Hebrew  People,  when 
the  fire  of  the  furnace  was  kindled  by  command  of  the  king 
of  Chalda3a,  were  cast  into  it  with  hands  and  feet  tied.  Yet 
when  that  king  commiserating  them  sought  them  in  the  fire 


Fire  changed  to  the  Three  Chihlren.  Bad  meii  Satan  s  graves.  571 

of  the  furnace,  he  saw  them  walkinsr  about  with  untouched  Book 
garments.     Where  it  is  plain  to  infer,  that  by  the  wonderful  — ^-^ 
dispensation  of  our  Creator,  the  property  of  fire,  being  modi- 
fied into  an  opposite  power,  at  the  same  time  never  touched 
their  garments,  and  yet  burnt  their  chains,  and  for  those  holy 
men  the  flame  was  both  cooled  for  the  infliction  of  torment, 
and  burnt  out  for  the  service  of  unbinding.     And  so  as  fire 
knows  how  to  burn   to   the   Elect   in   consolation,  and  yet 
knows  not  how  to  burn  in   punishment,  so   in  the  reverse 
case,  at  the  same  time  that  the  flame  of  hell  yields  no  light 
to  the  damned  in  the  grace  of  consolation,  it  does  yield  light 
in  punishment,  that  the   fire  of  punishment  may  both  glow 
with  no  brightness  to  the  eyes  of  the  damned,  and  for  the 
increase  of  their  pain   may  shew  how  the  objects   of  their 
affection   are    tormented.      And    what   wonder   is   it    if  we 
suppose  that  hell  fire  contains  at  the  same  time  the  infliction 
of  darkness  and  of  light,  when  we  know  by  experience  that 
the  flame  of  torches  too  burns  and  is  dark.     The  devouring 
flame  then  consumes  those,  whom  carnal  gratification  now 
pollutes.      The    gaping    and     immeasurable    gulf    of   hell 
swallows  up  Then  all  whom  vainglory  exalts  now,  and  they 
who  by  any  sinful  practice  fulfilled  here  below  the  will  of 
the  crafty   counsellor,  then   being  cast   oflf  are   brought  to 
torments  along  with  their  leader. 

103.  And  though  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the 
nature  of  men  and  angels,  yet  those  are  involved  in  one  and 
the  same  punishment,  who  are  bound  by  one  and  the  same 
guilt  in  sin.  Which  is  well  and  shortly  conveyed  by  the 
Prophet,  when  he  says,  Asshur  is  tJiere  and  all  his  company:  Ezek. 
his  graves  are  about  him.  For  who  is  set  forth  by  the  title  ^"^j  22. 
of  Asshur,  the  proud  king,  saving  that  old  enemy  who  fell 
by  pride,  who  for  that  he  draws  numbers  into  sin,  descends 
with  all  his  multitude  into  the  dungeons  of  hell.  Now  '  graves' 
are  a  shelter  for  the  dead.  And  what  other  suffered  a  bitterer 
death  than  he,  who,  in  setting  his  Creator  at  nought,  forsook 
life  ?  And  when  human  hearts  admit  him  in  this  state  of 
death,  assuredly  they  become  his  graves.  Now  '  his  graves 
are  about  him,'  in  that  all  in  whose  souls  he  now  buries 
himself  by  their  affections,  hereafter  he  joins  to  himself  by 
torments.    And  whereas  the  lost  now  admit  evil  spirits  within 


572  Good  icorhs  to  be  done  in  time. 

Job  10,  themselves  by  committintr  unlawful  deeds,  then  the  graves 
will  burn  together  with  the  dead. 


Moral.  c^         t  •    r  ^         ^  •  i  •      • 

104.  See  how  we  are  iniormed,  what  punishment  is  in 
store  for  the  damned,  and,  by  Holy  Writ  instructing  us, 
have  no  reason  to  question,  hov/  great  may  be  the  fire  in 
damnation,  how  great  the  darkness  in  that  fire,  how  great 
the  terror  in  that  darkness.  But  what  does  it  advantage  us 
to  foreknow  these  things,  if  it  is  not  our  lot  to  escape  them  \ 
Therefore  with  the  whole  bent  of  our  mind,  we  must  make 
it  our  business,  that  when  the  opportunity  of  being  at  liberty 
is  ours,  by  application  to  living  well,  we  escape  the  avenging 
torments  of  evil  doers.     For  it  is  hence  said  by   Solomon, 

Eccles.  Whatsoever  thy  hand  JindetJi  to  do^  do  it  with  thy  might ; 

'         for  there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge^  nor  wisdom, 

ls.55  6.in  the  grave,  whither  thou  goest.     Hence  Isaiah  saith.  Seek 

ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon  Him 

2  Cor.    while  He  is  near.     Hence  Paul   says,  Behold  now  is  the 

6   2 
'   '      accepted  time  ;  behold  now  is  the  day  of  salvation.     Hence 

Gal.  6,  he  says  again.  Whilst  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  do  good 

10.  .     \j 

unto  alt  men. 

105.  But  very  often  the  soul  girds  itself  up  to  walk  in  the 
way  of  uprightness,  shakes  off  sloth,  and  is  so  transported 
into  heavenly  realms  in  affection,  that  it  well  nigh  seems  that 
there  is  nothing  of  it  left  here  below  ;  and  yet  when  it  is 
brought  back  to  take  account  of  the  flesh,  without  which  the 
course  of  the  present  life  can  never  be  accomplished,  this 
keeps  it  weighed  down  below,  as  if  it  had  not  as  yet  reached 
aught  of  things  above.  When  the  words  of  the  heavenly 
oracle  are  heard,  the  soul  is  uplifted  into  love  of  the  heavenly 
land;  but  when  the  occupation  of  the  present  life  rises  up 
anew,  it  is  buried  under  the  heap  of  earthly  cares,  and  the 
seed  of  the  hope  above  comes  to  nothing  in  the  soil  of  the 
heart,  because  the  thorn  of  care  below  grows  rank.  Which 
same  thorn  '  Truth'  uproots  with  the  hand  of  holy  exhorta- 

Matt.     tion  by  Himself,  saying,  Take  therefore  no  thought  for  the 

Ron!     morroiv.    And  in  opposition  to  this,  it  is  said  by  Paul,  Make 

13,  14.  jiot  provision  for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof.     But  in 

these  words  of  the  Captain  and  the  soldier  we  see  that  the 

soul  is  then  pierced  thereby  with  a  mortal  wound,  when  a 

balance  of  measure  is  not  kept  therein. 


The  flesh  to  be  subordinate,  as  Sarah  to  Abraham.        573 

106.  For  whilst  we  still  live  in  mortal  flesh,  conceni  for  Book 

IX. 
the  flesh  is  not  wholly  cut  away  from  us  ;  but  it  is  regulated '— 

so  that  it  should  serve  the  mind  as  discretion  dictates.  For 
whereas  '  Truth'  forbids  us  to  be  anxious  for  the  morrow, 
He  does  not  deny  us  to  take  thought  in  a  certain  way  for  the 
present  things,  which  He  does  forbid  us  to  extend  to  the 
time  that  succeeds.  And  truly  while  Paul  will  not  let  pro- 
vision be  made  for  the  flesh  in  the  lusts  thereof,  most  cer-I^om. 

.         13    14. 

tainly  he  does  permit  it  to  be  made  in  things  of  necessity.  ' 
Thus  the  care  of  the  flesh  must  be  restrained  under  the 
discreet  guidance  of  a  complete  control,  that  it  may  always 
obey  and  never  rule,  that  it  may  not  as  a  mistress  bring  the 
soul  under  its  power,  but  being  subjected  to  the  dominion  of 
the  mind,  may  like  a  handmaid  wait  in  attendance,  that  it  may 
come  when  bidden,  and  when  repressed  dart  off"  at  a  beck  of 
the  heart ;  that  it  may  scarcely  shew  itself  in  the  rear  of  holy 
thought,  and  never  present  itself  to  one  front  to  front  when 
full  of  right  thoughts.  Which  is  well  conveyed  to  us  in  the 
account  contained  in  the  sacred  Lesson,  when  Abraham  isG^en.is, 
related  to  have  met  the  three  Angels.  For  he  met  them  by  '  * 
himself,  as  they  were  coming,  without  the  door  of  the  tent, 
but  vSarah  stood  behind  the  door;  for  the  Man  and  the  master 
as  it  were  of  the  spiritual  house,  i.  e.  our  understanding, 
ought,  in  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Trinity,  to  issue  out  of 
the  close  chamber  of  the  flesh,  and,  as  it  were,  to  go  forth 
out  of  the  door  of  his  dwelling-place  below ;  but  let  care  of 
the  flesh,  as  a  woman,  not  shew  herself  out  of  doors,  and  let 
her  be  ashamed  to  display  herself  ostentatiously,  that  being 
as  it  were  behind  the  back  of  the  husband,  under  the  discreet 
guidance  of  the  vSpirit,  busied  with  necessary  things  alone, 
she  may  learn  never  to  go  wantonly  uncovered,  but  to  be 
regulated  by  modesty.  But  oftentimes,  when  she  is  charged 
never  to  presume  on  herself,  but  to  resign  herself  wholly  to 
undoubting  hope  in  God,  she  turns  away  her  ear,  and  dis- 
believes that,  her  exertions  ceasing,  the  means  of  life  can  be 
forthcoming  to  her.  And  hence  this  same  Sarah,  upon 
hearing  the  promises  of  God,  laughs,  and  for  laughing  is 
chidden,  and  still,  so  soon  as  she  is  chidden,  she  is  made  a 
fmitful  mother.  And  she  who  in  the  vigour  of  youth  had  no 
power  to  conceive,  when  broken  by  the  years  of  age,  conceived 


574        Joy  comes  of  trusting  God  only.      Danger  of  Pride. 
Job  10,  in  a  withered  womb  ;  in  that  when  care   of  the  flesh  has 

22 

— — '—  ceased  to  entertain  confidence  in  self,  by  promise  from  God 

Moral.  .  .  .  ^  -    -,     r  \  •         • 

it  receives  against  hope  that  which  from  human  reasoning  it 
doubted  its  ever  obtaining.  Hence  he  that  is  begotten  is 
well  called  Isaac,  i.  e.  '  laughing,'  in  that  when  it  conceives 
sureness  of  hope  in  the  Highest,  what  else  does  our  mind 
give  birth  to  but  joy  ?  Therefore  we  must  take  heed  lest 
care  of  the  flesh  either  transgress  the  limits  of  necessity,  or 
in  that  which  it  discharges  with  moderation,  presume  on 
itself.  For  oftentimes  the  mind  is  betrayed  to  account  that 
to  be  necessary,  which  it  desires  for  pleasure,  so  that  it 
reckons  all  that  takes  its  fancy  to  be  '  the  useful'  that  we  owe 
to  life.  And  often  because  the  effect  follows  the  forecasting, 
the  mind  is  lifted  up  in  self-confidence.  And  when  that  is 
in  its  hand  which  is  lacking  to  the  rest,  it  exults  in  secret 
thought  for  the  greatness  of  its  foresight,  and  is  so  much  the 
further  removed  from  real  foresight,  in  proportion  as  it  is 
ignorant  of  the  exaltation  that  it  is  feeling.  Therefore  we 
ought  to  bethink  ourselves,  with  a  heedful  earnestness  of 
vigilance,  whether  of  what  we  execute  in  deed  or  what  we 
revolve  in  heart,  lest  either  earthly  care,  to  the  incumbrance 
of  the  mind,  be  multiplied  without,  or  at  least  lest  the 
spirit  be  lifted  up  within  for  its  control  thereof;  that 
whilst  we  dread  the  judgment  of  God  wdth  temporal  heed, 
we  may  escape  the  woes  of  ^  everlasting  horror.' 


BOOK  X. 

The  whole  of  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Job,  and  the  five  first 
verses  of  the  twelfth,  being  made  out,  he  closes  the  Second  Part  of  this 
work. 

1.  As  often  as  a  mighty  wrestler  is  gone  down  into  the  i. 
arena  of  the  lists,  those  who  prove  no  match  for  him  in 
strength  by  turns  present  themselves  for  the  working  of  his 
overthrow,  and  as  fast  as  one  is  overcome  another  is  directly 
raised  up  against  him,  and,  he  being  subdued,  another  takes 
his  place,  that  they  may  sooner  or  later  find  his  strength  in 
wrestling  more  yielding,  in  that  his  repeated  victory  by  itself 
wears  it  out,  so  that  as  each  fi'esh  opponent  comes  to  the 
encounter,  he  who  cannot  be  overcome  by  the  nature  of  their 
powers,  may  at  least  be  got  the  better  of  by  the  changing  of 
the  persons.  Thus,  then,  in  this  theatre  of  men  and  xVngels, 
blessed  Job  approved  himself  a  mighty  wrestler,  and  how  he 
prevailed  against  the  charges  of  his  adversaries,  he  shews  by 
his  continuance  in  unabated  force ;  to  whom  first  Eliphaz 
presents  himself,  and  next  Bildad,  and  finally  Zophar  puts 
himself  forward  in  their  place  in  the  overthrow  of  him,  and 
these  lift  up  themselves  with  all  their  might  to  deal  him 
blows,  yet  never  reach  so  far  as  to  strike  the  height  of  that 
well-fenced  breast.  For  their  very  words  plainly  imply  that 
they  deal  their  blows  upon  the  air,  in  that  as  they  do  not 
rebuke  the  holy  man  aright,  the  words  of  smiting  being 
uttered  in  empty  air  are  lost;  and  this  is  clearly  shewn, 
whereas  the  answer  of  Zophar  the  Naamathite  begins  with 
insult,  in  that  he  says, 

Chap.  xi.  2.  Should  not  he  that  talketh  much  hear  in  his 
turn?  and  should  a  man  full  of  words  be  Justified? 

2.  It  is  the  practice  of  the  impertinent  ever  to  answer  by     ii. 
the  opposite  what  is  said  aright,  lest,  if  they  assent  to  the 
things  asserted,  they  should  seem  inferior.     And  to  these  the 
words  of  the  righteous,  however  small  in  number  they  have 
been  heard,  are  '  much,'  in  that  as  they  cut  their  evil  habits 


576  Job''s  words  too  true  to  suit  with  Zophar's  vanity. 

Job  1],  to  the  quick,  they  fall  heavy  iipou  the  hearing,  whence  that 

-^ — is  even  wrested  to  a  crime,  which  by  a  right  declaration  is 

pronounced  against  crimes.     For  the  very  person,  who  had 

delivered    strong   sentences    on    grounds    of  truth,    Zophar 

rebukes    and  calls  full  of  words,  in  that,   whereas  wisdom 

reprimands  sins  by  the  mouth   of  the  righteous,  it  sounds 

like  superfluity  of  talkativeness  to  the  ears  of  the  foolish. 

For   fro  ward   men    account   nothing    right,    but   what   they 

themselves  think,  and  they  reckon  the  words  of  the  righteous 

idle  in  the  degree  that  they  find  them  differing  from  their 

own    notions.      Nor   yet    did    Zophar   deliver   a   fallacious 

sentiment, '  that  a  man  full  of  words  could  never  be  justified,' 

in  that  so  long  as  any  one  lets  himself  out  in  words,  the 

gravity  of  silence  being  gone,  he  parts  with  the  safe  keeping 

Isa.  32,  of  the   soul.     For   hence   it   is   written,  And  the  work   of 

17 

Prov.     righteousness,  silence.     Hence  Solomon  saith,  He  that  hath 
25,  28.  no  rule  over  his  own  spirit  in  talking,  is  like  a  city  that  is 
broken    down,  and  without  ivalls.      Hence  he  says  again, 
Prov.      In  the  multitude  of  words  there  ivanteth  not  sin.     Hence  the 
Ps'.  140  Psalmist  bears  witness,  saying.  Let  not  a  mail  full  of  words 
ii.Vulg.  be  established  upon  the  earth;  but  the  worth  of  a  true  sentence 
is  lost,  when  it  is  not  delivered  under  the  keeping  of  dis- 
cretion.    Thus  it  is  a  certain  truth,  that '  a  man  full  of  words 
cannot  be  justified,'  but  a  good  thing  is  not  well  said,  because 
there  is  no  heed  taken  to  whom  it  is  spoken.     For  a  true 
sentence  against  the  wicked,  if  it  is  aimed  at  the  virtue  of 
the  good,  loses  its  own  virtue,  and  bounds  back  with  blunted 
point,  in  proportion  as  that  is  strong  which  it  hits.     But  that 
the  wicked  cannot  hear  good  words  with  patience,  and  that 
wherein  they  neglect  the  amending  of  their  life,  they  brace 
themselves  up  to  words  of  rejoinder,  Zophar  plainly  instructs 
us,  in  that  he  subjoins; 

Ver.  3.  Should  men  hold  their  peace  at  thee  only?  and 
when  thou  mockest  at  others,  shall  no  man  confute  thee  ? 
iii.  ii.  The  uninstructed  mind,  as  we  have  said,  is  sorely  galled 
by  the  sentences  of  truth,  and  reckons  silence  to  be  a  punish- 
ment; it  takes  all  that  is  said  aright  to  be  the  disgrace  of 
mocking  at  itself.  For  when  a  true  voice  addresses  itself  to 
the  ears  of  bad  men,  guilt  stings  the  recollection,  and  in  the 
rebuking  of  evil   practices,  in    proportion   as    the    mind    is 


The  froward  think  to  be  dear  by  charging  others.        577 

touched  with  consciousness  within,  it  is  stirred  up  to  eager-  Book 
ness  in  gainsaying  without;  it  cannot  bear  the  voice,  in  that '■— 


being  touched  in  the  wound  of  its  guilt  it  is  put  to  pain,  and 
by  that  which  is  delivered  against  the  wicked  generally,  it 
imagines  that  it  is  itself  attacked  in  a  special  manner;  and 
what  it  inwardly  remembers  itself  to  have  done,  it  blushes  to 
hear  the  sound  of  without.  Whence  it  presently  prepares  itself 
for  a  defence,  that  it  may  cover  the  shame  of  its  guilt  by  words 
of  froward  gainsaying.  For  as  the  righteous,  touching  certain 
things  which  have  been  done  unrighteously  by  them,  account 
the  voice  of  rebuke  to  be  the  service  of  charity,  so  the 
froward  reckon  it  to  be  the  insult  of  mocker3^  The  one  sort 
immediately  prostrate  themselves  to  shew  obedience,  the 
other  are  lifted  up  to  shew  the  madness  of  self-defence.  The 
one  sort  take  the  helping  hand  of  correction  as  the  upholding 
of  their  life,  by  means  of  which  whilst  the  sin  of  the  present 
life  is  corrected,  the  wrath  of  the  Judge  that  is  to  come  is 
abated;  the  other,  when  they  find  themselves  assailed  by 
rebuke,  see  therein  the  sword  of  smiting,  in  that  whilst  sin  is 
unclothed  by  the  voice  of  chiding,  the  conceit  of  present 
glory  is  spoilt.  Hence  *  Truth'  says  by  Solomon  in  com- 
mendation of  the  righteous  man.  Give  instruction  to  a  wise  Prov.  9, 
man,  and  he  will  hasten  to  receive  it;  hence  he  makes 
nothing  of  the  obstinacy  of  the  wicked,  saying.  He  that^^"^'  7. 
reproveth  a  scorner  getteth  to  himself  wrong.  For  it  generally 
happens  that  when  they  cannot  defend  the  evils  that  are 
reproved  in  them,  they  are  rendered  worse  from  a  feeling  of 
shame,  and  carry  themselves  so  high  in  their  defence  of 
themselves,  that  they  rake  out  bad  points  to  urge  against  the 
life  of  the  reprover,  and  so  they  do  not  account  themselves 
guilty,  if  they  fasten  guilty  deeds  upon  the  heads  of  others 
also.  And  when  they  are  unable  to  find  true  ones,  they 
feign  them,  that  they  may  also  themselves  have  things  they 
may  seem  to  rebuke  with  no  inferior  degree  of  justice. 
Hence  Zophar,  for  that  it  stung  him  to  be  as  it  were  mocked 
at  by  reproof,  forthwith  subjoins  with  lying  lips, 

Ver.  4.  For  Thou  hast  said.  My  speech  is  pure,  and  I  am 
clean  in  Thine  eyes. 

4.  Whoso  remembers  the  words  of  blessed  Job,  knows  how    iv. 
falsely  this  charge  is  fastened   upon   his  voice.     For   how 

2  p 


578   Zophar  pretends  a  kind  wish  that  Job  were  instructed. 

Job  11,  could  he  call  himself  pure,  who  says,  If  I  justify  myself 
mine  own  mouth  shall  condemn  me;  but  there  is  this  in  the 


Job  9,*  wickedness  of  the  unrighteous,  that,  while  it  refuses  to 
^^*  bewail  real  evil  things  in  itself,  it  invents  them  in  others,  for 
it  makes  use  of  it  as  a  solace  of  evil  doing,  if  the  life  of  the 
reprover  can  be  also  stained  with  false  accusations.  But  we 
must  know  that  for  the  most  part  the  wicked  wish  what  is 
good  so  far  as  the  lips,  in  order  that  they  may  shew  that  that 
is  bad  which  we  have  at  present,  and  as  if  from  the  good 
will  they  bear  others,  they  pray  for  favourable  circumstances, 
in  order  that  they  may  appear  full  of  kindly  affection. 
Whence  too  Zophar  forthwith  subjoins,  saying, 

But  oh  that  God  would  speak  with  thee,  and  open  His 
lips  nnto  thee ! 
V.  5.  For  man  by  himself  speaks  to  himself  when  in  all  that 

he  thinks  he  is  not  withdrawn  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Di\ine 
Being  from  the  sense  of  carnal  wisdom ;  when  the  flesh  puts 
forth  a  sense,  and  inviting  the  mind  as  it  were  to  the  under- 
standing of  it,  sends  it  forth  abroad.     And  hence  '  Truth' 
Mark8,saith  to  Peter,  who  was  still  full   of  earthly  notions,  For 
^^'        thou  savour  est  not  the  thinys  that  he  of  God,  but  the  things 
that  be  of  men.     Yet,  when  he  made  a  good  confession,  the 
Mat.16,  W'Ords  are  spoken.  Flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto 
thee,  but  My  Father  which  is  in  Heaven.     Now  what  do  we 
understand  by  *  the  lips'  of  God  saving  His  judgments  ?    For 
when  the  lips  are  closed  the  voice  is  kept  in,  and  the  mean- 
ing of  the  person  keeping  silence  is  not  known;  but  when,  the 
lips  being  opened,  speech  is  put  forth,  the  mind  of  the  per- 
son speaking  is  found  out.     So  '  God  opens  His  lips'  when 
He  manifests  His  will  to  men  by  open  visitations.     For  He 
as  it  were  speaks  with  open  mouth,  when  the  veil  of  interior 
Providence  being  drawn  aside,  He  declines  to  conceal  what 
is  His  will.     For  as  it  were  with  closed  lips  He  forbears  to 
indicate  His  meaning  to  us,  when  by  the  secresy  of  His 
judgments    He   conceals    wherefore    He    does    any    thing. 
Zophar  therefore,  in  order  that  he   might  reprove  blessed 
Job  on  the  grounds  of  a  carnal  understanding,  and  shew  what 
kindness   of  disposition    he   himself    was    of,    wishes   good 
things  for  him,  which  even  when  they  are  there  present  he 
docs   not  know  to  be   so,  saying,  Bict  ok   that   God  tcould 


God*s  secret  Judgments^  icken  He  leaves  us  to  be  tried.    579 

speak  with  thee,  and  open  His  lips  with  thee.  As  if  he  were  Book 
to  say  in  plain  words,  *  I  feel  for  thy  uninstructedness  — -— 
more  than  for  thy  chastening,  in  that  I  know  thee  to  be 
endued  with  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh  alone,  and  void  of  the 
Spirit  of  Truth.  For  didst  thou  discern  the  secret  judgments 
of  God,  thou  wouldest  not  give  utterance  to  such  daring 
sentences  against  Him.'  And  because  when  Almighty  God 
raises  us  to  take  a  view  of  His  judgments.  He  forthwith  puts 
to  flight  the  mists  of  the  ignorance  that  is  in  us,  what  instruc- 
tion comes  to  us  by  His  lips  being  opened,  he  forthwith 
shews  by  adding  in  the  words, 

Ver.  6.  And  that  He  would  shew  thee  the  secrets  of  wis- 
dom, and  that  her  law  is  manifold. 

6.  The  public  works  of  Supreme  Wisdom  are  when  vi. 
Almighty  God  rules  those  whom  He  creates,  brings  to  an 
end  the  good  things  which  He  begins,  and  aids  by  His 
inspiration  those  whom  He  illumines  with  the  light  of  His 
visitation.  For  it  is  plain  to  the  eyes  of  all  men,  that  those 
whom  He  created  of  His  free  bounty.  He  provides  for  with 
lovingkindness.  And  when  He  vouchsafes  spiritual  gifts,  He 
Himself  brings  to  perfection  what  He  has  Himself  begun  in 
the  bounteousness  of  His  lovingkindness.  But  the  secret 
works  of  Supreme  Wisdom  are,  when  God  forsakes  those 
whom  He  has  created  ;  when  the  good  things,  which  He  had 
begun  in  us  by  preventing  us.  He  never  brings  to  completion 

by  going  on;  when  He  enlightens  us  with  the  brightness  of 
His  illuminating  grace,  and  yet  by  permitting  temptation 
of  the  flesh,  smites  us  with  the  mists  of  blindness;  when  the 
good  gifts  which  He  bestowed.  He  cares  not  to  preserve  to 
us;  when  He  at  the  same  time  prompts  the  desires  of  our 
soul  towards  Himself,  and  yet  by  a  secret  judgment  presses 
us  with  the  incompetency  of  our  weak  nature. 

7.  Which  same  secrets  of  His  Wisdom,  but  few  have 
strength  to  investigate,  and  no  man  has  strength  to  find  out ; 
in  that  it  is  most  surely  just  that  that  which  is  ordained  not 
unjustly  above  us,  and  concerning  us,  by  immortal  Wisdom, 
should  be  hidden  from  us  while  yet  in  a  mortal  state.  But 
to  contemplate  these  same  secrets  of  His  Wisdom  is  in  some 
sort  already  to  behold  the  power  of  His  incomprehensible 

2  p  -2 


580  Zophar''s  presumption.     God's  law  of  Charity  is  manifold. 

Job  11,  nature,  in  that  though  we  fail  in  the  actual  investigation  of 

--^^ —  His  secret  counsels,  yet  by  that  very  failure  we  more  tho- 

roughl}^  learn  Whom  we  should  fear.     Paul  had  strained  to 

Rom.     reach  these  secrets  of  that  Wisdom,  when  he  said,  0  the  depth 

11    33. 

'     '   of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God! 
Hoiv  unsearchable  are  His  judgments^  and  His  ways  past 
finding  out!    For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ? 
Or  who  hath  been  His  counsellor 'i^     He,  in  a  part  above, 
turning  faint  even  with  the  mere  search,  and  yet  through 
faintness  advancing  to  the  knowledge  of  his  own  weakness, 
Rom.  9,  saith  beforehand  the  words.  Nay  but  0  man,  icho  art  thou 
that  repliest  against  God  ?     Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to 
Him  that  formed  it,   Why  hast  Thou  made  me  thus  ?     He, 
then,   that  being  unable  to   attain  to   the   secrets   of  God, 
returned  back  to  the  recognition  of  his  own  weakness,  and 
by  thus  falling  short,  recalled  himself  to  the  instructing  of 
himself,  in  not  finding  out  the  secrets  of  wisdom,  so  to  say,  he 
did  find  them  out.     For  when  his  strength  failed  him  for  the 
investigation  of  the  counsels  of  the  Most  High,  he  learned 
how  to  entertain  fear  with  greater  humility,   and  the  man 
whom  his  own  weakness  kept  back  from  the  interior  know- 
ledge, humility  did  more  thoroughly  unite  thereto.     Thus 
Zophar,  who  is  both  instructed  by  the  pursuit  of  knowledge, 
and  uninstructed  by   the   effrontery   of  highs woln   speech, 
because  he  has  no  weight  himself,  wishes  for  a  better  man 
that  thing  which  he  has,   saying,  But  oh  that  God  would 
speak   with   thee,  and  open  His  lips  unto  thee;    that  He 
might  sheiv  thee  the  secrets  of  wisdom.     And  by  wishing 
he  also  shews  off  that  wisdom  wherewith  he  reckons  himself 
to  be  equipped  above  his  friend,  when  he  thereupon  adds. 
And  that  her  law  is  manifold.     What  should  the  *  law'  of 
God  be  here   taken  to  mean,  saving  charity,  whereby   we 
ever  read  in  the  inward  parts  after  what  manner  the  precepts 
of  life  should  be  maintained  in  outward  action  ?    For  con- 
cerning this  Law  it  is   delivered  by  the  voice  of  *  Truth,' 
John  15,  This  is  My  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another.     Con- 
j^Qjjj      cerning  it  Paul  says.  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.     Con- 
13,  10.   cerning  it  he  saith  again.  Bear  ye  one  another'^s  burthens, 
'  '  and  so  fulfil  ye  the  law  of  Christ.     For  what  can  the  Law  of 


Two  precepts  unfold  into  manifold  virtues.  581 

Christ  be  more  fitly  understood  to  mean  than  charity,  which  we  Book 
then  truly  fulfil  when  we  bear  the  burthens  of  our  brethren  — — — 


from  the  principle  of  love  ? 

8.  But  this  same  Law  is  called  *  manifold;'  in  that  charity, 
full  of  eager  solicitude,  dilates  into  all  deeds  of  virtue.     It 
sets  out  indeed  with  but  two  precepts,  but  it  reaches  out  into 
a  countless  number.      For   the  beginning   of  this   Law   is, 
the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour.     But  the 
love  of  God  is  distinguished  by  a  triple  division.  For  we  are 
bidden  to  love  our  Maker'  with  all  our  heart'  and  '  with  all 
our  soul'  and  '  with  all  our  might.'     Wherein  we  are  to  take 
note  that  when  the  Sacred  Word  lays  down  the  precept  that 
God  should  be  loved,  it  not  only  tells  us  with  what,  but  also 
instructs  us  with  how  much,  in  that  it  subjoins,  '  with  all;' 
so  that  indeed  he  that  desires  to  please  God  perfectly,  must 
leave  to  himself  nothing  of  himself.     And  the  love   of  our 
neighbour  is  carried  down  into  two  precepts,  since  on  the  one 
hand  it  is  said  by  a  certain  righteous  man.  Do  that  to  no  man  Tob.  4, 
which  thou    hatest.     And  on   the    other  '  Truth'   saith    by  ^* 
Himself,  Therefore  all  things  whatsoever  ye  icouldthat  7nen^'^^^^-7, 
should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them.     By  which  two     ' 
precepts  of  both  Testaments,  by  the  one  an  evil  disposition 
is  restrained,  and  by  the   other  a  good  disposition   charged 
upon  us,  that  every  man  not  doing  the  ill  which  he  would  not 
wish  to  suffer,  should  cease  from  the  working  of  injuries,  aud 
again  that  rendering  the  good  which  he  desires  to  be  done 
to  him,  he  exert  himself  for  the  service  of  his  neighbour  in 
kindness  of  heart.    But  while  these  same  two  are  thought  on 
with  heedful  regard,  the  heart  is  made  to  open  itself  wide  in 
innumerable  offices  of  virtue,  lest  whether  for  the  admittinc' 
of  things  which   it  ought  not,  the   mind  being  agitated  be 
heated  by  passions ;  or  for  the  setting  forth  of  whatsoever  it 
ought,   being   undone    by   indolence,   it   may    be   rendered 
inactive.    For  when  it  guards  against  doing  to  another  what  it 
would  noton  any  account  itself  undergo  at  the  hands  of  another 
it  looks  about  itself  on  every  side   with  a  heedful   eye,  lest 
pride  lift  it  up,  and  while  cutting  down  set  up  the  soul  even 
to  contempt  of  our  neighbour;    lest  coveting   mangle  the 
thought  of  the  heart,  and  while  stretching  it  wide  to  desire 


582  Manifold  offices  of  true  Charity  toivard  men. 

Job  11,  the  things  of  another,  straitly  confine  it;  lest  lust  pollute  the 
j^j^^'^^  heart,  and  corrupt  it,  thus  become  the  slave  of  its  passions,  in 
forbidden  courses;  lest  anger  increase,  and  inflame  it  even  to 
giving  vent  to  insult;  lest  envy  gnaw  it,  and  lest  jealous  of  the 
successes  of  others  it  consume  itself  with  its  own  torch;  lest 
loquacity  drive  on  the  tongue  beyond  all  bounds  of  modera- 
tion, and  draw  it  out  even  to  the  extent  of  license  in  slander; 
lest  bad  feeling  stir  up  hatred,  and  set  on  the  lips  even  to  let 
loose  the  dart  of  cursing.     Again,  when  it  thinks  how  it  may 
do  to  another  what  it  looks  for  at  the  hands  of  another  for 
itself,  it  considers  how  it  may  return  good  things  for  evil, 
and  better  things  for  good;  how  to  exhibit  towards  the  im- 
pertinent the  meekness  of  longsuffering;  how  to  render  the 
kindness  of  good  will  to  them  that  pine  with  the  plague  of 
malice,  how  to  join  the  contentious  with  the  bands  of  peace, 
how  to  train  up  the  peaceable  to  the  longing  desire  of  true 
Peace ;  how  to  supply  necessary  things  to  those  that  are  in 
need ;  how  to  shew  to  those  that  be  gone  astray  the  path  of 
righteousness;  how  to  soothe  the  distressed  by  words  and 
by  sympathy;  how  to  quench  by  rebuke  those  that  burn  in 
the  desires  of  the  world;  how  by  reasoning  to  soften  down  the 
threats  of  the  powerful,  how  to  lighten  the  bands  of  the 
oppressed  by  all  the  means   that  he  is  master  of;  how  to 
oppose  patience  to  those  that  offer  resistance  without;  how 
to  set  forth  to  those  that  are  full  of  pride  within  a  lesson  of 
discipline  together  with  patience;  how,  with  reference  to  the 
misdeeds  of  those  under  our  charge,  mildness  may  temper 
zeal,  so  that  it  never  relax  from  earnestness  for  the  rule  of 
right;  how  zeal  may  be  so  kindled  for  revenge,  that  yet  by 
kindling  thus  it  never  transgress  the  bounds  of  pity;  how  to 
stir  the  unthankful  to  love  by  benefits;  how  to  preserve  in 
love  all   that  are   thankful  by  services;  how  to  pass  by  in 
silence  the  misdoings  of  our  neighbour,  when  he  has  no  power 
to  correct  them;  how  when  they  may  be  amended  by  speak- 
ing to  dread  silence  as  consent  to  them  ;  how  to  submit  to 
what  he  passes  by  in  silence,  yet  so  that  none  of  the  poison 
of  annoyance  bury  itself  in   his  spirit;  how  to  exhibit  the 
service  of  good  will  to  the  malicious,  yet  not  so  as  to  depart 
from    the    claims   of  righteousness    from   kindness;  how  to 


Manifold  examplea  of  God's  Law  in  His  Saints.        583 

render  all  things  to  his  neighbours  that  he  is  master  of,  FofK 
yet  in  thus  rendering  them  not  to  be  swelled  with  pride;  in  -^-^ 
the  gQod  deeds  which  he  sets  forth  to  shrink  from  the  pre- 
cipice of  pride,  yet  so  as  not  to  slacken  in  the  exercise  of 
doing  good;  so  to  lavish  the  things  which  he  possesses  as  to 
take  thought  how  great  is  the  bounteousness  of  his  Kewarder, 
lest  in  bestowing  earthly  things  he  think  of  his  poverty  more 
than  need  be,  and  in  the  offering  of  the  gift  a  sad  look 
obscure  the  light  of  cheerfulness. 

9.  Therefore  the  Law  of  God  is  rightly  called  manifold,  in 
this  respect,  that  whereas  it  is  one  and  the  same  principle  of 
charity,  if  it  has  taken  full  possession  of  the  mind,  it  kindles 
her  in  manifold  ways  to  innumerable  works.  The  diverseness 
whereof  we   shall  set  forth  in  brief  if  we  go  through  and 
enumerate  her  excellencies  in  each  of  the  Saints  severally. 
Thus  she  in  Abel  both  presented  chosen  gifts  to  God,  and 
without  resistance  submitted  to  the  brother's  sword;  Enoch 
she  both  taught  to  live  in  a  spiritual  way  among  men,  and 
even  in    the  body    canied  him    away   from  men  to    a  life 
above.     Noah  she  exhibited  the  only  one  pleasing  to  God 
when  all  were   disregarded,  and  she  exercised  him  on  the 
building  of  the  ark  with  application  to  a  long  labour,  and 
she  preserved  him  the  survivor  of  the  world  by  the  practice 
of  religious  works.     In  Shem  and  Japhet  she   humbly  felt 
shame  at  the  father's  nakedness,  and  with  a  cloak  thrown  over 
their  shoulders  hid  that  which  she  looked  not  on.     She,  for 
that  she  lifted  the  right  hand  of  Abraham  for  the  death  of 
his  son  in  the  yielding  of  obedience,  made  him  the  father  of 
a  numberless  offspring  of  the  Gentiles.  She,  because  she  ever 
kept  the  mind  of  Isaac  in  purity,  when  his  eyes  were  now 
dim  with  age,  opened  it  wide  to  see  events  that  should  come 
to  pass  long  after.     She  constrained  Jacob  at  the  same  time 
to  bewail  from  the  core  of  his  heart  the  good  child  taken 
from  him,  and  to  bear  with  composure  the  presence  of  the 
wicked   ones.      She   instructed   Joseph,  when   sold  by  his 
brethren,  both  to  endure  servitude  with  unbroken  freedom  of 
spirit,  and  not  to  lord  it  afterwards  over  those  brethren  with 
a  high  mind.    She,  when  the  people  erred,  at  once  prostrated 
Moses   in  prayer,  even    to  the   beseeching  for    death,  and 
lifted  him  up  in  eagerness  of  indignant  feeling  even  to  the 


584  Charity  can  be  severe  as  well  as  indulgent. 

Job  11,  extent  of  slaying  the  people;  so  that  he  should  both  offer 

— — ^ — himself  to  die  in  behalf  of  the  perishing  multitude,  and  in 
Moral.  i     r   i      t        i  •      xt-     .     t 

the  stead  or  tne  Lord  m  His  indignation  straightway  let  loose 

his  rage  against  them  when  they  sinned.  She  lifted  the  arm 
of  Phinees  in  revenge  of  the  guilty  souls,  that  he  should 
pierce  them  as  they  lay  with  the  sword  he  had  seized,  and 
that  by  being  wroth  he  might  appease  the  wrath  of  the  Lord. 
She  instructed  Jesus  the  spy,  so  that  he  both  first  vindicated 
the  truth  by  his  word  against  his  false  countrymen,  and  after- 
vrards  asserted  it  with  his  sword  against  foreign  enemies.  She 
both  rendered  Samuel  lowly  in  authority,  and  kept  him  un- 
impaired in  his  low  estate,  who,  in  that  he  loved  the  People  that 
persecuted  him,  became  himself  a  witness  to  himself  that  he 
loved  not  the  height  from  whence  he  was  thrust  down.  David 
before  the  wicked  king  she  at  once  urged  with  humility  to 
take  flight,  and  filled  with  pitifulness  to  grant  pardon;  who  at 
once  in  fearing  fled  from  his  persecutor,  as  his  lord,  and  yet, 
when  he  had  the  power  of  smiting  him,  did  not  acknowledge 
him  as  an  enemy.  She  both  uplifted  Nathan  against  the 
king  on  his  sinning  in  the  authoritativeness  of  a  free  rebuke, 
and,  when  there  was  no  guilt  resting  on  the  king,  humbly 
I3.20  2.pi'0i^trated  him  in  making  request.  She  in  Isaiah  blushed 
not  for  nakedness  of  the  flesh  in  the  work  of  preaching,  and 
the  fleshly  covering  withdrawn,  she  penetrated  into  heavenly 
mysteries.  She,  for  that  she  taught  Elijah  to  live  spiritually 
with  the  earaestness  of  a  fervent  soul,  carried  him  off  even 
in  the  body  also  to  enter  into  life.  She,  in  that  she  taught 
Elisha  to  love  his  master  with  a  single  affection,  filled  him 
with  a  double  portion  of  his  master's  spirit.  Through  her 
Jeremiah  withstood  that  the  people  should  not  go  down  into 
Egypt,  and  yet  by  cherishing  them  even  when  they  were 
disobedient  he  even  himself  went  down  where  he  forbad  the 
going  down.  She,  in  that  she  first  raised  Ezekiel  from  all 
earthly  objects  of  desire,  afterwards  suspended  him  in  the  air 
by  a  lock  of  his  head.  She  in  the  case  of  Daniel,  for  that  she 
refrained  his  appetite  from  the  royal  dainties,  closed  for  him 
the  very  mouths  of  the  hungry  lions.  She,  in  the  Three 
Children,  for  that  she  quenched  the  flames  ofevilinchnations 
in  them  whilst  in  a  condition  ofpeace,inthe  season  of  affliction 
abated  the  verv  flames  in  the  furnace.     She  in  Peter  both 


St.  PauTs  description  of  Charity  illustrated.  585 

stoutly  withstood  the  threats  of  frowning  rulers,  and  in  the  Book 
setting  aside  of  the  rite  of  circumcision,  she  heard  the  words '— 


of  inferiors  with  humility.  She,  in  Paul,  both  meekly  bore 
the  violence  of  persecutors,  and  yet  in  the  matter  of  circum- 
cision boldly  rebuked  the  notion  of  one  by  great  inequality  his 
superior.  *  Manifold'  then  is  this  Law  of  God,  which  under- 
going no  change  accords  with  the  several  particulars  of 
events,  and  being  susceptible  of  no  variation  yet  blends 
itself  with  varying  occasions. 

10.  The  multiplicity    of  which    same   law,    Paul   rightly 
counts  up,  in  the    words.  Charity  stiff ereth   long,  and  is  ^  Cor. 
kind;  envieth  not,  vaunteth   not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up,Q/' ' 
doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly,  seeketh  not  her  own,  is  not 
easily  provoked,  thinketh  no  evil,  rojoiceth  not  in  iniquity, 
hut  rejoiceth  in  the  truth.     For  charity  '  sufFereth  long,'  in 
that  she  bears  with  composure  the  ills  that  are  brought  upon 
her.     She  '  is  kind,'  in  that  she  renders  good  for  evil  with  a 
bounteous  hand.     She  '  envieth  not,'  in  that  from  her  covet- 
ing nought   in   the  present  life,  she  thinketh  not  to  envy 
earthly  successes.     She  '  is  not  puffed  up,'  in  that  whereas 
she  eagerly  desires  the  recompense  of  the  interior  reward, 
she  does  not  lift  herself  up  on  the  score  of  exterior  good 
things.     She  *  doth  not  behave  herself  unseemly,'  in  that  in 
proportion  as  she  spreads  herself  out  in  the  love  of  God  and 
our  neighbour  alone,  whatever  is  at  variance  with  the  rule  of 
right  is  unknown  to  her.     She  is  not  covetous,  in  that  as  she 
is  wannly  busied  within  with  her  own  concerns,  she  never 
at  all  covets  what  belongs  to  others.     '  She  seeketh  not  her 
own,'  in  that  all  that  she  holds  here  by  a  transitory  tenure, 
she  disregards  as  though  it  were  another's,  in  that  she  knows 
well  that  nothing  is  her  own  but  what  shall  stay  with  her. 
She  *  is  not  easily  provoked,'  in  that  even  when  prompted  by 
wrongs  she  never  stimulates  herself  to  any  motions  of  self- 
avenging,  whilst  for  her  great  labours  she  looks  hereafter  for 
greater  rewards*     She  '  thinketh  no  evil,'  in  that  basing  the 
soul  in  the  love  of  purity,  while  she  plucks  up  all  hatred  by 
the  roots,  she  cannot  harbour  in  the  mind  aught  that  polhites. 
She  '  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,'  in  that  as  she  yearns  towards 
all  men  with  love  alone,  she  does  not  triumph  even  in  the 
ruin  of  those  that  are  against  her,  but  she  '  rejoiceth  in  the 


586  Patience  the  i^esult  ofknoioing  our  ill  desert. 

Job  10,  truth,'  in  that  loving  others  as  herself,  by  that  which  she 
- — '- — beholds  right  in  others  she  is  filled  with  joy  as  if  for  the 
growth  of  her  own  proficiency.  '  Manifold,'  then,  is  this  '  Law 
of  God,'  which  by  the  defence  of  its  instructiveness  is  proof 
against  the  dart  of  every  sin  which  assaults  the  soul  for  its 
destruction,  so  that  whereas  our  old  enemy  besets  us  with 
manifold  encompassing,  she  may  in  many  ways  rid  us  of 
him.  Which  Law  if  we  consider  with  heedful  attention,  we 
are  made  to  know  how  greatly  we  sin  each  day  against  our 
Maker.  And  if  we  thoroughly  consider  our  sins,  then 
assuredly  we  bear  afflictions  with  composure,  nor  is  any  one 
precipitated  into  impatience  by  pain,  when  conscience  gives 
itself  up  by  its  own  sentence.  Hence  Zophar,  knowing  what 
it  was  that  he  said,  but  not  knowing  to  whom  he  said  it, 
after  he  had  premised  the  words.  That  He  would  shew 
thee  the  secrets  of  wisdom,  and  that  her  Law  is  manifold, 
forthwith  adds, 

And  that  thou  mighiest  know  that  God  exacteth  of  thee 
less  than  thine  iniquity  deserveth. 
vii.  11.  For,  as  we  have  said,  the  pain  of  the  stroke  is  miti- 
•  gated,  when  the  sin  is  acknowledged ;  for  every  one  too 
bears  the  knife  of  the  leach  the  more  patiently,  in  proportion 
as  he  sees  what  he  cuts  to  be  gangrened.  He  therefore  that 
comprehends  the  manifold  character  of  the  Law,  reflects  how 
much  too  little  all  is  that  he  is  suffering ;  for  from  this,  that 
the  weight  of  the  sin  is  acknow^ledged,  the  pain  of  the  afflic- 
tion is  made  less. 

12.  But  herein  we  must  know  that  it  was  not  without 
great  iniquity  that  Zophar  reproached  the  righteous  man 
even  to  the  charging  him  with  iniquity.  And  thus  Truth 
with  justice  reproves  their  boldness,  but  mercifully  restores 
them  to  favour;  for  with  the  merciful  Judge  a  fault  never 
goes  without  pardon,  when  it  is  done  through  the  heat  of 
zealous  feeling  in  the  love  of  Him.  For  this  oftentimes 
happens  to  great  and  admirable  teachers,  that  in  proportion 
as  they  arc  inflamed  with  the  depth  of  charity,  they  exceed 
the  due  measure  of  correction,  and  that  the  tongue  utters 
somewhat  that  it  never  ought,  because  love  inflames  the 
heart  to  the  degree  that  it  ought.  But  the  word  of  offered 
affront  is  the  more  readily  spared,  in  proportion  as  it  is  con- 


Tlie  stroke  meant  for  sin,  misguided,  may  kill  a  friend.  587 

sidered  from  what  root  it  comes.  Whence  the  Lord  rightly  Book 
commanded  by  Moses,  saymg,  As  when  a  man  goeth  i?ito  ~-^ 
the  wood  with  his  neighbour  merely  to  hew  tvood,  and  the  19,  5. 6. 
wood  of  the  axe  fiieth  from  his  hand,  and  the  head  slippeth 
from  the  helve,  and  lighteth  upon  his  neighbour  that  he  die, 
he  shall  flee  unto  one  of  these  cities  and  live :  lest  perchance 
the  kinsman  of  him  whose  blood  hath  been  shed  pursue  the 
slayer  while  his  heart  is  hot,  and  overtake  him,  and  slay  him. 
For  we  '  go  to  the  wood  with  a  friend,'  whensoever  we  betake 
ourselves  with  a  neighbour  to  take  a  view  of  our  transgres- 
sions, and  we  '  merely  hew  wood,'  when  with  pious  purpose 
we  cut  away  the  evil  doings  of  offenders;  but  the  '  axe  fiieth 
from  his  hand,'  when  rebuke  carries  itself  into  severity 
beyond  what  ought  to  be,  and  the  '  head  slippeth  from  the 
helve,'  when  the  speech  goes  off  too  hard  from  the  act  of 
correcting,  and  it  *  lighteth  upon  a  neighbour,  that  he  die,' 
in  that  the  offered  insult  kills  its  hearer  as  to  the  spirit  of 
love.  For  the  mind  of  the  person  reproved  is  instantly 
hunied  into  hate,  if  unmeasured  censure  condemn  it  beyond 
what  ought  to  be.  But  he  that  heweth  wood  carelessly,  and 
kills  a  neighbour,  must  take  refuge  in  three  cities,  that  he 
may  live  unharmed  in  one  of  them,  in  that  if  betaking 
himself  to  the  lamentations  of  repentance,  he  be  hidden  in 
the  unity  of  the  Sacrament  under  hope  faith  and  charity, 
he  is  not  held  guilty  of  the  manslaughter  that  has  been  done; 
and  when  the  *  kinsman  of  the  slain'  has  found  him  he  slayeth 
him  not,  in  that,  when  the  strict  Judge  comes.  Who  has 
united  Himself  to  us  by  fellowship  with  our  own  nature.  He 
doubtless  never  exacts  retribution  for  guilt  of  sin  from  him, 
whom  faith  hope  and  charity  hide  beneath  the  shelter  of  His 
pardoning  grace.  Quickly  then  is  that  sin  done  away  which 
is  not  committed  of  the  set  aim  of  malice.  And  hence, 
Zophar  both  calls  him  iniquitous,  whom  a  sentence  from 
above  had  extolled,  and  yet  he  is  not  rejected  and  shut  out 
from  pardon,  in  that  he  is  prompted  to  words  of  contumely 
by  zeal  in  the  love  of  God.  Who,  for  that  he  does  not  know 
the  merits  of  blessed  Job,  further  added  in  illinstructed 
mockery,  saying, 

Ver.  7.  Canst  thou  find  out  the  footsteps  of  Godf  Canst 
thou  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection.^ 


588  God  sought  here  hy  the  ^footsteps'  of  His  Love. 

Job  10,      13.  What  does  he  call  '  the  footsteps  of  God,'  saving  the 
lovingkindness  of  His  visitation?   by   which    same    we   are 


Hist. 

^jjj^    Stimulated  to  advance  forward  to  things  above,  when  we  are 

influenced  by  the  inspiration  of  His  Spirit,  and  being  carried 
without  the  narrow  compass  of  the  flesh,  by  love  we  see  and 
own  the  likeness  of  our  Maker  presented  to  our  contempla- 
tion that  we  may  follow  it.  For  when  the  love  of  the 
spiritual  Land  kindles  the  heart.  He  as  it  were  gives  know- 
ledge of  a  way  to  persons  that  follow  it,  and  a  sort  of  footstep 
of  God  as  He  goes  is  imprinted  upon  the  heart  laid  under  it, 
that  the  waj^  of  life  may  be  kept  by  the  same  in  right  goings 
of  the  thoughts.  For  Him,  Whom  we  do  not  as  yet  see,  it 
only  remains  for  us  to  trace  out  by  the  footsteps  of  His  love, 
that  at  length  the  mind  may  find  Him,  to  the  reaching  the 
likeness  contemplation  gives  of  Him,  Whom  now  as  it  were, 
following  Him  in  the  rear,  it  searches  out  by  holy  desires. 
The  Psalmist  was  well  skilled  to  follow  these  footsteps  of 

Ps.63,8.our  Creator,  when  he  said,  iliy  soul  followeth  hard  after 
Thee.    Whom  too  he  busied  himself  that  he  might  find  even 

Ps.42,2.to  attaining  the  vision  of  His  loftiness,  when  he  said,  3Iy  soul 
thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living  God :  when  shall  I  come  and 
appear  before  the  face  of  God?  For  then  Almighty  God  is  found 
out  by  clear  conception,  when  the  corruption  of  our  mor- 
tality being  once  for  all  trodden  under  our  feet.  He  is  seen 
by  us  that  are  taken  up  into  heaven  in  the  brightness  of  His 
Divine  Nature.  But  at  this  present  time,  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit  which  is  poured  into  our  hearts  lifts  the  soul  from 
carnal  aims,  and  elevates  it  into  a  contempt  for  transitory 
things,  and  the  mind  looks  down  upon  all  that  it  coveted 
below,  and  is  kindled  to  objects  of  desire  above,  and  by  the 
force  of  her  contemplation  she  is  carried  out  of  the  flesh, 
while  by  the  weight  of  her  corruption  she  is  still  held  fast  in 
the  flesh ;  she  strives  to  obtain  sight  of  the  splendour  of 
uncircumscribed  Light,  and  has  not  power;  for  the  soul,  being 
burthened  with  infirmity,  both  never  wins  admittance,  and 
yet  loves  when  repelled.  For  our  Creator  already  exhibits 
concerning  Himself  something  whereby  love  may  be  excited, 
but  He  withdraws  the  appearance  of  His  vision  from  those 
so  loving.  Therefore  we  all  go  on  seeing  only  His  footsteps, 
in  that  only  in  the  tokens  of  His  gifts  we  follow  Him,  Whom 


GocTs  greatness  foils  our  best  attempts  at  knowledge.      589 

as  yet  we  see  not.     Which  same  '  footsteps'  cannot  be  com-  Book 
prehended,  in  that  it  is  all  unknown,  when,  "where,  and  by 


what  ways  the  gifts  of  His  Spirit  come,  as  '  Truth'  bears 
record,  saying,   The  wind  hloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  ye  John  3, 
cannot  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth.     Now  in^' 
the  height  of  the  rewarding  the  Almighty  may  be  found  out 
in   the  appearance^  afforded  to  contemplation,  yet  He  can  ^  per 
never  be  found   out  to   perfection.     For  though  sooner  or^^    ^^™ 
later  we  see  Him  in  His  brightness,  yet  we  do  not  perfectly 
behold  His  Essence.     For  the  mind  whether  of  Angels  or 
men,    whilst   it   gazes   toward    the    uncircumscribed    Light 
shrinks  into  little  by  this  alone,  viz.   that  it  is  a  created 
beinor ;  and  bv  its  advancement  indeed  it  is  made  to  stretch 
above  its  own  reach,  yet  not  even  when  spread  wide  can  it 
compass  the  splendours  of  Him,  Who  at  once  in  transcending, 
in  supporting,  and  in  filling,  encloses  all  things.     Hence  it  is 
yet  further  added, 

Ver.  8,  9.  He  is  higher  than  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do  ? 
Deeper  than  hell,  what  canst  thou  know?  His  measure  is 
longer  than  the  earth,  and  broader  than  the  sea. 

14.  In  that  God  is  set  forth  as  '  higher  than  heaven,'  ix. 
'  deeper  than  hell,'  *  longer  than  the  earth,'  and  '  broader  than 
the  sea,'  this  must  be  understood  in  a  spiritual  sense,  in- 
asmuch as  it  is  impious  to  conceive  any  thing  concerning 
Him  after  the  proportions  of  body.  Now  He  is  *  higher  than 
heaven,'  in  that  He  transcends  all  things  by  the  Incompre- 
hensibiUty  of  His  spiritual  Nature.  He  is  '  deeper  than  hell,' 
in  that  in  transcending  He  sustains  beneath.  He  is  '  longer 
than  the  earth,'  in  that  He  exceeds  the  measure  of  created 
being  by  the  everlasting  continuance  of  His  Eternity.  He 
is  '  broader  than  the  sea,'  in  that  He  so  possesses  the  waves 
of  temporal  things  in  ruling  them,  that  in  confining  He 
encompasses  them  beneath  the  every  way  prevailing  presence 
of  His  Power.  Though  it  is  possible  that  by  the  designation  of 
'  Heaven'  the  Angels  may  be  denoted,  and  by  the  term  '  hell,' 
the  demons,  while  by  the  '  earth'  the  righteous,  and  by  the 
'  sea'  sinners  are  understood.  Thus  He  is  '  higher  than  the 
heaven,'  in  that  the  very  Elect  Spirits  themselves  do  not 
perfectly  penetrate  the  vision  of  His  infinite  loftiness?  He 
is  '  deeper  than  hell,'  in  that  He  judges  and  condemns  the 


590        God  transcends  the  spiritual  as  the  natural  ivorld. 
Job  10,  craft  of  evil  spirits  with  far  more  searching  exactness  than 

8   9  • 

they  had  ever  thought.     He  is  '  longer  than  the  earth,'  in 


Lit. 

that  He    surpasses    our   long-suffering   by  the   patience  of 

Divine  long-suffering,  which  both  bears  with  us  in  our  sins, 

and  welcomes  us  when  we  are  turned  from  them   to    the 

rewards  of  His  recompensing.     He  is  '  wider  than  the  sea,' 

in  that  He  every  where  enters  into  the  doings  of  sinners  by 

the  presence  of  His  retributive  power,  so  that  even  when 

He  is  not  seen  present  by  His  appearance,  He  is  felt  present 

by  His  judgment. 

Moral.  15.  Yet  all  the  particulars  may  be  refen-ed  to  man  alone, 
so  that  he  is  himself  '  heaven,'  when  now  in  desire  he  is 
attached  to  things  above;  himself  *  hell,'  when  he  lies  grovel- 
ling in  things  below,  confounded  by  the  mists  of  his  tempta- 
tions ;  himself '  earth,'  in  that  he  is  made  to  abound  in  good 
works  through  the  fertility  of  a  stedfast  hope ;  himself '  the 
sea,'  for  that  on  some  occasions  he  is  shaken  with  alarm, 
and  agitated  by  the  breath  of  his  feebleness.  But  God  is 
^  higher  than  heaven,'  in  that  we  are  subdued  by  the  mighti- 
ness of  His  power,  even  when  we  are  lifted  above  our  own 
selves.  He  is  '  deeper  than  hell,'  in  that  He  goes  deeper  in 
judging  than  the  very  human  mind  looks  into  its  own  self  in 
the  midst  of  temptations.  He  is  '  longer  than  the  earth,  in 
that  those  fruits  of  our  life  which  He  gives  at  the  end,  our 
veiy  hope  at  the  present  time  comprehends  not  at  all.  He 
is  '  wider  than  the  sea,'  in  that  the  human  mind  being  tossed 
to  and  fro  throws  out  many  fancies  concerning  the  things 
that  are  coming,  but  when  it  now  begins  to  see  the  things 
that  it  had  made  estimate  of,  it  owns  itself  to  have  been  too 
stinted  in  its  reckoning.  Therefore  He  is  made  *  higher  than 
heaven,'  since  our  contemplation  itself  fails  towar^  Him. 
Hence  the  Psalmist  too  had  set  his  heart  on  high,  yet  he 

Pa.  139,  felt  that  he  had  not  yet  reached   unto  Him,  saying,   77*?/ 

^'  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me,  it  is  mighty,  I  cannot 

attain  unto  it.  He  knew  One  deeper  than  hell,  who  when 
sifting   his    own   heart,  yet   dreading    His    more    searching 

1  Cor.    judgment,  said.  For  I  know  nothing  by  myself  yet  am  I  tiot 

'   *      hereby  justified:  but  He  that  judgelh  me  is  the  Lord.     He 

saw  One  '  longer  than  the  earth,'  when  he  was  brought  to 

reflect  that  the  wishes  of  man's  heart  were  too  little  for  him, 


God's  greatness  how  discerned.     His  mysterious  judgments.  591 

saying,  Now  unto  Him  that  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abun-  Book 
danthj  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think.     He  had  beheld  One     ^' 


'  broader  than  the  sea,'  who  considered  whilst  he  feared  that  20!      ' 
the  human  mind  may  never  know  the  immeasurableness  of 
His  severity,  however  it  may  toss  and  fret  in  enquiring  after 
it,  saying.  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  TJiine  anger,  and  foi' Vs.  90, 
fear  can    tell    Thy  ivrath?    Whose    Power   the   inimitable  ^^' 
teacher  rightly  gives  us  the  knowledge  of,  when  he  briefly 
says,  That  ye  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  Saints  E^h.  3, 
what  is  the   breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height. ^^' 
For  God  has  '  breadth,'  in  that  He  extends  His  love  even  to 
gathering  in  the  very  persecutors.     He  has  '  length,'  in  that 
He  leads  us  onwards  by  bearing  with  us  in  long- suffering  to 
the   country  of  life.      He    has    '  loftiness,'    in   that    He  far 
transcends  the  understanding  of  the  very  beings  themselves 
that  have  been  admitted  into  the  heavenly  assemblage.     He 
has  *  depth,'  in  that  upon  the  damned  below  He  displays 
the  visitation  of  His  severity  in  an  incomprehensible  manner. 
And  these  same  four  attributes  He  exercises  towards  each 
one  of  us,  that  are  placed  in  this  life,  in  that  by  loving.  He 
manifests  His  *  breadth;'  by  suffering,  His  '  length;'  by  sur- 
passing  not   only    our   understanding,   but   even    our   veiy 
wishes.   His   '  height;'    and  His  *  depth,'    by  judging  with 
strictness  the  hidden  and  unlawful  motions  of  the  thoughts. 
Now  His  height  and  depth  how  unsearchable  it  is  no  man 
knows  saving  he,  who  has  begun  either  by  contemplation  to 
be  carried  up  on  high,  or  in  resisting  the  hidden  motions  of 
the  heart  to  be  troubled  by  the  urgency  of  temptation.     And 
hence  the  words  are  spoken  to  blessed  Job,  He  is  higher 
than  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do  ?  deeper  than  hell,  whence 
canst  thou  know  ?    As  if  it  were  said  to  him  in  open  con- 
tempt, '  His  depth  and  excellency  when  mayest  thou  ever 
discover,  who  are  not  taught  either  to  be  lifted  up  on  high 
by  virtue,  or  to  deal  severely  with  thyself  in  temptations. 
It  goes  on, 

Ver.  10.  If  He  overturn  all  things,  or  shut  them  up  to- 
gether, then  who  shall  gainsay  Him  ?  Or  who  ca?i  say  to 
Him,  Why  doest  Thou  so  ? 

16.  The  Lord '  overturns  heaven/  when  by  His  terrible  and     x. 
secret  ordering   He  pulls   down  the  height  of  man's   con- 


592  Strange  contrarieties  lejt  in  its  for  our  trial. 

Job  10,  templatioiis.  He  *  subverts  hell,''  when  He  allows  the  soul  of 
:rz — '- —  any  affrighted  under  its  temptations  to  fall  even  into  worse 
extremes.  He  *  overturns  the  earth,'  when  He  cuts  off  the 
fruitfulness  of  good  works  by  adversities  pouring  in.  He 
'  overturns  the  sea,'  when  He  confounds  the  fluctuations  of 
our  wavering  spirit,  by  the  rise  of  a  sudden  panic.  For  the 
heart,  disquieted  by  its  own  uncertainty,  fears  horribly  for 
this  alone,  that  she  goes  thus  wavering;  and  it  is  as  if  the 
sea  were  overturned,  when  our  very  trembling  towards  God 
is  itself  confounded  on  the  terribleness  of  His  judgment 
being  thought  on.  Whereas  therefore  we  have  described  in 
brief,  in  what  sort  heaven  and  hell,  earth  and  sea,  are  over- 
turned, now  the  somewhat  more  difficult  task  awaits  us,  to 
shew  how  these  may  be  '  shut  up  together.' 

17.  For  it  very  often  happens  that  the  spirit  already  lifts 
the  mind  on  high,  yet  that  the  flesh  assails  it  with  pressing 
temptations  ;  and  when  the  soul  is  led  forward  to  the  con- 
templation of  heavenly  things,  it  is  struck  back  by  the  images 
of  unlawful  practice  being  presented.  For  the  sting  of  the 
flesh  suddenly  wounds  him,  whom  holy  contemplation  was 
bearing  away  beyond  the  flesh.  Therefore  heaven  and  hell 
are  shut  up  together,  when  one  and  the  same  mind  is  at  once 
enlightened  by  the  uplifting  of  contemplation,  and  bedimmed 
by  the  pressure  of  temptation,  so  that  both  by  straining 
forward  it  sees  what  it  should  desire,  and  through  being 
bowed  down  be  in  thought  subject  to  that  which  it  should 
blush  for.  For  light  springs  from  heaven,  but  hell  is  held  of 
darkness.  Heaven  and  hell  then  are  brought  into  one,  when 
the  soul  which  already  sees  the  light  of  the  land  above,  also 
sustains  the  darkness  of  secret  temptation  coming  from  the 
warfare  of  the  flesh.  Yea,  Paul  had  already  gone  up  to  the 
height  of  the  third  heaven,  already  learnt  the  secrets  of 
Paradise,  and  yet  being  still  subject  to  the  assaults  of  the 
Rom.  7,  flesh,  he  groaned,  saying.  But  I  see  another  law  in  my 
members  warring  against  the  law  of  my  inind,  and  bringing 
me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members. 
How  then  was  it  with  the  heart  of  this  illustrious  Preacher, 
saving  that  God  had  *  shut  up  together'  heaven  and  hell,  in 
that  he  had  both  already  obtained  the  light  of  the  interior 
vision,  and  yet  continued  to  suffer  darkness  from  the  flesh.? 


Doubts  permitted  in  good  men  to  humble  them.  593 

xA.bove  himself  be  had  seen  what  to  seek  after  with  jov,  in  Book 

•  •       •  X 

himself  he  perceived  what  to  bewail  with  fear.     The  light — ^-^ — 

of  the  heavenly  land  had  already  shed  abroad  its  rays,  yet 

the  dimness  of  temptation  embarrassed  the  soul.     Therefore 

he  underwent  hell  together  with  heaven,  in  that  assurance 

set  him  erect  in  his  enlightenment,  and  lamentation  laid  him 

low  in  his  temptation. 

18.  And  it  often  happens  that  faith  is  now  vigorous  in  the 
soul,  and  yet  in  some  slight  point  it  is  wasted  with  uncertainty, 
so  that  both  being  well-assured^ it  lifts  itself  up  from  visible 
objects,  and  at  the  same  time  being  unassured  it  disquiets  itself 
in  certain  points.  For  very  often  it  lifts  itself  to  seek  after 
the  things  of  eternity,  and  being  driven  by  the  incitements  of 
thoughts  that  arise,  it  is  set  at  strife  with  its  verv  own  self. 
Therefore  the  '  earth  and  sea  are  shut  up  together,'  when 
one  and  the  same  mind  is  both  established  by  the  certainty 
of  rooted  faith,  and  yet  is  influenced  by  the  breath  of  doubt, 
through  some  slight  fickleness  of  unbelief.  Did  not  he 
experience  that  ^  earth  and  sea  were  shut  up  together'  in  his 
breast,  who  both  hoping  through  faith  and  wavering  through 
faithlessness,  cried.  Lord,  I  believe,  help  Thou  mine  unbelief?  Mark  9, 

23 

How  is  it  then  that  at  the  same  time  he  declares  that  he 
believes,  and  begs  to  have  the  unbelief  in  him  helped,  saving 
that  he  had  found  out  that  '  earth  and  sea  were  shut  up 
together'  in  his  thoughts,  who  both  being  assured  had  already 
begun  to  implore  through  faith,  and  being  unassured  still 
endured  the  waves  of  faithlessness  from  unbelief. 

19.  And  this  is  allowed  by  secret  providence  to  be  brought 
about,  that  when  the  soul  has  now  begun  to  arise  to  upright- 
ness, it  should  be  assailed  by  the  remnant  of  its  wickedness, 
in  order  that  this  very  assault  may  either  exercise  it  if  it 
resist,  or  if  it  be  beguiled  by  enjoyment  may  break  it  down. 
Therefore  it  is  well  said  here.  If  He  overturn  all  things,  or 
shut  them  up  together,  who  shall  gainsay  Him?  Or  who 
can  say  to  Him,  Why  doest  Thou  so  ?  For  God's  decree  can 
neither  lose  an}-  thing  by  opposition,  nor  be  ascertained  by 
enquiry,  when  He  either  withdraws  the  good  graces  which 
He  had  vouchsafed,  or  not  entirely  withdrawing  them,  lets 
them  be  shaken  by  the  assault  of  evil  inclinations.  For 
oftentimes  the  heart  is  lifted  up  in  highmindedness  when  it  is 

2  Q 


594  *  Vanitif  of  man  not  sin,  hut  allied  to  it. 

Job  11,  established  strongly  in  virtue  by  instances  of  joyful  success, 

— Hl_  but  when  our  Creator  beholds  the  motions  of  presumption 
kirking  in  the  heart,  He  forsakes  man  for  the  shewing  him  to 
himself,  that  his  soul  thus  forsaken  may  discover  what  she  is, 
in  that  she  wrongly  exulted  in  herself  in  a  feeling  of  security. 
Hence  whereas  it  is  said  that  '  all  is  overturned  and  shut  up 
together,'  he  therefore  adds, 

Ver.  11.  Fo7'  He  knoweih  the  vanity  of  men;  when  He 
seeth  wickedness  also,  doth  He  not  consider  it  ? 
xi.  20.  As  if  he  were  subjoining  in  explaining  the  things 
premised,  saying,  '  Because  He  sees  that  by  suffering  them 
evil  habits  gain  growth,  by  judging  He  brings  to  nought  His 
gifts.'  Now  the  right  order  is  observed  in  the  account,  in 
that  vanity  is  first  described  to  be  known,  and  afterwards 
iniquity  to  be  considered.  For  all  iniquity  is  vanity,  but 
not  all  vanity,  iniquity.  For  we  do  vain  things  as  often  as 
we  give  heed  to  what  is  transitory.  Whence  too  that  is  said 
to  vanish,  which  is  suddenly  withdrawn  from  the  eyes  of  the 

Ps.39,5.  beholder.  Hence  the  Psalmist  saith.  Every  man  living  is 
altogether  vanity.  For  herein,  that  by  living  he  is  only 
tending  to  destruction,  he  is  rightly  called  '  vanity'  indeed; 
but  by  no  means  rightly  called  '  iniquity'  too.  For  though  it 
is  in  punishment  of  sin  that  he  comes  to  nought,  yet  this 
particular  circumstance  is  not  itself  sin,  that  he  passes  swiftly 
from  life.     Thus  all  things  are  vain  that  pass  by.     Whence 

Eccles.  too  the  words  are  spoken  by  Solomon,  All  is  vanity. 

^'^'  21.  But  Mniquity'  is  fitly  brought  in    immediately  after 

'  vanity.'  For  whilst  we  are  led  onwards  through  some 
things  transitory,  we  are  to  our  hurt  tied  fast  to  some  of  them, 
and  when  the  soul  does  not  hold  its  seat  of  unchangeableness, 
running  out  from  itself  it  goes  headlong  into  evil  ways. 
From  vanity  then  that  mind  sinks  into  iniquity,  which  from 
being  familiar  with  things  mutable,  whilst  it  is  ever  being 
hurried  from  one  sort  to  another,  is  defiled  by  sins  springing 
up.  It  is  possible  too  that  '  vanity'  may  be  taken  for  sin,  and 
that  by  the  title  of  ^  iniquity'  weightier  guilt  may  be  desig- 
nated; for  if  vanity   were  not    sometimes  sin,  the  Psalmist 

Ps.39  G.  would  not  have  said,  Though  man  tvalkelh  in  the  image  of 

^"^^'  Qod,  surely  he  is  disquieted  in  vain:  he  heapeth  up  riches, 
and  knoweth  not  who  shall  gather  them.     For  though  we 


'  Vanity'  chosen  soon  leads  to  ^  iniquity.''  5}^)5 

preserve  the  image  of  the  Trinity  in  our  natural  constitution,  Book 
yet  being  disturbed  by  the  vain  motions  of  self-indulgence, 


we  go  wrong  in  our  practice;  so  that  in  ever-alternating  forms 
lust  agitates,  fear  breaks  down,  joy  beguiles,  grief  oppresses. 
Therefore  from  vanity,  as  we  have  also  said  above,  we  are  led 
to  iniquity,  when  first  we  let  ourselves  out  in  light  misde- 
meanors, so  that  habit  making  all  things  light,  we  are  not  at 
all  afraid  to  commit  even  heavier  ones  too  afterwards.  For 
while  the  tongue  neglects  to  regulate  idle  words,  being  caught 
by  the  custom  of  engrained  carelessness,  it  fearlessly  gives  a 
loose  to  mischievous  ones.  Whilst  we  give  ourselves  to 
gluttony  we  are  straightway  betrayed  into  the  madness  of  an 
unsteady  mind,  and  when  the  mind  shrinks  from  overcoming 
the  gratification  of  the  flesh,  it  very  often  plunges  even  into 
the  whirlpool  of  unbelief.  Hence  Paul,  looking  at  the 
mischiefs  that  befel  the  Israeiitish  people,  in  order  to  keep 
off  from  his  hearers  threatened  ills,  was  justly  mindful  to 
relate  in  order  what  took  place,  saying.  Neither  he  ye  l  Cor. 
idolaters,  as  were  some  of  them;  as  it  is  ivritten.  The  people  ^^^  3*2 
sat  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose  up  to  play.  For  eating  <5. 
and  drink  set  them  on  to  play,  and  play  drew  them  into 
idolatry;  for  if  the  offence  of  vanity  is  not  restrained  with 
care,  the  unheeding  mind  is  swiftly  swallowed  up  by  iniquity, 
as  Solomon  testifies,  who  says,  He  that  desplseth  small  things 
falleth  little  by  little.  For  if  we  neglect  to  take  heed  to 
little  things,  being  insensibly  led  away,  we  perpetrate  even 
greater  things  with  a  bold  face ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed,  that 
it  is  not  said  that  iniquity  is  '  seen,'  but  that  it  is  '  considered.' 
For  we  look  more  earnestly  at  those  things  which  we  consider. 
Thus  God  '  knoweth  the  vanity  of  men,  and  considereth  their 
iniquity,'  in  that  He  leaves  not  even  their  minor  offences  un- 
punished, and  prepares  Himself  with  greater  earnestness  to 
smite  their  worse  ones.  Therefore  whereas  men  set  out  with 
lighter  misdeeds,  and  go  on  to  those  of  a  graver  order,  vanity 
overcasts  while  iniquity  blinds  the  mind,  which  same  mind, 
so  soon  as  it  has  parted  with  the  light,  presently  lifts  itself  so 
much  the  higher  in  swoln  pride,  in  proportion  as  being  taken 
in  the  snares  of  iniquity,  it  withdraws  further  from  the 
truth.  Hence  also  he  fitly  sets  forth  whereunto  vanity  forces 
men  joined  with  iniquity,  in  that  he  forthwith  adds, 

2  Q  2 


596  Wilful  man  like  a  wild  a&s^s  colt. 

Job  11,      Ver.  12.  For  the  vain,  man  is  exalted  in  pride. 

12.  .     .  ^ 

-7j 22.  For  it  is  the  end  of  vanity,  whereas  it  mangles  the 

ii.     heart  by  sin,  to  render  it  bold  by  the  offence,  so  that,  forgetful 

of  its  guiltiness,  the  soul  which  feels  no  sorrow  to  have  lost 

its  innocency,  blinded  by  a  righteous  retribution,  should  at 

the   same  time  part  with  humility  also;    and  it   very  often 

happens,  that,  enslaving  itself  to  unlawful  desires,  it  rids  itself 

of  the  yoke  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord;  and  as  if  henceforth  at 

liberty  for  the  commission  of  wickedness,  it  strives  to  put  in 

execution  all  that  self-indulgence  prompts.    Hence  when  the 

vain  man  is    said    to  be    exalted   in    pride,  therefore    it   is 

brought  in. 

And  thinketh  himself  free  horn  like  a  wild  ass's  colt. 
xiii.  23.  For  by  ^  a  wild  ass's  colt'  is  set  forth  every  kind  of  wild 
animals,  which  being  left  free  to  the  motions  of  nature,  are  not 
held  by  the  reins  of  persons  ruling  them.  For  the  fields  leave 
animals  in  a  state  of  liberty  both  to  roam  where  they  list, 
and  to  rest  when  they  are  wearied;  and  though  man  is  im- 
measurably superior  to  insensate  beasts,  yet  that  is  very  often 
not  allowed  to  man,  which  is  granted  to  brute  creatures.  For 
those  animals,  which  are  never  kept  for  any  other  end, 
assuredly  never  have  their  movements  held  in  under  the  bands 
of  discipline ;  but  man,  who  is  being  brought  to  a  life  hereafter, 
must  of  necessity  be  held  in  all  his  movements  under  the 
controlling  hand  of  discipline,  and  like  a  tame  animal  render 
service,  bound  with  reins,  and  live  restricted  by  eternal 
appointments.  He  then  that  seeks  to  put  in  practice  in  un- 
restrained liberty  all  the  things  that  he  has  a  desire  for,  what 
else  is  this  but  that  he  longs  to  be  like  the  wild  ass's  colt, 
that  the  reins  of  discipline  may  not  hold  him  in,  but  that  he 
may  boldly  run  at  large  through  the  forest  of  desires  ? 

24.  But  oftentimes  Divine  mercy  breaks  by  the  encounter 
of  sudden  adversity  those,  whom  it  sees  going  into  the  un- 
ruliness  of  lawless  freedom,  that  being  crushed  they  may 
learn  with  what  damnable  exaltation  they  had  been  swoln, 
that  being  now  tamed  by  the  experience  of  the  scourge,  they 
may  like  tame  animals  yield  the  mind's  neck  to  the  reins  of 
the  commandments,  and  go  along  the  ways  of  the  present 
life  at  the  ruler's  beck.  With  these  reins  he  knew  well  that  he 
Ps.  73,  ^y^^  bound,  who  said,   F  am  as  a  beast  before  Thee,  and  lam 


Submission  to  God's  Will.     Hardness  of  the  heart.         597 

continually  with  Thee.     Whence  too  that  raging  persecutor,  Book 
when  he  was  brought  away  from  the  field  of  unbelievhig 1— 


self-indulgence  to  the  house  of  faith,  being  pricked  by  the 
spurs  of  his  ruler,  heard  the  words,  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  Acts  9, 
against  the  pricks.  It  remains  then,  if  we  would  not  hence- ^* 
forth  be  like  the  wild  ass's  colt,  that  in  all  that  we  desire  we 
first  look  out  for  the  token  of  the  interior  appointment,  so 
that  our  mind  in  all  that  it  strives  at  may  be  held  in  by  the 
bridle  of  the  Supreme  control,  and  may  fulfil  its  wishes  the 
more  effectually  to  the  obtaining  of  life,  by  the  very  same  act, 
whereby  even  against  its  will  it  treads  under  foot  the  aims  and 
objects  of  its  own  life.  Zophar  delivered  many  forcible 
sayings,  but  he  is  not  conscious  that  he  is  addressing  them 
to  a  better  than  himself;  whence  he  still  further  subjoins  in 
words  of  upbraiding, 

Ver.  13.    Thou  hast  set  firm  thine  heart,  and  stretched  out 
thine  hands  towards  Him. 

25.  The  heart  is  not  here  said  to  be  '  set  firm'  by  virtue  but  xiv. 
by  insensibility,  for  every  soul  that  submits  itself  to  the 
consideration  of  the  interior  severity,  is  directly  softened  by 
the  fear  thereof;  and  the  shaft  of  divine  dread  enters  into 
him,  in  that  he  carries  weak  bowels  through  humility.  But 
he  that  is  hardened  by  obstinacy  in  insensibility,  as  it  were 
sets  his  heart  firm,  that  the  darts  of  heavenly  fear  may  not 
pierce  it.  Whence  the  Lord  says  mercifully  to  some  by  the 
Prophet,  And  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  you,Ezek. 
and  I  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh.  For  He  '  takes  away  ^ 
the  stony  heart,'  when  He  removes  from  us  the  hardness  of 
pride.  And  He  '  gives  us  a  heart  of  flesh,'  when  He  there- 
upon changes  that  same  hardness  into  sensibility.  Now  by 
'  hands'  as  we  have  often  taught  are  denoted  works.  To  stretch 
out  the  hands  to  God,  then,  with  sin,  is  to  pride  ourselves 
upon  the  excellency  of  our  works  to  the  prejudice  of  the 
grace  of  the  Giver.  For  he  that,  speaking  in  the  presence  of 
the  Eternal  Judge,  ascribes  to  himself  the  good  that  he  does, 
stretches  out  his  hands  to  God  in  a  spirit  of  pride.  It  is  in 
this  way  truly  that  the  lost  ever  let  themselves  loose  against 
the  Elect,  and  so  heretics  against  Catholics ;  that  when 
they  are  unable  to  abuse  their  doings,  they  set  themselves 
to  blame  the  good  for  pride  in  those  doings,  that  those,  whom 
they  cannot  upbraid  for  weak  points  in  practice,  they  may 


598  Sin  to  be  renounced  in  deed  and  in  thought. 

Job  11,  charge  with  the  guilt  of  high-mindedness.     And  hence  the 

'-  good  things  which  are  done  outwardly,  they  now  no  longer 

reckon  to  be  good,  in  that  they  are  set  forth  as  it  were  in  the 
prosecution  of  swelling  conceit.  And  these  oftentimes  with 
swelling  thoughts  rebuke  lowly  deeds,  and  know  not  that 
they  are  dealing  blows  against  themselves  by  their  words. 
But  whereas  Zophar  had  hitherto  chidden  the  righteous  man 
with  reproof,  now,  as  giving  him  lessons  of  instruction,  he 
subjoins, 

Ver.  13,  14,  15.  If  the  iniquity  which  is  in  thine  hand 
thou  put  far  from  thee^  and  wickedness  dwell  not  in  thy 
tabernacle,  then  shall  thou  lift  up  thy  face  without 
spot,  yea  thou  shall  he  stedfast,  and  shall  not  fear. 
XV.  29.  Every  sin  is  either  committed  in  thought  alone,  or  it 
is  done  in  thought  and  deed  together.  Therefore  *  iniquity 
in  the  hand'  is  offence  in  deed;  but  '  wickedness  in  the 
tabernacle,'  is  iniquity  in  the  heart ;  for  our  heart  is  not 
unfitly  called  a  tabernacle,  w^herein  we  are  buried  w^ithin 
ourselves,  when  we  do  not  shew  ourselves  outwardly  in  act. 
Zophar  therefore,  in  that  he  was  the  friend  of  a  righteous 
person,  knows  what  he  should  say,  but  in  that  he  reproached  a 
righteous  person,  bearing  the  likeness  of  heretics,  he  does  not 
know  how  rightly  to  deliver  even  the  things  which  he  knows. 
But  let  us,  treading  under  our  feet  all  that  is  delivered  by  him 
in  pride  of  spirit,  reflect  how  true  his  words  are,  if  they  had 
but  been  spoken  in  a  right  manner.  For  fii'st  he  bids  that 
*  iniquity'  be  removed  from  the  ^  hand,'  and  afterwards  that 
'  wickedness'  be  cut  off  from  the  '  tabernacle ;'  for  whoso- 
ever has  already  cut  away  fi'om  himself  all  wicked  deeds  with- 
out, must  of  necessity  in  returning  to  himself  probe  himself 
discreetly  in  the  purpose  of  his  heart,  lest  sin,  which  he  no 
longer  has  in  act,  still  hold  out  in  thought.  Hence  too  it  is 
Prov.  well  said  by  Solomon,  Prepare  thy  work  without,  and 
^^>  27-  diligently  work  thy  field,  that  afterwards  thou  mayest 
build  thine  house.  For  what  is  it  when  the  '  work  is  pre- 
pared,' to  '  till  the  field  diligently  without,'  saving  when  the 
briars  of  iniquity  have  been  plucked  up,  to  train  our  practice 
to  bearing  fruits  of  recompense  ?  And  after  the  tilling  of  the 
field,  what  else  is  it  to  return  to  the  building  of  our  house, 
than  that  we  very  often  learn  from  good  deeds  the  perfect 
purity  of  life   which   we  should  build   up  in  our  thoughts. 


Practice  perfects  in  rir/Ziteousness.    Boldness  toward  God.     599 

For  almost  all  good  deeds  come  from  the  thoughts,  but  there  Book 
be  some  fine  points  of  thought  which  have  their  birth  in  ^' 
action;  for  as  the  deed  is  derived  from  the  mind,  so  on  the 
other  hand  the  mind  is  instructed  by  the  deed  ;  for  the  soul 
taking  the  first  beginnings  of  divine  love  dictates  the  good 
things  which  should  be  done,  but  after  the  deeds  so  dictated 
have  begun  to  be  fiilfilled,  being  practised  by  its  own  actions, 
it  learns  how  little  it  saw  when  it  began  to  dictate  good 
deeds.  Thus  the  '  field  is  tilled  without,  that  the  house  may 
afterwards  be  built;'  for  very  often  we  gain  from  outward 
practice  what  an  extreme  nicety  of  righteousness  we  should 
keep  in  our  hearts ;  and  Zophar  was  well  minded  to  observe 
this  order,  in  that  he  spake  first  of '  iniquity  being  put  away 
from  the  hands,'  and  afterwards  '  wickedness  fi'om  the  taber- 
nacle ;'  for  the  mind  can  never  be  completely  set  upright  in 
thought  when  it  still  goes  astray  in  deed. 

27.  Now  if  we  thoroughly  wipe  away  these  two,  we  then 
directly  '  lift  our  face  without  spot'  to  God.     For  the  soul  is 
the  inner  face  of  man,  by  which  same  we  are  known,  that  we 
may  be  regarded  with  love  by  our  Maker.     Now  it  is  to  lift 
up  this  same  face,  to  raise  the  soul  in  ^  God  by  appliance  to  i  ai.  <to.' 
the  exercises  of  prayer.    But  there  is  a  spot  that  pollutes  the 
uplifted  face,  when  consciousness  of  its  own  guilt  accuses 
the   mind  intent ;    for  it  is  forthwith  dashed  from  all  con- 
fidence of  hope,  if  when  busied  in  prayer  it  be  stung  with 
recollection   of  sin  not  yet  subdued.     For  it    distiTists   its 
being  able  to  obtain  what  it  longs  for,  in  that  it  bears  in 
mind  its  still  refusing  to  do  what  it  has  heard  fiom  God. 
Hence  it  is  said  by  John,  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  iJohn3, 
not,  then  have  we  confidence  toward  God;  and  tchatsoever   ^'^^' 
ue  ask  we  shall  receive  of  Him.     Hence  Solomon  saith,  HeVrox. 
that  iurneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law,  ecen  his^^^' 
prayer  shall  he  abomination.     For  our  heart  blames  us  in 
ofiering  up  our  prayers,  when  it  calls  to  mind  that  it  is  set  in 
opposition  to  the  precepts  of  Him,  Whom  it  implores,  and 
the  prayer  becomes  abomination,  when  there   is  a  *  turning 
away'  from  the  control  of  the  law ;  in  that  verily  it  is  meet 
that  a  man  should  be  a  stranger  to  the  favours  of  Him,  to 
Whose  bidding  he  will  not  be  subject. 

28.  Wherein  there  is  this  salutary  remedy,  if  when  the 


coo  How  to  '  Lijl  up  the  face  without  spot^  to  God. 

Job  11  soul  reproaches  itself  upon  the  remembrance  of  sm,  it  first 

13—15.  bewail  that  in  praj^er,  wherein  it  has  gone  wrong,  that  where- 

°"^^'as  the  slain  of  offences  is  washed  away  by  tears,  in  offering 

up  our  prayers  the  face  of  the  heart  may  be  viewed  unspotted 

by  our  Maker.    But  we  must  be  over  and  above  on  our  guard, 

that  the  soul  do  not  again  fall  away  headlong  to  that,  which 

it  is  overjoyed  that  it  has  washed  away  by  tears;  but  whilst 

the   sin   that  is   deplored   is   again    committed,  those    very 

lamentings  be   made  light   of  in  the  eyes  of  the  righteous 

Ecclus.  Ji-i<^^ge.     For  we  should  call  to  mind  what  is  said.  Do  not 

7,  14.     repeat  a  word  in  thy  prayer  ;   by  which  same  saying  the 

wise  man  in  no  sort  forbids  us  to  beseech  pardon  oftentimes, 

but  to  repeat  our  sins.     As  if  it  were  expressed   in  plain 

words;    '  When   thou  hast   bewailed  thy  misdoings,  never 

again  do  any  thing  for  thee  to  bewail  again  in  prayer.' 

29.  Therefore  that  '  the  face   may  be  lifted  up  in  prayer 
without  spot,'  it  behoves  that  before  the   seasons  of  prayer 
every  thing  that  can   possibly  be   reproved  in    the    act  of 
prayer  be  heedfully  looked  into,  and  that  the  mind  when  it 
stays  from  prayer  as  well  should  hasten  to  shew  itself  such, 
as  it  desires   to    appear   to    the   Judge   in   the  very  season 
itself  of  prayer.     For  we  often  harbour  some  impure  or  for- 
bidden thoughts  in  the  mind,  when  we  are  disengaged  from 
our  prayers.     And  when  the  mind  has  lifted  itself  up  to  the 
exercises  of  prayer,  being  made  to  recoil,  it  is  subject  to 
images  of  the  things  whereby  before  it  was  burthened  of  free 
will  whilst  unemployed.    And  the  soul  is  now  as  it  were  with- 
out ability  to  lift  up  the  face  to  God,  in  that  the  mind  being 
blotted  within,  it  blushes  at  the  stains  of  polluted  thought. 
Oftentimes  we  are  ready  to  busy  ourselves  with  the  concerns 
of  the  world,  and  when  after  such  things  we  apply  ourselves 
to   the  business   of  prayer,   the   mind    cannot  lift  itself  to 
heavenly  things,  in   that  the  load  of  earthly  solicitude  has 
sunk   it  down  below,  and    the    face  is  not  shewn  pure    in 
prayer,  in  that  it  is  stained  by  the  mire  of  grovelling  ima- 
gination. 

30.  However,  sometimes  we  rid  the  heart  of  every  encum- 
brance, and  set  ourselves  against  the  forbidden  motions  there- 
~  of,  even  at  such  times  as  we  are  disengaged  from  prayer,  yet 

because  we  ourselves  commit  sins  but  seldom,  we  arc  the 


Not  to  forgive^  is  a  '  spot'  in  Go(Vs  sight,  601 

more  backward  in  letting  go  the  offences  of  others,  and  in  Book 

proportion  as  our  mind  the  more  anxiously  dreads  to  sin,  the ' — 

more  unsparingly  it  abhors  the  injuries   done  to  itself  by 
another;   whence  it  is  brought  to  pass  that  a  man  is  found 
slow  to  grant  pardon,  in  the  same  degree  that  by  going  on 
advancing,  he  has  become  heedful  against  the  commission 
of  sin.     And  as  he  iears  himself  to  transgress  against  another, 
he  claims  to  punish  the  more  severely  the  transgression  that 
is  done  against  himself.     But  what  can  be  discovered  worse 
than  this  spot  of  bitterness  ^  which  in  the  sight  of  the  Judge  ^  doloris 
does  not  stain  charity,  but  kills  it  outright.?     For  every  sin 
stains  the  life  of  the  soul,  but  bitterness  maintained  against 
our  neighbour  slays  it;  for  it  is  fixed  in  the  soul  like  a  sword, 
and  the  very  hidden  parts  of  the  bowels  are  gored  by  the  point 
thereof;  and  if  it  be  not  first  drawn  out  of  the  pierced  heart, 
no  whit  of  divine  aid  is  won  in  prayer.     For  the  medicines 
of  health  cannot  be  applied  to  the  wounded  limbs,  unless 
the  iron  be  first  withdrawn  from  the  wound.     Hence  it  is 
.  that  '  Truth'  saith  by  Itself,  //*  ye  forgive  not  men   their  Matt.  6, 
trespasses^  neither  will  your  Father    Which  is  in  Heaven 
forgive  you  your   trespasses.     Hence   He  enjoins,   saying. 
And  when  ye  stand  praying,  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  ^^^\ 
any.     Hence  He  saith  again,  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  Luke  6, 
unto  you;  forgive,  and  ye  shall  be  forgiven.     Hence  to  the^^* 
form  of  petition.  He  affixed  the  condition  of  pity;  saying. 
Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  ^^att.  6, 
against  us :    that  truly  the  good  which  we  beg  from  God 
being  pierced  with  compunction,  we  first  do  with  our  neigh- 
bour, being  altered  by  conversion.     Therefore  we  then  truly 
'  lift  our  face  without  spot,'  when  we  neither  commit  forbidden 
misdeeds,   nor   retain   those   which    have    been    committed 
against  ourselves  from  jealous  regard  for  self;  for  in  the  hour 
of  prayer  our  soul  is  overwhelmed  with  sore  dismay,  if  either 
its  practice  still  continue  to  pollute  it,  or  bitterness  kept  for 
the  injuring  of  another  lay   charge   against  it;   which    two 
when  any  one  has  cleansed  away,  he  forthwith  arises  free  to 
the  things  which  are  subjoined,  Yea,  thou  shall  be  stedl'ast^ 
and  shall  not  fear,  in  that  doubtless  he  fears  the  Judge  the 
less,  the  more  stedfast  he  stands  in  good  deeds.     For  he  gets 
the  mastery  of  fears,  who  retains  possession  of  stedfastness, 


602  Contemplation  harder  to  maintain  than  action. 

Job  11,  in  that  whilst  he  anxiously  busies  himself  to  do  what  our 
,  ~  ^'  Creator  tenderly  enioins,  he  bethinks  hiroself  in  security  of 

MOUAL.  ... 

that  which  He  threatens  with  terriblcness. 

31.  Moreover  it  should  be  known,  that  there  are  some 
good  deeds  wherein  we  persevere  unwearied,  and  again, 
there  are  some  from  which  we  are  continually  giving  over 
,  and  falling  away,  and  we  are  restored  to  these,  not  without 
I  great  endeavours  at  intervals  of  time;  for  in  the  active  life 
the  mind  is  stablished  without  failing,  but  from  the  con- 
templative, being  overcome  by  the  load  of  its  infirmity,  it 
faints  away.  For  the  first  endures  the  more  stedfastly  in 
proportion  as  it  opens  itself  to  things  about  it  for  our 
neighbour's  ^^'eal;  the  latter  falls  away  the  more  swiftly,  in 
proportion  as  passing  beyond  the  barriers  of  the  flesh,  it 
endeavours  to  soar  up  above  itself-  The  first  directs  its 
way  through  level  places,  and  therefore  plants  the  foot  of 
practice  more  strongly;  but  the  other,  as  it  aims  at  heights 
above  itself,  the  sooner  descends  wearied  to  itself.  Which  is 
well  and  briefly  conveyed  by  Ezekiel,  when  he  relates  the 
motions  of  the  living  creatures  which  he  had  seen,  saying, 
Ez.  1,9.  They  turned  not  ivhen  they  went;  and  soon  after  he  subjoins 
^^*  in  addition.  And  the  living  creatures  went  and  returned. 
For  sometimes  the  holy  ^  living  creatures  go  and  return  not,' 
and  sometimes  they  '  go  and  return  forthwith;'  for  when  the 
minds  of  the  Elect,  through  the  grace  of  an  active  life  being 
vouchsafed  them,  abandon  the  paths  of  error,  they  never 
return  to  the  evil  courses  of  the  world  which  they  have 
forsaken;  but  when  through  the  gaze  of  contemplation  they 
are  led  to  stay  themselves  from  this  same  active  life,  they  '  go 
and  return,'  in  that  hereby,  that  they  are  never  able  to 
continue  for  long  in  contemplation,  they  again  let  themselves 
out  in  action,  that  by  busying  themselves  in  such  things  as  are 
immediately  near  them,  they  may  recruit  their  strength,  and 
may  be  enabled  by  contemplation  again  to  soar  above  them- 
selves. But  while  this  practice  of  contemplation  is  in  due 
method  resumed  at  intervals  of  time,  we  hold  on  assuredly 
without  failing  all  its  entireness;  for  though  the  mind  being 
overcome  by  the  weight  of  its  infirmity  fall  short,  yet  being 
restored  again  by  continual  eflbrts  it  lays  hold  thereof.  Nor 
should   it  be  said  to  have  lost  its  firniness  in  that,  which. 


Sufferings  of  the  Elect  here  are  transient.  603 

though  it  be  ever  failnig  in,  it  is  ever  pursuing,  even  when  Book 
it  has  lost  the  same.     It  proceeds; 


Ver.  16.   Thou  shall  also  forget  thy  misery^  and  no  more 
remember  it,  as  waters  that  pass  away. 

32.  The  mind  feels  the  ills  of  the  present  life  the  more    xvi. 
severely,  in  proportion  as  it  neglects  to  take  account  of  the 
good  that  comes  after;  and  as  it  will  not  consider  the  rewards 
that  are  in  store,  it  reckons  all  to  be  grievous  that  it  undergoes; 
and   hence   the  blinded  imagination    murmurs   against  the 
stroke  of  the  scourge,  and  that  is  taken  for  an  immeasurable 
woe,  which  by  the  days  flowing  on  in  their  course  is  daily 
/being  brought  to  an  end.     But  if  a  man  once  raise  himself 
I  to  things  eternal,  and  fix  the  eye  of  the  soul  upon    those 
,'  objects   which  remain  without  undergoing  change,  he  sees 
i  that  here  below  all  whatsoever  runs   to    an   end   is  almost 
nothing   at   all.      He  is  subject   to    the  adversities  of  the 
present  life,  but  he  bethinks  himself  that  all  that  passes  away  is 
as  nought.     For  the  more  vigorously  he  makes  his  way  into 
the  interior  joys,  he  is  the  less  sensible   of  pains  without. 
Whence  Zophar,  not  being  afraid  with  boldfaced  hardihood 
to  instruct  one  better  than  himself,  exhorts  to  righteousness, 
and  shews  how  little  chastening  appears  in  the  eyes  of  the 
righteous  man.     As  if  it  were  in  plain  words ;  '  If  thou  hast 
a  taste  of  the  joy  which  remains  within,  all  that  gives  pain 
without   forthwith   becomes   light.'      Now^  he  does  well  in 
likening  the  miseries  of  the  present  life  to  '  waters  that  pass 
away,'  for  passing  calamity  never  overwhelms  the  mind  of 
the  Elect  with  the  force  of  a  shock,  yet  it  does  tinge  it  with 
the  touch  of  sorrow.     For  it  drops  indeed  with  the  bleeding 
of  the  wound,  though  it  is  not  dashed  from  the  certainty  of 
its  salvation.     But  it  often   happens   that  not  only   stripes 
inflict  bruises,  but  that   in  the  mind  of  each  one   of  the 
righteous  the  temptings  of  evil  spirits  come  in  force,  so  that 
he  is  grieved  by  the  stroke   without,   and  is  in   some   sort 
chilled  within  by  temptation.     Yet  grace  never  forsakes  him, 
which  same  the  more  severely  it  smites  us  in  the  dealings  of 
Providence,  so  much  the  more  does  it  watch  over  us  in  pity; 
for  when  it  has  begun  to  grow  dark  through  temptation,  the 
inward  light  kindles  itself  again.     Whence  too  it  is  added; 


604  Great  joy  often  granted  afier  dark  temptations. 

Job  11,     Ver.  17.  And  the  noonday  splendour  shall  rise  to  thee  at 
-^ — -  eventide. 

Hist. 

xvii.  33.  For  '  the  noonday  splendour  at  eventide'  is  the  renew- 
ing of  virtue  in  the  season  of  temptation,  that  the  soul  should 
be  reinvigorated  by  the  sudden  heat  of  charity,  which  but 
now  was  full  of  fear,  that  the  light  of  grace  had  sunk  to  it ; 
which  Zophar  further  unfolds  with  more  exactness,  when  he 
subjoins, 

Ver.  18.  And  when  thou  thinkest  thyself  consiuned^  thou 
shall  arise  like  the  morning  star. 

xviii.  34.  For  it  often  comes  to  pass  that  so  many  temptations 
beset  our  path,  that  the  very  multitude  of  them  almost 
inclines  us  to  the  downfall  of  desperation.  Hence  for  the 
most  part,  when  the  mind  is  turned  to  weariness,  it  scarce 
takes  account  even  of  the  hurts  that  its  virtue  sustains,  and 
notwithstanding  that  it  is  wholly  filled  with  pain,  it  is  as  if  it 
were  now  dislocated  from  the  sense  of  pain,  and  were  unable 
to  reckon  up  with  what  a  tumult  of  thoughts  it  is  overrun. 
It  sees  itself  momentarily  on  the  point  of  falling  headlong, 
and  grief  itself  withstands  it  worse,  that  it  should  not  lay 
hold  of  the  arms  of  resistance.  Mists  encompass  the  eyes, 
wherever  turned  about,  and  whereas  darkness  ever  obstructs 
the  sight,  the  sad  soul  sees  nought  else  than  darkness;  but 
with  the  merciful  Judge  it  often  happens  that  this  very  sad- 
ness, which  even  weighs  down  the  effect  of  prayer,  intercedes 
for  us  the  more  piercingly.  For  then  our  Creator  sees  the 
blackness  of  our  sorrow,  and  pours  back  again  the  rays  of 
the  light  withdrawn,  so  that  the  mind  being  immediately 
braced  up  by  His  gifts  becomes  full  of  vigour,  which  same  a 
little  before  contending  evil  propensities  kept  down  under 
the  heel  of  pride.  At  once  it  shakes  off  the  load  of  torpor, 
and  bursts  with  the  light  of  contemplation  after  the  dark- 
ness of  its  troubled  state.  At  once  that  is  raised  to  the  joy 
of  advancement,  which  amidst  temptations  was  well  nigh 
driven  by  despair  to  a  sorer  fall.  Without  a  conflict  of  the 
heart  it  looks  down  upon  present  things,  without  let  of  mis- 
giving it  trusts  in  the  retribution  to  come.  Therefore  when 
the  righteous  man  *  thinks  himself  consumed,  he  arises  like  the 
morning  star,'  in  that  so  soon  as  he  has  begun  to  be  benighted 


NoWy  the  Elect  are  raised  up  from  temporal  sorroios.      605 

uith  the  blackness  of  temptations,  he  is  restored  anew  to  the  Book 
light  of  grace,  and  he  in  himself  manifests  the  day  of  righte ^-^— 


ousness,  who  the  moment  before,  on  the  point  to  fall,  dreaded 
the  night  of  guiltiness.  Now  the  life  of  the  righteous  is 
rightly  compared  to  the  '  morning  star.'  For  the  morning- 
star,  being  precursor  of  the  sun,  proclaims  the  day.  And  what 
does  the  innocency  of  the  Saints  proclaim  to  us,  saving  the 
brightness  of  the  Judge,  That  cometh  after  ?  For  in  our  admi- 
ration of  them  we  see  what  we  are  to  account  of  the  Majesty 
of  the  true  Light.  We  do  not  yet  behold  the  power  of  our 
Redeemer,  but  we  admire  His  goodness  in  the  characters  of 
His  Elect.  Therefore  in  that  the  life  of  the  good  presents 
to  our  eyes  on  the  consideration  of  it  the  force  of  Truth, 
the  '  morning  star'  aiises  bright  to  us  heralding  the 
sun. 

35.  But  be  it  known  that  all  that  we  have  made  out,  pro- 
ceeding upon  the  opposition  of  spiritual  temptations,  may 
without  hindrance  be  interpreted  by  external  ills,  for  holy 
men,  because  they  love  the  things  above  from  the  bottom  of 
their  heart,  encounter  hardships  in  things  below ;  but  at  the 
end  they  find  the  light  of  joy,  which  in  the  span  of  this  pass- 
ing life  they  care  not  to  have.     Whence  it  is  said  on  this 
occasion    by    Zophar,    And    the    noondaij    splendour   shall 
arise  to  thee  at  eventide.     For  the  sinner's  light  in  the  da}'- 
time  is  dimness  at  eventide,  in  that  he  is  buoyed  up  with 
good  fortune  in  the  present  life,  but  is  swallowed  up  by  the 
darkness  of  calamit}-  at  the  end;  but  to  the  righteous  man 
the  noonday  splendour  ariseth  at  eventide,  in  that  he  knows 
what  exceeding  brightness  is  in  store  for  him  when  he  has 
already  begun  to  set.     Hence  it  is  written;   Whoso  Jeareth  ^cdus. 
the  Lord,  it  shall  go  tcell  with  him  at  the  last.     Hence  it  is  ' 
declared  by  the  Psalmist ;    When  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep,  Ps.  127, 
^this  is  the  heritage  of  the   Lord.      He,   while   he  is   still  T'^^'^ 
set   in    the  strife  of  this  present   life    as    well,   '  when    he  ^^^ 
thinketh  himself  consumed,  ariseth  like  the  morning  star;' 
because    whilst     falling     outwardly     he     is     renewed     in- 
wardly.    And  the  more   that   he  encounters   crosses  with- 
out,   the    more    richly   he    gleams    with    the   hght   of   his 
virtues   within,   as  Paul    testifies,   who    saith.    Though   our  2  Cot. 
outward  man  perish,  yet  the  imvard  man  is  renewed  day  by   '     * 


GOG  Present  suffering  increases  future  Joy. 

Job  M,day.     For  our  light  affliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment 


Hist. 


worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory.  And  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  he  never  says, 
'  when  thou  art  consumed,'  but,  '  when  thou  thinkest  thyself 
consumed,'  in  that  both  that  which  we  see  is  doubtful,  and 
that  which  we  hope  for  certain.  Whence  too  the  same  Paul 
did  not  know,  but  thought,  that  he  was  consumed,  who  even 
when  falling  headlong  into  sufferings  and  tribulations,  shone 
2  Cor.  bright  like  the  morning  star,  saying,  As  dying.,  and^  behold., 
'  *  ' ive  live;  as  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing;  as  j)oor,  yet  , 
making  many  rich.  And  we  should  know  that  the  worse 
plight  the  mind  of  the  good  is  reduced  to  for  the  love  of  the 
truth,  the  more  sure  and  certain  its  hope  of  the  rewards  of 
eternity.     Whence  too  it  is  justly  added; 

Ver.  18.  And  thou  shall  have  confidence,  because  hope  is 
set  before  thee. 
xix.        36.  For  hope  lifts  itself  the  more  firmly  rooted  in  God, 
in  proportion  as  a  man  has  suffered  harder  things  for  His 
sake,  since  the  joy  of  the  recompensing  is  never  gathered  in 
eternity,  which  is  not  first  sown  here  below  in  religious  sor- 
Ps.  126,  rowing.     Hence  the  Psalmist  saith,   TJiey  went  forth  and 
wept  as  they  went,  bearing  precious  seed,  but   they  shall 
doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing,  bringing  their  sheaves 
2  Tim.  with  them.     Hence  Paul  saith.  If  ue  be  dead  with  Him,  ice 
^i^^'^"^' shall  also  live  with  Him;  if  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign 
ActsU,'i^il^i    Him.     Hence  he    warns  his   disciples,  saying,    A?id 
^^*        that  we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God.     Hence  the  Angel,  shewing  the  glory  of  the 
Bev.  7,  Saints  to  John,  saith.  These  are  they  that  came  out  of  great 
tribulation,  and  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them 
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.     Therefore  because  we  now 
sow  in  tribulation  that  we  may  afterwards  reap  the  fruit  of 
joy,  the  heart  is  strengthened  with  the  larger  measure  of  con- 
fidence in  proportion  as  it  is  pressed  with  the  heavier  weight 
of  affliction  for  the  Truth's  sake.     Whence  it  is  therefore 
fitly  added, 
»  V.  de-      Yea,  being  dug  to  the  bottom  ^,  thou  shall  rest  secure. 
fossus         ^^    For  just  as  present  security  begets  toil  to  the  wicked, 
so  present  toil  begets  perpetual  security  to  the  good.     Hence 
he  already  knew  that  it  was  his  '  to  rest  secure  after  he  had 


Rest  succeeds  deep  self -searching ,  COT 

been  dug  to  the  bottom,'  who  said,  For  I  am  now  ready  to  Book 
he  offered,  and  the  time  of  mij  departure  is  at  hand.    I  have 


fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course:  I  have  kept  ^  g.g. 
the  faith.  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of 
righteousness,  ivhich  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall 
give  me  at  that  day.  For  as  he  had  striven  without  giving 
over  against  transitory  ills,  doubtless  he  reckoned  without 
misgiving  on  enduring  joys. 

38.  Not  but  that  the  expression,  *  been  dug  to  the  bottom,' 
may  be  understood  in  another  sense  also  :  for  oftentimjes  being 
busied  with  transitory  matters,  we  neglect  to  consider  in  what 
great  things  we  go  wrong ;  but  if  the  eye  of  reflection  being 
brought  in,  the  pile  of  earthly  thoughts  be  discharged  from 
the  recesses  of  the  heart,  what  lay  hid  from  sight  w^ithin  is 

f<  disclosed  to  view;  whence  holy  men  never  cease  to  explore 
f  1  the  secret  hiding  places  of  their  souls ;  minutely  searching 
/  themselves,  they  throw  off  the  cares  of  earthly  things, 
and  their  thoughts  being  thoroughly;  dug  up  from  the 
bottom^,  when  they  find  that  they  are  not  cankered  in  any  wise  i  effossis 
by  the  guilt  of  sin,  they  rest  secure  in  themselves  as  upon  the 
bed  of  the  heart.  For  they  desire  to  be  hid  apart  fi*om  the 
coiu'ses  of  this  world.  They  are  always  thinking  on  their 
own  concerns,  and  when  they  are  not  at  all  tied  by  the  harness 
of  government,  they  decline  to  pass  judgment  on  what  concerns 
others.  Therefore  '  having  been  dug  to  the  bottom  they  rest 
secure,'  in  that  whilst  with  wakeful  eye  they  dive  into  their 
inmost  recesses,  they  withdraw  themselves  from  the  toilsome 
burthens  of  this  world  under  the  disengagement  of  repose. 
And  hence  it  is  yet  further  added, 

Ver.  19.  Also  thou  shall  lie  down,  and  there  shall  he  none 
to  make  thee  afraid. 

39.  Whosoever  seeks  present  glory  doubtless  dreads  con-  xxi. 
tempt.    He,  who  is  ever  agape  after  gain,  is  ever  surely  in 
fear  of  loss.     For  that   object,  the   receiving   of  which   is 
medicine  to  him,  the  loss  thereof  is  his  wounding,  and  as  he 

is  rivetted  under  fetters  to  things  mutable  and  destined  to 
perish,  so  he  lies  gi'ovelling  beneath,  far  apart  from  the 
stronghold  of  security.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  whoever  is 
rooted  in  the  desire  of  eternity  alone,  is  neither  uplifted  by 
good  fortune  nor  shaken  by  adverse  fortune;  whilst  he  has 


G08  Worldly  desires  cause  worldly  fears.  Menpromise  lohatthey  value. 

Job.  11, nought  in  the  world  which  he  desires,  there  is  nought  which 

TT    — he  dreads  from  the  world.     For  it  is  hence   that   Solomon 
Hist. 

Prov.     saith.  It  shall  not  grieve  the  just  whatsoever  shall  happen 

Pj.'q^  '  unto  him.     Hence  he  says  again.  The  righteous  as  a  bold 

28, 1.  lion  shall  be  without  alarm.  Therefore  it  is  rightly  said  here; 
Also  thou  shall  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  thee  afraid,  in 
that  every  one  the  more  completely  casts  away  from  himself 
the  fear  that  cometh  from  the  world,  the  more  thoroughly  he 
overcomes  in  himself  the  lust  of  the  world.     Did  not  Paul  lie 

Rom.  8,  down  and  rest  in  heart  without  fear,  when  he  said,  For  I  am 
persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor 
principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to 

1  So       come,  nor  strength^,  nor  height,  nor  deptli,  nor  any  other 

^'     creature  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from,  the  love  of  God 

which    is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.     The  force  of  which 

same  love  is   commended  by  the   true   voice    of  the   Holy 

Cant.  8,  Church,  where  it  is  said  in  the  Song  of  songs.  For  love  is 
strong  as  death.  For  love  is  compared  to  the  force  of  death, 
in  that  that  soul  which  it  has  once  taken  possession  of,  it 
wholly  kills  to  the  deli ghtfuln ess  of  the  world,  and  sets  it 
up  the  stronger  in  authority,  that  it  renders  it  indifferent 
towards  objects  of  terror.  But  herein  it  is  to  be  known,  that 
when  bad  men  deliver  right  sentiments,  it  is  very  hard  for 
them  not  to  let  themselves  out  upon  that,  which  they  are 
going  after  in  secret  within.  Hence  Zophar  forthwith 
adds ; 

Yea,  many  shall  make  suit  unto  thee. 

xxii.  40.  For  the  righteous  do  not  keep  themselves  in  the 
nan'ow  paths  of  innocency  with  this  view,  that  they  may  be 
implored  by  others,  but  whether  heretics  or  any  that  be  per- 
verse, all  of  them,  in  that  they  live  with  an  appearance  of 
innocency  among  men,  have  the  desire  to  shew  themselves 
as  intercessors  in  behalf  of  men,  and  when  in  talk  they  convey 
holy  truths,  what  they  themselves  are  hankering  after,  they 
promise  to  others  as  something  great;  and  whilst  they  tell  of 
heavenly  things,  they  soon  shew  by  their  pledges  what  their 
hearts  are  bent  on.  But  lest  by  long  continuing  to  promise 
earthly  things,  they  may  be  made  appear  what  they  are,  they 
quickly  return  to  words  of  uprightness.  Whence  it  is  im- 
mediately added. 


The  eyes  of  the  iciched  fail  ivhen  their  oljects  perish.        ()09 

But  the  eyes  of  the  wicked  shall fail,arid  refuge  shall  perish   Book 
from  them. 


41.  That  by  the  designation  of  eyes'  the  energy  of  the  xxiii. 
intention  is  set  forth  to  us,  '  Truth'  testifies  in  the  Gospel, 
saying.  If  thine  eye  shall  he  single^  thy  whole  body  shall  he^^^^^-^j 
full  of  light.  Forasmuch  as  if  a  pure  intention  have  pre- 
ceded our  action,  howsoever  it  may  seem  otherwise  to  men, 
yet  to  the  eyes  of  our  interior  Judge,  the  body  of  the  deed 
that  follows  after  is  presented  pure.  Therefore  the  *  eyes'  of 
the  wicked  are  the  intentions  of  carnal  desires  in  them,  and 
these  fail  for  this  reason,  that  they  are  careless  of  their 
eternal  interests,  and  are  ever  looking  for  transitory  ad- 
vantages alone.  For  they  aim  to  get  themselves  an  earthly 
name,  they  wish  above  all  things  to  grow  and  increase  in 
temporal  goods,  they  are  daily  advancing  with  the  tide  of 
transient  things  to  the  goal  of  death ;  but  they  think  not  to 
take  account  of  the  things  of  mortalit}'  upon  the  principles 
of  their  mortal  nature.  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  failing  minute 
by  minute,  and  yet  the  desire  of  the  flesh  is  growing;  property 
gotten  is  snatched  off  by  an  instant  end,  yet  the  eagerness  in 
getting  is  not  ended  the  more  ;  but  when  death  withdraws 
the  wicked,  then  indeed  their  desires  are  ended  with  their 
life.  And  the  eyes  of  these  fail  them  through  the  Avenging 
of  the  Most  High,  for  that  they  would  not  fail  here  by  their 
own  determination  to  earthly  gratification.  These  same 
eyes  of  such  persons  the  Psalmist  had  seen  closed  to  their 
former  enjoyment,  when  he  said.  In  that  day  all  their  Fs.  146, 
thoughts  jwrish.  For  they  meet  at  once  with  eternal  woes  ' 
they  had  never  thought  on,  and  on  a  sudden  lose  the  temporal 
goods,  they  had  long  while  held  and  dealt  with.  And  for 
these  *  all  refuge  shall  perish,'  in  that  their  iniquity  finds  not 
w^here  to  hide  itself  from  the  visitation  of  the  searching 
Judge.  For  now,  when  the  wicked  undergo  some  slight 
mishaps  or  evil  chances,  they  find  a  hiding-place  for  refuge, 
in  that  they  forthwith  have  recourse  to  the  enjoyment  of 
earthly  objects  of  desire.  For  that  poverty  torment  them 
not,  they  beguile  the  spirit  with  riches.  Or  lest  the  contempt 
of  their  neighbours  sink  them,  they  exalt  themselves  with 
titles.  If  the  body  is  cloyed  with  satiety,  it  is  pampered  with 
the  variety  of  viands  set  before  it.     If  the  mind  is  weighed 

2  R 


(310  Carnal  men's  hojye,  good  men's  abomination. 

Job  11,  down  by  any  impulse  to  sadness,  it  is  immediately  relieved 
-=j— ^ — by  the  bcguilements  of  spovtiveness  being  introduced.  Here 
therefore  they  have  as  many  places  of  refuge  as  they  make 
for  themselves  entertainments  of  delight ;  but  one  time 
*  refuge  shall  perish  from  them,'  in  that  their  soul,  when  all 
these  are  gone,  sees  only  itself  and  the  Judge.  Then  the 
pleasure  is  withdrawn,  but  the  guilt  of  pleasure  is  preserved; 
and  ere  long  the  miserable  wretches  leani  by  their  perishing 
that  they  were  perishable  things  they  had  possession  of 
Yet  these  as  long  as  they  live  in  the  body  never  cease  to 
seek  after  things  of  a  nature  to  do  them  harm.  Whence  it 
is  still  further  added, 

And  their  hope  shall  be  the  abomination  of  the  soul. 
xxiv.  42.  What  does  the  sinner  hope  for  here  in  all  his  thoughts 
saving  to  surpass  others  in  power,  to  go  beyond  all  men  in 
the  abundance  of  his  stores,  to  bow  down  his  rivals  in  lording 
it  over  them,  to  display  himself  as  an  object  of  admiration  to 
his  followers,  to  gratify  anger  at  will,  to  make  himself  known 
as  kind  and  gracious  when  he  is  commended,  whatever  the 
appetite  longs  for  to  offer  to  it,  to  acquiesce  in  all  that 
pleasure  dictates  by  the  fulfilling  of  the  thing  ?  Well  then  is 
their  hope  said  to  be  '  the  abomination  of  the  soul,'  for  the 
very  same  objects  which  carnal  men  go  after,  all  spiritual 
persons  abominate,  according  to  the  sentence  of  righteous- 
ness. For  that  which  sinners  account  pleasure,  the  righteous, 
surely,  hold  for  pain.  Therefore  the  hope  of  the  wicked  is 
the  abomination  of  the  soul,  for  the  spirit  is  wasted  while  the 
body  is  at  ease.  For  as  the  flesh  is  sustained  by  soft  treat- 
ment, so  is  the  soul  by  hard  dealing ;  soothing  appliances 
cherish  the  first,  harsh  methods  exercise  the  last.  The  one 
is  fed  with  enjoyment,  the  last  thrives  on  bitterness.  And  as 
hardships  wound  the  flesh,  so  softness  kills  the  spirit,  as 
things  laborious  kill  the  one,  so  things  delightful  destroy 
the  other.  Therefore  the  hope  of  carnal  men  is  said  to  be 
the  abomination  of  the  soul ;  in  that  the  spirit  perishes  for 
ever  by  the  same  means  whereby  the  flesh  lives  pleasantly 
for  a  while. 

43.  Now  Zophar  would  have  said  this  aright,  if  blessed 
Job  had  not  proclaimed  it  all  more  fully  even  by  living 
accordingly.     But  whereas  he  sets  himself  to  give  an  holier 


Conceit  of  knowledge  breeds  foolish  contempt,  611 

man  admonition  concerning  the  way  of  living,  and  to  instruct  Book 


one  more  skilled  than  himself  with  the  tutorage  of  wisdom,  he  — ^-^ 
hy  his  own  act  makes  the  weight  of  his  words  light,  in  that 
by  letting  in  indiscreetness  he  undoes  all  that  he  says ;  in 
that  he  is  pouring  on  the  liquid  element  of  knowledge  into  a 
full  vessel.  For  the  treasures  of  knowledge  are  possessed 
by  the  indiscreet  just  as  treasures  of  corporal  substance  are 
often  in  the  possession  of  fools.  For  some  that  are  sustained 
by  a  full  measure  of  earthly  goods  at  times  give  largely  even 
to  those  that  have,  that  they  may  themselves  seem  to  have 
them  in  fuller  measure  than  all  men.  So  the  v.icked,  since 
they  are  imbued  with  truth,  speak  in  some  respects  right 
even  to  those  that  are  more  right  than  they  are,  not  that 
they  may  instruct  others  that  hear  them,  but  that  they  may 
make  it  appear  with  what  a  lund  of  instruction  they  are 
furnished.  For  they  hold  that  they  excel  all  men  in  wisdom, 
therefore  they  imagine  that  there  is  nothing  that  they  can 
say  to  any  man  beyond  the  measure  of  theii  greatness. 
Thus  all  the  wicked,  thus  all  heretics  are  not  afraid  to 
instmct  their  betters  with  a  high  tone,  in  that  they  look  upon 
all  as  inferior  to  themselves.  But  Holy  Church  recalls 
every  one  that  is  high  minded  from  the  height  of  his  self- 
esteem,  and  fashions  him  anew-  by  the  band  of  discretion  in 
the  jointing  of  equality.  Whence  blessed  Job,  who  is  a 
member  of  the  same  Holy  Church,  seeing  that  the  mind  of 
his  friend  was  swoln  and  big  in  words  of  instruction  whicli 
he  delivered,  thereupon  answered,  saying, 

Chap.  xii.  •2.    No  doubt  but  ye  are  the  only  men,  and 
tcisdom  shall  die  with  you. 

44.  Whosoever  reckons  himself  to  excel  all  men  in  the  xxv. 
faculty  of  reason,  what  else  does  such  a  man  but  exult  that 
he  is  the  '  only  Man  ?'  xA.nd  it  often  ha])pens  that  when  the 
mind  is  borne  on  high  through  pride,  it  is  uplifted  in  con- 
tempt of  all  men,  and  in  admiration  of  self.  For  self-applause 
springs  up  in  the  imagination,  and  folly  is  itself  its  own 
flatterer  for  singularity  of  wisdom.  It  ponders  all  that  it  has 
heard,  and  considers  the  words  that  it  utters ;  and  it  admires 
its  own,  and  scoffs  at  those  of  others.  He  then,  who  thinks 
that  he  only  is  wise,  what  else  is  this  but  that  he  believes 
that  that  same  '  wisdom  dies  with  him  ?'     For  what  he  denies 

2  r2 


C12  Job''s  friends  proud  of  common  attainments. 

Job  12,  to  be  ^ith  others,  ascribing  to  himself  alone,  he  doth,  in 
-rT—~  tiiith,  confine  within  the  period  of  his  brief  span.  But  we 
are  to  consider  what  exact  discretion  the  holy  man  employs, 
in  order  that  the  arrogance  of  his  friends  in  the  fulness  of 
pride  might  be  brought  within  bounds,  in  that  he  adds  forth- 
with, 

Ver.  3.  But  I  have  understanding  as  well  as  you ;  I  am 
not  inferior  to  you, 
xxvi.  45.  For  who  is  ignorant  how  greatly  the  practice  and  the 
knowledge  of  blessed  Job  excels  the  knowledge  that  his 
friends  have  ?  Now  in  order  to  correct  their  pride,  he  asserts 
that  he  is  '  not  inferior'  to  them,  and  lest  he  should  transgress 
the  limits  of  his  own  humility,  he  keeps  to  himself  that  he  is 
superior  to  them ;  not  by  setting  himself  above,  but  by 
equalling  himself  to  them,  he  points  out  what  they  should 
learn  concerning  themselves,  who  are  far  unlike  to  him ;  that 
whereas  that  wisdom  which  is  high  is  voluntarily  bowed 
down,  the  knowledge  which  lies  grovelling  may  never  erect 
itself  against  the  nature  of  its  powers,  and  he  does  well  that  he 
immediately  recalls  these  to  a  sense  of  their  equal  condition, 
reflecting  that  they  are  swoln  to  excess  as  if  for  singularity 
in  greatness,  when  he  afterwards  proceeds. 

Yea,  who  knoweth  not  such  things  as  these  that  ye  know  ? 
xxvii.  46.  As  though  he  said  in  plain  words ;  Since  what  ye  say 
is  known  to  all  men,  wherefore  are  ye  puffed  up  by  the  know- 
ledge contained  in  your  sayings,  as  of  singular  merit  ?  There- 
fore whereas  in  bringing  back  the  pride  of  the  self-conceited 
to  a  common  level  of  equality,  he  has  reproved  with  a  full 
correction,  he  now  breaks  out  into  statements  of  instruction; 
that  his  friends  having  been  humbled  first  might  learn  the 
weightiness  of  Truth,  and  how  reverently  they  should  hear  it. 
It  proceeds, 

Ver.  4.  He  that  is  mocked  of  his  neighbour  as  I  am, 
calleth  upon  God,  and  He  answereth  him, 
xxviii.  47.  Oftentimes  the  frail  mind,  when  it  is  welcomed  by  the 
breath  of  human  regard  on  the  score  of  good  actions,  runs 
out  into  outward  delights,  so  that  it  lays  aside  what  it  in- 
wardly desires,  and  willingly  lies  all  loosely  in  that  which  it 
gives  ear  to  without.  So  that  it  does  not  so  much  delight  to 
become  as  to  be  called  blessed ;  and  whereas  it  gapes  after 


Mockery  of  men  drives  holy  minds  to  God.  613 

the  words  of  applause,  it  gives  over  what  it  had  begun  to  be  ;  Book 
I   and  so  it  is  severed  from  God  by  the  same  means  by  which — ^-^— 
it  appeared  to  be  commendable  in  God.     But  sometimes  it 
presses  forward  in  good  practice  with  a  constant  heart,  and 
yet  is  pushed  hard  by  the  scoffs  of  men;  it  does  admirable 
deeds,  and  gets  only  abuse;  and  he  that  might  have  been 
made  to  go  forth  without  by  commendations,  being  repulsed 
by  insults,  returns  back  again  into  himself;  and  stablishes 
himself  the  more  firmly  in  God,  that  he  findeth  no  place 
without  when  he  may  rest  in  peace :  for  all  his  hope  is  fixed 
in  his  Creator.     And  amidst  scoffs  and  revilings,  the  interior 
Witness  is  alone   implored.     And  his  soul  in   his   distress 
becomes  God's  neighbour,  in  proportion  as  he  is  a  stranger 
to  the  favour  of  man's  esteem.     He  forthwith  pours  himself 
out  in  prayer,  and  being  pressed  without,  he  is  refined  with 
a  more  perfect  purity  to  penetrate  into  all  within.    I'herefore 
it   is   well    said   at   this    time,   He    that   is    mocked  of  his 
neighbour  as  I  am,  will  call  upon  God,  and  He  will  hear 
him.     For  whilst  the  wicked  reproach  the  soul  of  the  good, 
they  are  shewing  them  Whom   to  seek  as  the   Witness  of 
their  actions.     And  while  their  soul  in  compunction  braces 
itself  in  prayer,  it  is   united  within   itself  to   the  hearing 
of  the   Most  High,  by  the  same  act  whereby  it  is  severed 
from  the   applause    of  man  without   itself     But   we  ought 
to  note  how  thoughtfully  the  words  are  inserted,  as  I  am. 
For  there    be  some  men  whom  both  the  scoffings  of  their 
fellow-creatures  sink  to   the  ground,  and  yet  they  are  not 
such  as  to  be  heard  bv  the  ears  of  God.     For  when  mock- 
ing  issues  against  sin,  surely  no  virtuous  merit  is  begotten 
in  that  mocking.     For  the  priests  of  Baal,  when  they  called 
upon  him  with  clamorous  voices,  were  mocked  by  Elijah, 
when  he  said.  Cry  aloud;  for  he  is  a  god,  either  he  is  talking,  i  Kings 
or  he  is  staying  on  a  Journey.     But  this  mocking  was  con-  ^^'  '^'^' 
ducive  to  the  service  of  virtue,  in  that  it  came  by  the  deserts 
of  sin.     So  that  it  is  advisedly  said  now,  He  that  is  mocked 
of  his  friend,  as  I  am,  calleth  upon  God,  and  He  heareth 
him.     For  the  mockery  of  his  fellow-creatures  makes  Him 
God's  neighbour,  whom  innocency  of  life  keeps  a  stranger  to 
his  fellow -creatures'  wickednesses.     It  proceeds. 

For  the  upright  man'^s  simplicity  is  Umghed  to  scorn. 


014  Simplicity  of  the  upright  scorned  by  the  World. 

Job  12,      48.  It  is  the  wisdom  of  this  world  to  overlay  the  heart 
with  inventions,  to  veil  the  sense  with  words;  things  that  are 


XXIX. 

Hist.*  ^^^se  to  shew  for  true,  what  is  true  to  make  out  fallacious. 
This  is  the  wisdom  that  is  acquired  by  the  young  by  practice. 
This  is  learnt  at  a  price  by  children,  they  that  are  acquainted 
with  it  are  filled  with  pride,  despising  other  men ;  they  that 
know  nothing  of  it,  being  subdued  and  browbeaten,  admire  it 
in  others;  for  this  same  duplicity  of  wickedness,  being  glossed 
over  by  a  name,  is  their  joy  and  delight,  so  long  as  froward- 
ness  of  mind  goes  by  the  title  of  urbanity.  She  dictates  to 
her  followers  to  seek  the  high  places  of  honour,  to  triumph 
in  attaining  the  vain  acquisition  of  temporal  glory;  to  return 
manifold  the  mischiefs  that  others  bring  upon  us ;  when 
the  means  are  with  us,  to  give  way  to  no  man's  opposition; 
when  the  opportunity  of  power  is  lacking,  all  whatsoever  he 
cannot  accomplish  in  wickedness  to  represent  in  the  guise  of 
peaceable  good  nature.  But  on  the  other  hand  it  is  the 
wisdom  of  the  righteous,  to  pretend  nothing  in  show,  to 
discover  the  meaning  by  words;  to  love  the  truth  as  it  is,  to 
eschew  falsehood ;  to  set  forth  good  deeds  for  nought,  to  bear 
evil  more  gladly  than  to  do  it;  to  seek  no  revenging  of  a 
wrong,  to  account  opprobrium  for  the  Truth's  sake  to  be 
a  gain.  But  this  simplicity  of  the  righteous  is  '  laughed  to 
scorn,'  in  that  the  goodness  of  purity  is  taken  for  foil}'  with 
the  wise  men  of  this  world.  For  doubtless  every  thing  that  is 
done  from  innocency  is  accounted  foolish  by  them,  and 
whatever  truth  sanctions  in  practice  sounds  weak  to  carnal 
wisdom.  For  what  seems  worse  folly  to  the  world  than  to 
shew  the  mind  by  the  words,  to  feign  nothing  by  crafty 
contrivance,  to  return  no  abuse  for  wrong,  to  pray  for  them 
that  speak  evil  of  us,  to  seek  after  poverty,  to  forsake  our 
possessions,  not  to  resist  him  that  is  robbing  us,  to  offer 
the  other  cheek  to  one  that  strikes  us.''  Whence  that 
illustrious  Wise  one  of  God  speaks  well  to  the  lovers  of  this 

Exod.8,  world,  We  shall  sacrifice  the  abominalion  of  the  Egyptians 
to  the  Lord  our  God.  For  the  Egyptians  loathe  to  eat  the 
flesh  of  shee]),  but  that  which  the  Egyptians  loathe,  the 
Israelites  offer  up  to  God;  for  that  singleness  of  conscience, 
which  the  unrighteous  one  and  all  scorn  as  a  thing  most 
mean  and  abject,  the  righteous  turn  into  a  sacrifice  of  virtue. 


The  '  ricW  that  are  judged^  those  who  think  themselves  so,  615 

and  the  just  in  their  worshipping  sacrifice  purity  arid  mild-  Book 
ness  to  God,  which  the  sons    of  perdition  in  abomination 


thereof  account  weakness.  Which  same  siraphcity  of  the 
righteous  man  is  briefly  yet  adequately  expressed,  in  that 
the  words  are  forthwith  introduced; 

Ver.  5.  A  lamp  despised  in  the  thought  of  the  rich. 

49.  What  is  denoted  in  this  place  by  the  title  of  the  '  rich,'  xxx. 
but  the  highmindedness  of  the  proud,  who  have  no  respect 
for  the  Judge  that  shall  come,  while  they  are  swollen  with 
proud  thoughts  within  themselves  ?  For  there  are  some  that 
by  a  fortune  are  not  lifted  up  in  pride,  but  elevated  thereby 
through  works  of  mercy.  And  there  are  some  who,  while 
they  see  that  they  overflow  with  earthly  resources,  do  not 
look  for  the  true  riches  of  God,  and  have  no  affection  for  the 
eternal  land,  for  they  think  that  this  is  enough  for  them,  that 
they  are  set  up  with  temporal  goods.  The  fortune  then  is 
not  in  fault,  but  the  feeling.  For  all  things  that  God  created 
are  good,  but  he  who  uses  good  things  amiss,  assuredly 
brings  it  about  that  as  it  were  through  gluttonness  of  greedy 
appetite,  he  perishes  by  the  bread  whereby  he  ought  to  live. 
The  beggar  Lazarus  attained  to  rest,  but  torments  racked  the 
proud  rich  one.  And  yet  Abraham  was  rich,  who  held 
Lazarus  in  his  bosom.  Yet  holding  commune  with  his 
Maker,  he  says,  /  have  taken  upon  me  to  speak  unto  theGen.is, 
Lord,  which  am  hnt  dust  and  ashes!  How  then  did  he 
know  to  set  a  value  on  riches,  who  accounted  himself  to  be 
dust  and  ashes  f  or  how  could  his  possessions  even  exalt 
him,  who  entertained  such  poor  notions  about  himself  who 
was  the  owner  of  them } 

50  Yet  again  there  are  some,  to  whom  earthly  property  is 
not  vouchsafed,  and  yet  they  are  set  up  in  their  own  ayes, 
in  height  of  swollen  pride.  At  the  same  time  that  there  is 
no  fortune  at  all  to  uplift  these  to  the  display  of  power,  yet 
the  frowardness  of  their  ways  assigns  them  a  place  among 
the  lost  children  of  riches.  All,  then,  that  love  of  the  life  to 
come  does  not  fill  with  abasement,  the  sacred  word  here  calls 
rich.  For  in  the  avenging  of  Judgment,  there  is  no  difference 
to  them  whether  tbcy  be  swollen  with  goods,  or  only  in 
disposition.  These,  when  they  see  the  life  of  the  simple  sort 
in  this  world  to  be  lowly  and  abased,  forthwith  scoff"  at  them 


616  Men  icho  die  to  sin  thought  dead  by  the  World. 

Job  12,  with  proud  sconiings ;  for  they  mark  that  that  is  wholly  wanting 

'- —  to  them  without,  which  they  pant  after  themselves  with  their 

best  endeavours.  Therefore  they  look  down  upon  them  as 
fools,  who  are  without  those  things,  by  the  having  or  merely 
loving  of  which  they  themselves  in  trath  are  perishing;  and 
they  take  those  for  dead,  whom  they  observe  in  no  sort  to  live 
with  themselves  after  the  flesh.  For  he  that  dies  from  the 
desires  of  this  world,  is  of  course  held  by  earthly  minds 
to  be  utterly  dead.  Which  is  well  represented  by  the 
miracle  of  our  Redeemer  when  He  frees  a  man  from  an 
Mark9, unclean  spirit,  concerning  which  same  it  is  written:  And 
''  the  spirit  cried  and  rent  him  sore,  and  came  out  of  him, 
and  he  was  as  one  dead;  insomuch  that  many  said,  he  is 
dead.  But  Jesus  took  him  hy  the  hand,  and  lifted  him  up, 
and  he  arose:  for  he  looks  like  one  dead  that  is  set  free  from 
the  power  of  an  evil  spirit.  For  whosoever  has  already  got  the 
better  of  earthly  desires,  makes  the  life  of  carnal  conversation 
extinct  in  himself;  and  he  seems  dead  to  the  world,  in  that 
he  lacks  the  wicked  one  that  possessed  him,  who  urged  him 
by  impure  desires;  and  many  call  him  dead,  in  that  they 
who  know  not  how  to  live  spiritually,  look  upon  him  who  does 
not  follow  carnal  good  to  be  wholly  lifeless. 

51.  But  because  the  very  scoffers  at  the  simple  ones  are 
themselves  too  enrolled  under  the  name  of  Christians,  being 
overruled  by  reverence  for  religion,  they  are  ashamed  to  make 
a  display  of  the  sin  of  open  scoffing.  Whence  it  happens 
that  full  of  pride  in  themselves,  and  in  silence,  they  scoff  at 
those  whom  they  take  to  be  utterly  mean  and  abject  from 
their  simplicity.  Therefore  it  is  well  expressed,  A  lamp  is 
despised  in  the  tJtought  of  the  rich;  for  all  the  proud,  whereas 
they  are  unskilled  to  estimate  the  blessings  to  come,  as  we 
have  said  above,  account  him  almost  as  nothing  whom  they 
do  not  see  to  be  possessed  of  that  which  they  are  devoted  to. 
For  it  often  happens  that  each  one  of  the  Elect,  who  is  being 
conducted  to  eternal  bliss,  is  overwhelmed  here  with  uninter- 
mitted  calamitj*,  there  is  no  plentifulness  of  stores  that  buoys 
him  up,  no  lustre  from  titles  that  makes  him  conspicuous,  no 
crowd  of  followers  falls  to  his  lot,  no  pomp  of  raiment  makes 
him  a  figure  in  the  eyes  of  men,  but  he  is  regarded  as  an 
object  of  contempt  by  all  men,  and  accounted  unworthy  of 


David  despised  without ,  bright  within.  617 

the  regard  of  this  world.     Yet  in  the  eyes  of  the  hidden  Book 
Judge  he  is  bright  with  virtues,  and  full  of  lustre  from  the  — — — 
merits  of  his  life;  he  dreads  to  be  honoured,  he  never  shrinks 
from  being  despised, he  disciplines  the  body  by  continence,  he 
is  fattened  by  love  alone  in  the  soul,  he  ever  sets  his  mind  to 
bear  with  patience,  and  standing  erect    on   the   ground  of 
righteousness,  he  exults  in  the  insults  he  receives,  he  com- 
passionates the  distressed  from  his  heart,  he  rejoices  in  the 
successes  of  the  good  as  in  his  own,  he  carefully  ruminates 
the  provender  of  the  sacred  word  in  his  heart,  and  when 
examined  he  is  unskilled  to  give  a  double  answer;  '  a  lamp' 
because  he  is  bright  within,  ^  despised'  because  he  is  not 
luminous  without.     Inwardly   he   glows  with  the    flame  of 
charity,  without  he  shines  with  no  gloriousness    of  lustre. 
Therefore  he   shines  and  is  despised,  who,  while  he  glows 
with   virtue,  is  accounted  vile.     Hence  it  is  that  his  own 
father  looked  down  upon  holy  David,  when  he  refused  to  i  Sam. 
present  him  to  the  eyes  of  the  Prophet  Samuel.  He,  when  he  l^'  ^^* 
had  brought  out  seven  sons  to  receive  the  grace  of  anointing, 
being  questioned  by  the  Prophet  whether  he  had  gone  through 
the  whole  number  of  his  children,  answered   with   despair 
enough,  There  remaineih  yet  a  little  hoy  that  keepeth  the 
sheep;  and  when   he  was  brought  forward  and  chosen,  he 
heard  the  words,  Man  looketh  in  the  face,  hut  the   Lord 
searcheth  the  heart.     Thus  David  was  a  lamp  by  his  inno- 
cency,  but  yet  a   lamp    greatly  despised,  in  that  he    gave 
no  light  to  those  that  regard  the  outside  appearance.    But  be 
it  known  that  every  righteous  man  is  either  without  temporal 
glory,  or  if  he   has  it,  he  breaks  it  beneath  himself,  that 
he   may  freely  rise    on    high    above   his    own  honour,   lest 
overcome   by   enjoyment   he  be  brought  down  beneath   it. 
It  is  hence  that  that  illustrious  Preacher  lowered  the  glory  of 
his  Apostleship  before  the  eyes  of  men,  saying,  We  have  not  \  Thess. 
U8ed  this  power,  when  we  might  have  been  burthensome  a.9^'^-^- 
the  Apostles  of  Christ,  but  we  made  ourselves  little  children 
among  you.     But  the  swelling  of  the  neck  still  remained  in 
the  heart  of  the  hearers  of  that  same  person,  when  they  said, 
For  his  letters  say  they  are  iveighty  and  powerful,  but  his2  Cor. 
bodily  presence  is  weak,  and  his  speech  contemptible.     For^^'^^* 
him  who  they  knew  could  say  such  things  they  determined 


618         True  Light  despised  till  revealed  in  the  Judgment. 

Job  12,  could  not  live  in  common  with  tliemselv^es,  and  when  they 

* —  both  saw  him  lowly  in  his  mode  of  hfe  and  high  in  his  tone 

of  speech,  their  pride  drove  them  on,  that  him  whose  writings 
had  made  him  to  be  feared,  his  vrords  in  presence  should  make 
an  object  of  little  account.  What  then  was  Paul,  saving  '  a 
lamp  despised  in  the  thought  of  the  rich,'  who  by  the  same  act 
whereby  he  set  forth  a  lesson  of  humihty,  got  the  affronts  of 
highmindedness  from  ill-instructed  disciples.  For  in  a  dread- 
ful way,  the  sickness  of  those  so  filled  with  pride  was  increased 
by  the  same  means,  whereby  it  ought  to  have  subsided; 
while  the  proud  mind  of  carnal  persons  rejected,  as  if  it  were 
worthy  of  scorn  that  which  their  master  set  forth  as  deserving 
of  imitation.  Was  not  he  '  a  lamp  despised,'  who  when  he 
shone  forth  with  so  many  virtues,  underwent  such  adverse 
treatment  at  the  hands  of  his  persecutors  ?  He  discharges 
his  mission  in  chains,  and  his  bonds  are  made  known  in  all 
the  palace,  he  is  beaten  with  rods,  he  is  beset  with  number- 
less dangers  from  his  own  race  and  from  the  Gentiles;  at 
Lystra  he  is  battered  with  stones,  he  is  dragged  by  the  feet 
without  the  city,  in  that  he  is  taken  for  dead.  But  to  what 
point  is  this  *  lamp  despised  ?'  Up  to  what  point  is  it  held 
contemptible?  Does  it  never  at  any  point  unveil  its  lustre? 
Does  it  never  shew,  with  what  excess  of  brightness  it  glows? 
It  does  shew  clearly.  For  when  it  is  said  that  the  '  lamp 
is  despised  in  the  thought  of  the  rich,'  it  is  therefore  added, 
Prepared  for  an  appointed  time. 
xxxi.  5*2.  For  the  '  appointed  time'  for  ^  the  despised  lamp'  is  the 
predestined  Day  of  final  Judgment,  wherein  it  is  shewn  how 
each  one  of  the  righteous,  who  is  now  contemned,  shines 
bright  in  greatness  of  power.  For  then  they  come  as  judges 
with  God,  who  now  are  judged  unjustly  for  God's  sake. 
Then  their  Light  shines  over  so  much  the  wider  space,  the 
more  cruelly  the  persecutor's  hand  confines  and  fetters  them 
now.  Then  it  will  be  made  clear  to  the  eyes  of  the  wicked, 
that  they  were  supported  by  heavenly  power,  \\  ho  forsook  all 
earthly  things  of  their  free  will.  Whence  Truth  saith  to  His 
Mat.  19, own  Elect;  Ye  which  have  followed  Me,  in  the  Regene- 
ration,  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  in  the  throne  of  His 
glory,  ye  also  shull  sit  npon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel,     Not  that  the  court  of  the  interior 


They  that  choose  poverty  shall  judye  with  Christ.        619 
Assize  will  have  no  more  than  twelve  judges,  but,  surely,  that  Book 

"V' 

by  the  number  twelve  the  amount  of  the  whole  is  described;     ^  * 


for  whosoever  being  urged  by  the  incitement  of  divine  love, 
has  forsaken  all  that  he  possessed  here,  shall  doubtless  attain 
there  to  the  height  of  judicial  power;  that  he  may  then 
come  as  judge  in  company  with  the  Judge,  who  now  by 
consideration  of  the  Judgment  chastens  himself  with  volun- 
tary poverty.  For  hence  it  is  that  it  is  said  by  Solomon  con- 
cerning the  spouse  of  Holy  Church,  Her  husband  is  knownvrov. 
in  the  gates^  when  he  sitteth  among  the  elders  of  the  land.^^^'^^' 
Hence  Isaiah  says.  The  Lord  will  come  to  judg7nejit,  with  is.3,i4. 
the  elders  of  His  people.  Hence  Truth  proclaims  these  same 
Elders  now  no  longer  servants  but  fiiends.  Henceforth  /Johnis, 
call  you  not  servants,  hut  I  hare  called  you  friends.  And 
the  Psalmist  regarding  these  same  saith.  Honourable  alsoFs.  139, 
are  thy  friends  unto  me,  O  God.  And  whilst  he  beheld 
their  loftiness  of  mind,  and  how  they  trod  down  with  the 
heel  of  the  foot  the  glory  of  the  world,  he  thereupon  added. 
How  siablished  is  their  rule!  And  that  we  might  not  think 
that  they  be  few,  who  we  learn  thus  advance  even  to  the 
summit  of  such  high  perfection,  he  thereupon  added,  //'  / 
should  count  them,  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  sand. 
For  as  many  persons,  then,  as  now  wittingly  abase  them- 
selves for  the  love  of  the  Trulh,  so  many  lamps  shall  then 
blaze  forth  in  the  Judgment.  Therefore  let  it  be  justly  said, 
A  lamp  despised  in  the  thought  of  the  rich,  prepared  for  the 
appointed  time;  for  the  soul  of  every  righteous  man  is 
despised  as  abject,  when  in  passing  through  life  he  is  with- 
out glory;  but  he  is  beheld  as  an  object  to  admire,  when  he 
shines  from  on  high. 

53.  Amid  these  things  it  is  good  to  lift  the  eye  of  the 
mind  to  the  paths  of  our  Redeemer,  and  to  proceed  step  by 
step  from  the  members  to  the  head.  For  He  did  Himself  prove 
truly  *  a  lamp'  to  us,  Vv^ho  by  dying  upon  the  Cross  for  our 
redemption,  poured  light  through  the  wood  into  our  benighted 
minds.  John  had  attained  to  see  that  we  are  lightened 
by  this  Lamp,  when  he  said.  That  was  the  true  Light,  John  1, 
which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world.  Yet 
he  saw  it  '  despised  in  the  thought  of  the  rich,'  when  he  soon 
after  brought  in,   He  came  unto   His  own,  and  His  ownxex.u. 


020  Christ,  os  a  Lamp  despised, 

Job  iQ, received  Him   not.     Herod   desired   to   examine   into   the 

'- — flames  of  this  Lamp,  vvhen  he  lons-ed  to  see  the  miracles  of 

Alleg.  .  ,  . 

Lute23  that  One,  as  it  is  written,  For  he  was  desirous  to  see  Him  of 

^'  a  long  season,  because  lie  had  heard  many  tilings  of  Him, 

and  he  hoped  to  have  seen  some  miracles  done  by  Him.  But 
this  Lamp  did  not  shine  forth  before  his  eyes  with  a  single 
ray  of  light,  in  that  to  him,  who  sought  Him  not  from  piety 
but  from  curiosity,  He  exhibited  nothing  wonderful  concern- 
ing Himself.  For  our  Redeemer  when  He  was  questioned 
held  His  peace,  when  He  was  looked  for,  He  scorned  to  shew 
forth  His  miracles,  and  keeping  Himself  to  Himself  in  secret, 
those  whom  He  found  looking  for  outward  things  He  left  in 
their  ingratitude  without,  rather  choosing  to  be  openly 
despised  by  those  who  were  led  by  pride,  than  to  be  com- 
mended with  empty  voice  by  those  that  did  not  believe. 
And  hence  this  '  Lamp'  is  straightway  '  despised,'  according 

Luke23,  ^Q  what  is  there  added.  And  Herod  with  his  men  of  icar  set 
Him  at  nought,  and  mocked  Him,  and  arrayed  Him  in  a 
gorgeous  robe. 

54.  Yet  the  '  despised  lamp,'  which  is  subject  to  scoffings 
on  earth,  flashes  judgment  from  heaven.  Hence  it  is  justly 
added  \\Qxe,  prepared  for  an  appointed  season.     Concerning 

Ps.75,2.  which  same  season  He  saith  by  the  Psalmist,  When  I  shall 
receive    the    time,  I  will  judge  uprightly.     Hence   in    the 

John  7,  Gospel  '  Truth'  declareth,  saying,  My  lime  is  not  yet  come. 

Acts  3,  Hence  Peter  saith.  Whom  the  heaven  must  receive  until  the 

^^'  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things.  Therefore  the  ^  Lamp' 
which  is  now  '  despised'  is  '  prepared'  for  its  coming  '  at  the 
appointed  season.'  For  He  by  Himself  judge th  sin  on  the 
last  Day,  Who  now  bears  with  the  scoffs  of  sinners,  and  then 
He  brings  out  severity  the  more  rigorously,  the  more  mildly 
He  now  spreads  low  His  patience  in  calling  sinners.  For 
he  that  awaits  long  while  for  some  to  be  converted,  if  they 
be  not  converted,  torments  them  without  revoke.  Which 
same  truth  he  conveys  by  the  Prophet  in  few  words,  saying, 

Is.  42,  /  have  long  time  holden  my  peace,  I  have  been  still  and 
refrained  myself;  now  will  I  cry  like  a  travailing  icoman. 
For  as  we  have  already  before  said,  a  woman  in  travail  with 
pain  gives  forth  that  which  she  bore  for  long  in  her  inmost 
parts.    He  then  that  for  long  time  held  his  peace, '  crieth  like 


shall  shine  out  in  Judi/ment.  621 

a  travailing  woman,'  in  that  the  Judge  that  shall  come,  Who  Book 
for  long  bore  with  the  deeds  of  men  without  taking  venge ^-^— 


ance,  sooner  or  later  brings  to  light  with  hotness  of  examin- 
ation, as  if  with  pain  of  mind,  the  sentence  of  direful  visiting 
which  He  kept  within.  Therefore  let  none  despise  this  Lamp, 
when  it  is  out  of  sight,  lest  He  burn  up  His  despisers  when 
He  shineth  fi'om  heaven.  For  to  whomsoever  He  does  not 
now  burn  to  give  pardon,  He  shall  then  assuredly  burn  to 
award  punishment.  Therefore  because  by  grace  fi'om  above 
we  are  vouchsafed  the  season  of  our  calhng,  whilst  there 
is  still  the  room  left,  let  us  by  altering  our  ways  for  the 
better  flee  from  the  wrath  of  Him,  Who  is  every  where 
present.  For  him  alone  that  visitation  fails  to  find,  whom 
correction  keeps  in  hiding. 

55.  Let  it  suffice  for  us  by  the  Lord's  bounty  to  have  now 
run  through  these  particulars  in  two  volumes^  For  because  \corpo- 
we  cannot  embrace  in  a  brief  exposition  the  following  parts"  ^** 
of  the  sacred  book,  drawn  out  in  the  stream  of  mysteries,  we 
must  of  necessity  reserve  them  for  other  sheets,  that  the 
reader  may  return  the  more  ardent  to  the  task  of  reading,  in 
proportion  as  he  has  breathing  given  him  by  the  inteiTuption 
of  what  is  read. 


\% 


Gregory  the  Great  •  Morals* 


PONTIFICAL  INSTITUTE  OF  MEDIAEVAL  SiUUlfe-S 

59  QUEEN'S  PARK  CRESCENT 

T0R0NT0-~5,   CANAD/^ 

11815  - 

