Catena Aurea. 


COMMENTARY 


ON THE 
FOUR GOSPELS, 
COLLECTED OUT OF THE 
WORKS OF THE FATHERS 
BY | 


S. THOMAS AQUINAS. 


VOL. I. 
ST. MATTHEW. PART T. 


OXFORD, 
JOHN HENRY PARKER ; 
J. G. F. AND J. RIVINGTON, LONDON. 
MDCCCXLI. 


BAXTER, FRINTER, OXFORD. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


THE following Compilation not being admissible into the 
Library of the Fathers from the date of some few of the 
authors introduced into it, the Editors of the latter work 
have been led to publish it in a separate form, being assured 
that those who have subscribed to their translations of the 
entire Treatises of the ancient Catholic divines, will not feel 
less interest, or find less benefit, in the use of so very 
judicious and beautiful a selection from them. The Editors 
refer to the Preface which follows for some account of the 
nature and characteristic excellences of the work, which will 
be found as useful in the private study of the Gospels, as it 
is well adapted for family reading, and full of thought for 
those who are engaged in religious instruction. 


Oxford, May 6, 1841. 


Digitized by Google 


PREFACE. 


By a Catena PaATRUM is meant a string or series of 
passages selected from the writings of various Fathers, and 
arranged for the elucidation of some portion of Scripture, as 
the Psalms or the Gospels. Catenas seem to have originated 
in the short scholia or glosses which it was customary in 
MSS. of the Scriptures to introduce between the lines or on 
the margin, perhaps in imitation of the scholiasts on the 
profane authors. These, as time went on, were gradually 
expanded, and passages from the Homilies or Sermons of 
the Fathers upon the same Scriptures added to them. 

The earliest commentaries on Scripture had been of this 
discursive nature, being addresses by word of mouth to the 
people, which were taken down by secretaries, and so pre- 
served. While the traditionary teaching of the Church still 
preserved the vigour and vividness of its Apostolical origin, 
and spoke with an exactness and cogency which impressed 
an adequate image of it upon the mind of the Christian 
Expositor, he was able to allow himself free range in hand- 
ling the sacred text, and to admit into the comment his own 
particular character of mind, and his spontaneous and indi- 
vidual ideas, in the full security, that, however he might follow 
the leadings of his own thoughts in unfolding the words of 
Scripture, his own deeply fixed views of Catholic truth 
would bring him safe home, without overstepping the limits 
of truth and sobriety. Accordingly, while the early Fathers 


manifest a mogt remarkable agreement in the principles and 
VOL. I, b 


i PREFACE. 


the substance of their interpretation, they have at the same 
time a distinctive spirit and manner, by which each may 
be known from the rest. About the vith or viith century 
this originality disappears; the oral or traditionary teaching, 
which allowed scope to the individual teacher, became 
hardened into a written tradition, and henceforward there is 
a uniform invariable character as well as substance of Scrip- 
ture interpretation. Perhaps we should not err in putting 
Gregory the Great as the last of the original Commentators ; 
for though very numerous commentaries on every book of 
Scripture continued to be written by the most eminent doctors 
in their own names, probably not one interpretation of any 
importance would be found in them which could not be traced 
to some older source. So that all later comments are in fact 
Catenas or selections from the earlier Fathers, whether they 
present themselves expressly in the form of citations from their 
volumes, or are lections upon the Lesson or Gospel for the 
day, extempore indeed in form, but as to their materials 
drawn from the previous studies and stores of the expositor. 
The latter would be better adapted for the general reader, 
the former for the purposes of the theologian. 

Commentaries of both classes are very numerous. Fabri- 
cius* speaks of several hundred MS. Catenas in the Royal 
Library of France. According to Wolf and Cramer’ the 
earliest compiler of a Greek Catena was Cicumenius, in the 
ixth or xth century; for the claims of Olympiodorus in the 
vith to be the author of the Catena on Job, have been 
disproved by Patricius Junius, in his edition. (Lond. 1637.) 
But though this may be the first regular Catena, the practice 
of compiling commentaries had been in use much earlier. 
In the East, Eustathius of Antioch in the ivth, and Procopius 
of Gaza in the beginning of the vith, collected “ the inter- 
pretations of the ancients;” and in the West, the Com- 
mentaries on the Gospels which go under the name of Bede, 
(A.D. 700,) are but a summary of the authorized interpreta- 


* Vol. viii. p. 638. ed. Harles. Matt. et Marci, Oxon. 1840. which con- 
> Pref. in Catenas in Evang. SS. tains much information on the subject. 


PREFACE. iil 
tions chiefly drawn from S. Augustine, 8. Leo, &c., and even 
S. Jerome describes his Commentary on Galatians as a com- 

% | pendium of former writers, chiefly Origen. 

It may be added, that the same change took place in dog- 
matic teaching, as in the exposition of Scripture. This indeed 
was still more to be expected, for the issue of controversies 
and the decrees of Councils had given to the doctrinal state- 
ments of the Fathers an authority, or rather prerogative, 
which was never claimed for their commentaries. Accord- 
ingly, S. John Damascene’s work on the Orthodox Faith in 
the viiith century is scarcely more than a careful selection 
and combination of sentences and phrases from the great 
theologians who preceded him, principally S. Gregory 
Nazianzen. A comment or scholia by the same author 
upon 8. Paul’s Epistles have come down to us, which are 
mainly taken from S. Chrysostom, but with some use of 
other expositors. 

All such commentaries have more or less merit and use- 
fulness, but they are very inferior to the ‘ Catena Aurea,’ 
which is now presented to the English reader; being all of 
them partial and capricious, dilating on one passage, and 
passing unnoticed another of equal or greater difficulty ; 
arbitrary in their selection from the Fathers, and as compi- 
lations crude and indigested. But it is impossible to read 
the Catena of S. Thomas, without being struck with the 
masterly and architectonic skill with which it is put together. 
A learning of the highest kind,—not a mere literary book- 
knowledge, which might have supplied the place of indexes 
and tables in ages destitute of those helps, and when every 
thing was to be read in unarranged and fragmentary MSS.— 
but a thorough acquaintance with the whole range of eccle- 
Stastical antiquity, so as to be able to bring the substance 
of all that had been written on any point to bear upon the 
text which involved it—a familiarity with the style of 
each writer, so as to compress into few words the pith of a 
whole page, and a power of clear and orderly arrangement in 
this mass of knowledge, are qualities which make this Catena 

b 2 


1V PREFACE. 


perhaps nearly perfect as a conspectus of Patristic inter- 
pretation. Other compilations exhibit research, industry, 
learning; but this, though a mere compilation, evinces a 
masterly command over the whole subject of Theology. 

The Catena is so contrived that it reads as a running com- 
mentary, the several extracts being dovetailed together by the 
compiler. And it consists wholly of extracts, the compiler 
introducing nothing of his own but the few connecting 
particles which link one extract to the next. There are 
also a few quotations headed ‘ Glossa,’ which none of the 
editors have been able to find in any author, and which 
from their character, being briefly introductory of a new 
chapter or a new subject, may be probably assigned to the 
x compiler; though even this is dispensed with whenever it 
is possible: when a Father will furnish the words for such 
transition or connection, they are dexterously introduced. 
In the Gospel of S. Matthew there are only a few other 
passages which seem to belong to S. Thomas. These are 
mostly short explanations or notes upon something that 
seemed to need explanation in some passage quoted, and 
which in a modern book would have been thrown into the 
form of a foot note. An instance of this may be seen in 
. ! |p, 405. The only important passages of this kind are some 

Glosses on chap. xxvi. 26. which will be noticed in their 
| place. oe 
This continuity is expressed in the title which the Author 
gives his work in his dedication to Pope Urban IV. ‘ expo- 
sitio continua; the term Catena was not used till after his 
death. De Rubeis the Venetian editor speaks of a MS. 
of the xivth century in which it is so entitled, but the 
earlier editions have either ‘Glossa Continua,’ or ‘ Conti- 
nuum.’ The sacred text is broken into paragraphs longer 
or shorter; the shortest less than a verse, the longest twenty 
verses, and the exposition of each portion follows this order:— 
First, the transition from the last paragraph to that under 
review; if they are events, the harmony with the chronology 
of the other Evangelists is shewn, S. Augustine (de Consensu 


PREFACE. v 


Evangelistarum) being the authority used for this: then comes 

the literal, or, what is called, the historical exposition. 

Where different Fathers have given different explanations, 

they are introduced generally in the order of the most 

obvious and literal first, and so proceeding to the most 

recondite, by the words ‘ Vel aliter.. Then if any im- 

portant doctrine hinges upon any part of the passage or 

comma, selections are given from the most approved treatises 

on the subject; e. g. on chap. v. 17, a lengthened summary of f 
the arguments against the Manicheans from Aug. cont. Faust. ; 

on chap. xi. 21. long extracts from Aug. de Bono Perseve- 

rantiz; on viii. 2. a short passage from Damascenus de Fid. 

Orth. as if for the purpose of referring the reader to a treatise 
which contains a full discussion of the doctrine implied in 
the words, ‘ And he stretched forth his hand, and touched 
him ;’ on xiii. 29. on the question of toleration, Aug. ep. ad 
Vincentium is quoted. And the comment on the portion is 
wound up with what is variously called the mystical, moral, 
allegorical, tropical, tropological, or spiritual scnse. The 
peculiar exposition of Origen, which seems to hold a mean 
place between the historical and the authorized mystical 
interpretation, is accordingly often inserted between these. 

The quotations do nut profess to be made with scrupulous 
adherence to the words of the original. But they are not 
(a very few excepted) abridgments in the words of the 
compiler, but condensations in their own language’. How 
admirably this is done may be seen by any one who will 
lake the trouble of collating a few pages of some of the 
More diffuse writers, e. g. S. Chrysostom or Origen, with the 
Catena. For instances particularly in which a sentence is 
made up of clauses gathered from distant pages, sce the 
summary of the Sermon on the Mount, chap. vii. in fin., and 
4 quotation from Chrysostom on chap. xxiii. 26. 

Nor is it the case with this Catena as it seems to be with 
every other, that some one commentary has been taken as 
@ nucleus or basis, into which other extracts have been 
inserted. Dr. Cramer says, that Chrysostom is the staple - 


_- 


on 


vi PREFACE. 


of all the Greek Catenas on S. Matthew; but though S. 
Thomas held Chrysostom in such esteem that he is reported 
to have said ‘ malle se uti Chrysostomi libris in Matthaesum 
quam possidere fruique Lutetia Parisiorum,’ (pref. Ben.) and 
though he has drawn upon the Homilies very largely, it 
is no more than he has done upon nearly all the principal 
commentaries. If any book might be supposed to have been 
his guide more than another it would be Rabanus Maurus; 
though we should not say that he quoted any other writers 
mediately through Rabanus, yet this compiler seems often 
to have guided him to quotations in 8. Augustine, Gregory, 
and the general treatises of the Latin Fathers. 

With respect to the fidelity of the references, putting aside 
the connective Glosse which may probably be assigned to 
S. Thomas himself, there are very few (as far as the transla- . 
tion has hitherto proceeded) which it has not been possible 
to find. Of these, some are quoted from S. Augustine’s 
Sermons, and among the multitude of doubtful and spurious 
compositions of this class, it is probable that the extracts 
to which they belong may be found, though it was scarcely 
worth while to spend much time in the search of a few 
unimportant passages. But there are two passages of serious 
moment, one on Matt. xvi. 18. the other on Luke xxii. 19. 
quoted from S. Cyril, which require a remark. The first 
affirming the supremacy of the successors of S. Peteris quoted 
from ‘ Cyn. in hb. Thes.’ but occurs no where in 8. Cyril’s 
writings. Accordingly it has been made the groundwork 
of an old charge against S. Thomas (lately revived by a 
German writer, see Ellendorf Hist. Bliitter) of forgery, which 
however has been amply refuted by Guyart and Nicolai. In 
the dedication to another of his works, ‘ Opusculum contra 
errores Grecorum’ addressed to Pope Urban IV. he says, 
Libellum ab excellentia vestra mihi exhibitum diligenter 
perlegi, in quo inveni quamplurima ad nostra fidei as- 
sertionem utilia. Consideravi autem quod ejus fructus 
posset apud plurimos impediri propter quadam in aucto- 
ritatibus SS. Patrum contenta, que dubia esse videntur. 


PREFACE. vil 


The other passage is affirmatory of Transubstantiation, 
and quoted from S. Cyril without any specification of place; 
on this Father Simon (Hist. Crit. c. 38.) observes, that 
S. Cyril’s commentaries on the New Testament have come 
down to us imperfect, and this very passage occurs quoted 
under the name of Cyril in the second part of the Greek 
Catena of Possinus. (in Matt. xxvii. 28.) The words ‘ imo 
quem bibas quem manduces, on chap. v. 27. are not in 
the earlier editions of the Catena, but were inserted (perhaps 
by the Louvain Editor) from the original text of S. 
Augustine. 

Of the authors cited, the Catena contains nearly all that 
is material in S. Chrysostom’s Homilies on S. Matthew, 
S. Jerome’s Commentary, S. Hilary’s Canons, and the Glossa 
Ordinaria all through the Gospel. The Latin commentary 
of Pseudo-Chrysostom is cited fully till about the middle of 
chap. viii. after which it is cited more rarely. At this place 
the Benedictine editor notes a hiatus in some of the MSS. of 
Chrysostom. S. Augustine de Cons. Ev. and In Sermonem 
Domini in Mont. are nearly incorporated into the Catena, 
and from ch. xvi. to the end, Origen’s Commentaries on 
5. Matthew. 

It is generally supposed that Aquinas was ignorant of 
Greek, and that therefore he must have quoted the Greek 
authors in Translations; but his own words in his dedication 
to Pope Urban seem to imply otherwise. ‘ Interdum etiam 
sensum posui, verba dimisi, precipue in Homiliario Chry- 
sostomi propter hoc quod est translatio vitiosa.’ That for 
Chrysostom he used neither the version of Anianus, (as the 
Benedictine editor of Chrys. supposed,) nor the current 
Latin version, is evident on the slightest comparison with 
his quotations. However this may be, he has in several 
instances quite missed the sense of the Greek. 

The Catena begins to quote Origen’s Commentary on 
S. Matt. at chap. xvi. though our fragment of it begins as 
early as chap. xiii. It uses the Old Interpretation, which 
Huet conjectures to have been the work of Bellator, or of 


Vill PREFACE. 


some contemporary of Cassiodorus. This version will be 
found in the Ben. Ed. of Origen, and is according to Huet 
barbarous and full of errors. 

Great accidental value is given to many of the inedited 
Greek Catenas by the extracts which they contain from lost 
works; in this on S. Matt. are quoted two writers, whose 
works do not seem to have been printed. The first 1s 
Remigius, which is frequently cited throughout. The 
commentary on S. Matthew of Remigius, a Monk of Auxerre 
in the ixth century, is extant in MS. in several libraries, but 
the only part of it which has ever been printed is the Preface, 
in Fontani Nove FEruditorum Delicie, Florence 17983. 
One short passage concerning the dates of the Gospels, 
which is quoted in S. Thomas’s Proem, is not found in this 
Preface, but a passage in S. Thomas’s Proem to S. Mark 
quoted from Remigius super Matt. occurs in it. This 
would be proof enough of the identity of the Remigius of 
the Catena with the inedited Commentary described by 
Fontani. But he has also printed in the same volume 
several homilies of Remigins, which he says are only 
extracts or abridgments (apocope) of the Commentary. 
On comparing these with the quotations in the Catena, 
they answer exactly to that description, the substance is the 
same, the words only a little different. 

Haymo is much more rarely quoted. The quotations do 
not correspond with the ‘ Homilies on the Gospels’ printed 
with his name at Paris, 1545, but there is much the same 
kind of resemblance between them, as between the quotations 
and the Homilies of Remigius. It may perhaps be con- 
jectured, that he also may have written a commentary of 
which the Homilies were abridgments. 

Rabanus Maurus, who as well as Haymo was a scholar of 
Alcuin, wrote one of the most full and valuable commentaries 
on S. Matthew extant. It contains copious extracts from 
the Latin Fathers, such, he says, ‘quantum mihi pre 
innumeris monastice servitutis retinaculis licuit, et pro 
nutrimento parvulorum quod non parvam nobis _ingerit 


PREFACE. 1X 


molestiam et lectionis facit injuriam,’ (he seems from this to 
have been Abbot at the time he wrote,) but interwoven with 
the extracts is much original matter of his own, ‘ nonnulla 
que mihi Author lucis aperire dignatus est‘, which he 
distinguishes by the note ‘ Maurus’ on the margin. In the 
only printed edition of his works, there is a hiatus of several 
pages in chapp. 28. and 24. and another in chap. 28. ‘ que 
inter excudendum a militibus omnia vastantibus deperdita 
sunt.’ 

8. Jerome speaks of his own commentary on S. Matthew 
{in the preface to Eusebius), as having been written off very 
hastily in the short space of a fortnight—and as being 
entirely his own, if for no other reason, from his want of 
leisure to read the numerous commentators even then 
existing on the Gospels. He names Origen’s twenty-five 


volumes, and as many homilies on S. Matthew only; Theo- 


philus Antioch., Hippolytus Martyr, Theodorus, Apollinaris, 
Didymus, Hilary, Victorinus, Fortunatianus. He says also, 
“historicani interpretationem digessi breviter, et interdum 
spiritualis intelligentise flores miscui, perfectum opus re- 
servam in posterum.” 

The Enarrationes in Mattheum printed as the work of the 
Archbishop Anselm (Cologne, 1612) are ascribed by Cave 
‘o Anselm Laudunensis, and by others to William of Paris 
who died in 1249. This is partly a compilation “and partly 
Original: It does not seem used in the Catena, but it has 
been referred to in this translation as containing many 
Passages cited in the Catena, under the title Gloss., and 
Which appeared to have been drawn by both authors from 
some common source. ° 

The Glossa Ordinaria seems to have been a brief Catena, 
compiled from the Fathers by Strabus, a Monk of Fulda, a 
pupil and amanuensis of Rabanus Maurus. Among the 
€xtracts, he seems to have inserted short observations of his 


* Great part of the introduction of Epistle dedicatory to Bp. Acca; how is 
Rabanus describing his method of com- this to be explained P 
Pilation, is word for word with Bede’s 


x PREFACE. 


own, distinguishing them by the title of ‘Glossa.’ Even of these 
the substance seems to have been drawn from the Fathers, 
or rather from that received mode of interpreting Scripture 
and Fathers which was traditionally preserved in the Schools. 
These portions (in whatever degree original) got the name of 
Glossa Ordinaria say the editors, (Douay, 1617,) “‘ quia illam 
posteri omnes tanquam officinam ecclesiasticorum sensuum 
consulere solebant.” It is sometimes cited under the title of 
* auctoritas.’ 

The Glossa Interlinearis is ascribed to Anselm Laudu- 
nensis early in the xiith century, and was intended to 
accompany the common editions of the Bible written in a 
small hand in the vacant spaces between the lines. 

A few passages are quoted from Bede. Of these some are 
from his Homilies on the Gospels, some from his Commentary 
_ on Luke. There is among Bede’s works a Commentary on 
S. Matthew, and in one or two instances this is referred to 
by Nicolai, but on looking at the quotations in older 
editions of the Catena, it is merely ‘ Bed. in Hom.’ To 
many quotations of Remigius and Rabanus, which agreed in 
sense with this Commentary on Matthew, the mark ‘e Beda’ 
has been added, because he was the earliest author in which 
the translator found them; but an inspection of this Com- 
mentary will make it very doubtful whether it is Bede’s. 
First, he does not mention it in the catalogue which he gives 
of his own works at the end of the Hist. Eccl. (p. 222. ed. 
Smith.) Secondly, those on Mark and Luke (which he does 
mention there) are introduced by Epistles to Acca, Bishop of 
Hexham. Thirdly, The style of these is different, being 
full and copious, that on Matthew short, and ‘ per saltus.’ 
Fourthly, Comparing Rabanus’ numerous quotations from 
Bede, they seem to be all taken from the comments on the 
parallel passages of Mark and Luke. But a great deal of 
what is given as original in Rabanus coincides with the 
Commentary on S. Matth. in question. Is it an abridg- 
ment of Rabanus, or did they only both draw upon their. 
recollections of the Fathers? The Commentary on S. Paul’s 


PREFACE. x1 


Epistles printed among Bede’s Works, and which is a com- 
pilation chiefly from S. Augustine, seems to have been proved 
by Mabillon to be the work of Florus the Deacon, (Mab. 
Vet. Analecta, i. 12.) The following extracts from Bede’s 
Preface to S. Luke illustrate the manner of compiling such 
Commentaries then in fashion. Bede excused himself from 
the task because it had been so fully performed by Ambrose. 
Acca answers that there were many things in Ambrose so 
eloquent and high, that they could only be understood by 
Doctors, and something weaker was wanted for the unlearned; 
that S. Gregory had not been afraid to rifle all the Fathers 
for his homilies on the Gospels, and in short it might be said 
of every thing with the comic poet, ‘ Nihil sit dictum quod 
non sit dictum prius.’ Bede then describes the method he 
had pursued; “ Having gathered around me the works 
of the Fathers, truly the most worthy to be employed in 
such a task, I set myself diligently to look out what 
S. Ambrose, what Augustine, what Gregory most keen-eyed, 
(as his name signifies,) the Apostle of our nation, what the 
Translator of the Sacred Story Jerome, and what the other 
Fathers have thought upon the words of Luke. This I 
forthwith committed to paper either in the very words of the 
author, or where abridgment was needed in my own. To 
save the labour of inserting a reference to the author in each 
case in my text, I have marked the first letters of his 
name in the margin, being anxious that none should take 
me for a plagiarist, endeavouring to pass off as my own the 
words of greater men.” Vol. v. p. 215. ed. Col. 

The Translation has been made from the Venetian edition 
of 1775, which professes to give the original text of the 
Catena without the alterations of Nicolai. For by the 
repeated reprints—and no book went through more during 
the two first centuries after the invention of printing—the 
text had become so corrupt—“ tam frequentes in eam 
irepserant et tam enormes corruptela, tot depravata voces, 
tot involute constructiones, tot perturbate phrases, tot 


xii PREFACE. 


presertim ex Grecis autoribus autoritates adulteratez, tot 
vitiosz versiones, tot mutilati textus, tot indices omissi vel 
preepostere annotati, tot hiantes et imperfecti sensus occur- 
rebant ut eas mirer tam impense laudari potuisse que tam 
turpiter aberrassent.” (Pref. Nicol.) Nicolai therefore in 
1657 undertook a recension of the text, for which he 
employed, not MSS. or early editions of the Catena, (the 
Venetian editor thinks it probable that he used only two 
editions, one a Parisian, the other an Antwerp,) but had 
recourse to the authorities themselves; his aim being, not so 
much to give it as it came from S. Thomas, but to improve 
the usefulness of the work, as what it is indeed, a com- 
plete syllabus of Catholic theology. But as the Venetian 
edition is wretchedly printed, it has been corrected through- 
out by a reference to Nicolai, (ed. Lugd. 1686,) and the 
references have all been verified afresh and adapted to 
the best editions of the Fathers. No reference has been 
given to any passage which the translator has not verified 
for himself substantially in its own original place; but 
in those places only in which there was any doubt or 
difficulty about the meaning, or where an important 
doctrine was involved, or any important variety of reading 
between the two editions of the Catena, has he attentively 
collated the passage of the Catena with the original; in a 
very few has he introduced any alteration or addition from 
the originals, and that has been sometimes noticed in the 
note. Where a reference could not be found, it has been 
marked ‘non occurrit;’ of these the majority are those 
Glossze which are most probably to be ascribed to S. 
Thomas: of the rest, some had escaped the diligence of 
Nicolai, only one or two which Nic. had marked as found, 
the present translator has not been able to find. 

Where no note of reference is put, it is to be understood 
that the passage is in each case in the author’s commentary 
on that chapter and verse of S. Matt.; as the only note of 
reference to which must have been ‘in locum,’ it was thought 


PREFACE. xii 


a perpetual repetition of that note was needless. To aid in 
referring to S. Chrys. the number of the Homily has been 
given at the first place where each is referred to. 

The references to Scripture have been verified anew, (those in 

the Psalms conformed to the numeration of the English Bible,) 
and many more given which the previous editions omit. The 
text of the Gospel commented upon is given from the E. V.; 
but all passages quoted in the body of the comment are 
translated from the Latin as there given, which is often 
important when the remarks are upon words which have no 
equivalent in our version, e. g. ‘ supersubstantialis’ in c. vi. 
Il. There is no uniformity in the editions in the mode of 
Printing the sacred text. The MSS. and earlier editions do not 
contain it, so that it is probable that it was so published by 
Aquinas, especially as nearly the wholeis worked into the series 
of comment; the next class of editions have the sacred text, 
Scupying a small space in the centre of the upper part of 
the page, and the Catena arranged around it ; and at last the 
commata or paragraphs, which it was clearly S. Thomas’s 
intention to make, were divided, and‘in some editions the 
portion of text was inserted between them, in others each 
chapter was printed at the head of its own comment, divided 
into the same paragraphs, with letters referring to the para- 
graphs of the Catena. 


It only remains to add, that the Editors are indebted for 
the Translation of St. Matthew, as well as for the above 
introductory remarks, to the Rev. Marx Pattison, M.A. 
Fellow of Lincoln College. 


J. H. N. 


Digitized by Google 


LIST OF AUTHORS 
USED IN THE CATENA ON ST. MATTHEW, 


With the Editions of their Works referred to in the Translation. 


Origen, Presbyter of Alexandria, A.D. 230. Ed. Ben. Par. 1753. 
Pseudo-Origen Homilia sea ex diversis locis collecte. Merlin, Par. 1512. 
S. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, A.D. 248. Oxford Translation, 1839. 


Eusebius, Archbishop of Ceesarea, A.D. 315. Oxford, 1838. 
S. Athanasius, Archbishop of Alexandria, A.D. 326. Ed. Ben. Par. 1698. 
Psendo- Dionysius the Areopagite, A.D. 340—530. Paris, 1615. 
8. Hilary, Bishop of Poictiers, A.D. 354. Ed. Ben. Par. 1693. 
S. Gregory of Nazianzus, Abp. of Constantinople, A.D. 370. Col. 1680. 
S. Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, A.D. 370. Paris, 1615. 
S. Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan, A.D. 374. Ed. Ben. Par. 1686. 
S. Jerome, Presbyter and Monk of Bethlehem, A.D. 378. Verona, 1735. 
Nemesius, A.D. 380. Apud Bibl. Patr. Grac. Paris, 1624. 


8. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, A.D. 396. Ed. Ben. Par. 1679—1700. 
8.JohnChrysostom, A bp.of Constantinople,A.D.398. Ed. Ben Par.1718—38. 


8. Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria, A.D. 412. Paris, 1638. 
8. Maximus, Bishop of Turin, A.D. 422. Paris, 1614. 
Cassian, Presbyter and Monk of Marseilles, A.D. 424. Bibl. Patr. 
S. Peter Chrysologus, Archbishop of Ravenna, A.D. 433. Col. 1618. 
Council of Ephesus, Canons of, et 

Thedstie-ct eee ¢ A.D. 431. ap. Labbe Concilia, Par. 1671. 
S. Leo I. Pope, A.D. 440. Venice, 1783. 
Gennadius, Presbyter of Marseilles, A.D. 495. Haméb. 1614. 
S. Gregory I. Pope, A.D. 590. Ed. Ben. Paris, 1705. 
8. Isidore, Archbishop of Seville, A.D. 595. Col. 1617. 
Bede, Venerable, Presbyter and Monk of Yarrow, A.D. 700. Col. 1612. 
S. John, Presbyter of Damascus, A.D. 730. Paris, 11712. 
Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mayence, A.D. 847. Col. 1626. 


Haymo, Bishop of Halberstadt, A.D. 853. 
Remigius, Presbyter and Monk of Auxerre, 
Glosea Ordinaria, in ninth century. Lugd. 1589. 
Paschasius Radbertus, A.D. 850. 

Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury, A.D. 1080. ‘ 
8. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, A.D. 1093. Col. 1612. 
Glossa Interlinearis, in twelfth century. Lugd. 1589. 


W inted. 
aaanek orks not printed. 


Bibl. Patr. 


ERRATUM. 


Page 95. note. for ‘ Adamannus, Abbot of Lindisferne’ read ‘ Adamnanus, 
Abbot of Hii or Iona’ : 


PREFACE 


TO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


ST. MATTHEW. 


ISAIAH xl. 9. 


Go up to the top of the mountain, thou that preachest glad 
tidings in Sion; lift up thy voice with might, thou that 
preachest in Jerusalem: cry aloud, fear not: say to the cities 
of Judah, Behold your God! Lo, the Lord God shall come 
with power, and His arm shall have dominion; Lo, His 
retard is with Him. 


Tue Prophet Isaiah, a manifest preacher of the Gospel, 
briefly expressing the loftiness, the name, and the substance 
of the Gospel doctrine, addresses the evangelic teacher in the 


Person of the Lord, saying, Go up to the top of the mountain, 
&e. 


But to make our beginning with the title, The Gospel. 
Avcustine ; The word ‘ Evangelium,’ (Gospel,) is rendered Aug. 
in Latin ‘ bonus nuntius,’ or ‘ bona annuntiatio,’ (good news.) rae 
It may indeed be used on all occasions whenever any goodi. 2. 
is ammounced; but it has come to be appropriated to the 
announcement of the Saviour. GuLoss. Those who have 
related the birth, deeds, words, and sufferings of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, are properly styled Evangelists. CHRYsSOSTOM; Chrys. 
For what is there that can equal these good tidings? God on Hom. 


in Matt. 


earth, man in heaven; that long war ceased, reconciliationi. 2. 

made between God and our nature, the devil overthrown, 

death abolished, paradise opened. These things, so far beyond 

our merits, are given us with all fulness ; not for our own toil 

or labour, but because we are beloved of God. ‘Rae. 
Avc. Whereas God in many ways heals the souls of men, ac- deers 

cording to the times and the seasons which are ordained by Hisi6. 
VOL. I. B 


~ - 


2 PREFACE TO THE GOSPEL 


marvellous wisdom, yet has He in no way more beneficently 
provided for the human race, than when the Very Wisdom of 
God, the Only Son of one substance and coeternal with the 
Father, stooped to take upon Him perfect man, and the Word 
was made flesh and dwelt among us. Hereby He made manifest 
how high a place among creatures had human nature, in that 
Pseudo- He appeared to men as Very Man. Pseupo-Auc. God was 
Sere, demade man, that man might be made God. Gutoss; This 
ee part of the glad tidings that should be preached, the Prophet 
leo,  foretells saying, Behold, your God, &c. LEo Pope; For this 
a ae emptying of himself, by which the Invisible made Himself 
xxviii.3, Visible, and the Creator and Lord of all things chose to 
become one of us mortal creatures, was a stooping of His 
mercy, not a failing of His power. GLoss; Therefore that 
the Lord should not be supposcd to be present in such a way 
as that there should be any thing lost of His power, the 
Aug. Prophet adds, The Lord shall come tweith power. AUG. 
ve lot’ Come, not by passing through the regions of space, but byw. 
i 12. shewing Himself to men in the flesh. Lro; By the 
Sate unspeakable power of God, it was wrought, that while very 
Nativ. Man was in the inviolable God, and very God in passible 
8. x1x. 3. 
flesh, there was bestowed upon man, glory through shame, 
Ae. immortality through punishment, life through death. Avda. 
catorum For blood that was without sin being shed, the bond of all 
ae men’s sins was done away, by which men were before held 
captive by the Devil. GLtoss; Therefore because men, having 
been delivered from sin by virtue of Christ suffering, became the 
servants of God, it follows, And His arm shall have dominion. 
co. Leo; In Christ then was given us this wonderful deliverance, 
Ubisup- that on our passible nature the condition of death should 
not abide, which His impassible essence had admitted, and 
that by that which could not die, that which was dead might 
be brought to life. GLoss; And thus through Christ is 
opencd to us the entrance of immortal glory, concerning which 
it follows, Lo, His reward is with Him; that, namely, of 
Matt. 5. which Himself speaks, Your reward is abundant in heaven. 
ae Acc. The promise of eternal life, and the kingdom of f 
Saas heaven belongs to the New Testament; in the Old Testament 
iv.2.. are contained promises of temporal things. | 


Gross; So then evangelic teaching delivers to us four things 


ACCORDING TO 8T. MATTHEW. 3 


concerning Christ; the Divinity that takes upon it, the 
Humanity that is taken upon it, His Death by which we 

are delivered from bondage, His Resurrection by which the 
entrance of a glorious life is opened to us. On this account it 

is represented in Ezekiel under the figure of the four animals. 
Grecory ; The Only-begotten Son of God was Himself verily Greg. 
made Man; Himself condescended to die as the sacrifice of ers 
our redemption as a Calf; He rose again through the power 

of His might, as a Lion; and as an Eagle He ascended 

aloft into heaven. G toss; In which ascension He shewed 
manifestly His Divinity; Matthew then is denoted by the 

Man, because he dwells chiefly on the humanity of Christ ; 

Mark by the Lion, because he treats of His Resurrection; 

Luke by the Calf, because he insists on His Priesthood; John 

by the Eagle, because he describes the sacraments of His 
Divinity, AmBrosE; And it has happened well that we Ambros. 
set out with delivering the opinion that the Gospel according <7" 
to Matthew is of a moral kind, for morals are the peculiar pref. 
Province of man. The figure of a Lion is ascribed to Mark, 
because he begins with an assertion of His Divine power, 
saying, The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son 

of God. The figure of the Eagle is given to John, because 

he has described the miracles of the Divine Resurrection. 

Gree. These things the commencement of each of the Gospel Greg. 
books testifies. Because he opens with Christ's human gene- ©?! **?- 
ration, Matthew is rightly designated by a Man; Mark by a 

Lion, because he begins with the crying in the desert; Luke 

by a Calf, because he begins with a sacrifice; because he 

lakes his beginning from the divinity of the Word, John 
is worthily signified by an Eagle. Ava. Or, Matthew Auz. 
who has chiefly represented the regal character of Christ, is oe 
designated by a Lion; Luke by a Calf, because of the Priest’s Evang. 
victim; Mark, who chose neither to relate the royal nor the’ si 
priestly lineage*, and yet is clearly busied about His human 
nature, is designated by the figure of a Man. These three 
animals, the Lion, the Man, the Calf, walk on the earth, 
Whence these three Evangelists are mostly employed about 

those things which Christ wrought in the flesh. But John, 


* The original text of Augustine has sacerdotalem vel consecrationem vel cog- 
here, “neque stirpem regiam neque nationem.” 


B 2 


4 PREFACE TO THE GOSPEL 


as the Eagle, soars on high, and with most keen eyes of the 
heart beholds the light of unchangeable Truth. From which 
we may understand, that the other three Evangelists are oc- 
cupied about the active, and John about the contemplative, 
life. The Greek Doctors by the Man understood Matthew, 
because he has deduced the Lord's lineage according to the 
flesh ; by the Lion, John, because as the lion, strikes terror 
into the other beasts by his roaring, so John struck terror into 
all heretics; by the Calf, they understood Luke, because the 
calf was the victim of the Priests, and he is much employed 
concerning the Temple and the Priesthood ; and by the Eagle 
they understood Mark, because the eagle in the Divine Scrip- 
ture is used to denote the Holy Spirit, who spake by the 
mouths of the Prophets; and Mark begins with a citation 
from the Prophets. 
Prolog. JEROME; Concerning the number of the Evangelists, it 
in Evan, should be known, that there were many who had written 
oe Gospels, as the Evangelist Luke witnesses, saying, Foras- 
Luke 1, much as many have taken in hand, &c. and as books 
remaining to the present time declare which divers authors 
have set forth, therein laying the foundation of many 
heresies; such as the Gospel according to the Egyptians, 
according to Thomas, Matthias, and Bartholomew’; that of 
the twelve Apostles, and Basilides, and Apelles, and others 
whom it would be long to reckon up. But the Church, 
which is founded by the Lord’s word upon the rock, sending 
forth, like Paradise, its four streams, has four corners and four 
rings, by which as the ark of the covenant, and the guardian 
of the Law of the Lord, it is carried about on moveable‘ 


date. One is still extant and is one of 
the two Gospels of our Saviour’s infancy, 
which seein to be the work of the Gnos- 


b These apocryphal compositions 
are elsewhere mentioned by Clement 
Alex. (Strom. iii. p. 539, 553.) Ori- 
tics. 


gen (in Lue. i.) Eusebius (Hist. ii. 
25.) Pseudo-Athanasius (Synops. 76.) 
Cyril (Catech. iv. 36. vi.31.) Epiphanius 
(Her. 62.n.2.) Ambrose (in Lue. i. 2.) 
and Pope Gelasius in his Decree. 

The Gospel according to the Egyp- 
tians is supposed to be one of the works 
referred to in the beginning of St. Luke. 
Tt was afterwards used by the Gnostics 
and Sabellians in their defence. There 
seem to have been several Gospels ac- 
cording to Thomas, one ascribed to a 


disciple of Manes; one of an eaENeE jd 


The Gospel according to the 
Twelve Apostles seems to be the same 
as the celebrated Gospel according to 
the Nazarenes, or Hebrews, supposed 
to have been prior to the inspiredGospels, 
and afterwards corrupted by the Ebion- 
ites, Basilides was a Gnostic, and 
Apelles a Marcionite. Little is known 
of the Gospels according to Matthias, 
and Bartholomew ; the former seems to 
have been of Gnostic origin. 

© Some read ‘ immobilibus.’ 


ee és ae ‘ tee. 


m.D nf tq, & 


a La 


ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. ts) 


staves. AUG. Or, Because there are four quarters of Aug. 
the world, through the whole of which Christ’s Church is regal 


extended. In learning and preaching they had a different2. 
order from that they had in writing. In learning and 
preaching they ranked first who followed the Lord present 
in the flesh, heard Him teaching, saw Him acting, and by His 
mouth were sent to preach the Gospel; but in penning the 
Gospel, an order which we must suppose to have been fixed 
by Heaven, the first place, and the last place were filled out 
of the number of those whom the Lord chose before His 
passion, the first by Matthew, the last by John; so that the 
other two, who were not of that number, but who yet followed 
Christ speaking in them, were embraced as sons, and placed 
in the middle between the other two, so as to be supported by 
them on both sides. REemicius; Matthew wrote in Judea 
in the time of the Emperor Caius Caligula; Mark in Italy, at 
Rome, in the time of Nero or Claudius, according to Raba- 
nus ; Luke in the parts of Achaia and Beotia, at the request 
of Theophilus ; John at Ephesus, in Asia Minor, under Nerva. 
BepeE; But though there were four Evangelists, yet what they 
wrote is not so much four Gospels, as one true harmony of 
four books. For as two verses having the same substance, |. gcc. 
but different words and different metre, yet contain one and 

the same matter, so the books of the Evangelists, though 

four in number, yet contain one Gospel, teaching one doc- 

trine of the Catholic faith. Curysost. It had indeed been ¢j,,y., 
enough that one Evangelist should have written all; but Ubisup. 
whereas four speak all things as with one mouth, and that 
neither from the same place nor at the same time, nor having 

met and discoursed together, these things are the greatest 

test of truth. Itis also a mark of truth, that in some small 
matters they seem to disagree. For had their agreement been 
complete throughout, adversaries might have supposed that it 

was by a human collusion that this was brought about. 
Indeed in essentials which pertain to direction of life, and 
preaching the faith, they do not differ in the least thing. And 

if in their accounts of miracles, one tells it in one way, another 

in another, let not this disturb you; but think that if one had 

told all, the other three would have been a needless superfluity ; 

had they all written different things, there would have been no 


6 PREFACE TO THE GOSPEL 


room for proof of their harmony. And if their account differs 
in times or modes, this does not hinder the truth of the facts 
themselves which they relate, as shall be shewn below. 
Au. AuG. Though each seems to have followed an order of 
Ub! UP narration of his own, yet we do not find any one of them 
writing as if in ignorance of his predecessor, or that he left 
out some things which he did not know, which another was 
to supply ; but as each had inspiration, he gave accordingly 
the cooperation of his own not unnecessary labour. 
Glow.  Gtoss. But the sublimity of the Gospel doctrine consists, 
i sup. ie . , 
first, in its preeminent authority. © Auc. For among all 
the Divine instruments which are contained in Holy Wntt, 
the Gospel has justly the most excellent place; its first 
preachers were the Apostles who had seen the Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ present in the flesh; and some of 
them, that is, Matthew and John, published each a book of 
such things as seemed good to be published concerning Him. 
And that it should not be supposed, that, as far as relates 
to receiving and preaching the Gospel, it makes any dif- 
ference whether it is announced by those who followed Him 
during His sojourn in the flesh, or by those who faithfully 
believed what they heard from others, it is provided by Divine 
Providence through the Holy Spint", that a commission, as 
well of writing as of preaching the Gospel, should be bestowed 
on some out of the number of those that followed the first 
Apostles. Gross. And thus it is clear that the sublimity of 
the authority of the Gospel is derived from Christ; this is proved 
by the words of the Prophet cited above, Go up to the top of the 
mountain. Yor Christ is that Mountain of whom the same 
Is, 2,2, Isaiah speaks, And there shall be in the last days a mountain 
prepared, the house of the Lord in the top of the mountains ; 
that is, upon all the saints who from Christ the Mountain are 
also called mountains; for of His fulness have we all received. 
And rightly is that, Go thou up upon a high mountain, ad- 
dressed to Matthew, who, as had been foretold, in his own 
person saw the deeds of Christ, and heard His doctrine. 
Aug. AvtcG. This should be: considered which to many presents 
a great difficulty, why the Lord Himself wrote nothing, so 


Evan. 1. 
7. that we are obliged to give our belief to others who wrote 


d A clause is inserted here from the original to complete the sense. 


ACCORDING TO 8ST. MATTHEW. 7 


of Him. Gtoss. But we ought not to say that He wrote 
nothing, seeing His members have written those things 
which they learned by the dictation of their Head. For 
whatever He would have us to read concerning His 
actions or His words, that He enjoined upon them to 
write as His own hands. 

Gioss. Secondly, the Evangelic doctrine has sublimity of 
strength ; whence the Apostle says, The Gospel is the power es 1, 
of God to the salvation of all that believe. The Prophet also !° 
shews this in the foregoing words, Lift up thy voice with 
might; which further marks out the manner of evangelic 
teaching, by that raising the voice which gives clearness to the 
doctrine. Avo. For the mode in which Holy Scripture is put Aug. 
together, is one accessible to all, but thoroughly entered into tt 
by few. The things it shews openly, it doth as a familiar friend Ep. 3. 
without guile speaking to the heart of the unlearned, as the 
learned. The things it veils in mysteries, it does not deck 
out in lofty speech, to which a slow and unlearned soul would 
not dare to approach, as a poor man would not to a rich; 
but in lowly phrase it invites all, whom it not only feeds 
with plain truth, but exercises in hidden knowledge; for 
it has matter of both. But that its plain things might 
not be despised, these very same things it again withholds; 
being withheld they become as new; and thus become 
new they are again pleasingly expressed. Thus all tempers 
have here what is meet for them; the bad are corrected, 
the weak are strengthened, the strong are gratified. | GuLoss, 

But because the voice when raised on high is heard further 
off, by the raising of the voice may be denoted the pub- 
lication of the Gospel doctrine; because it is given to be 
preached not to one nation only, but to all nations. The 
Lord speaks, Preach the Gospel to every creature. GREGORY 3 Greg. 
By every creature may be meant the Gentiles. H Ane 

Goss. The Evangelic doctrine has, thirdly, the loftiness of} Homin 
liberty. Ava. Under the Old Testament because of the pro- ie aie 
mise of temporal goods and the threatening of temporal evils, Aug. 
the temporal Jerusalem begets slaves; but under the New (uve. 
Testament, where faith requires love, by which the Law Legis et 
can be fulfilled not more through fear of punishment, than ; eee 


i. 17, 
from love of righteousness, the eternal Jerusalem begets 


8 PREFACE TO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. 


freemen. GLoss. This excellence of the Gospel doctrine the 
_ Prophet describes when he says, Cry aloud, fear not. 

It remains to see to whom, and for what purpose, this Gospel 
llier. was written. JEROME; Matthew published his Gospel in 
eee: Judea, in the Hebrew tongue, for the sake of those of the Jews 
Euseb who believed in Jerusalem. Goss. For having first preached 
eae the Gospel in Judea, being minded to pass to the Gentiles, 
ria. he first put in writing a Gospel in Hebrew, and left it as a 

memorial to those brethren from whom he was departing. 
For as it was necessary that the Gospel should be preached 
for confirmation of the faith, so was it necessary that it 
Pseudo- Should be written to oppose heretics. PsEuDO-CHRYS. 
has Matthew has arranged his narrative in a regular series of 
in Matt.events. First, the birth, secondly, the baptism, thirdly, the 
ptoleg: temptation, fourthly, the teachings, fifthly, the miracles, sixthly, 
the passion, seventhly, the resurrection, and lastly, the ascension 
of Christ; desiring by this not only ‘to set forth the history 
of Christ, but to teach the order of evangelic life. It is nought 
that we are born of our parents, if we be not reborn again of 
God by water and the Spirit. After baptism we must resist 
the Devil. Then being as it were superior to all temptation, 
he is made fit to teach, and if he be a priest let him teach, 
and commend his teaching, as it were, by the miracles of a 
good life; if he be lay, let him teach faith by his works. In 
the end we must take our departure from the stage of this 
world, and there remains that the reward of resurrection and 
glory follow the victory over temptation. 

Goss. From what has been said then, we understand the 
title Gospel, the substance of the Gospel doctrine, the emblems 
of the writers of the Gospel, their number, their time, language, 
discrepancy and arrangement; the sublimity of the Gospel 
doctrine ; to whom this Gospel is addressed, and the method 
of its arrangement. 


COMMENTARY 
ON THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


ST. MATTHEW. 


CHAP. I. 


Ver. 1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, 
the Son of David, the Son of Abraham. 


Jerome; ‘The face of a man’ (in Ezekiel’s vision) signifies Ez. i. 5. 
Matthew, who accordingly opens his Gospel with the human Prolog. 
genealogy of Christ. Rasanus; By this exordium he shews i : 
that it is the birth of Christ according to the flesh that hej, im Matt. 
has undertaken to narrate. PsEvpo-CHrRysosTomM; Matthew Pseudo- 
wrote for the Jews, and in Hebrew’; to them it was unne- ate 
cessary to explain the divinity which they recognized ; but in Matt. 
necessary to unfold the mystery of the Incarnation. John 4°™-i. 
wrote in Greek for the Gentiles who knew nothing of a 
Son of God. They required therefore to be told first, that 
the Son of God was God, then that this Deity was in- 
camate. RaBanus; Though the genealogy occupies only 
a small part of the volume, he yet begins thus, The book of 
the generation. For it is the manner of the Hebrews to name 
their books from that with which they open; as Genesis. 

Gross. The full expression would be This is the book of Gloss. 
the generation; but this is a usual ellipse; e.g. The vision of C™"™™ 
Isuiah, for, ‘ This is the vision.’ Generation, he says in the 
singular number, though there be many here given in succes- 

sion, as it is for the sake of the one generation of Christ that 

the rest are here introduced. CHRyYsSosTOM; Or he therefore Chrys. 
entitles it, The book of the generation, because this is the sum #0™-* 


Matt. 
of the whole dispensation, the root of all its blessings; viz. Hom. ii. 


a It seems to be the general witness written before or after the Greek. 
of antiquity that there was a Hebrew This Hebrew copy was interpolated by 
copy of St. Matthew’s Gospel, whether the Ebionites. 


Hil. 
Quest, 
Nov.et 
Vet. 
Test. q. 
49. 


10 CHAP. I. 


that God became man;; for this once effected, all other things 
followed of course. RaBanus; He says, The book of the 
generation of Jesus Christ, because he knew it was written, 
‘The book of the generation of Adam.’ He begins thus 
then, that he may oppose book to book, the new Adam 
to the old Adam, for by the one were all things restored 
which had been corrupted by the other. JEROME; We read 
in Isaiah, Who shall declare His generation? But it does not 
follow that the Evangelist contradicts the Prophet, or under- 
takes what he declares impossible; for lsaiah is speaking of 
the generation of the Divine nature; St. Matthew of the in- 
carnation of the human. CuHrys. And do not consider this 
genealogy a small thing to hear: for truly it is a marvellous 
thing that God should descend to be born of a woman, and 
to have as His ancestors David and Abraham. MReEmiIGIUs; 
Though any affirm that the prophet (Isaiah) does speak of His 
human generation, we need not answer to his enquiry, Who 
shall declare it? ““ No man;” but,“ Very few;” because Matthew 
and Luke have. Rasanus; By saying, of Jesus Christ, he 
expresses both the kingly and priestly office to be in Him, 
for Jesus, who first bore this name, was after Moses, the first 
who was leader of the children of Israel; and Aaron, anointed 
by the mystical ointment, was the first priest under the 
Law. Hyitary; What God conferred on those, who, by the 
anointing of oil were consecrated as kings or priests, this 
the Holy Spirit conferred on the Man Christ; adding more- 
over a purification. The Holy Spirit cleansed that,which,taken 
of the Virgin Mary, was exalted into the Body of the Saviour, 
and this is that anointing of the Body of the Saviour’s flesh 
whence He was called Christ’. Because the impious craft 
of the Jews denied that Jesus was born of the seed of David, 
he adds, The son of David, the son of Abraham. Curys. 


GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


b This passage is from a work com- 
monly ascribed to Hilary the Deacon. 
The Fathers bear out its doctrine. 
e. g. ‘* Since the flesh is not holy 
in itself, therefore it was sanctified 
even in Christ, the Word which dwelt 
in it, through the Holy Ghost, sanctify- 
ing His own Temple, and changing it 
into the energy of His own Nature, 
For therefore is Christ’s Body under- 
stood to be both holy and hallowing, as 


being made a Temple of the Word 
united to it bodily, as Paul says.” 
Cyril Alex. lib. v. in Joann. p. 992. In 
like manner Gregory of Nazianzus 
speaks of ‘‘ the Father of the True and 
really Anointed (Christ), whom He has 
anointed with the oil of gladness above 
His fellows, anointing the manhood 
with the Godhead, so as to make both 
one.” Orat. 5. fin. 


VER. I. ST. MATTHEW. 11 


But why would it not have been enough to name one of them, 
David alone, or Abraham alone? Because the promise had 
been made to both of Christ to be born of their seed. To 
Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth oe 22, 
be blessed. To David, Of the fruit of thy body will I set}? Be sf, fp 
upon thy seat. He therefore calls Christ the Son of both, 11. 
to shew that in Him was fulfilled the promise to both. Also 
because Christ was to have three dignities ; King, Prophet, 
Priest ; but Abraham was prophet and priest; priest, as God 
says to him in Genesis, Take an heifer; Prophet, as the Lord Gen. 15, 
said to Abimelech concerning him, He ts a prophet, and shall a 
pray for thee. David was king and prophet, but not priest.7. | 
Thus He is expressly called the son of both, that the three- 
fold dignity of His forefathers might be recognized by here- 
ditary right in Christ. AmMBROosE; He therefore names ambros. 
specially two authors of His birth—one who received the " oe 
promise concerning the kindreds of the people, the other who 
obtained the oracle concerning the generation of Chnst; and 
though he is later in order of succession is yet first named, 
inasmuch as it is greater to have received the promise con- 
cerning Christ than concerning the Church, which is through 
Christ; for greater is He who saves than that which is saved. 
JeroME. The order of the names is inverted, but of necessity , 
for had he written Abraham first, and David afterwards, he 
would have to repeat Abraham again to preserve the series 
of the genealogy. Psrupo-Curys. Another reason is that 
royal dignity is above natural, though Abraham was first in 
time, yet David in honour. 

Goss. But since from this title it appears that the whole book 
is concerning Jesus Christ, it is necessary first to know what we 
must think concerning Him; for so shall be better explained 
what this book relates of Him. Avec. Cerinthus then and Ebion Aug. 
made Jesus Christ only man; Paul of Samosata, following» de garth 
them, asserted Christ not to have had an existence from eternity, 
but to have begun to be from His birth of the Virgin Mary ; 
he also thought Him nothing more than man. This heresy Arthas 
was afterwards confirmed by Photinus. Psrupo-ATHAN. The Vigil. 
Apostle John, seeing long before by the Holy Spirit this, oe 
man’s madness, rouses him from his deep sleep of error by os gt 
the preaching of his voice, saying, In the beginning was the 9. 646.) 


12 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


John 1, Word. He therefore, who in the beginning was with God, 
could not in this last time take the beginning of His being 
from man. He says further, (let Photinus hear his words,) 

John17, Father, glorify Me with that glory which I had with Thee 

ae de Gefore the world was. AvuG. The error of Nestorius was, 

ire: that he taught that a man only was born of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, whom the Word of God received not into Unity of person 
and inseparable fellowship; a doctrine which Catholic ears 

Cyr. could notendure. CyYRILOF ALEXANDRIA; Saith the Apostle 

ees of the Only-begotten, Who being in the an of God, thought et 

eae _ no robbery to be equal with God. Who then is this who is 

Pita, in the form of God? or how emptied He Himself, and 

S: humbled Himself to the likeness of man? If the above- 
mentioned heretics dividing Christ into two parts, i. e. the 
Man and the Word, affirm that it was the Man that was 
emptied of glory, they must first shew what form and equality 
with the Father are understood to be, and did exist, which 
might suffer any manner of emptying. But there is no 
creature, in its own proper nature, equal with the Father; how 
then can any creature be said to be emptied? or from what 
eminence to descend to become man? Or how can he be 
understood to have taken upon Him, as though He had not 
at first, the form of a servant? But, they say, the Word being 

“equal with the Father dwelt in Man born of a woman, and 
“this is the emptying. I hear the Son truly saying to the 

John 14, Holy Apostles, /f any man love Me, he will keep My saying; 
"and My Father will love him, and We will come unto him, and 
“make Our abode with him. Hear how He saith that He and 
“the Father will dwell in them that love Him.” Do you then 
suppose that we shall grant that He is there emptied of His 

glory, and has taken upon Him the form of a servant, when 

He makes His abode in the hearts of them that love Him? 

Or the Holy Spirit, does He fulfil an assumption of human 

Isid. flesh, when He dwells in our hearts? IstporRE; But not 

KP psi to mention all arguments, let us bring forward that one to 

166. which all arguments point, that, for one who was God to 
assume a lowly guise both has an obvious use, and is an 
adaptation and in nothing contradicts the course of nature. 
But for one who is man to speak things divine and super- 
natural is the highest presumption ; for though a king may 


VER. l. ST. MATTHEW. 13 


humble himself a common soldier may not take on him the 
state of an emperor. So,if He were God made man, all lowly 
things have place; but if mere man, high things have none. 
Ate. Sabellius they say was a disciple of Noetus, who taught Aug. 
that the same Christ was one and the same Father and Holy “ Heres. 
Spirit. PsEcpo-ATHAN. The audaciousness of this most insane 41. 
error I will curb by the authority of the heavenly testimonies, Fore 
and demonstrate the distinct personality of the proper substance Me 
ofthe Son. I shall not produce things which are liable to be (ibid. 
explained away as agreeable to the assumption of humanP- ®44-) 
nature; but shall offer such passages as all will allow to be 
decisive in proof of His divine nature. In Genesis we find 

God saying, Let Us make man in Our on Image. By this 

plural number shewing, that there was some other person to 

whom He spoke. Had He been one, He would have been said 

to have made Him in His own Image, but there is another; - 

and He is said to have made man in the Image of that other. 
Gross. Others denied the reality of Christ’s human na- Gloss. 
ture. WValentinus said, that Christ sent from the Father, °° °° 
carried about a spiritual or celestial body, and took nothing 

of the Virgin, but passed through her as through a channel, 
taking nothing of her flesh. But we do not therefore believe 

Him to have been born of the Virgin, because by no other 
means He could have truly lived in the flesh, and appeared 
among men; but because it is so written in the Scripture, 
which if we believe not we cannot either be Christians, or be 

saved. But even a body taken of spiritual, or ethereal, or 
clayey substance, had He willed to change into the true and 

very quality of human flesh, who will deny His power to do 

this’ The Manicheans said that the Lord Jesus Christ was 

a phantasm, and could not be born of the womb of a woman. 

But if the body of Christ was a phantasm, He was a deceiver, 

and if a deceiver, then He was not the truth. But Christ is 

the Truth ; therefore His Body was not a phantasm. GLOss- Gloss. 
And as the opening both of this Gospel, and of that according "°° °° 
to Luke, manifestly proves Christ’s birth of a woman, and 

hence His real humanity, they reject the beginning of both guy, 
these Gospels. Avc. Faustus affirms, that “ the Gospel © coat 


“both begins, and begins to be so called, from the preaching Sti aust. 


14 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


“Christ‘, in which He no where affirms Himself to have been 
“born of men. Nay, so far is this genealogy from being part 
«of the Gospel, that the writer does not venture so to entitle it; 
“beginning, ‘The book of the generation,’ not ‘ The book of the 
“Gospel.’ Mark again, who cared not to write of the genera- 
“tion, but only of the preaching of the Son of God, which is 
“properly The Gospel, begins thus accordingly, The Gospel of 
“Jesus Christ the Son of God. Thus then, all that we read in 
Matt. 4, Matthew before the words, Jesus began to preach the Gospel 
11. “of the kingdom, is a part of the genealogy, not of the Gospel. 
“I therefore betook myself to Mark and John, with whose 
“prefaces I had good reason to be satisfied, as they introduce 
“neither David, nor Mary, nor Joseph.” ‘To which Augustine 
2 Tim. replies, What will he say then to the Apostle’s words, Remem- 
2,8. ber the resurrection of Jesus Christ of the seed of David 
according to my Gospel. But the Gospel of the Apostle Paul 
was likewise that of the other Apostles, and of all the faithful, 
as he says, Whether I, or they, thus have we preached the 
Gospel. 
Aug. Aug. The Arians will not have the Father, Son, and Holy 
one Spirit, to be of one and the same substance, nature, and 
existence ; but that the Son is a creature of the Father, and the 
Holy Spirit a creature of a creature, i.e. created by the Son; 
further, they think that Christ took the flesh without a soul. 
Id.de But ‘John declares the Son to be not only God, but even of 
Trin..6. the same substance as the Father; for when he had said, The 
Word was God, he added, all things were made by Him; 
whence it is clear that He was not made by Whom all things 
were made ; and if not made, then not created; and therefore 
of one substance with the Father, for all that is not of one 
ld.con'. substance with the Father is creature.*+I know not what 
Fel. 13: benefit the person of the Mediator has conferred upon us, if 
He redeemed not our better part, but took upon Him our flesh 
only, which without the soul cannot have consciousness of the 
benefit. But if Christ came to save that which had perished, 


« The Ebionites, as well asthe Mani- St. Luke. Epiph. Her. xlii. 11. But 
chees, rejected the beginning of St. what exact portion they rejected is 
Matthew, vid. Epiphan. Her. xxx. 13. doubtful. 

And the Marcionites the beginning of 


= 


VER. I. ST. MATTHEW. 15 


the whole man had perished, and therefore needs a Saviour ; 
Christ then in coming saves the whole man, taking on Him 

both soul and body. How too do they answer innumerable td. Lib. 
objections from the Gospel Scriptures, in which the Lord oe 
speaks so many things manifestly contrary to them? as is that, q. 80. 
My soul ts sorrowful even unto death, and, I have power to lay Matt.26, 
down My life; and many more things of the like kind. Should *® John 10, 
they say that He spoke thus in parables, we have at hand 18. 
proofs from the Evangelists themselves, who in relating His 
actions, bear witness as to the reality of His body, so of His 

soul, by mention of passions which cannot be without a soul; 

as when they say, Jesus wondered, was angry, and others of 

like kind.’ The Apollinarians also as the Arians affirmed that - nds 
Christ had taken the human flesh without the soul. But», 55, 
overthrown on this point by the weight of Scripture proof, 

they then said that that part which is the rational soul of man 

was wanting to the soul of Christ, and that its place was filled 

by the Word itself. But if it be so, then we must believe 

that the Word of God took on Him the nature of some brute 

with a human shape and appearance. But even concerning 

the nature of Christ’s body, there are some who have so far 
swerved from the right faith, as to say, that the flesh and the 

Word were of one and the same substance, most perversely 
insisting on that expression, The Word was made flesh; which 

they interpret that some portion of the Word was changed into 

flesh, not that He took to Him flesh,of the flesh of the Virgin‘. 

Cyrit. We account those persons ‘mad who have suspected Cyr. 
that so much as the shadow of change could take place in the 7" Ep: rae 
nature of the Divine Word; it abides what it ever was, neither Aaseeks 
is nor can be changed. LEO; We do not speak of Christ Ep. oe 
as man in such a sort as to allow that any thing was wanting Leo. 

to Him," which it is certain pertains to human nature, whether ae 3 
soul, or rational mind, or > flesh, and flesh such as was taken of Const 
the Woman, not gained by a change or conversion of the Word ; os yi 
into flesh. These three several errors, that thrice false heresy Palest. 
of the Apollinarists has brought forward. Eutyches also 

chose out this third dogma of Apollinaris, which denying 


4 Some of the Apollinarians thus held. doctrine was afterwards ascribed to the 
vid. Nyssen. vol. il. p.694.A, Theodor. Eutychians, vid. Vigil. Taps. in Eutych. 
Eranist. p. 174. ed, Schulz, The same iv. Theod. Her. iv. 13, 


Id. Ep. 
35. ad 
Julian. 


16 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO | CHAP. I. 


the verity of the human body and soul, maintained that our 
Lord Jesus Christ was wholly and entirely of one nature, as 
though the Divine Word had changed itself into flesh and 
soul, and as though the conception, birth, growth, and such 
like, had been undergone by that Divine Essence, which was 
incapable of any such changes with the very and true flesh ; 
for such as is the nature of the Only-begotten, such is the 
nature of the Father, and such is the nature of the Holy 
Ghost, both impassible and eternal. But if to avoid being 
driven to the conclusion that the Godhead could feel suf- 
fering and death, he departs from the corruption of Apollinaris, 
and should still dare to affirm the nature of the incarnate 
Word, that is of the Word and the flesh, to be the same, he 
clearly falls into the insane notions of Manicheus and Marcion, 
and believes that the Lord Jesus Christ did all His actions 
with a false appearance, that His body was not a human 
body, but a phantasm, which imposed on the eyes of the 
beholders. But what Eutyches ventured to pronounce as an 
episcopal decision, that in Christ before His incarnation were 
two natures, but after His incarnation only one, it behoved 
that he should have been urgently pressed to give the reason 
of this his belief. I suppose that in using such language he 
supposed the soul which the Saviour took, to have had its 
abode in heaven before it was born of the Virgin Mary*. 
This Catholic hearts and ears endure not, for that the Lord 
when He came down from heaven shewed nothing of the 
condition of human nature, nor did He take on Him any soul 
that had existed before, nor any flesh that was not taken of 
the flesh of His mother. Thus what was justly condemned 
in Origen‘, must needs be rebuked in Eutyches, to wit, that 
our souls before they were placed in our bodies had actions 
not only wonderful but various. Remic. These heresies 
therefore the Apostles overthrow in the opening of their 
Gospels, as Matthew in relating how He derived His descent 
from the kings of the Jews proves Him to have been truly 
man and to have had true flesh. Likewise Luke, when he 
¢ This opinion, which involves Nesto- Leont. de Sectis 7 init. 
rianism, the opposite error to Eutychi- f Vid. Origen. in Joan. t. i. n. 37. 
anism or Monophysitism, 18 imputed to t. xx. n. 17. Periarch. ii. 6. n. 4. in 


Eutyches by Flavian, ap. Leon. Ep. xxii. Cels. i. 32, 33. 
3. Ephrem, Antioch. ap Phot. p. 805. 


VER. 2. ST. MATTHEW. 17 


describes the priestly stock and person; Mark when he says, 
The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God; 
and John when he says, Jn the beginning was the Word; 
both shew Him to have been before all ages God, with God 
the Father. 


2. Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; 
and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren. 


Ave. Matthew, by beginning with Christ’s genealogy, Aug. 
shews that he has undertaken to relate Christ’s birth according p°C°"™ 
to the flesh. But Luke, as rather describing Him as a Priest}. 
for the atonement of sin, gives Christ’s genealogy not in the 
beginning of his Gospel, but at His baptism, when John bare 
that testimony, Zo, He that taketh away the sins of the world. Jobn }, 
In the genealogy of Matthew is figured to us the taking on?” 
Him of our sins by the Lord Christ; in the genealogy of 
Luke, the taking away of our sins by the same; hence Matthew 
gives them in a descending, Luke in an ascending, series. 

But Matthew, describing Christ’s human generation in de~ 
scending order, begins his enumeration with Abraham. 
AmBRosE; For Abraham was the first who deserved the Ambros. 
witness of faith; He believed God, and it was accounted to ape 
him for righteousness. It behoved therefore that he should tb. i 
be set forth as the first in the line of descent, who was the™ ” a 
first to deserve the promise of the restoration of the Church, 
In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And it 
is again brought to a period in David, for that Jesus should 
be called his Son; hence to him is preserved the privilege, 
that from him should come the beginning of the Lord’s 
genealogy. CurysosT. Matthew then, desiring to preserve Chrys. 
in memory the lineage of the Lord’s humanity through the “°" me 
succession of His parents, begins with Abraham, saying, 
Abraham begat Isaac. Why does he not mention Ismael, 
his first-born? And again, Isaac begat Jacob; why does he 
not speak of Esau his first-born? Because through them he 
could not have come down to David. Gutoss. Yet he names Gloss. 
all the brethren of Judah with him in the lineage. Ismael 
and Esau had not remained in the worship of the true God; 
but the brethren of Judah were reckoned in God’s people. 

VOL. I. c 


fear . 


Par ee 


18 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. f. 


Chrys. Curysost. Or, he names all the twelve Patriarchs that he may 
Hom. }ower that pride which is drawn from a line of noble ancestry. 


‘, 
Waal” y 


For many of these were born of maidservants, and yet were 
Patriarchs and heads of tribes. Gtoss. But Judah is the 
only one mentioned by name, and that because the Lord was 
descended from him only. But in each of the Patriarchs we 
must note not their history only, but the allegorical and moral 
meaning to be drawn from them; allegory, in seeing whom 
each of the Fathers foreshewed; moral instruction in that 
through each one of the Fathers some virtue may be edified 
in us either through the signification of his name, or through 
his example*. Abraham is in many respects a figure of Christ, 
and chiefly in his naine, which is interpreted the Father of 
many nations, and Christ is Father of many believers. 
Abraham moreover went out from his own kindred, and abode 
in a strange land; in like manner Chiist, leaving the Jewish 


"4. nation, went by His preachers throughout the Gentiles. 
Ac fo +-* 4. PsEUDO-CHRYs. Isaac is interpreted ‘ laughter,’ but the 


laughter of the saints is not the foolish convulsion of the 
lips, but the rational joy of the heart, which was the 
mystery of Christ. For as he was granted to his parents 
in their extreme age to their great joy, that it might be 
known that he was not the child of nature, but of grace, 
thus Christ also in this last time came of a Jewish mother 
to be the joy of the whole earth; the one of a virgin, the 
other of a woman past the age, both contrary to the expecta- 
tion of nature. Remic. Jacob is interpreted ‘ supplanter, 


Ps.18, and itis said of Christ, Thou hast cast down beneath Me them 


43. 


that rose up against Me. Pseupo-Curys. Our Jacob in 
like manner begot the twelve Apostles in the Spirit, not in the 
flesh ; in word, notin blood. Judah is interpreted ‘ confessor,’ 
for he was a type of Christ who was to be the confessor of 
His Father, as He spake, £ confess to Thee, Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth. Gioss. Morally; Abraham signifies 
to us the virtue of faith in Christ, as an example himself, as it 


g Origen considered that there were iv.p.168. By the moral sense is meant, 
three senses of Scripture, the literal as the name implies, a practical appli- 
or historical, the moral, and the mysti- cation of the text; by mystical, one 
eal or spiritual, corresponding to the which interprets it of the invisible and 
three parts of man, body, soul, and the spiritual world. 
spirit. Hom. in Levit. v. 5. de Princio. 


VER. 3—6. ST. MATTHEW. 19 


is said of him, Abraham believed God,and it was accounted unto 
Him for righteousness. Usaac may represent hope ; for Jsaac 
is interpreted ‘ laughter, as he was the joy of his parents ; 
and hope is our joy, making us to hope for eternal blessings 
and to joy inthem. Abraham begat Isaac, and faith begets 
hope. Jacob signifies ‘ love,’ for love embraces two lives’; 
active in the love of our neighbour, contemplative in the love 
of God; the active is signified by Leah, the contemplative by 
Rachel. For Leah is interpreted ‘ labouring", for she is active 
in labour; Rachel' ‘ having scen the beginning,’ because by 
the contemplative, the beginning, that is God, is seen. Jacob 
is born of two parents, as love is born of faith and hope ; for 
what we believe, we both hope for and love. 


3—6. And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; 
and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram ; 
and Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat 
Naasson; and Naasson begat Salmon; and Salmon 
begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; 
and Obed begat Jesse; and Jesse begat David the 
king. 

Goss. Passing over the other sons of Jacob, the Evangelist 
follows the family of Judah, saying, But Judah begat Phares 
and Zara of Thamar. Aug. Neither was Judah himself a Aug. 
first-born, nor of these two sons was either his first-born ; he Dae 
had already had three before them. So that he keeps in that 15. 
line of descent, by which he shall arrive at David, and from 
him whither he purposed. JEROME; It should be noted, 
that none of the holy women are taken into the Saviour’s 
genealogy, but rather such as Scripture has condemned, that 
He who came for sinners being born of sinners might so put 
away the sins of all; thus Ruth the Moabitess follows among 
the rest. AmBROSE; But Luke has avoided the mention of Ambros. 
these, that he might set forth the series of the priestly race 4 a 
immaculate. But the plan of St. Matthew did not exclude the 


b Leah fall of labour, Jerom. de 38. &c.) Jerom. ibid. who also gives the 
nomin. Hebr. from 7x5, to weary one’s interpretation in the text, from 4X4 


° and 55-7 momn beginning.) 
i Rachel, an ewe, (as Gen. xxxi, ee 


c2 


20 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


righteousness of natural reason; for when he wrote in his 
Gospel, that He who should take on Him the sins of all, was 
born in the flesh, was subject to wrongs and pain, he did not 
think it any detraction from His holiness that He did not refuse 
the further humiliation of a sinful parentage. Nor, again, would 
it shame the Church to be gathered from among sinners, when 
the Lord Himself was born of sinners; and, lastly, that the be- 
nefits of redemption might have their beginning with His own 
forefathers: and that none might imagine that a stain in their 
blood was any hindrance to virtue, nor again any pride them- 
selves insolently on nobility of birth. CHrysost. Besides 
this, it shews that all are equally liable to sin; for here is 
Thamar accusing Judah of incest, and David begat Solomon 
with a woman with whom he had committed adultery. But 
if the Law was not fulfilled by these great ones, neither could 
it be by their less great posterity, and so all have sinned, and 


Ambros. the presence of Christ is become necessary. AMBROSE; 


ubi sup. 


Eph. 2 
i.” 


Observe that Matthew does not name both without a meaning; 
for though the object of bis writing only required the mention 
of Phares, yet in the twins a mystery is signified; namely, 
the double life of the nations, one by the Law, the other by 
Faith. |PsEupo-Curys. By Zarah is denoted the people 
of the Jews, which first appeared in the light of faith, coming 
out of the dark womb of the world, and was therefore marked 
with the scarlet thread of the circumciser, for all supposed that 
they were to be God’s people; but the Law was set before 
their face as it had been a wall or hedge. Thus the Jews 
were hindered by the Law, but in the times of Christ’s coming 
the hedge of the Law was broken down that was between Jews 
and Gentiles, as the Apostle speaks, Breaking down the middle 
wall of partition; and thus it fell out that the Gentiles, who were 
signified by Phares, as soon as the Law was broken through by 
Christ’s commandments, first entered into the faith, and after fol- 
lowed the Jews. Gtoss. Judah begat Phares and Zarah before 
he went into Egypt, whither they both accompanied their father. 
In Egypt, Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram; 
Aram begat Aminadab; Aminadab begat Naasson; and 
then Moses led them out of Egypt. Naasson was head of the 
tribe of Judah under Moses in the desert, where he begat 
Salmon ; and this Salmon it was who, as prince of the tribe 


VER. 3—6. ST. MATTHEW. 2) 


of Judah, entered the land of promise with Joshua. PsEupo- 
Currys. But as we believe that the names of these Fathers 
were given for some special reason under the providence of 
God, it follows, but Naasson begat Salmon. This Salmon 
after his father’s death entered the promised land with Joshua 

as prince of the tribe of Judah. He took a wife of the name of 
Rahab. This Rahab is said to have been that Rahab the harlot 
of Jericho who entertained the spies of the children of Israel, 
and hid them safely. For Salmon being noble among the 
children of Israel, inasmuch as he was of the tribe of Judah, 
and son of the prince thereof, beheld Rahab so ennobled 
through her great faith, that she was worthy whom he should 
take to wife. Salmon is interpreted ‘ receive a vessel",’ perhaps 

as if invited in God’s providence by bis very name to receive 
Rahab a vessel of election. GtLoss. This Salmon in the 
promised land begat Booz of this Rahab. Booz begat Obeth 

of Ruth. Pseupo-Curys. How Booz took to wife a 
Moabitess whose name was Ruth, I thought it needless to 
tell, seeing the Scripture concerning them is open to all, 

We need but say thus much, that Ruth married Booz for the 
reward of her faith, for that she had cast off the gods of her 
forefathers, and had chosen the living God. And Booz received 

her to wife for reward of his faith, that from such sanctified wed- 
lock might be descended a kingly race. AMBROSE; But how Ambros, 
did Ruth who was an alien marry a man that was a Jew? and %!*P- 
wherefore in Christ’s genealogy did His Evangelist so much as 
mention a union, which in the eye of the law was bastard? 
Thus the Saviour’s birth of a parentage not admitted by the 
law appears to us monstrous, until we attend to that declara- 
tion of the Apostle, The Law was not given for the righteous, \ Tim, 
but for the unrighteous. For this woman who was an alien, ' % 
a Moabitess, a nation with whom the Mosaic Law forbad all 
intermarriage, and shut them totally out of the Church, how 
did she enter into the Church, unless that she were holy and 
unstained in her life above the Law? Therefore she was 
exempt from this restriction of the Law, and deserved to be 
numbered in the Lord’s lineage, chosen from the kindred of 
her mind, not of her body. To us she is a great example, for 


* nodw. Probably as if from yxy Ch. a vessel; perhaps yery 5 yyys. 


22 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


that in her was prefigured the entrance into the Lord’s Church 
of all of us who are gathered out of the Gentiles. JEROME; 
Is. 16,1. Ruth the Moabitess fulfils the prophecy of Isaiah, Send forth, 
O Lord, the Lamb that shall rule over the earth, out of the 

rock of the desert to the mount of the daughter of Sion. 
Goss. Jesse, the father of David, has two names, being 
Is.11,!,more frequently called Isai. But the Prophet says, There 
shall come a rod from the stem of Jesse; therefore to shew 
that this prophecy was fulfilled in Mary and Christ, the 
Evangelist puts Jesse. Remic. It is asked, why this 
epithet King is thus given by the holy Evangelist to 
David alone? Because he was the first king in the tribe 
of Judah. Christ Himself is Phares ‘ the divider,’ as it 
Mat.25,is written, Zhou shalt divide the sheep from the goats; He 
vt. 6, is Zaram', ‘ the east,’ Lo the man, the east is His name; He is 
12. Esrom”, ‘an arrow,’ He hath set me as a polished shaft. 
Is.49,2. Rapan. Or following another interpretation, according to the 
abundance of grace, and the width of love. He is "Aram the 
Is. 42,1. chosen, according to that, Behold my Servant whom I have 
chosen. He is Aminadab, that is ‘ willing’, in that He says, 
1s.54,6. F will freely sacrifice to Thee. Also He is Naasson?, i. e. 
‘augury, as [le knows the past, the present, and the future ; 
John 3, or, ‘like a serpent,’ according to that, Moses lifted up the 
: serpent in the wilderness. He is SSalmon, i.e. ‘ that feeleth,” 
Luke 8, as He said, I feel that power is gone forth out of me. 
Gross; Christ Himself espouses Rahab, i. e. the Gentile 
Church; for Rahab ‘is interpreted either ‘ hunger,’ or ‘ breadth,’ 
or ‘ might;’ for the Church of the Gentiles hungers and thirsts 
after righteousncss, and converts philosophers and kings by 
the might of her doctrine. Ruth is interpreted either ‘ seeing” 
or ‘ hastening*,’ and denotes the Church which in purity of 
heart sees God, and hastens to the prize of the heavenly call. 
Remic. Christ is also Booz‘, because He is strength, for, 


1 fT; in Zech. 6, 12. it is MOY. 
™ JIOXM, as if from YN, and so 


Jerome, 


® 5% to be lofty, vid. infr. p. 23. 

° 3°19 ‘My My people is willing,—Je- 
rome ; comp. nat WY, Ps. 110, 3. 

P wy, from wry3 to augur from 
serpents, and so Jerome. 


4 And so Jerome. 

* arm, to be wide or broad. [aan 
might 3y%y hunger}. 

* And so Jerome, from yyy, and 
perhaps yn for the second. 

‘ And so Jerome; perhaps ty3 — 
ar activity; here, as if iy “ with 
might.’ 


VER. 3—6. ST. MATTHEW. 23 


When Iam lifted up, I will draw all men unto Me. He is John12, 
Obeth, ‘a servant’, for, the Son of man came not to be a 20, 
ministered unto, but to minister. He is Jesse, or ‘ burnt’,’ 28. 

for, [ am come to send fire on earth. He is David", ‘ mighty ; yye2, 
in arm,’ for, the Lord is great and powerful ; ‘ desirable,’ 49. 


Ps.24,8. 


for, He shall come, the Desire of all nations ; ‘ beautiful to y,,. 9, 
behold,’ according to that, Beautiful in form before the sons of t se 
men. GuLoss. Let us now see what virtues they be which ~ ’— 
these fathers edify in us; for faith, hope, and charity are the 
foundation of all virtues; those that follow are like additions 

over and above them. Judah is interpreted ‘ confession,’ of 
which there are two kinds, confession of faith, and of sin. If 

then, after we be endowed with the three forementioned 
virtues, we sin, confession not of faith only but of sin is 
needful for us. Phares is interpreted ‘ division,’ Zamar 

‘the east,’ and Thamar ‘ bitterness*.’ Thus confession begets 
separation from vice, the rise of virtue, and the bitterness 

of repentance. After Phares follows Esron, ‘ an arrow,’ for 

when one is separated from vice and secular pursuits, he 
should become a dart wherewith to slay by preaching the vices 

of others. Aram is interpreted ‘elect’ or ‘lofty*, for as soon 

as one is detached from this world, and profiteth for another, 

he must needs be held to be elect of God, famous amongst 

men, high in virtue. Naasson is ‘ augury,’ but this augury is . 

of heaven, not of earth. It is that of which Joseph boasted 

when he said, Ye have taken away the cup of my Lord, where- Gen. 44, 
with He is wont to divine. The cup is the divine Scripture * 
wherein is the draught of wisdom; by this the wise man 
divines, since in it he sees things future, that is, heavenly 
things. Nextis Salgmon’, ‘ that perceiveth,’ for he who studies ( 
divine Scripture becomes perceiving, that is, he discerns by 
the taste of reason, good from bad, sweet from bitter. Next 

is Booz, that is ‘ brave,’ for who is well taught in Scripture 
becomes brave to endure all adversity. Pstupo-CHrys. 

This brave one is the son of Rahab, that is, of the Church ; 

for Rahab signifies ‘ breadth’ or ‘ spread out,’ for because the 


* 33)\y Obed, and so Jerome. Jer. 31, 15. Hoa. 12, 16. 
* As if from WN. 2 Lofty from O97. 
Y And so Jerome. : bow peace, and so Jerome. 


* OMIM bitternesses, from WO 


| 


\ 


Aug. 
De 


Cons. 


24 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


Church of the Gentiles was called from all quarters of the 
earth, it is called ‘ breadth.’ Gtoss. Then follows Obeth, 
i. ec. ‘ servitude,’ for which none is fit but he who is strong; 
and this servitude is begotten of Ruth, that is ‘haste,’ for 
it behoves a slave to be quick, not slow. Psrupo-CHrys. 
They who look to wealth and not temper, to beauty and not 
faith, and require in a wife such endowments as are required 
in harlots, will not beget sons obedient to their parents or 
to God, but rebellious to both; that their children may be 
punishment of their ungodly wedlock. Obeth begat Jesse, 
that is ‘refreshment,’ for whoever is subject to God and his 
parents, begets such children as prove his ‘ refreshment.’ 
Goss. Or Jesse may be interpreted ‘ incense*.’ For it 
we serve God in love and fear, there will be a devotion in 
the heart, which in the heat and desire of the heart offers the 
sweetest incense to God. But when one is become a fit 
servant, and a sacrifice of incense to God, it follows that he 
becomes David, (i.e. ‘ of a strong hand,’) who fought mightily 
against his enemies, and made the Idumeans tributary. In 
like manner ought he to subdue carnal men to God by 
teaching and example. 


6—8. David the king begat Solomon of her that had 
been the wife of Urias; and Solomon begat Roboam ; 
and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asa; and 
Asa begat Josaphat. 


The Evangelist has now finished the first fourteen genera- 
tions, and is come to the second, which consists of royal 
personages, and therefore beginning with David, who was the 
first king in the tribe of Judah, he calls him David the king. 
Avec. Since in Matthew’s genealogy is shewed forth the 
taking on Him by Christ of our sins, therefore he descends 


Ev.ii.4. from David to Solomon, in whose mother David had sinned. 


Aug. 
Lib. 


Retract. 
ii, 16. 


Luke ascends to David through Nathan, for through Nathan 
the prophet God punished David’s sin; because Luke's 
genealogy is to shew the putting away of our sins. Ip. That 


© See bel. p. 29. n. i, 


VER. 8—1]1. ST. MATTHEW. 25 


is it, must be said, through a prophet of the same name, for 
it was not Nathan the son of David who reproved him, but a 
prophet of the same name. Remic. Let us enquire why 
Matthew does not mention Bathsheba by name as be does 
the other women. Because the others, though deserving of 
much blame, were yet commendable for many virtues. But 
Bathsheba was not only consenting in the adultery, but in 
the murder of her husband, hence her name is not introduced 
in the Lord’s genealogy. GtLoss. Besides, he does not name 
Bathsheba, that, by naming Unias, he may recal to memory 
that great wickedness which she was guilty of towards him. 
AMBROSE. But the holy David is the more excellent in this, Ambros. 
that he confessed himself to be but man, and neglected not to Y!P- 
wash out with the tears of repentance the sin of which he 
had been guilty, in so taking away Unas’ wife. Herein 
shewing us that none ought to trust in his own strength, for 
we have a mighty adversary whom we cannot overcome 
without God’s aid. And you will commonly observe very 
heavy sins befalling to the share of illustrious men, that they 
may not from their other excellent virtues be thought 
more than men, but that you may see that as men they yield 
to temptation. Pszupo-Curys. Solomon is interpreted 
‘ peace-maker,’ because having subdued all the nations 
round about, and made them tributary, he had a peaceful 
reign. Roboam is interpreted ‘ by a multitude of people,’ 
for multitude is the mother of sedition; for where many are 
joined in a crime, that is commonly unpunishable. But a 
limit in numbers is the mistress of good order. 


8—11. And Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat 
Ozias; and Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham 
begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias; and Eze- 
kias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; 
and Amon begat Josias; and Josias begat Jechonias 
and his brethren, about the time they were carried 
away to Babylon. 


JEROME; In the fourth book of Kings we read, that Ocho- 
zias was the son of Joram. On his death, Josabeth, sister of 


—_——— 


Exod. 
20, 8. 


Aug. 
Hilar. 
Amast. 
V.et N. 
Test. 

q- 85. 


26 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


Ochozias and daughter of Joram, took Joash, her brother's 
son, and preserved him from the slaughter of the royal seed 
by Athalias. To Joash succeeded his son Amasias; after 
him his son Azarias, who is called Ozias; after him his son 
Joatham. Thus you see according to historical truth there 
were three intervening kings, who are omitted by the 
Evangelist. Joram, moreover, begot not Ozias, but Ocho- 
zias, and the rest as we have related. But because it was 
the purpose of the Evangelist to make each of the three 
periods consist of fourteen generations, and because Joram 
had connected himself with Jezebel’s most impious race, 
therefore his posterity to the third generation is omitted in 
tracing the lineage of the holy birth. Hutary. Thus the 
stain of the Gentile alliance being purged, the royal race is 
again taken up in the fourth following generation. Psrupo- 
Currys. What the Holy Spirit testified through the Prophet, 
saying, that He would cut off every male from the house 
of Ahab, and Jezebel, that Jehu the son of Nausi fulfilled, 
and received the promise that his children to the fourth 
generation should sit on the throne of Israel. As great 
a blessing then as was given upon the house of Ahab, so 
great a curse was given on the house of Joram, because of the 
wicked daughter of Ahab and Jezebel, that his sons to the fuurth 
generation should be cut out of the number of the Kings. 
Thus his sin descended on his posterity as it had been 
written, L wll visit the sins of the fathers upon the children 
unto the third and fourth generation. ‘Thus see how 
dangerous it is to marry with the seed of the ungodly. 
Auc. Or, Ochozias, Joash, and Amasias, were excluded 
from the number, because their wickedness was continuous 
and without interval. For Solomon was suffered to hold the 
kingdom for his father’s deserts, Roboam for his son’s. But 
these three doing evil successively were excluded. This then 
is an example how a race is cut off when wickedness is shewn 


therein in perpetual succession. And Ozias begat Joatham ; 


Js. 38, 1. 


and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias. 
GLoss; This Ezekias was he to whom, when he had no 
children, it was said, Set thy house in order, for thou shalt 
die. He wept, not from desire of longer life, for he knew 
that Solomon had thereby pleased God, that he had not 


VER. 10. ST. MATTHEW. 27 


asked length of days; but he wept, for he feared that God's ! 4.0... | 
promise should not be fulfilled, when himself, being in the /7, 77,/- |. 
line of David of whom Christ should come, was without = ~ec.¢.- 
children. And Evzekias begat Manasses; and Manasses 
begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias. Pseupo-Curys. But 

the order in the Book of Kings is different, thus namely ; 2 Kings 
Josias begot Eliakim, afterwards called Joakim; Joakim a 
begot Jechonias. But Joakim is not reckoned among the 
Kings in the genealogy, because God’s people had not 

set him on the throne, but Pharaoh by his might. For 

if it were just that only for their intermixture with the 

race of Ahab, three kings should be shut out of the number 

in the genealogy, was it not just that Joakim should be 
likewise shut out, whom Pharaoh had set ap as king by 
hostile force? And thus Jechonias, who is the son of Joakim, 

and the grandson of Josiah, is reckoned among the kings as 

the son of Josiah, in place of his father who is omitted. 
JEROME. Otherwise, we may consider the first Jeconias to 

be the same as Joakim, and the second to be the son not the 
father, the one being spelt with k and m, the second by ch 

and n. This distinction has been confounded both by Greeks 

and Latins, by the fault of writers and the lapse of time. 
AMBROSE. ‘That there were two kings of the name of Ambros. 
Joakim, is clear from the Book of Kings. And Joakim slept = oe 
with his fathers, and Joachin his son reigned in his stead.2 Kinge 
This son is the same whom Jeremiah calls Jeconias. And 2*’* 
rightly did St. Matthew purpose to differ from the Prophet, 
because he sought to shew therein the great abundance of the 
Lord’s mercies. For the Lord did not seek among men 
nobility of race, but suitably chose to be born of captives and 

of sinners, as He came to preach remission of sin to the 
captives. The Evangelist therefore did not conceal either of 
these ; but rather shewed them both, inasmuch as both were 
called Jeconias. Remic. But it may be asked, why the 
Evangelist says they were born in the carrying away, when 

they were born before the carrying away. He says this because 

they were born for this purpose, that they should be led 
captive, from the dominion of the whole nation, for their own 

and others’ sins. And because God foreknew that they were 


28 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO _ CHAP. I. 


to be carried away captive, therefore he says, they were born 
in the carrying away to Babylon. But of those whom the 
holy Evangelist places together in the Lord’s genealogy, it 
should be known, that they were alike in good or ill fame. 
Judas and his brethren were natable for good, in like manner 
Phares and Zara, Jechonias and his brethren, were notable 
for evil. GLoss. Mystically, David is Christ, who overcame 
Golias, that is, the Devil. Urias, i.e. God is my light, is 
. 14, the Devil who says, I will be like the Highest. To Him the 
"Church was married, when Christ on the Throne of the 
majesty of His Father loved her, and having made her 
beautiful, united her to Himself in wedlock. Or Urias is the 
Jewish nation who through the Law boasted of their light. 
From them Christ took away the Law, having taught it 
to speak of Himself. Bersabee is ‘ the well of satiety,’ that 
is, the abundance of spiritual Brace Remiac. Bersabee is 
interpreted ‘ the seventh well,’ or ‘ the well of the oath‘;’ by 
which is signified the grant of baptism, in which is given the 
gift of the sevenfold Spirit, and the oath against the Devil is 
made. Christ is also Solomon, i. e. the peaceful, accord- 
7 ian 2,ing to that of the Apostle, He is our peace. Roboam! 
° is, the breadth of the people,’ according to that, Many shall 
come from the East and from the West. Rasan. Or; ‘ the 
might of the people,’ because he quickly converts the people 

to the faith. Rermic. He is also Abias, that is, ‘ the Lord 
Mat.23, Father, according to that, One is your Father who is in 
John 3, heaven. And again, Ye call me Master and Lord. He is also 
pic ;, Asa*, that is, ‘ lifting up,’ according to that, Who taketh away 
29. the sins of the world. He is also Josaphat, that is, ‘ judging,’ 
oe ms for, The Father hath committed all judgment unto the Son. 
Solin 3, He is also Joram, that is, ‘ lofty,’ according to that, No man 
hath ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from 
heaven. He is also Ozias, that is, ‘ the Lord’s strength,’ for 

ry 118, The Lord is my strength and my praise. He is also Jotham’, 


Rom. that is, ‘ completed,’ or ‘ perfected,’ for Christ is the end of 
10, 4. 


~—o 


~ 


® yaw “IS the well of the oath, ishness of the people, Ecclus. xlvii. 23. 
the origin of the name is given, Gen. ¢ So Jerome; as if from NDI=NW); 
xxi. 28—31. ‘‘ satiety,” as if from yaw. but NDN means a physician. 

« So Jerome, from 3fy; or the fool- * And so Jerome, from 5797. 


VER. 10. ST. MATTHEW. ‘ 29 


the Taw. He 1s also Ahaz‘, that is, ‘ turning,’ according to 

that, Be ye turned to Me. Rasan. Or, ‘embracing,’ because Zech. 1, 
None knoweth the Father but the Son. Remic. He is also Set 
Ezekias, that is, ‘ the strong Lord,’ or, ‘ the Lord shall 11, 27. 
comfort ;’ according to that, Be of good cheer, I have overcome Jobn16, 
the world. He is also Manasses, that is, ‘ forgetful,’ or, °* 

‘ forgotten,’ according to that, Z will not remember your Exek. 
sins any more. He is also Adton'*, that is, ‘ faithful,’ according “* ped 
to that, Zhe Lord is faithful in all His words. He is also Ps. 145, 
Josias, that is, ‘ the incense of the Lord',’ as, And being in an Lake, 
agony, He prayed more earnestly. RRaBaN. And that incense 44- 
signifies prayer, the Psalmist witnesses, saying, Let my Ps. 141, 
prayer come up as incense before Thee. Or, ‘ The salvation” 

of the Lord,’ according to that, My salvation is for ever. Is. 55. 
Remic. He is Jechonias‘, that is, ‘ preparing,’ or ‘ the Lord’s 
preparation,’ according to that, If J shall depart, I will also John 14, 
prepare a place for you. GLoss. Moray After David* 
follows Solomon, which is interpreted, ‘ peaceful.’ For one 

then becomes peaceful, when unlawful motions being composed, 

and being as it were already set in the everlasting rest, he 
serves God, and turns others to Him. Then follows Roboam, 

that is ‘ the breadth of the people.’ For when there is no 
longer any thing to overcome within himself, it behoves a man 

to look abroad to others, and to draw with him the people of 

God to heavenly things. Next is Abias, that is, ‘ the Lord 
Father,’ for these things premised, He may proclaim Himself 

the Son of God, and then He will be Asa, that is, ‘ raising up,’ 

and will ascend to His Father from virtue to virtue: and He 

will become Josaphat, that is, ‘ judging,’ for He will judge 
others, and will be judged of none. Thus he becomes Joram, 

that is, ‘ lofty,’ as it were dwelling on high; and is made 
Oziah, that is, ‘ the strong One of the Lord,’ as attributing all 

his strength to God, and persevering in his path. Then 
follows Jotham, that is, ‘ perfect, for he groweth daily to 
greater perfection. And thus he becomes Ahaz, that is, 
‘embracing,’ for by obedience knowledge is increased accord- 


© trp to seize or hold, and so Jerome. from TS fire in the ritual service, or 
» A strong mountain; Jerome. It seed ‘Lev. xxiv. 7. 
has no Hebrew root. k yq'95° ‘¢ the Lord establisheth,” 
' A sacrifice to the Lord,—Jerome; also ‘< prepareth.” 


Pseudo- 
Chrys. 
ubi sup. 
Jer. 22, 
30. 


John18, 


36. 


30 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. TI. 


ing to that, They have proclaimed the worship of the Lord, 
and have understood His doings. Then follows Ezekias, 
that is,‘ the Lord is strong,’ because he understands that God 
is strong, and so turning to His love, he becomes Manasses, 
‘ forgetful, because he gives up as forgotten all worldly 
things; and is made thereby Amon, that is, ‘ faithful,’ for 
whoso despises all temporal things, defrauds no man of his 
goods. Thus he is made Josias, that is, ‘ in certain hope of 
the Lord’s salvation ;’ for Josias is interpreted ‘ the salvation 
of the Lord.’ 


12—15. And after they were brought to Babylon, 
Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zoro- 
babel; and Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat 
Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor; and Azor begat 
Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat 
Eliud; and Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat 
Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob. 


Psgupo-Curys. After the carrying away, he sets Jeconiah 
again, as now become a private person. AMBROsE. Of whom 
Jeremiah speaks. Write this man dethroned; for there 
shall not spring of his seed one sitting on the throne of 
David. How is this said of the Prophet, that none of the 
seed of Jeconias should reign? For if Christ reigned, and 
Christ was of the seed of Jeconiah, then has the Prophet 
spoken falsely. But it is not there declared that there shall 
be none of the seed of Jeconiah, and so Christ is of his seed; 
and that Christ did reign, is not in contradiction to the 
prophecy; for He did not reign with worldly honours, as He 
said, My kingdom is not of this world. Psrupo-Curys. 
Concerning Salathiel', we have read nothing either good or 
bad, but we suppose him to have been a holy man, and in 
the captivity to have constantly besought God in behalf of 
afflicted Israel, and that hence he was named Salathiel, 
‘ the petition of God™.’ Salathiel begot Zorobabel, which is 
interpreted, ‘ flowing postponed,’ or, ‘ of the confusion,’ or 
here, ‘ the doctor of Babylon®.’ I have read, but know not 


1 This Gloss. from Pseudo-Chrys. is m : i 
not found in Nicolai’s edition. aN TONW ‘« T have asked of God. 


VER. 12—15. ST. MATTHEW. 31 


whether it be true, that both the priestly line and the royal line 

were united in Zorobabel; and that it was through him that 

the children of Israel returned into their own country. For 

that in a disputation held between three, of whom Zorobabel 

was one, each defending his own opinion, Zorobabel’s 
sentence, that Truth was the strongest thing, prevailed; and 

that for this Darius granted him that the children of Israel 
should return to their country; and therefore after this 
providence of God, he was rightly called Zorobabel, ‘ the 
doctor of Babylon.’ For what doctrine greater than to shew 

that Truth is the mistress of all things? GLoss; But this 
seems to contradict the genealogy which is read in Chronicles. 

For there it is said, that Jeconias begot Salathiel and Pha- 1 Chron. 
daias, and Phadaias begot Zorobabel, and Zorobabel Mosol-* se 
lah, Ananias, and Salomith their sister. But we know that 

many parts of the Chronicles have been corrupted by time, 

and error of transcribers. Hence come many and controverted 
questions of genealogies which the Apostle bids us avoid. 

Or it may be said, that Salathiel and Phadaias are the same 1Tim.1, 
man under two different names. Or that Salathiel and Phadaias * 
were brothers, and both had sons of the same name, and that 

the writer of the history followed the genealogy of Zorobabel, 

the son of Salathiel. From Abiud down to Joseph, no history 

is found in the Chronicles ; but we read that the Hebrews had 

many other annals, which were called the Words of the Days, 

of which much was burned by Herod, who was a foreigner, 

in order to confound the descent of the royal line. And 
perhaps Joseph had read in them the names of his ancestors, 

or knew them from some other source. And thus the 
Evangelist could learn the succession of this genealogy. 

It should be noted, that the first Jeconiah is called the 
resurrection of the Lord, the second, the preparation of the 
Lord. Both are very applicable to the Lord Christ, who 
declares, I am the resurrection, and the life; and, I go to 
prepare «a place for you. Salathiel, i.e.‘ the Lord is my John11, 
petition,’ is suitable to. Him who said, Holy Father, keep them}. , " 


whom Thou hast given Me. Remic. He 1s also Zorobabel, 2. ‘ 
ohn 17, 


1. 
© The teacher of Babylon; Jerome; tracted, bound;” hence another of the 
perhaps from “jz “ crown;’’ 3%jy Ch. meanings in the text. 


flowed, poured away,” Syr. “ con- - 


32 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


ate 9, that is, ‘ the master of confusion,’ according to that, Your 
Master eateth with publicans and sinners. Ue is Abiud, 
John 10, that is, ‘He is my Father,’ according to that, I and the 
Father are One. He is also Eliacim®, that is, ‘ God the 
John 6, Reviver,’ according to that, I will revive him again in the 
last day. He is also Azor, that is, ‘ aided,’ according to that, 
gohe 8, He who sent Me is with Me. He is also Sadoch, that 1s, 
1 Pet. 3, the just,’ or, ‘ the justified,’ according to that, He was 
18. delivered, the just for the unjust. He is also Achim, that is, 
Matt. «my brother is He,’ according to that, Whoso doeth the will 
12, 50. o¢ My Father, he is My brother. He is also Eliud, that is, 
John 20,‘ He is my God,’ according to that, My Lord, and my God. 
Gtioss. He is also Eleazar, i.e. ‘God is my helper,’ as in 
the seventeenth Psalm, My oo; my helper. He is also 
Eph. 4, Mathan, that is, ‘ giving,’ or, ‘ given,’ for, He gave gifts for 
Tobi: men; and, God 80 loved the world, that He gave His only- 
16. | begotten Son. “Remic. He is also Jacob, ‘ that sup- 
planteth,’ for not only hath He supplanted the Devil, but hath 
Lute given His power to His faithful people; as, Behold I have 
10, 19. given yew power to tread upon serpents. He is also Joseph, 
John0, that is, ‘ adding,’ according to that, J came that they might 
have life, and that they might have it abundantly. 

RaBaN. But let us see what moral signification these 
names contain. After Jeconias, which means ‘ the prepara- 
tion of the Lord,’ follows Salathiel, i. e.‘ God is my petition,’ 
for he who is rightly prepared, prays not but of God. Again, 
he becomes Zorobabel, ‘ the master of Babylon,’ that is, of 
the men of the earth, whom he makes to know concerning 
God, that He is their Father, which is signified in Abiud. 
Then that people rise again from their vices, whence follows 
Eliacim, ‘ the resurrection ;’ and thence rise to good works, 
which is Azor, and becomes Sadoch, i.e. ‘ righteous ;’ and 
then they are taught the love of their neighbour. He is my 
brother, which is signified in Achim; and through love to 
God he says of Him, ‘ My God,’ which Eliud signifies. Then 
follows Eleazar, i. e. ‘God is my helper ;’ he recognizes God as 
his helper. But whereto he tends is shewn in Matthan, which 
is interpreted ‘ gift,’ or ‘giving;’ for he looks to God as his 
benefactor; and as he wrestled with and overcame his vices 

° So Jerome, arp» 5yq “ God will raise up.” 


VER. 16. ST. MATTHEW. 33 


in the beginning, so he does in the end of life, which belongs 
to Jacob, and thus he reaches Joseph, that is, ‘ The increase of 
virtues.’ 


16. And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, 
of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. 


Goss. In the last place, after all the patriarchs, he sets 
down Joseph the husband of Mary, for whose sake all the 
rest are introduced, saying, But Jacoh begot Joseph. JE- 
ROME. This passage is objected to us by the Emperor 
Julian in his Discrepancy of the Evangelists. Matthew calls 
Joseph the son of Jacob, Luke makes him the son of Hell. 
He did not know the Scripture manner, one was his father 
by nature, the other by law. For we know that God com- 
manded by Moses, that if a brother or near kinsman died Deut. 
withont children, another should take his wife, to raise up 2° 
seed to his brother or kinsman. But of this matter Africanus 
the chronologist®, and Eusebius of Czsarea, have disputed 
more fully. Euses. For Matthan and Melchi at different shes 
periods had each a son by one and the same wife Jesca. Fecles. 
Matthan, who traced through Solomon, first had her, and died ?- 7- 
leaving one son, Jacob by name. As the Law forbade not a 
widow, either dismissed from her husband, or after the death 
of her husband, to be married to another, so Melchi, who 


oe ee 


gon. Thus shall we find Jacob ae Heli, though of a differ- 
ent race, yet by the same mother, to have been brethren. One 
of whom, namely Jacob, after Heli his brother was deceased 
without issue, married his wife, and begat on her the third, 
Joseph, by nature indeed and reason his own son; where- 
upon also it is written, And Jacob begat Joseph. But by the 
Law, he was the son of Heli; for Jacob, being his brother, 
raised up seed to him. Thus the genealogy, both as recited 
by Matthew, and by Luke, stands right and true; Matthew 
saying, And Jacob begot Joseph; Luke saying, Which was 
the son, as it was supposed, (for he adds this withal,) of Joseph, 


vp In his Epiat. ad Aristidem, vid. lived in the second century. 
Routh Reliqn. vol. ii. p. 114. Africanus 


VOL. I. D 


Aug. 
DeCo 


li. 2. 


Euseb. 


34 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. ° 


which was the son of Heli, which was the son of Melcht. Nor 
could he have more significantly or properly expressed that way 
of generation according to the Law, which was made by a 
certain adoption that had respect to the dead, carefully leav- 
ing out the word Jegetting throughout even to the end. 
AUGUSTINE. He is more properly called his son, by whom he 


Eyaies was adopted, than had he been said to have been begotten of 


him of whose flesh he was not born. Wherefore Matthew, in 
saying Abraham begot Isaac, and continuing the same phrase 
throughout down to Jacob begot Joseph, sufficiently declares 
that he gives the father according to the order of nature, so 
as that we must hold Joseph to have been begotten, not 
adopted, by Jacob. Though even if Luke had used the word 
begotten, we need not have thought it any serious objection ; 
for it is not absurd to say of an adopted son that he is be- 
gotten, not after the flesh, but by affection. Evsres. Neither 


ubi ups does this lack good authority; nor has it been suddenly devised 


Cons 


Evang. 


li. 4. 


Chrys. 


by us for this purpose. For the kinsmen of our Saviour ac- 
cording to the flesh, either out of desire to shew forth this 
their so great nobility of stock, or simply for the truth’s sake, 
have delivered it untous. AuG. And suitably does Luke, who 
relates Christ’s ancestry not in the opening of his Gospel, but 
at his baptism, follow the line of adoption, as thus more 
clearly pointing Him out as the Priest that should make 
atonement for sin. For by adoption we are made the sons of 
God, by believing in the Son of God. But by the descent 
according to the flesh which Matthew follows, we rather see 
that the Son of God was for us made man. Luke sufficiently 
shews that he called Joseph the son of Heli, because he was 
adopted by Heli, by his calling Adam the son of God, which 
he was by grace, as he was set in Paradise, though he lost it 
afterwards by sinning. CHrysosT. Having gone through all 


Hom. iv. 146 ancestry, and ended in Joseph, he adds, The husband of 


Gen. 
De 
Eccles. 


Dog. 
2. 


Mary, thereby declaring that it was for her sake that he was 
included in the genealogy. JEROME; When you hear this 
word husband, do not straight bethink you of wedlock, but 
remember the Scripture manner, which calls persons only be- 
trothed husband and wife. GENNaDIUs; The Son of God was 
born of human flesh, that is of Mary, and not by man after the 
way of nature, as Ebion says; and accordingly it is signi- 


ven. 16. ST. MATTHEW. 35 


ficantly added, Of her Jesus was born. Auc. This is said Aug. 
against Valentinus, who taught that Christ took nothing of an 
the Virgin Mary, but passed through her as through a channel. 
or pipe. Ip. Wherefore it pleased Him to take flesh of the 
womb of a woman, is known in His own secret counsels; 
whether that He might confer honour on both sexes alike, by 
taking the form of a man, and being born of a woman, or 
from some other reason which I would not hastily pronounce on. 
Hitary; What God conveyed by the anointing of oil to those fil, 
who were anointed to be kings, this the Holy Spirit conveyed RU""t, 
upon the man Christ, adding thereto the expiation; where- Vet. 
fore when born He was called Christ; and thus it proceeds, ye 1 
who ts called Christ. Ave. It was not lawful that he should Aug. 
think to separate himself from Mary for this, that she brought (° | 
forth Christ as yet a Virgin. And herein may the faithful Evang. 
gather, that if they be married, and preserve strict continence” ' 
on both sides, yet may their wedlock hold with union of 
love only, without carnal; for here they see that it is possible 
that a son be born without carnalembrace. Avc. In Christ’s Aug. 
parents was accomplished every good benefit of marriage, Noni et 
fidelity, progeny, and a sacrament. The progeny we see in Conenp. 
the Lord Himself; fidelity, for there was no adultery; sacra-*"? 
ment, for there was no divorce. JEROME; The attentive 
reader may ask, Seeing Joseph was not the father of the Lord 
and Saviour, how does his genealogy traced down to him in 
order pertain to the Lord? We will answer, first, that it is 
not the practice of Scripture to follow the female line in its 
genealogies; secondly, that Joseph and Mary were of the 
same tribe, and that he was thence compelled to take her to 
wife as a kinsman, and they were enrolled together at Beth- 
lehem, as being come of one stock. Ava. Also, the line of Aug. 
descent ought to be brought down to Joseph, that in wedlock &" *"?- 
no wrong might be done to the male sex, as the more worthy, 
provided only nothing was taken away from the truth ; because 
Mary was of the seed of David. Ip. Hence then we believe that 11. 
Mary was in the line of David; namely, because we believe "°° °°” 
the Scripture which affirms two things, both that Christ was 
of the seed of David according to the flesh, and that He 
should be conceived of Mary not by knowledge of man, but 
as-yet a virgin. THE CounciL or Epnesus. Herein we 

D2 


Vigil. 
Cont. 


Fel. 12. 


36 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


must beware of the error of Nestorius, who thus speaks ; 
‘“‘ When Divine Scripture is to speak either of the birth of 
Christ which is of the Virgin Mary, or His death, it is never 
seen to put God, but either, Christ, or Son, or Lord; since 
these three are significative of the two natures, sometimes of 
this, sometimes of that, and sometimes of both this and that 
together. And here is a testimony to this, Jacob begot Joseph 
the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called 
Christ. For God the Word needed not a second birth of a 
woman.” PsEeuDo-AuG. But not one was the Son of God, and 
another the son of a man; but the same Christ was the Son of 


ap. Aug. both God and man. Andasin one man, the soul is one and the 


t. 8 


45, © body is another, so in the mediator between God and man, 


the Son of God was one, and the son of man another; yet of 
both together was one Christ the Lord. Two in distinction 
of substance, one in unity of Person. But the heretic objects; 
‘‘ how can you teach Him to have been born in time whom 
you say was before coeternal with His Father? For birth is as 
it were a motion of a thing not in being, before it be bom, 
bringing about this, that by benefit of birth it come into— 
being. Whence it is concluded, that He who was im being 
cannot be born; if He could be born He was not in being.” 
(To this it is replied by Augustine;) Let us imagine, as many 
will have it, that the universe has a general soul, which by 
some unspeakable motion gives life to all seeds, so as that 
itself is not mixed up with the things it produces. When 
this then passes forth into the womb to form passible matter 
to its own uses, it makes one with itself the person of that 
thing which it is clear has not the same substance. And 
thus, the soul being active and the matter passive, of two 
substances 18 made one man, the soul and the flesh being 
distinct; thus it is that our confession is, that that soul is 
born of the womb which in coming to the womb we say con- 
ferred life on the thing conceived. He, I say, is said to be 
born of His mother, who shaped to Himself a body out of her, 
in which He might be born; not as though before He was 
bom, His mother might, as far as pertained to Him, not 
have been in being. In liké manner, yea in a manner yet 
more incomprehensible and sublime, the Son of God was 
born, by taking on Him perfect manhood of his Mother. He 


VER. 17. ST. MATTHEW. 37 


who by his singular almighty power is the cause of their being 
born to all things that are born. 


17. So all the generations from Abraham to 
David are fourteen generations; and from David until 
the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen genera- 
tions ; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto 
Christ are fourteen generations. 


Pseupo-Curys. Having enumerated the generations from 
Abraham to Christ, he divides them into three divisions of 
fourteen generations, because three times at the end of four- 
teen generations the state of the people of the Jews was 
changed. From Abraham to David they were under Judges; 
from David to the carrying away into Babylon under Kings; 
from the carrying away to Christ under the High Priests. - 
What he would shew then is this; like as ever at the end of 
fourteen generations the state of men has changed, so there 
being fourteen generations completed from the carrying away 
to Christ, it must needs be that the state of men be changed 
by Christ. And so since Christ all the Gentiles have been 
made under one Christ Judge, King, and Priest. And for that 
Judges, Kings, and Priests prefigured Christ’s dignity, their 
beginnings were always in a type of Christ; the first of the * 
Judges was Joshua the son of Nave; the first of the Kings, 
David; the first of the Priests, Jesus son of Josedech. That this 
was typical of Christ none doubts. CuHrys. Or he divided the 
whole genealogy into three parts, to shew that not even by 
the change of their government were they made better, but 
under Judges, Kings, High Priests, and Priests, held the 
same evil course. For which cause also he mentions the 
captivity in Babylon, shewing that neither by this were they 
corrected. But the going down into Egypt is not mentioned, 
because they were not still in terror of the Egyptians as they 
were of the Assyrians or Parthians; and because that was a 
remote, but this a recent event; and because they had not 
been carried thither for sin as they had to Babylon. AMBROSE; Ambros. 
Let us not think this is to be overlooked, that though there = is 
were seventeen Kings of Judwa between David and Jeconiah, 
Matthew only recounts fourteen. We must observe that there 


- ——? 


38 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


might be many more successions to the throne than generations 
of men; for some may live longer and beget children later ; 
or might be altogether without seed; thence the number of 
Kings and of generations would not coincide. GtLoss. Or 
we may say, that there are three Kings overlooked, as was said 


Ambios. above. AMBROSE; Again, from Jeconiah to Joseph are 


ubi sup. 


~~ 


computed twelve generations; yet he afterwards calls these 
also fourteen. But if you look attentively, you will be able to 
discover the method by which fourteen are reckoned here. 
Twelve are reckoned including Joseph, and Christ is the 
thirteenth ; and history declares that there were two Joakims, 
that is two Jeconiahs, father and son. The Evangelist has 
not passed over either of these, but has named them both. 
Thus, adding the younger Jeconiah, fourteen generations are 
computed. Psrupo-Curys. Or, the same Jeconiah is 
counted twice in the Gospel, once before the carrying away, 
and again after the carrying away. For this Jeconiah being 
one person had two different conditions; before the carrying 
away he was King, as being made King by the people of 
God; but he became a private man at the carrying away ; hence 
he is reckoned once among the Kings before the carrying away ; 
and after the carrying away once among private men. AUG. 
Or, one of Christ’s forefathers is counted twice, because in him, 


.Jeconiah to wit, there was made a passing off to strange 


nations since he was carried to Babylon. Wherever a series 
turns out of the right line to go in any other direction there 
is an angle made, and that part that is in the angle is reckoned 
twice. Thus here is a figure of Christ, who passes from the 
circumcision to the uncircumcision, and is made a comer- 
stone. Remic. He made fourteen generations, because the 
ten denotes the decalogue, and the four the four books of the 
Gospel; whence this shews the agreement of the Law and 
the Gospel. And he put the fourteen three times over, that 
he might shew that the perfection of law, prophecy, and 
grace, consists in the faith of the Holy Trinity. Goss. 


Or in this number is signified the sevenfold grace of the 


Holy Spirit. The number is made up of seven, doubled, 
to shew that the grace of the Holy Spirit is needed both for 
soul and body to salvation. Also the genealogy is divided 
into three portions of fourteen thus. The first from Abraham 


VER. 17. . ST. MATTHEW. 39 


to David, so as that David is included in it; the second from 
David to the carrying away, in which David is not included, 
but the carrying away is included; the third is from the 
catrying away to Christ, in which if we say that Jeconiah is 
included, then the carrying away is included. In the first are 
denoted the men before the Law, in which you will find some 
of the men of the Law of nature, such as Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob, all as far as Solomon. In the second are denoted the 
men under the Law; for all who are included in it were under 
the Law. In the third are found the men of grace; for it is 
finished in Christ, who was the giver of grace; and because 
in it was the deliverance from Babylon, signifying the de- 
liverance from captivity that was made by Christ. Ava. Aug. 
After having divided the whole into three periods of fourteen °@!*"?- 
generations, he does not sum them all up and say, The sum 
of the whole is forty and two; because one of those fathers, 
that is Jeconiah, is reckoned twice; so that they do not 
amount to forty-two, as three times fourteen does, but 
because one is reckoned twice over, there are only forty-one 
generations. Matthew therefore, whose purpose was to draw 
out Christ’s kingly character, counts forty successions in the 
genealogy exclusive of Christ. This number denotes the 
time for which we must be governed by Christ in this world, 
according to that painful discipline which is signified by the 
iron rod of which it is written in the Psalms, Thou shalt rule 
them with a rod of tron. That this number should denote 
this our temporal life, a reason offers at hand, in this, that the 
seasons of the year are four, and that the world itself is 
bounded by four sides, the east, and west, the north, and the 
south. But forty contains ten four times. Moreover, ten 
itself is made up by a number proceeding from one to four. 
Goss. Or, the ten refers to the decalogue, the four to 
this life present, which passes through four seasons; or by 
the ten is meant the Old Testament, by the four the New. 
Remic. But if any, maintaining that it is not the same 
Jeconiah, but two different persons, make the number forty 
and two, we then shall say that the Holy Church is signified; 
for this number is the product of seven, and six; (for six 
times seyen make forty-two;) the six denotes labour, and the 
seven rest. 


vid. 
Ign. ad 
Eph. 19. 


Hieron. 
cont. 
Helvid. 
io prince. 


non occ. 


40 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


18. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this 
wise: When as His mother Mary was espoused to 


Joseph, before they came together, she was found with 
child of the Holy Ghost. 


PsEupo-Curys. Having said above, And Jacob begat 
Joseph, to whom Mary being espoused bare Jesus; that none 
who heard should suppose that His birth was as that of any 
of the forementioned fathers, he cuts off the thread of his 
narrative, saying, But Christ’s generation was thus. As 
though he were to say, The generation of all these fathers 
was as I have related it; but Christ’s was not so, but as follows, 
His mother Mary being espoused. Curys. He announces 
that he is to relate the manner of the generation, shewing 
therein that he is about to speak some new thing; that you 
may not suppose when you hear mention of Mary’s husband, 
that Christ was born by the law of nature. Remic. Yet it 
might be referred to the foregoing in this way, The generation 
of Christ was, as 1 have related, thus, Abraham begat Isaac. 
JEROME; But why is He conceived not of a Virgin merely, 
but of a Virgin espoused? First, that by the descent of 
Joseph, Mary’s family might be made known; secondly, that 
she might not be stoned by the Jews as an adulteress; thirdly, 
that in her flight into Egypt she might have the comfort of a 
husband. The Martyr Ignatius adds yet a fourth reason, 
namely, that his birth might be hid from the Devil, looking 
for Him to be born of a wife and not of a virgin. |§PsEupo- 
Curys. Therefore both espoused and yet remaining at home; 
for as in her who should conceive in the house of her husband, 
is understood natural conception ; so in her who conceives 
before she be taken to her husband, there is suspicion of 
infidelity. JEROME; Jt is to be known, that Helvidius, a 
certain turbulent man, having got matter of disputation, 
takes in hand to blaspheme against the Mother of God. 
His first proposition was, Matthew begins thus, When she 
was espoused. Behold, he says, you have her espoused, but, 
as ye say, not yet committed; but surely not espoused for any 
other reason than as being to be married. OricEN; She 
was indeed espoused to Joseph, but not united in wedlock ; 
that is to say, His mother immaculate, His mother incorrupt, 


we, 
VER. 18. ST. MATTHEW. ' 41 


His mother pure. His mother! Whose mother? The mother 

of God, of the Only-begotten, of the Lord, of the King, of the 

Maker of all things, and the Redeemer of all. CYRIL ; Cyril. 

What will any one see in the Blessed Virgin more than in ae 

other mothers, if she be not the mother uf God, but of Christ, Egypt. 

or the Lord, as Nestorius says? For it would not be absurd oi ca 

should any one please to name the mother of any anointed 

person, the mother of Christ. Yet she alone and more than 

they is called the Holy Virgin, and the mother of Christ. 

For she bare not a simple man as ye say, but rather the Word 

incarnate, and made man of God the Father. But perhaps 

you say, Tell me, do you think the Virgin was made the 

mother of His divinity ? To this also we say, that the Word 

was born of the very substance of God Himself, and without 

beginning of time always coexisted with the Father. But in 

these last times when He was made flesh, that is united to 

flesh, having a rational soul, He is said to be born of a woman 

after the flesh. Yet is this sacrament in a manner brought 

out hke to birth among us; for the mothers of earthly children 

impart to their nature that flesh that is to be perfected by de- 

grees in the human form; but God sends the life into the 

animal. But though these are mothers only of the earthly 

bodies, yet when they bear children, they are said to bear the 

whole animal, and not a part of it only. Such do we sce to 

have been done in the birth of Emmanuel; the Word of God 

was born of the substance of His Father; but because He 

took on Him flesh, making it His own, it is necessary to 

confess that He was born of a woman according to the flesh. 

Where seeing He is truly God, how shall any one doubt to 

call the Holy Virgin the Mother of God? CHRYSOLOGUS ; Chrysol. 

If you are not confounded when you hear of the birth of God, ee: 

let not His conception disturb you, seeing the pure virginity 

of the mother removes all that might shock human reverence. 

And what offence against our awe and reverence is there, 

when the Deity entered into union with purity that was always 

dear to Him, where an Angel is mediator, faith is bridemaid, 

where chastity is the giving away, virtue the gift, conscience 

the judge, God the cause; where the conception is inviolateness, ue 

the birth virginity, and the mother a virgin’. Cyrit; Butifjee™ 
Antioch. 


q The allusions here made may be ii. 1. of Tertullian, who, with reference (Ep. p- 
illustrated by a pussage in the Ad Uxor. to the civil usages, speaks of ‘‘ the 107.) 


S43. Sh. 


Bede. 
in Lue. 
e.3. 


De 
Nupt. 
Concup. 
i. 12, 


Pseudo- 
Aug. 

in App. 
122 et 
al. 


42 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


we were to say that the holy Body of Christ came down from 
heaven, and was not made of His mother, as Valentinus does, 
in what sense could Mary be the Mother of God? Gross. 
The name of His Mother is added, Mary. BEDE; Mary 
1s interpreted, ‘ Star of the Sea,’ after the Hebrew; ‘ Mistress,’ 
after the Syriac; as she bare into the world the Light of 
salvation, and the Lord’. Gross. And to whom she was 
betrothed is shewn, Joseph. _Pseupo-Curys. Mary was 
therefore betrothed to a carpenter, because Christ the Spouse 
of the Church was to work the salvation of all men through 
the wood of the Cross. Currys. What follows, Before they 
came together, does not mean before she was brought to the 
bridegroom’s house, for she was already within. For it was 
a frequent custom among the ancients to have their betrothed 
wives home to their house before marriage; as we see done 
now also, and as the sons-in-law of Lot were with him in the 
house. Gtoss. But the words denote carnal knowledge. 
PsEupo-Curys. That He should not be born of passion, of 
flesh and blood, who was therefore born that He might take 
away all passion of flesh and blood. Ava. There was 
“20 carnal knowledge in this wedlock, because in sinful flesh 
this could not be without carnal desire which came of sin, 
and which He would be without, who was to be without sin ; 
and that hence He might teach us that all flesh which is born 
of sexual union is sinful flesh, seeing that Flesh alone was 
without sin, which was not so born. 

Pseupo-Aug. Christ was also born of a pure virgin, because 
it was not holy that virtue should be born of pleasure, chastity 
of self-indulgence, incorruption of corruption. Nor could He 
come from heaven but after some new manner, who came to 
destroy the ancient empire of death. Therefore she received 
the crown of virginity who bare the King of chastity. Farther, 
our Lord sought out for Himself a virgin abode, wherein to be 
received, that He might shew us that God ought to be borne 
in a chaste body. Therefore He that wrote on tables of stone 
without an iron pen, the same wrought in Mary by the Holy 


happiness of that Marriage, which the 
Church brings about, (conciliat,) the Ob- 
lation confirms, the ’ Blessing seals, the 
Angels witness, and the Father ratifies. 2 
In Chrysologus the Angel brings about, 

(interpres est,) virtue is the oblation or 
bride’s gift, and a pure conscience is 


the witness. 

‘i oy, their rebellion. S. Ambrose 
interprets it ‘‘ Gud from my race,” and 
‘‘ the bitterness of the sea.” de Instit. 
Virg. 33. It is not necessary to give 
the origin of these various interpreta- 
tions. 


ver. 18. ST, MATTHEW. 43 


Spirit; She was found with child of the Holy Ghost. 
JeERoME; And found by none other than by Joseph, who knew 

all, as being her espoused husband. PsEupo-Curys. For, as 

a not incredible account relates, Joseph was absent when the 
things were done which Luke writes. For it is not easy to 
suppose that the Angel came to Mary and said those words, 
and Mary made her answer when Joseph was present. And 
even if we suppose thus much to have been possible, yet it 
could not be that she should have gone into the hill country, 
and abode there three months when Joseph was present, 
because he must needs have enquired the causes of her 
departure and long stay. And so when after so many months 

he returned from abroad, he found her manifestly with 

child. CHrysost. He says exactly was found, for so we use 

to say of things not thought of. And that you should not 
molest the Evangelist by asking in what way was this birth of 

a virgin, he clears himself shortly, saying, Of the Holy Ghost. 

As much as to say, it was the Holy Ghost that wrought this 
miracle. For neither Gabriel nor Matthew could say any 
further. Guoss. Therefore the words, Is of the Holy Ghost, Gloss. 
were set down by the Evangelist, to the end, that when itth- oa 
was said that she was with child, all wrong suspicion should 

be removed from the minds of the hearers. PsEupo-Ave. i 
But not, as some impiously think, are we to suppose, that thes. % 
Holy Spirit was as seed, but we say that He wrought with ie in 
the power and might of a Creator’. AMBROSE; That which 4 ane 
is of any thing is either of the substance or the power! De 8pir. 
of that thing; of the substance, as the Son who is of thes, oe 
Father; of the power, as all things are of God, even as Mary 

was with child of the Holy Spirit. Auc. Furthermore, Aug. 
this manner in which Christ was born of the Holy. Spirit Fach. 
suggests to us the grace of God, by which man without any 
previous merits, in the very beginning of his nature, was 
united with the Word of God into so great unity of person, 

that he was also made son of God. But inasmuch as thec. 38. 
whole Trinity wrought to make this creature which was con- 
ceived of the Virgin, though pertaining only to the person of 

the Son, (for the works of the Trinity are indivisible,) why is 


* And thus S. Hilary speaks of the Trin. ii. 26. 
sementiva ineuntis Spiritus efficacia. de 


Hieron. 
Cont. 
Helvid. 
in prin- 
cip. 


Luke I, 


5. 


Mat. 1, 
10. 


44 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


the Holy Spirit only named in this work? Must we always, 
when one of the Three is named in any work, understand that 
the whole Trinity worked in that? JERomE; But says Hel- 
vidius; Neither would the Evangelist have said Before they 
came together, if they were not to come together afterwards ; 
as none would say, Before dinner, where there was to be no 
dinner. As if one should say, Before I dined in harbour, I set 
sail for Africa, would this have no meaning in it, unless he 
were at some time or other to dine in the harbour? Surely 
we must either understand it thus,—that be/ore, though it often 
implies something to follow, yet often is said of things that 
follow only in thought; and it is not necessary that the things 
so thought of should take place, for that something else has 
happened to prevent them from taking place. JEROME; 
Therefore it by no means follows that they did come together 
afterwards ; Scripture however shews not what did happen. 
Remic. Or the word come together may not mean carnal 
knowledge, but may refer to the time of the nuptials, when 
she who was betrothed begins to be wife. Thus, before 
they came together, may mean before they solemnly celebrated 
the nuptial rites. Auc. How this was done Matthew 
omits to write, but Luke relates afier the conception of John, 


. In the sixth month the Angel was sent; and again, The Holy 


Ghost shall come upon thee. This is what Matthew relates 
in these words, She was found with child of the Holy Ghost. 
And it is no contradiction that Luke has described what 
Matthew omits; or again that Matthew relates what Luke 
has omitted; that namely which follows, from Now Joseph 
her husband being a just man, to that place where it is said 
of the Magi, that They returned into their own country 
another way. If one desired to digest into one narrative the 
two accounts of Christ's birth, he would arrange thus; begin- 
ning with Matthew’s words, Now the birth of Christ was on 
this wise; then taking up with Luke, from There was in the 
days of Herod, to, Mary abode with her three months, and 
returned to her house; then taking up again Matthew, add, 
She was found with child of the Holy Ghost. 


VER. 19, ST. MATTHEW. 45 


19. Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, 
and not willing to make her a public example, was 
minded to put her away privily. 


Curysost. The Evangelist having said that she was found 

with child of the Holy Ghost, and without knowledge of man, 
that you should not herein suspect Christ’s disciple of invent- 
ing wonders in honour of his Master, brings forward Joseph 
confirming the history by his own share in it; Now Joseph 
her husband, being a just man. Psevupo-Avue. Joseph, under- cae 
standing that Mary was with child, is perplexed that it should 4 ae 
be thus with her whom he had received from the temple of App. 
the Lord, and had not yet known, and resolved within him- ” ore 
self, saying, What shall I do? Shall I proclaim it, or shall I 
overlook it? If I proclaim it, 1 am indeed not consenting to 
the adultery; but Iam running into the guilt of cruelty, for 
by Moses’ law she must be stoned. If I overlook it, I am 
consenting to the crime, and take my portion with the 
adulterers. Since then it is an evil to overlook the thing, 

and worse to proclaim the adultery, I will put her away from 
being my wife. AMBROSE; St. Matthew has beautifully taught Ambros. 
how a righteous man ought to act, who has detected hisi? 5" 
wife’s disgrace; so as at once to keep himself guiltless of her 
blood, and yet pure from her defilements; therefore it is he 
says, Being a just man. Thus is preserved throughout in 
Joseph the gracious character of a righteous man, that his 
testimony may be the more approved; for, the tongue of the 
just speaketh the judgment of truth. JEROME; But how is 
Joseph thus called just, when he is ready to hide his wife’s 
sin? For the Law enacts, that not only the doers of evil, but they 
who are privy to any evil done, shall be held to be guilty. 
CurysostT. But it should be known, that just here is used to 
denote one who is in all things virtuous. For there is a par- 
ticular justice, namely, the being free from covetousness ; 

and another universal virtue, in which sense Scripture gene- 
rally uses the word justice. Therefore being just, that is 
kind, merciful, he was minded to put away privily her who 
according to the Law was liable not only to dismissal, 

but to death. But Joseph remitted both, as though living 
above the Law. For as the sun lightens up the world, 


46 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. TI. 


before he shews his rays, so Christ before He was born 
caused many wonders to be seen. AvucG. Otherwise; if 
you alone have knowledge of a sin that any has committed 
against you, and desire to accuse him thereof before men, you 
do not herein correct, but rather betray him. But Joseph, 
being a just man, with great mercy spared his wife, in this 
great crime of which he suspected her. The seeming cer- 
tainty of her unchastity tormented him, and yet because he 
alone knew of it, he was willing not to publish it, but to send 
her away privily ; seeking rather the benefit than the punish- 
ment of the sinner. JEROME; Or this may be considered a 
testimony to Mary, that Joseph, confident in her purity, and 
wondering at what had happened, covered in silence that 
mystery which he could not explain. Rasanus; He beheld 
her to be with child, whom he knew to be chaste; and 
Is.11,1. because he had read, There shull come a Rod out of the stem 
of Jesse, of which he knew that Mary was come‘, and had 
Is.7,14,also read, Behold, a virgin shall conceive, he did not doubt 
that this prophecy should be fulfilled in her. Oricen; But 
if he had no suspicion of her, how could he be a just man, 
and yet seek to put her away, being immaculate? He sought 
to put her away, because he saw in her a great sacrament, to 
Gloss. approach which he thought himself unworthy. GLoss. 
ae Or, in seeking to put her away, he was just; in that 
he sought it privily, is shewn his mercy, defending her from 
disgrace; Being a just man, he was minded to put her away; 
and being unwilling to expose her in public, and so to disgrace 
Ambros. her, he sought to do it privily. AMBROSE; But as no one 
in hi puts away what he has not received; in that he was minded 
Gloss. to put her away, he admits to have received her. GLoss. 
partap. Or, being unwilling to bring her home to his house to live 
Anselm. . ; : S02 
partin With him for ever, he was minded to put her away privily ; 
Qrd. that is, to change the time of their marriage. For that is true 
virtue, when neither mercy is observed without justice, nor 
justice without mercy; both which vanish when severed one 
from the other. Or he was just because of his faith, in that 


* Jerome in loc. Ambros. de Spir. flower (flos) which is spoken of in the 
S. ii. 5. and Pseudo-Augustine (t. vi. clause following. Cyril Alex.et Theod. 
p- 570.) so apply these words, con- in loc. explain it of Christ. 
sidering Christ the ‘* Branch” or 


VER. 20. ST. MATTHEW. 47 


he believed that Christ should be born of a virgin; wherefore . 
he wished to humble himself before so great a favour. 


20. But while he thought on these things, 
behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him 
in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear 
not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which 
is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. 


Remic. Because Joseph was minded, as has been said, to 
put Mary away privily, which if he had done, there would 
have been few who would not rather have thought her a 
harlot than a virgin, therefore this purpose of Joseph was 
changed by Divine revelation, whence it is said, While he 
thought on these things. Gtoss. In this is to be noted Gloss, 
the wise soul that desires to undertake nothing rashly.*?- 4" 
Curyrs. Also observe the mercifulness of Joseph, that he 
imparted his suspicions to none, not even to her whom he 
suspected, but kept them within himself. | Pseupo-AUuG. Pseudo- 
Yet though Joseph think on these things, let not Mary the an n 
daughter of David be troubled; as the word of the Prophet App. 
brought pardon to David, so the Angel of the Saviour delivers se 
Mary. Behold, again appears Gabriel the bridesman of this 
Virgin; as-it follows, Behold the Angel of the Lord appeared 
to Joseph. AMBROSE; In this word appeared is conveyed 
the power of Him that did appear, allowing Himself to be 
seen where and how He pleases. Rasan. How the Angel 
appeared to Joseph is declared in the words, In his sleep ; 
that is, as Jacob saw the ladder offered by a kind of imagining 
to the eyes of his heart. Curys. He did not appear so 
openly to Joseph as to the Shepherds, because he was faithful; 
the shepherds needed it, because they were ignorant. The 
Virgin also needed it, as she had first to be instructed in these 
mighty wonders. In like manner Zacharias needed the 
wonderful vision before the conception of his son. GLOSS. Gloss. 
The Angel appearing calls him by name, and adds his descent, Part Int. 
in order to banish fear, Joseph, son of David; Joseph, as serge 
though he were known to him by name and his familiar friend. 
PsEupo-Curys. By addressing him as son of David, he sought 
to recal to his memory the promise of God to David, that of 


Ambros. 
in Luc. 
ii. 5. 


Deut. 
22, 23. 


48 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


his seed should Christ be born. CuHrys. But by saying, 
Be not afraid, he shews him to be in fear that he had offended 
God, by having an adulteress; for only as such would he have 
ever thought of putting her away. CurvsoLoc. As her 
betrothed husband also he is admonished not to be afraid ; 
for the mind that compassionates has most fear; as though 
he were to say, Here is no cause of death, but of life; she 
that brings forth life, does not deserve death. Pszupo-Curys. 
Also by the words, Fear not, he desired to shew that he knew 
the heart; that by this he might have the more faith in those 
good things to come, which he was about to speak concerning 
Christ. AMBROSE; Be not troubled that he calls her his 
wife; for she is not herein robbed of her virginity, but her 
wedlock is witnessed to, and the celebration of her marriage 
is declared. JEROME; But we are not to think that she ceased 
to be betrothed, because she is here called wife, since we 
know that this is the Scripture manner to call the man and 
woman, when espoused, husband and wife; and this is con- 
firmed by that text in Deuteronomy, [fone find a virgin that 
is betrothed to a man in the field, and offer violence to her, 
and lie with her, he shall die, because he hath humbled his 
neighbour's wife. CuHurys. He says, Fear not to take unto 
thee; that is, to keep at home; for in thought she was already 
dismissed. Rasan. Or, to take her, that is, in marriage- 
union and continual converse. PsEupo-Curys. There were 
three reasons why the Angel appeared to Joseph with this 
message. First, that a just man might not be led into an 
unjust action, with just intentions. Secondly, for the honour 
of the mother herself, for had she been put away, she could 
not have been free from evil suspicion among the unbelievers. 
Thirdly, that Joseph, understanding the holy conception, 
might keep himself from her with more care than before. 
He did not appear to Joseph before the conception, that he 
should not think those things that Zacharias thought, nor 
suffer what he suffered in falling into the sin of unbelief 
concerning the conception of his wife in her old age. For it 
was yet more incredible that a virgin should conceive, than 
that a woman past the age should conceive. CuHRys. Or, 
The Angel appeared to Joseph when he was in this perplexity, 
that his wisdom might be apparent to Joseph, and that this 


VER. 20. ST. MATTHEW. ‘49 


might be a proof to him of those things that he spoke. For 
when he heard out of the mouth of the Angel those very things 
that he thought within himself, this was an undoubted proof, 
that he was a messenger from God, who alone knows the 
secrets of the heart. Also the account of the Evangelist is 
beyond suspicion, as he describes Joseph feeling all that a 
husband was likely to feel. The Virgin also by this was 
more removed from suspicion, in that her husband had felt 
jealousy, yet took her home, and kept her with him after her 
conception. She had not told Joseph the things that the 
Angel had said to her, because she did not suppose that she 
should be believed by her husband, especially as he had 
begun to have suspicions concerning her. But to the Virgin 
the Angel announced her conception before it took place, 
lest if he should defer it till afterwards she should be in 
straits. And it behoved that Mother who was to receive the 
Maker of all things to be kept free from all trouble. Not 
only does the Angel vindicate the Virgin from all impurity, 
but shews that the conception was supernatural, not removing 
his fears only, but adding matter of Joy; saying, Thal which 
ts born in her 18 of the Holy Spirit. 

Gioss. To be born in her, and born of her, are two Gloss. 
different things; to be born of her is to come into the world; 
to be born in her, is the same as to be conceived. Or the 
word born is used according to the foreknowledge of the 
Angel which he has of God, to whom the future is as the past. 
Pseupo-Auc. But if Christ was born by the agency of the iil. 
Holy Ghost, how is that said, Wisdom hath built herself x°** 
an house? That house may be taken in two meanings. V. ‘est. 
First, the house of Christ is the Church, which He built 
with His own blood; and secondly, His body may be calledi. 
His house, as it is called His temple. J ut the work 
of the Holy Spirit, is also the work of the Son of God, 
because of the unity of their nature and their will; for 
whether it be the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit, that 
doeth it, it is the Trinity that works, and what the Three do, is 
of One God. Avec. But shall we therefore say that the Holy Aug. 
Spirit is the Father of the man Christ, that as God the Father Fostue 
begot the Word, so the Holy Spirit begot the man? This is 
such an absurdity, that the ears of the faithful cannot bear it. 

VOL. I. E 


50 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


How then do we say that Christ was born by the Holy 
Spirit, if the Holy Spirit did not beget Him? Did He create 
Him? For so far as He is man He was created, as the Apostle 


Ren \, speaks; He was made of the seed of David according to the 


Gloss. 


ap. An- 


selm. 


flesh. For though God made the world, yet is it not nght 
to say that it is the Son of God, or born by Him, but that it 
was made, or created, or formed by Him. But seeing that 
we confess Christ to have been born by the Holy Spirit, and 
of the Virgin Mary, how is He not the Son of the Holy 
Spirit, and is the Son of the Virgin? It does not follow, that 
whatever is born by any thing, is therefore to be called the 
son of that thing; for, not to say that of man is born in one 
sense a son, in another a hair, or vermin, or a worm, none of 
which are his son, certainly those that are born of water and the 
Spirit none would call sons of water; but sons of God their 
Father, and their Mother the Church. Thus Christ was born 
of the Holy Spirit, and yet is the Son of God the Father, not 
of the Holy Spirit. 


21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou 
shalt call His name Jesus: for He shall save His 
people from their sins. 


Curysost. What the Angel thus told Joseph, was beyond 
human thought, and the law of nature, therefore he confirms 
his speech not only by revealing to him what was past, but 
also what was to come; She shall bring forth a Son. 
Gtioss. That Joseph should not suppose that he was no 
longer needed in this wedlock, seeing the conception had 
taken place without his intervention, the Angel declares to 
him, that though there had been no need of him in the con- 
ception, yet there was need of his guardianship; for the 
Virgin should bear a Son, and then he would be necessary 
both to the Mother and her Son; to the Mother to screen her 
from disgrace, to the Son to bring Him up and to circumcise 
Him. The circumcision is meant when he says, And thou 
shalt call His name Jesus; for it was usual to give the name 
in circumcision. Pszeupo-Cuarys. He said not, Shall bear thee 
a Son, as to Zacharias, Behold, Elisabeth thy wife shall bear 


thee a son. For the woman who conceives of her husband, 


VER. 22. ST. MATTHEW. ol 


bears the son to her husband, because he is more of him 
than of herself; but she who had not conceived of man, did 
not bear the Son to her husband, but to herself. CHRyYsosT. 
Or, he left it unappropriated, to shew that she bare Him to 
the whole world. Rapan. Thou shalt call His name, he says, 
and not, “ shalt give Him a name,” for His name had been 
given from all eternity. Curysost. This further shews that 
this birth should be wonderful, because it is God that sends 
down His name from above by His Angel; and that not any 
name, but one which is a treasure of infinite good. Therefore 
also the Angel interprets it, suggesting good hope, and by 
this induces him to believe what was spoken. For we lean 
more easily to prosperous things, and yield our belief more 
readily to good fortune. JEROME; Jesus is a Hebrew word, 
meaning Saviour. He points to the etymology of the name, 
saying, For He shall save His people from their sins. Remia. 
He shews the same man to be the Saviour of the whole 
world, and the Author of our salvation. He saves indeed 
not the unbelieving, but His people; that 1s, He saves those 
that believe on Him, not:so much from visible as from invisible 
enemies; that is, from their sins, not by fighting with aris, 
but by remitting their sins. CurRysoLtoc. Let them approach 
to hear this, who ask, Who is He that Mary bare? He shall 
save His people; not any other man’s people; from what? 
from their sins. That it is God that forgives sins, if you do 
not believe the Christians so affirming, believe the infidels, 
or the Jews who say, None can forgive sins but God only. 


22. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, 

23. Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and shall 
bring forth a Son, and they shall call His Name 
Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. 


Remi. It is the custom of the Evangelist to confirn what 
he says out of the Old Testament, for the sake of those Jews 
who believed on Christ, that they might recognize as fulfilled 
in the grace of the Gospel, the things that were forctold in the 
Old Testament; therefore he adds, Now all this was done. 

E 2 


Luke §, 
l. 


Gloss. 
ap. Au- 


selm. 


Isa. 7, 
] 


noo occ. 


Gen. 40, 


Jerom. 


In Is. vii. 
14, 


52 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. J. 


Here we must enquire why he should say all this tras done, 
whew above he has only related the conception. It should 
be known that he says this to shew, that in the presence of 
God all this was done before it was done among men. Or 
he says, all this was done, because he is relating past events ; 
for when he wrote, it was all done. GtLoss. Or, he says, 
all this was done, meaning, the Virgin was betrothed, she was 
kept chaste, she was found with child, the revelation was 
made by the Angel, that it might be fulfilled which was 
spoken. For that the Virgin should conceive and should 
bring forth would never have been fulfilled, had she not been 
espoused that she should not be stoned; and had not her 
secret been disclosed by the Angel, and so Joseph taken her 
unto him, that she was not dismissed to disgrace and to 
perish by stoning. So had she perished before the birth, that 
prophecy would have been made void which says, She shall 
bring forth a Son. Gtoss. Or it may be said, that the word 
that does not here denote the cause ; for the prophecy was 
not fulfilled merely because it was to be fulfilled. But it 
is put consecutively, as in Genesis, He hung the other on the 
gallows, that the truth of the interpreter might be proved; 
since by the weighing of one, truth is established. So also 
in this placc we must understand it as if it were, that which 
was foretold being done, the prophecy was accomplished. 
Curysost. Otherwise; the Angel seeing the depths of the 
Divine mercy, the laws of nature broken through and recon- 
ciliation made, He who was above all made lower than all; 
all these wonders, all this he comprises in that one saying, 
Now all this hath happened; as though he had said, Do 
not suppose that this is newly devised of God, it was deter- 
mined of old. And he rightly cites the Prophet not to the 
Virgin, who as a maiden was untaught in such things, but to 
Joseph, as to one much versed in the Prophets. And at first 
he had spoken of Mary as thy wzfe, but now in the words of 
the Prophet he brings in the word “ Virgin,” that he night hear 
this from the Prophet, as a thing long before determined. 
Theretore to confirm what he had said, he introduces Isaiah, 
or rather God ; for he does not say, Which was spoken by 
Isaiah, but, Which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet. 
JEROME. Since it is introduced in the Prophet by the words, 


VER, 22. ST. MATTHEW. 53 


The Lord Himself shall give you a sign, it ought to be some- 
thing new and wonderful. But if it be, as the Jews will have 
it, a young woman, or a girl shall bring forth, and not a virgin, 
what wonder is this, since these are words signifying age and 
not purity? Indeed the Hebrew word signifying Virgin 
(Bethula) is not used in this place, but instead the word 
* Halma*,’ which except the LXX all render ‘ girl.” But the 
word ‘ Halma’ has a twofold meaning; it signifies both ‘ girl,’ 
and ‘ hidden;’ therefore ‘ Halma’ denotes not only ‘ maiden’ 
or ‘ virgin,’ but ‘ hidden,’ ‘ secret ;’ that is, one never exposed 
to the gaze of men, but kept under close custody by her parents. 
In the Punic tongue also, which is said to be derived from 
Hebrew sources, a virgin is properly called ‘ Halma.’ In our 
tongue also ‘ Halma’ means holy; and the Llebrews use words 
of nearly all languages ; and as far as my memory will serve 
me, I do not think I ever met with Halma used of a married 
woman, but of her that is a virgin, and such that she be not 
merely a virgin, but in the age of youth; for it is possible for an 
old woman to be a maid. But this was a virgin in years of 
youth, or at least a virgin, and nota child too young for marmiage. 
Ip. For that which Matthew the Evangelist says, Shall have in 10 loc. 
her womb, the Prophet who is foretelling something future, 
writes, shall receive. The Evangelist, not foretelling the future 
but describing the past, changes shall receive, into shall have; 
but he who has, cannot after receive that he has. He says, 
Lo, a Virgin shall have in her womb, and shall bear a Son. 
Lro; The conception was by the Holy Spirit within the Leo, 
womb of the Virgin; who, as she conceived in perfect", 
chastity, in like manner brought forth her Son. Psrupo-Auc. Pseudo- 
He, who by a touch could heal the severed limbs of others, Aug: 
how much more could He, in His own birth, preserve whole». !23. 
that which He found whole? In this parturition, soundness 
of the Mother’s body was rather strengthened than weakened, 
and her virginity rather confirmed than lost. |§ THEODOTUS ; Theod. 
Inasmuch as Photinus affirms that He that was now bom ote a 
was mere man, not allowing the divine birth, and maintains (onc. 
that He who now issued from the womb was the man separate fae 
from the God; let him shew how it was possible that human ‘= pp- 
nature, born of the Virgin’s womb, should have preserved the 1655. 


S TIDY, &e. waglives Septuag. 


Jerom. 
in Is. vii. 
14, 


Jerom. 
ubi sup. 


54 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


virginity of that womb uncorrupted; for the mother of no man 
ever yct remained a virgin. But forasmuch as it was God 
the Word who was now born in the flesh, He shewed Himself 
to be the Word, in that He preserved His mother’s virginity. 
For as our word when it is begot does not destroy the mind, 
so neither does God the Word in choosing His birth destroy 
the virginity. Carrs. As it is the manner of Scripture to 
convey a knowledge of events under the form of a name, s0 
here, They shall call His name Emmanuel, means nothing else 
than, They shall see God among men. Whence he says not, 
‘Thou shalt call,’ but, They shall call. Rasan. First, 
Angels hymning, secondly, Apostles preaching, then Holy 
Martyrs, and lastly, all believers. JEROME; The LXX and 
three others translate, ‘ Thou shalt call,’ instead of which we 
have here, They shall call, which is not so in the Hebrew ; 
for the word ‘ Charathi®, which all render Thou shalt call, 
may mean, ‘ And she shall call,’ that is, The Virgin that shall 
conceive and shall bear Christ, shall call His name Emmanuel, 
which is interpreted, ‘God with us.” Remic. It is a question, 
who interpreted this name? The Prophet, or the Evangelist, 
or some translator? It should be known then, that the 
Prophet did not interpret it; and what need had the Holy 
Evangelist to do so, seeing he wrote in the Hebrew tongue? 
Perhaps that was a difficult and rare word in Hebrew, and 
therefore needed interpretation. It is more probable that 
some translator interpreted it, that the Latins might not be 
perplexed by an unintelligible word. In this name are con- 
veyed at once the two substances, the Divinity and Humanity 
in the one Person of the Lord Jesus Christ. He who before 
all time was begot in an unspeakable manner by God the 
Father, the same in the end of time was made Emmanuel, 
that is, God with us, of a Virgin Mother. This God with us 
may be understood in this way. He was made with us, 
passible, mortal, and in all things like unto us without sin; 
or because our frail substance which He took on Him, He 


joined in one Person to His Divine substance. JEROME; 


It should be known, that the Hebrews believe this prophecy 

to refer to Lizekias the son of Ahaz, because in his reign 

Samaria was taken; but this cannot be established. Ahaz 
h AIST? 


VER. 22. ST. MATTHEW. 55 


son of Jotham reigned over Juda and Jerusalem sixteen 
years, and was succeeded by his son Ezekias, who was 
twenty-three years old, and reigned over Judea and Jerusalem 
twenty-nine years; how then can a prophecy prophesied in the 

first year of Ahaz refer to the conception and birth of Ezekias, 
when he was already nine years of age? Unless perhaps the 
sixth year of the reign of Ezekias, in which Samaria was 
taken, they think is here called his infancy, that is, the infancy 

of his reign, not of his age; which even a fool must see to be 

hard and forced. A certain one of our interpreters contends, 

that the Prophet Isaiah had two sons, Jashub and Emmanuel; 

and that Emmanuel was born of his wife the Prophetess as a 

type of the Lord and Saviour. But this is a fabulous tale. 
Petrus ALFonsus. For we know not that any man of that Petr. 
day was called Emmanuel. But the Hebrew objects, How can Aen 
it be that this was said.on account of Christ and Mary, when7. 
many centuries intervened between Ahaz and Mary? But 
though the Prophet was speaking to Ahaz, the prophecy was 

yet not spoken to him only or of his time only; for it is intro- 
duced, Hear, O house of David; not,‘ Hear, O Ahaz.’ Again, Isa. 7, 
The Lord Himself shall give you a sign; meaning Ile, and ie 
none other; from which we may understand that the Lord 
Himself should be the sign. And that he says ¢o you, (plur.) 

and not ‘ to thee,’ shews that this was not spoken to Ahaz, or 

on his account only. JeERoMsB. What is spoken to Ahaz then Jerom. 
is to be thus understood. This Child, that shall be born ubt sup 
of a Virgin of the house of David, shall now be called 
Emmanuel, that is, God with us, because the events (perhaps 
delivery from the two hostile kings) will make it appear that 

you have God present with you. But after He shall be called 
Jesus, that is, Saviour, because He shall save the whole human 

race. Wonder not, therefore, O house of David, at the new- 

ness of this thing, that a Virgin should bring forth a God, 
seeing He has so great might that though yet to be born after 

a long while, He delivers you now when you call upon Him. 

Avc. Who so mad as to say with Manicheus, that it is a weak Aug. 
faith not to believe in Christ without a witness; whereas the ti 
Apostle says, How shall they believe on Him of whom théy \2. 45. 
have not heard? Or how shall they hear without a preacher? =i os 
That those things which were preached by the Apostles might ae 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


Jonah 3. 


56 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. f. 


not be contemned, nor thought to be fables, they are proved 
to have been foretold by the Prophets. For though attested 
by miracles, yet there would not have been wanting men to 
ascribe them all to magical power, had not such suggestions 
heen overcome by the additional testimony of prophecy. For 
none could suppose that long before He was born, He had 
raised up by magic prophets to prophesy of Him. For if we 
say to a Gentile, Believe on Christ that He is God, and he 
should answer, Whence is it that I should believe on Him ¢ 
we might allege the authority of the Prophets. Should he 
refuse assent to this, we establish their credit from their having 
foretold things to come, and those things having truly come 
to pass. I suppose he could not but know how great perse- 
cutions the Christian religion has formerly suffered from the 
Kings of this world; let him now behold thuse very Kings 
submitting to the kingdom of Christ, and all nations serving 
the same; all which things the Prophets foretold. He then 
hearing these things out of the Scriptures of the Prophets, 
and beholding them accomplished throughout the whole earth, 
would be moved to faith. | Guoss. This error then is barred 
by the Evangelist saying, That it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet. Now one kind of 
prophecy is by the preordination of God, and must needs be 
fulfilled, and that without any free choice on our part. Such is 
that of which we now speak ; wherefore he says, Zo, to shew 
the certainty of prophecy. There is another kind of prophecy 
which is by the foreknowledge of God, and with this our free 
will is mixed up; wherein by grace working with us we 
obtain reward, or if justly deserted by it, torment. Another 
is not of foreknowledge, but is a kind of threat made after the 
manner of men; as that, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be 
overthrown: understanding, unless the Ninevites amend them- 
selves. 


24. Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the 
angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him 
his wife : 

25. And knew her not till she had brought forth 
her first-born Son: and he called his name Jesus. 


VER. 24, 25. ST. MATTHEW. 37 


Remic. Life returned by the same entrance through which 
death had entered in. By Adam’s disobedience we were 
ruined, by Joseph’s obedience we all begin to be recalled to 
our former condition; for in these words is commended to us 
the great virtue of obedience, when it is said, And Joseph 
rising from sleep, did as the Angel of the Lord had commanded 
him. Goss. He not only did what the Angel commanded, Gloss. 
but as he commanded it. Let each one who is warned of = re 
God, in like manner, break eff all delays, rise from sleep, ae 
and do that which is commanded him.  PsEupo-CHRYS. cit, 
Tvok unto him, not took home to him; for he had not sent 
her away ; he had put her away in thought only, and now 
took her again in thought. Remic. Or, Took her so far, as 
that the nuptial rites being complete, she was called his wife ; 
but not so far as to lie with her, as it follows, And knew 
her not. Js&roMeE. Helvidius is at much superfluous trouble Jerom. 
to make this word know refer to carnal knowledge rather than ¢orsy, 
to acquaintance, as though any had ever denied that; or as ife. 5. 
the follies to which he replies had ever occurred to any person 
of common understanding. He then goes on to say, that the 
adverb ‘ until’ denotes a fixed time when that should take 
place, which had not taken place before; so that here from 
the words, He knew her not until she had brought forth her 
first-born Son, it is clear, he says, that after that he did know 
her. And in proof of this he heaps together many instances 
from Scripture. To all this we answer, that the word ‘ until’ 
is to be understood in two senses in Scripture. And con- 
ceming the expression, knew her not, he has himself shewn, 
that it must be referred to carnal knowledge, none doubting 
that it is often used of acquaintance, as in that, The child Luke 2, 
Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem,and His parents knew not * 
of tt. In like manner ‘ until’ often denotes in Scripture, as 
he has shewn, a fixed period, but often also an infinite time, 
as in that, Even to your old age Tam He. Will God then Isa. 46, 
cease to be when they are grown old? Also the Saviour in i: 
the Gospel, Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of Mat 28, 
this world. Will He then leave His disciples at the end of ° 
the world? Again, the Apostle says, He must reign till He \ Cor. 
has put His enemies under His feet. Be it understood then, !* 7 
that that which if it had not been written might have been 


Jerom. 
cont. 


Helvid. 
8. 


58 CHAP. I. 


doubted of, is expressly declared to us; other things are left 
to our own understanding’. So here the Evangelist informs 
us, in that wherein there might have been room for error, that 
she was not known by her husband until the birth of her Son, 
that we might thence infer that much less was she known after- 
wards. Pseupo-Curys. As one might say, ‘ He told it not 
so long as he lived;’ would this imply that he told it after 
his death? Impossible. So it were credible that Joseph might 
have known her before the birth, while he was yet ignorant 
of the great mystery; but after that he understood how she 
had been made a temple of the Only-begotten of God, how 
could he occupy that? The followers of Eunomius think, 
as they have dared to assert this, that Joseph also dared 
to do it, just as the insane think all men equally mad with 
themselves. Jerome. Lastly, I would ask, Why then did 
Joseph abstain at all up to the day of birth? He will surely 
answer, Because of the Angel’s words, That which is born in 
her, Sc. He then who gave so much heed to a vision as not 
to dare to touch his wife, would he, after he had heard the 
shepherds, seen the Magi, and known so many miracles, dare 
to approach the temple of God, the seat of the Holy Ghost, 
the Mother of his Lord? 

Psrupo-Curys. It may be said, that know here signifies 
simply, to understand ; that whereas before he had not under- 
stood how great her dignity, after the birth he then kvew that 
she had been made more honourable and worthy than the 
whole world, who had carried in ber womb Him whom the 
whole world could not contain. Gtoss. Otherwise; On 
account of the glorification of the most holy Mary, she could 
not be known by Joseph until the birth; for she who had the 
Lord of glory in her womb, how should she be known? If 
the face of Moses talking with God was made glorious, so 
that the children of Israel could not look thereon, how much 


GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


the vision had its effect upon him up to 
that time when it was no longer neces- 
sary. Just as if, in speaking of a man 
like Augustine, one said, that, in conge- 
quence of some awfuloccurrence, he was 


¢ In other words, ‘* till’’ need not 
imply a ¢ermination at a certain point of 
time, but may be giving us information 
up to a point from which onwards there 


is already nu doubt. Supposing an 
Evangelist thought the very notion 
shocking that Joseph should have con- 
sidered the Blessed Virgin as his wife 
after he waa a witness of her bearing 
God the Son, he would only say that 


in the habit of saying prayers till the 
time of his conversion, no one would 
suppose that he left them off on being 
converted. 


VER. 24, 25. ST. MATTHEW. 59 


more could not Mary be known, or even looked upon, who 

bare the Lord of glory in her womb? After the birth she was 
known of Joseph to the beholding of her face, but not to be 
approached camally. JEROME; From the words, her jirst- 

born Son, some most erroneously suspect that Mary had other 

sons, saying that first-born can only be said of one that has 
brethren. But this is the manner of Scripture, to call the 
first-born not only one who is followed by brethren, but the 
first-birth of the mother. Ip. For if he only was first-born Cont. 
who was followed by other brethren, then no first-birth could io 
be due to the Priests, till such time as the second birth took 
place. Gross. Or; He is first-born among the elect by Gloss. 
grace; but by nature the Only-begotten of God the Father, ie 
the only Son of Mary. And called His name Jesus, on the 
eighth day on which the circumcision took place, and the 
Name was given. ReEmiG. It is clear that this Name was 

well known to the Holy Fathers and the Prophets of God, 

but to him above all, who spake, My soul fainted for Thy Ps. 119, 
salvation ; and, My soul hath rejoiced in Thy salvation. Also Pela, 5. 


to him who spake, J till yoy in God my Saviour. ra 3, 


Aug. 


non occ. 


Gloss. 


CHAP. II. 


1. Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of 
Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there 
came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, 

2. Saying, Where is He that is born King of the 
Jews? for we have seen [fis star in the east, and are 
come to worship Him. 


Ava. After the miraculous Virgin-birth, a God-man having 
by Divine power proceeded from a virgin womb; in the 
obscure shelter of such a cradle, a narrow stall, wherein lay 
Infinite Majesty in a body more narrow, a God was suckled 
and suffered the wrapping of vile rags—amidst all this, on a 
sudden a new star shone in the sky upon the earth, and driving 
away the darkness of the world, changed night into day; that 
the day-star should not be hidden by the night. Hence itis that 
the Evangelist says, Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem. 
Remie. In the beginning of this passage of the Gospel he 
puts three several things; the person, When Jesus was born, 
the place, in Bethlehem of Judea, and the time, in the days 
of Herod the king. These three circumstances verify his 
words. J&ROME. We think the Evangelist first wrote, as 
we read in the Hebrew, ‘ Judah,’ not ‘ Juda.’ For in what 
other country is there a Bethlehem, that this needs to be dis- 
tinguished as in ‘Judwa?’ But ‘Judah’ is written, because 
there is another Bethlehem in Galilee. Gross. There are 


Tosh.19, tO Bethichems; one in the tribe of Zabulon, the other in 


15. 


the tribe of Judah, which was before called Ephrata. 
Aua. Concerning the place, Bethlehem, Matthew and Luke 


agree; but the cause and manner of their being there, Luke 


relates, Matthew omits. Luke again omits the account of 
the Magi, which Matthew gives. 


GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. 61 


Pseupo-Curys. Let us see to what serves this designation 
of time, In the days of Herod the king. It shews the fulfil- 
ment of Daniel’s prophecy, wherein he spake that Christ 
should be born after seventy weeks of years. For from the 
time of the prophecy to the reign of Herod, the years of 
seventy weeks were accomplished. Or again, as long as 
Judza was ruled by Jewish princes, though sinners, so long 
prophets were sent for its amendment; but now, whereas 
God’s law was held under the power of an unrighteous king, 
and the righteousness of God enslaved by the Roman rule, 
Christ 1s born; the more desperate sickness required the 
better physician. Rasanus. Otherwise, he mentions the 
foreign king to shew the fulfilment of the prophecy. The Gea.4g, 
Sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from ne 
betureen his feet, until Shiloh come. AMBROSE; It is said, that Ambros. 
some Idumzan robbers coming to Ascalon, brought with - rr 
them among other prisoners Antipater*. He was instructed 
in the law and customs of the Jews, and acquired the 
friendship of Hyrcanus, king of Judza, who sent him as his 
deputy to Pompey. He succeeded so well in the object of 
his mission, that he laid claim to a share of the throne. He 
was put to death, but his son Herod was under Antony 
appointed king of Judea, by a decree of the Senate; so it is 
clear that Herod sought the throne of Judea without any 
connection or claim of birth. Curys. Herod the king, 
mentioning his dignity, because there was another Herod who 
put John to death. 

Pseupo-CHrys. When He was born... behold wise men, 
that is, immediately on His birth, shewing that a great God 
existed in a little one of man. RaBanus. The Magi are men 
who enquire into the nature of things philosophically, but 
common speech uses Magi for wizards. In their own country, 
however, they are held in other repute, being the philosophers 
of the Chaldzans, in whose lore kings and princes of that 
nation are taught, and by which themselves knew the birth 
of the Lord. Auc. What were these Magi but the first Aug. 


Serm. 
202. 
® The same account of Herod’s that Herod was an Idumean, of noble 
her is given by Africanus, Euseb. birth, and that his father Antipas was 


i. 7. but Josephus says A panan governor of Idumea under Alexander 
xiv. 1.n. 3. de Bell. Jud. i. 6. n. 2.) Janneus. 


Aug. 
Serm. 
200. 


Numb. 
24, 17. 


62 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


fruits of the Gentiles? Israclitish shepherds, gentile Magians, 
one from far, the other from near, hastened to the one 
Corer-stone. Ip. Jesus then was manifested neither to the 
learned nor the righteous; for ignorance belonged to the 
shepherds, impiety to the idolatrous Magi. Yet does that 
Corner-stone attract them both to Itself, seeing He came to 
choose the foolish things of this world to confound the wisc, 
and not to call the righteous, but sinners; that nothing great 
should exalt himself, none weak should despair. GLoss. 
These Magi were kings, and though their gifts were threc, 
it is not to be thence inferred that themselves were only three 
in number, but in them was prefigured the coming to the faith 
of the nations sprung from the three sons of Noah. Or, the 
princes were only three, but each brought a large company 
with him. They came not after a year’s end, for He would 
then have been found in Egypt, not in the manger, but on the 
thirteenth day. To shew whence they came it is said, from 
the East. Remic. It should be known, that opinions vary 
respecting the Magi. Some say they were Chaldeans, who 
are known to have worshipped a star“as God; thus their 
fictitious Deity shewed them the way to the trne God. Others 
think that they were Persians ; others again, that they came 
from the utmost ends of the carth. Another and more pro- 
bable opinion is, that they were descendants of Balaam, who 
having his prophecy, Jhere shall rise a Star out of Jacob, 
as soon as they saw the star, would know that a King was 
born. JEROME. They knew that such a star would rise by 
the prophecy of Balaam, whose successors they were. But 
whether they were Chaldzans, or Persians, or came from the 
utmost ends of the earth, how in so short a space of time 
could they arrive at Jerusalem? Remic. Some used to 
answer, ‘ No marvel if that boy who was then born could 
draw them so speedily, though it were from the ends 
of the earth. Gtoss. Or, they had dromedaries and 
Arabian horses, whose great swiftness brought them to Beth- 
lehem in thirteen days. PsEupo-Curys. Or, they had set 
out two years before the Saviour’s birth, and though they 
travelled all that time, neither meat nor drink failed in their 
scrips. RemiG. Or, if they were the descendants of Balaam, 
their kings are not far distant from the land of promise, and 


VER. I, 2. ST. MATTHEW. 63 


might easily come to Jerusalem in that so short time. But 

why does he wnite from the East? Because surely they came 

from a country eastward of Judea. But there is also great 
beauty in this, They came out of the East, seeing all who 

come to the Lord, come from Him and through Him; as it 1s 

said in Zechariah, Behold the Man whose name is the Eust. Zech. 6, 
Psrupo-Curys. Or, whence the day springs, thence came |* 
the first-fruits of the faith; for faith is the light of the soul. 
Therefore they came from the East, but to Jerusalem. 
Remic. Yet was not the Lord bor there; thus they knew 

the time but not the place of His birth. Jerusalem being 

the royal city, they believed that such a child could not be 

born in any other. Or it was to fulfil that Scripture, The 1sa.2, 3. 
Law shall go out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem. And there Christ was first preached. Or it was 

to condemn the backwardness of the Jews. 

Psgupo-Aug. Many kings of Judza had been born and died ‘ oo 

before, yet had Magi ever sought out any of them for adoration? 4 rack nd. 
No, for they had not been taught that any of these spoke hae 
from heaven. To no ordinary King of Judza had these men, 
aliens from the land of Juda, ever thought such honour due. 
But they had been taught that this Child was one, in worship- 
ping whom they would certainly secure that salvation which 
is of God. Neither His age was such as attracts men’s 
flattery ; His limbs not robed in purple, His brow not crowned 
with a diamond, no pompous train, no awful army, no glo- 
rious fame of battles, attracted these men to Him from the 
remotest countries, with such earnestness of supplication. 
There lay in a manger a Boy, newly born, of infantine size, 
of pitiable poverty. But in that small Infant lay hid 
something great, which these men, the first-fruits of the 
Gentiles, had learned not of earth but of heaven; as it follows, 
We have seen Hts stur in the east. They announce the 
vision and ask, they believe and enquire, as signifying those 
who walk by faith and desire sight. 

Gree. It should be known that the Priscillianists, here- Greg. 
tics who believe every man to be born under the aspect of Evang: 
some planet, cite this text in support of their error; the new 10. 2. 4. 
star which appeared at the Lord’s birth they consider to ane 
have been his fate. Aue. And, according, to Faustus this 5 a 


i. 1. 


64 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IT. 


introduction of the account of the star would lead us rather 
to call this part of the history, ‘ The Nativity,’ than ‘ The 
Sup. 2. Gospel.’ GrEGorY; But far be it from the hearts of the 
pt e faithful to call any thing, ‘ fate. Aue. For by the word 
v.1, ° fate,’ in common acceptation, is meant the disposition of 
the stars at the moment of a person’s birth or conception ; 
to which some assign a power independent of the will of 
God. These must be kept at a distance from the ears of all 
who desire to be worshippers of Gods of any sort. But 
others think the stars have this virtue committed to them by 
the great God; wherein they greatly wrong the skies, in that 
they impute to their splendent host the decreeing of crimes, 
such as should any earthly people decree, their city should in 
the judgment of mankind deserve to be utterly destroyed. 
PsEupo-Curys. If then any should become an adulterer or 
homicide through means of the planets, how great is the 
evil and wickedness of those stars, or rather of Him who 
made them? For as God knows things to come, and what 
evils are to spring from those stars; if Ife would not hinder 
it, He is not good; if He would but could not, He is weak. 
Again,if it be of the star that we are either good or bad, we have 
neither merit nor demerit, as being involuntary agents; and 
why should I be punished for sin which I have done not 
wilfully, but by necessity? The very commands of God 
against sin, and exhortations to righteousness, overthrow such 
folly. For where a man has not power to do, or where he 
has not power to forbear, who would command him either to 
do or to forbear? GrReEGory Nyss. How vain morcover is 
prayer for those who live by fate; Divine Providence is 
banished from the world together with piety, and man is 
made the mere instrument of the sidereal motions. For 
these they say move to action, not only the bodily members, 
but the thoughts of the mind. Ina word, they who teach 
this, take away all that is in us, and the very nature of a 
contingency ; which is nothing less than to overturn all 
things. For where will there be free will? but that which is 
Aug. de in us must be free. Auc. It cannot be said to be utterly 
Cw-Del. absurd to suppose that sidereal afflatus should influence the 
state of the body, when we sce that it is by the approach 
and departure of the sun that the seasons of the year are 


VER. 1, 2. ST. MATTHEW. Gd 


varied, and that many things, as shells and the wonderful 
tides of the Ocean, increase or decrease as the moon waxes 
or wanes. But not so, to say that the dispositions of the 
mind are subject to sidereal impulse. Do they say that the 
stars rather foreshew than effect these results? how then do 
they explain, that in the life of twins, in their actions, their 
successes, professions, honours, and all other circumstances 
of life, there will often be so great diversity, that men of 
different countries are often more alike im their lives than 
twins, between whose birth there was only a moment’s, and 
between whose conception in the womb there was not 
a moment’s, interval. And the small interval between their 
births is not enough to account for the great difference 
between their fates. Some give the name of fate not only to 
the constitution of the stars, but to all series of causes, at the 
same time subjecting all to the will and power of God. 
This sort of subjection of human affairs and fate is a con- 
fusion of language which should be corrected, for fate is 
strictly the constitution of the stars. The will of God we do 
not call ‘ fate,’ nnless indeed we will derive the word from 
‘ speaking ;’ as in the Psalms, God hath spoken once, twice Ps. 62, 
have I heard the same., There is then no need of much!! 
contention about what is merely a verbal controversy. 

Auc. But if we will not subject the nativity of any man Aug. 
to the influence of the stars, in order that we may vindicate faust, 
the freedom of the will from any chain of necessity; howii. 5. 
much less must we suppose sidereal influences to have ruled 
at His temporal birth, who is eternal Creator and Lord of 
the universe? The star which the Magi saw, at Christ s 
birth according to the flesh, did not rule Lis fate, but 
ministered as a testimony to Him. Further, this was not of 
the number of those stars, which from the beginning of the 
creation observe their paths of motion according to the law 
of their Maker; but a star that first appeared at the birth, 
ministering to the Magi who sought Christ, by going before 
them till it brought them to the place where the infant God 
the Word was. According to some astrologers such is the 
connexion of human fate with the stars, that on the birth of 
some men stars have been known to leave their courses, and 
go directly to the new-born. The fortune indeed of him 

VOL. I. F 


66 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


that is born they suppose to be bound up with the-course of 

the stars, not that the course of the stars is changed after the 

day of any man’s birth. If then this star were of the number 

of those that fulfil their courses in the heavens, how could it 

determine what Christ should do, when it was commanded 

at His birth only to leave its own course? If, as is more 

probable, it was first created at His birth, Christ was not 

therefore born because it arose, but the reverse; so that if 

we must have fate connected with the stars, this star did not 

rule Christ’s fate, but Christ the stars. Curys. The object 

of astrology is not to learn from the stars the fact of one’s 

birth ; but from the hour of their nativity to forecast the fate 

of those that are born. But these men knew not the time of 

the nativity to have forecast the future from it, but the 
converse. 

Gloss. Gtoss. ‘ His star,’ 1. e. the star He created for a witness of 

a Himself. Gtoss. To the Shepherds, Angels, and the 

ord. §Magians, a star points out Christ; to both speaks the tongue 

of Heaven, since the tongue of the Prophets was mute. The 

Angels dwell in the heavens, the stars adorn it, to both there- 

Greg. fore the heavens declare the glory of God. Gree. To the 

i. at Jews who used their reason, a rational creature, i.e. an Angel, 

; Hom. ought to preach. But the Gentiles who knew not to use 

their reason are brought to the knowledge of the Lord, not 

by words, but by signs; to the one prophecy, as to the 

faithful; to the other signs, as to the unbelievers. One and 

the same Christ is preached, when of perfect age, by 

Apostles; when an infant, and not yet able to speak, is 

announced by a star to the Gentiles; for so the order of 

reason required ; speaking preachers proclaimed a speaking 

Leo, Lord, mute signs proclaimed a mute infant. Leo; Christ 

tect 9, Himself, the expectation of the nations, that innumerable 

posterity once promised to the most blessed patriarch 

Abraham, but to be born not after the flesh, but by the 

Spint; therefore likened to the stars for multitude, that from 

the father of all nations, not an earthly but an heavenly 

progeny might be looked for. Thus the heirs of that 

promised posterity, marked out in the stars, are roused to the 

faith by the rise of a new star, and where the heavens had 

been at first called in to witness, the aid of Heaven is con- 


VER. I, 2. ST. MATTHEW. 67 


tinued. Carysost. This was manifestly not one of the 
common stars of Heaven. First, because none of the stars 
moves in this way, from east to south, and such is the 
situation of Palestine with respect to Persia. Secondly, 
from the time of its appearance, not in the night only, but 
during the day. Thirdly, from its being visible and then 
again invisible; when they entered Jerusalem it hid itself, 
and then appeared again when they left Herod. Further, it 
had no stated motion, but when the Magi were to go on, it 
went before them; when to stop, it stopped like the pillar of 
cloud in the desert. Fourthly, it signified the Virgin’s 
delivery, not by being fixed aloft, but by descending to 
earth, shewing herein like an invisible virtue formed into the 
visible appearance of a star. Remic. Some affirm this star 
to have been the Holy Spirit; He who descended on the 
baptized Lord as a dove, appearing to the Magi as a star. 
Others say it was an Angel, the same who appeared to the 
shepherds. 

Gross. In the east. It seems doubtful whether this refers Gloss. 
to the place of the star, or of those that saw it; it might a 
have risen in the east, and gone before them to Jerusalem. 

Aus. Will you ask, from whom had they learned that Avg. 
such an appearance as a star was to signify the birth of 37). 1. 
Christ? I answer from Angels, by the warning of some 
revelation. Do you ask, was it from good or ill Angels? 
Truly even wicked spirits, namely the dzemons, confessed 
Christ to be the Son of God. But why should they not 
have heard it from good Angels, since in this their adoration 
of Christ their salvation was sought, not their wickedness 
condemned? The Angels might say to them, ‘ The Star 
which ye have seen is the Christ. Go ye, worship Him, 
where He is now born, and see how great is Ile that is 
born.” Leo; Besides that star thus seen with the bodily Leo, 
eye, a yet brighter ray of truth pierced their hearts; they were y.,,, 3, 
enlightened by the illumination of the true faith. PsevUDo- Hil. 
Auc. They might think that a king of Judzea was born, since wae 
the birth of temporal princes is sometimes attended by aN. gle: 
star. These Chaldean Magi inspected the stars, not with 
malevolence, but with the true desire of knowledge; follow- 
ing, it may be supposed, the tradition from Balaam; so that 

F 2 


68 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IT. 


when they saw this new and singular star, they understood it 
to be that of which Balaam had prophesied, as marking the 
birth of a King of Judea. 

Leo, Leo. What they knew and believed might have been 

ubi SUP: sufficient for themselves, that they needed not to seek to see 
with the bodily eye, what they saw so clearly with the 
spiritual. But their earnestness and perseverance to see the - 
Babe was for our profit. It profited us that Thomas, after 
the Lord’s resurrection, touched and felt the marks of his 
wounds, and so for our profit the Magians’ eyes looked on 
the Lord in His cradle. Pseupo-Curys. Were they then 
ignorant that Herod reigned in Jerusalem? Or that it is a 
capital treason to proclaim another King while one yet lives? 
But while they thought on the King to come, they feared 
not the king that was; while as yet they had not seen 
Christ, they were ready to die for Him. O blessed Magi! 
who before the face of a most cruel king, and before having 
beheld Christ, were made His confessors. 


3. When Herod the king had heard these things, 
he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. 

4, And when he had gathered all the Chief Priests 
and Scribes of the people together, he demanded of 
them where Christ should be born. 

5. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of 
Judea: for thus it is written by the prophet, 

6. And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art 
not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of 
thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people 
Israel. 


Aug. Auc. As the Magi seek a Redeemer, so Herod fears a 
non occ. successor. Gross. The King, he is called, though in com- 
Gloss. parison with him whom they are seeking he is an alien and 
a foreigner. Pseupo-Curys. Herod zas troubled when he 
heard that a King was born of Jewish lineage, lest, himself 
being an Idumezan, the kingdom should return again to 
native priscces, and himself be expelled, and his seed after 


VER. 3—O6. ST. MATTHEW. 69 


hin. Great station is ever obnoxious to great fears; as the 
boughs of trees planted in high ground move when never so 

hittle wind blows, so high men are troubled with little 
rumours; while the lowly, like trees in the valley, remain at 
peace. AvucG. If His birth as an infant makes proud kings one 
tremble, what will His tribunal as a Judge do? Let princes 200. 2. 
fear Him sitting at the right hand of His Father, whom 

this impious king feared while He hanged yet on His 
mother’s breast. Lro. Thou art troubled, Herod, without Leo, 
cause. Thy nature cannot contain Christ, nor is the Lord of peer 
the world content with the narrow bounds of thy dominion. 

He, whom thou wouldest not should reign in Judea, reigns 
every where. Gtoss. Perhaps he was troubled not on his Gloss. 
own account, but for fear of the displeasure of the Romans.” ’ 
They would not allow the title of King or of God to 
any without their permission. Gree. At the birth of a Greg. 
King of Heaven, a king of earth is troubled; surely, earthly sii 
greatness is confounded, when heavenly greatness shews* !2 
itself. Leo. Herod represents the Devil; who as he Leo, 
then instigated him, so now he unweariedly imitates him. yyy; 9. 
For he is grieved by the calling of the Gentiles, and by the 

daily ruin of his power. Pseupo-Curys. Both have their 

own causes of jealousy, both fear a successor in their king- 

dom; Herod an earthly successor, the Devil a spiritual. 

Even Jerusalem is troubled, which should have rejoiced at 

that news, when a Jewish King was said to be risen up. 

But they were troubled, for the wicked cannot rejoice at the 
coming of the good. Or perhaps it was in fear that Herod 
should wreak his wrath against a Jewish King on his race. 
Goss. Jerusalem was troubled with him, as willing to Gloss. 
favour him whom it feared; the vulgar always pay undue 
honour to one who tyrannizes over it. Observe the diligence 

of his enquiry. If he should find him, he would do to him 

as he shewed afterwards his disposition; if he should not, 

he would at least be excused to the Romans. Remice. 

They are called Scribes, not from the employment of writing, 

but from the interpretation of the Scriptures, for they were 
doctors of the law. Observe, he dves not enquire where 
Christ is born, but where He should be born; the subtle 
purpose of this was to sec if thev would shew pleasure at 


70 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


the birth of their King. IIe calls Him Christ, because he 
knew that the King of the Jews was anointed. Psrupo- 
Curys. Why docs Herod make this enquiry, seeing he 
believed not the Scriptures? Or if he did believe, how 
could he hope to be able to kill Him whom the Scriptures 
declared should be King? The Devil instigated him, who 
believed that Scripture lies not; such is the faith of devils, 
who are not permitted to have perfect belief, even of that 
which they do believe. That they do believe, it is the force 
of truth constrains them; that they do not believe, it is that 
they are blinded by the enemy. If they had perfect faith, 
they would live as about to depart from this world soon, not 
as to possess it for ever. | 
ea Leo; The Magi, judging as men, sought in the 
xxxi, 2, royal city for Him, whom they had been told was born a 
King. But He who took the form of a servant, and came 
not to judge but to be judged, chose Bethlehem for His birth, 
Theod. Jerusalem for His death. ‘lHEopDotus; Had He chosen 
es ‘the mighty city of Rome, it might have been thought that 
oone this change of the world had been wrought by the might of 
‘ther citizens; had He been the son of the emperor, his power 
might have aided Him. But what was His choice? All that 
was mean, all that was in low esteem, that in this transform- 
ation of the world, divinity might at once be recognized. 
Therefore He chose a poor woman for His mother, a poor 
country for His native country; He has no money, and this 
Gieg. stable is His cradle. GRreEcory; Rightly is He born in 
nee Bethlehem, which signifies the house of bread, who said, 
vii l. Lo am the living bread, who came down from heaven. 
Pseupo-Curys. When they should have kept secret the 
mystery of the King appointed of God, especially before a 
foreign king, straightway they became not preachers of the 
word of God, but revealers of His mystery. And they not 
only display the mystery, but cite the passage of the prophet, 
Gloss. Vv1Z. Micah. Gtoss. He quotes this prophecy as they quote 
oa who give the sense and not the words. JEROME; The 
Ripist. Jews are here blamed for ignorance; for whereas the pro- 
67. phecy says, Thou Bethlehem Ephrata; they said, ‘ Bethle- 
hem in the land of Judah.’ Pseupo-Curys. By cutting 
short the prophecy, they became the cause of the murder of 


VER. 3—6. ST. MATTHEW. 71 


the Innocents. For the prophecy proceeds, From thee shall 
go forth a King who shall feed My people Israel, and His 
day shall be from everlasting. Had they cited the whole 
prophecy, Herod would not have raged so madly, considering 
that it could not be an earthly King whose days were spoken 


of as from everlasting. JEROME; The following is the Jerom. 


sense of the prophecy. Thou, Bethlehem, of the land of 
Judah, or Ephrata, (which is added to distinguish it from 
another Bethlehem in Galilee,) though thou art a small 
village among the thousand cities of Judah, yet out of thee 
shall be born Christ, who shall be the Ruler of Israel, who 
according to the flesh is of the seed of David, but was born 
of Me before the worlds; and therefore it is written, His 
goings forth are of old. In the beginning was the Word. 
Gioss. This latter half of the prophecy the Jews dropped ; 
and other parts they altered, either through ignorance, (as 
was said above,) or for perspicuity, that Herod who was 
a foreigner might better understand the prophecy; thus for 
Ephrata, they said, land of Judah; and for little among 
the thousands of Judah, which expresses its smallness con- 
trasted with the multitude of the people, they said, not the 
least among the princes, willing to shew the high dignity 
that would come from the birth of the Prince. As if they 
had said, Thou art great among cities from which princes 
have come. Remic. Or the sense is; though little among 
cities that have dominion, yet art thou not the least, for out 
of thee shall come the Ruler, who shall rule My people Israel; 
this Ruler is Christ, who rules and guides His faithful people. 
Currys. Observe the exactness of the prophecy; it is 
not He shall be in Bethlehem, but shall come out of 
Bethlehem ; shewing that He should be only born there. 
What reason is there for applying this to Zorobabel, as 
some do? For his goings forth were not from _ ever- 
lasting; nor did he go forth from Bethlehem, but was 
born in Babylonia. The expression, art not the least, 
1s a further proof, for none but Christ could make the 
town where He was born illustrious. And after that birth, 
there came men from the utmost ends of the earth to 
see the stable and manger. He calls Him not ‘ the Son 
of God,’ but the Ruler who shall govern My people Israel ; 


In Mich. 
v. 2. 


Gloss. 


ton occ. 


72 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


for thus He ought to condescend at the first, that they should 
not be scandalized, but should preach such things as more 
pertained to salvation, that they might be gained. Who 
Shall rule My people Israel, is said mystically, for those 
of the Jews who believed; for if C&rist ruled not all the Jews, 
theirs is the blame. Meanwhile he is silent respecting the 
Gentiles, that the Jews might not be scandalized. Mark 
this wonderful ordinance; Jews and Magi mutually instruct 
each other; the Jews learn of the Magi that a star had 
proclaimed Christ in the cast, the Magi from the Jews that 
the Prophets had spoken of Him of old. Thus confirmed 
by a twofold testimony, they would look with more ardent 
faith for One whom the brightness of the star and the voice 
Au. of the Prophets equally proclaimed. AvucG. The star that 
oe guided the Magi to the spot where was the Infant God with 
373.4. His Virgin Mother, might have conducted them straight to 
the town; but it vanished, and shewed not itself again to 
them till the Jews themselves had told them the place where 
Christ should be born ; Bethichem of Judea. Like in this 
to those who built the ark for Noah, providing others with a 
refuge, themselves perished in the flood; or like to the stones 
by the road that shew the miles, but themselves are not able 
to move. The enquirers heard and departed; the teachers 
spake and remained still. Even now the Jews shew us 
something similar; for some Pagans, when clear passages 
of Scripture are shewn them, which prophesy of Christ, 
suspecting them to be forged by the Christians, have recourse 
to Jewish copies. Thus they leave the Jews to read 
unprofitably, and go on themselves to believe faithfully. 


7. Then Herod, when he had privily called the 
wise men, enquired of them diligently what time the 
star appeared. 

8. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go 
and search diligently for the young Child; and 
when ye have found Him, bring me word again, 
that I may come and worship Him also. 

‘9. When they had heard the king, they departed. 


VER. 7, 8, 9. ST. MATTHEW. 73 


Pseupo-CuHrys. As soon as Herod had heard the answer, 
though doubly authenticated, both by the authority of the 
Priests, and the passage from the Prophets, he yet turned 
not to worship the King that was to be born, but sought 
how he might put Him to geath by subtilty. He saw that 
the Magi were neither to be won by flattery, nor awed by 
threats, nor bribed by gifts, to consent to this murder; he 
sought therefore to deceive them; he privily called the wise 
men; that the Jews, whom he suspected, might not know of 
it. For he thought they would incline the rather to a King of 
theirown nation. Remic. Diligently enquired; craftily, for he 
feared they would not return to him, and then he should 
know how he should do to put the young Child to death. 
Psecpo-AuG. The star had been seen, and with great wonder, Pseudo- 
nearly two years before. We are to understand that it was eee _ 
signified to them whose the star was, which was visible all APP 
that time till He, whom it signified, was born. Then as a 
soon as Christ was made known to them they set out, and 
came and worshipped Him in thirteen days from the east*. 
Curysost. Or, the star appeared to them long time before, 
because the journey would take up some time, and they were to 
stand before Him immediately on His birth, that seeing Him 
in swaddling clothes, He might seem the more wonderful. 
Gross. According to others, the star was first seen on the Gloss, 
day of the nativity, and having accomplished its end, ceased "”" °’ 
to be. Thus Fulgentius says, “‘ The Boy at His birth Serm.de 
created a new star.” Though they now knew both time Ppiph. 
and place, he still would not have them ignorant of the 
person of the Child, Go, he says, and enquire diligently of 
the young Child; a commission they would have executed 
even if he had not commanded it. Curys. Concerning the 
young Child, he says, not ‘ of the King;’ he envies Him the 
regal title. Psrupo-Curyrs. To induce them to do this, he 
put on the colour of devotion, beneath which he whetted the 
sword, hiding the malice of his heart under colour of 


4 This is written upon the notion have taken place after the Purification, 
that the Magi presented themselves to on the return of St. Mary to Bethlehem. 
Christ twelve days after His birth, However, Aug. (Cons. Ev. ii. 11.) 
according to the Latin date for cele- places it before the Purification. 
brating the event. It seems really to ‘ 


Greg. 
Hom. in 
Ev. i. 
10. 3. 


Gloss, 
Ansclin. 


Ambros. 
in Luc. 
i. 45. 


74 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


humility. Such is the manner of the malicious, when they 
would hurt any one in secret, they feign meekness and 
affection. Greco. He feigns a wish of worshipping Him 
only that he may discover Him, and put Him to death. 
Remic. The Magi obeyed the King so far as to seek the 
Lord, but not to return to Herod. Like in this to good 
hearers; the good they hear from wicked preachers, that 
they do; but do not imitate their evil lives. 


9. And, lo, the star, which they saw in the east, 
went before them, till it came and stood over where 
the young Child was. | 


Pseupo-Curys. This passage shews, that when the star 
had brought the Magi nearly to Jerusalem, it was hidden from 
them, and so they were compelled to ask in Jerusalem, where 
Christ should be born? and thus to manifest Him to them; 
on two accounts, first, to put to confusion the Jews, inasmuch 
as the Gentiles instructed only by sight of a star sought 
Christ through strange lands, while the Jews who had read 
the Prophets from their youth did not receive Him, though 
born in their country. Secondly, that the Priests, when asked 
where Christ should be born, might answer to their now 
condemnation, and while they instructed Herod, they were 
themselves ignorant of Him. The star went before them, to 
shew them the greatness of the King. Auc. To perform its 
due service to the Lord, it advanced slowly, leading them to 
the spot. It was ministering to Him, and not ruling His 
fate; its light shewed the suppliants and filled the inn, shed 
over the walls and roof that covered the birth; and thus it - 
disappeared. Pseupo-Curys. What wonder that a divine 
star should minister to the Sun of righteousness about to rise. 
It stood over the Child’s head, as it were, saying, ‘ This is 
He; proving by its place what it had no voice to utter. 
Goss. It is evident that the star must have been in the air, 
and close above the house where the Child was, else it 
would not have pointed out the exact house. 

AMBROSE; The star is the way, and the way is Christ; 
and according to the mystery of the incarnation, Christ is a 


vER. 10, 11. Si. MATTHEW. 795 


star. He is a blazing and a morning-star. Thus where 
Herod is, the star is not seen; where Christ is, there it is 
again seen, and points out the way. Rewia. Or, the star 
figures the grace of God, and Herod the Devil. He, who 

by sin puts himself in the Devil’s power, loses that grace; 
but if he return by repentance, he soon finds that grace again 
which leaves him not till it have brought him to the young 
Child’s house, i.e. the Church. Gtoss. Or, the star is the Gloss. 
illumination of faith, which leads him to the nearest aid;° 
while they turn aside to the Jews, the Magi lose it; so those 
who seek counsel of the bad, lose the true light. 


10. When they saw the star, they rejoiced with 
exceeding great joy. 

11. And when they were come into the house, they 
saw the young Child with Mary His mother, and fell 
down, and worshipped Him: and when they had 
opened their treasures, they presented unto Him gifts; 
gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. 


Goss. This service of the star is followed by the rejoicing 
of the Magi. Remic. And it was not enough to say, They 
rejoiced, but they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. PsEuDo- 
Curys. They rejoiced, because their hopes were not falsified 
but confirmed, and because the toil of so great travel had not 
been undertaken in vain. Gtoss. He rejoices indeed who Gloss. 
rejoices on God’s account, who is the true joy. With great 
joy, he says, for they had great cause. Psrupo-Curys. By 
the mystery of this star they understood that the dignity of 
the King then born exceeded the measure of all worldly 
kings. Remic. He adds greatly, shewing that men rejoice 
more over what they have lost than over what they possess. 
Leo. Though in stature a babe, needing the aid of others, {,0, 
unable to speak, and different in nothing from other infants, a 
yet such faithful witnesses, shewing the unseen Divines. 4.4 
Majesty which was in Him, ought to have proved most 
certainly that that was the Eternal Essence of the Son of 


Gloss. 
Anselm. 


Greg. 
om. in 
Evang. 
i. 106. 
Aug. 
non occ. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 
Prov. 
21, 20. 


76 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IT. 


God that had taken upon Him the true human nature. 
PsEupo-Curys. Mary His mother, not crowned with a 
diadem or laying on a golden couch; but with barely one 
garment, not for ornament but for covering, and that such as 
the wife of a carpenter when abroad might have. Had they 
therefore come to seek an earthly king, they would have 
been more confounded than rejoiced, deeming their pains 
thrown away. But now they looked for a heavenly King ; 
so that though they saw nought of regal state, that star’s 
witness sufficed them, and their eyes rejoiced to behold 
a despised Boy, the Spirit shewing Him to their hearts in all 
His wonderful power, they fell down and worshipped, seeing 
the man, they acknowledged the God. Rasanus. Joseph 
was absent by Divine command, that no wrong suspicions 
might occur to the Gentiles. GLoss. In these offerings we 
observe their national customs, gold, frankincense, and 
various spices abounding among the Arabians; yet they 
intended thereby to signify something in mystery. GREG. 
Gold, as to a King; frankincense, as sacrifice to God; myrrh, 
as embalming the body of the dead. Ava. Gold, as paid 
to a mighty King; frankincense, as offered to God; myrrh, 
as to one who is to die for the sins of all. Psrupo- 
Currys. And though it were not then understood what these 
several gifts mystically signified, that is no difficulty; the 
same grace that instigated them to the deed, ordained the 
whole. Remic. And it is to be known that each did not 
offer a different gift, but each one the three things, each one 
thus proclaiming the King, the God, and the man. CuHrys. 
et Marcion and Paul of Samosata then blush, who will not 
see what the Magi saw, those progenitors of the Church 
adoring God in the flesh. That He was truly in the flesh, 
the swaddling clothes and the stall prove; yet that they 
worshipped Him not as mere man, but as God, the gifts 
prove which it was becoming to offer toa God. Let the 
Jews also be ashamed, seeing the Magi coming before them, 
and themselves not even earnest to tread in their path. 
Grec. Something further may yet be meant here. Wisdom 
is typified by gold; as Solomon saith in the Proverbs, 4 
treasure to be desired is in the mouth of the wise. By 
frankincense, which is burnt before God, the power of prayer 


VER. 12. ST. MATTHEW. 77 


is intended, as in the Psalms, Let my speech come before thee Ps. 141, 
as incense. In myrth is figured mortification of the flesh. ~ 

To a king at his birth we offer gold, if we shine in his sight 

with the light of wisdom; we offer frankincense, if we have 
power before God by the sweet savour of our prayers ; we offer 
myrrh, when we mortify by abstinence the lusts of the flesh. 
Gioss. The three men who offer, signify the nations who — 
come from the three quarters of the earth. They open their neem 
treasures, 1. e. manifest the faith of their hearts by confession. 
Rightly in the house, teaching that we should not vain- 
gloriously display the treasure of a good conscience. They 

bring three gifts, i.e. the faith in the Holy Trinity. Or vid. sup. 
opening the stores of Scripture, they offer its threefold Sense, p, ote 
historical, moral, and allegorical; or Logic, Physic, and 
Ethics, making them all serve the faith. 


12. And being warned of God in a dream that they 
should not return to Herod, they departed into their 
own country another way. 


Aug. The wicked Herod, now made cruel by fear, will Aug. 
needs do a deed of horror. But how could he ensnare him” 
who had come to cut off all fraud? His fraud is escaped as 
it follows, And being warned. JEROME; They had offered 
gifts to the Lord, and receive a warning corresponding to it. 

This warning (in the Greek ‘ having received a response’) 

is given not by an Angel, but by the Lord Himself, to 
shew the high privilege granted to the merit of Joseph. 
Gioss. This warning is given by the Lord Himself; it is Gloss. 
none other that now teaches these Magi the way they” 
should return, but He who said, [ am the way. Not that John 14. 
the Infant actually speaks to them, that His divinity may 

not be revealed before the time, and His human nature may 

be thought real. But he says, having received an answer, 

for as Moses prayed silently, so they with pious spirit had 
asked what the Divine will bade. By another way, for 
they were not to be mixed up with the unbelieving Jews. 
Curys. See the faith of the Magi; they were not offended, Chrys. 


nor said within themselves, What need now of flight? or Bae 


Grey. 
Hom. in 
Ev. 1. 
10. 7. 


78 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IL. 


of secret return, if this Boy be really some great one? . Such 
is true faith; it asks not the reason of any command, but 
obeys. Psreupo-Curys. Had the Magi sought Christ as an 
earthly King, they would have remained with Him when 
they had found Him; but they only worship, and go their 
way. After their return, they continued in the worship of 
God more stedfast than before, and taught many by their 
preaching. And when afterwards Thomas reached their 
country, they joined themselves to him, and were baptized, 
and did according to his preaching’. Grec. We may learn 
much from this return of the Magi another way. Our 
country is Paradise, to which, after we have come to the 
knowledge of Christ we are forbidden to return the way we 
came. We have left this country by pride, disobedience, 
following things of sight, tasting forbidden food; and we 
must return to it by repentance, obedience, by contemning 
things of sight, and overcoming carnal appetite. PsEupo- 
Curys. It was impossible that they, who left Herod to 
go to Christ, should return to Herod. They who have 
by sin left Christ and passed to the devil, often return to 
Christ; for the innocent, who knows not what is evil, is 
easily deceived, but. having once tasted the evil he has taken’ 
up, and remembering the good he has left, he returns in 
penitence to God. He who has forsaken the devil and 
come to Christ, hardly returns to the devil; for rejoicing 
in the good he has found, and remembering the evil he has 
escaped, with difficulty returns to that evil. 


13. And when they were departed, behold, the 
angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, 
saying, Arise, and take the young Child and His 
mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I 
bring thee word; for Herod will seek the young 
Child to destroy Him. 


b S. Thomas is said to have preached Margi are mentioned, Pseudo-Hippol. 
to the Parthians, Persians, or Indians. de Duod. Apost. (ed. Fabr. Append. p. 
Euseb. Hist. iii. 1. Clem. Recogn. ix. 30.) Combefis conjecturing Mardi. 

29. Greg. Naz. Or. 25. p. 438. The 


VER. 13—10. ST. MATTHEW. 7Y 


14. When he arose, he took the young Child and 
His mother by night, and departed into Egypt: 

15. And was there until the death of Herod: that 
it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord 
by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called 
my Son. 


Rapanus. Here Matthew omits the day of purification when 
the first-born must be presented in the Temple with a lamb, 
or a pair of turtle doves, or pigeons. Their fear of Herod 
did not make them bold to transgress the Law, that they 
should not present the Child in the temple. Assoon then as 
the rumour concerning the Child begins to be spread abroad, 
the Angel is sent to bid Joseph carry Him into Egypt. 
Remic. By this that the Angel appears always to Joseph in 
sleep, is mystically signified that they who rest from 
mundane cares and secular pursuits, deserve angelic visita- 
tions. Hitary; The first time when he would teach Joseph 
that she was lawfully espoused, the Angel called the Virgin 
his espoused zeife; but after the birth she is only spoken of 
as the Mother of Jesus. As wedlock was rightfully imputed 
to her in her virginity, so virginity is esteemed venerable in 
her as the mother of Jesus. Pseupo-Curys. He says not, 
‘ the Mother and her young Child,’ but, the young Child and 
His mother ; for the Child was not born for the mother, but 
the mother prepared for the Child. How is this that the Son 
of God flies from the face of man? or who shall deliver from 
the enemy’s hand, if He Himself fears His enemies? First ; 
He ought to observe, even in this, the law of that human 
nature which He took on Him; and human nature and 
infancy must flee before threatening power. Next, that 
Christians when persecution makes it necessary should not 
be ashamed to fly. But why into Egypt? The Lord, who 
keepeth not His anger for ever, remembered the woes He 
had brought upon Egypt, and therefore sent His Son thither, 
and gives it this sign of great reconciliation, that with this 
one remedy He might heal the ten plagues of Egypt, and the 
nation that had been the persecutor of this first-born people, 
might be the guardian of His first-born Son. As formerly 


80 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


they had cruelly tyrannized, now they might devoutly serve ; 
nor go to the Red Sea to be drowned, but be called to the 
waters of baptism to receive life. Avo. Hear the sacrament 
of a great mystery. Moses before had shut up the light of 
day from the traitors the Egyptians; Christ by going down 
thither brought back light to them that sate in darkness. 
He fled that he might enlighten them, not that he might 
escape his foes. Ip. The miserable tyrant supposed that by 
the Saviour’s coming he should be thrust from his royal 
throne. But it was not so; Christ came not to hurt others’ 
dignity, but to bestow His own on others. HuLary; Egypt 
full of idols; for after this enquiry for Him among the Jews, 
Christ leaving Judza goes to be cherished among nations 
given to the vainest superstitions. JEROME; When he takes 
the Child and His mother to go into Egypt, it is in the night 
and darkness, when to return into Judza, the Gospel speaks 
of no light, no darkness. Pseupo-Curys. The straitness of 
every persecution may be called night—the relief from it in 
like manner, day. Rasanus; For when the true light with- 
draws, they who hate the light are in darkness, when it 
returns they are again enlightened. CuHurys. See how imme- 
diately on His birth the tyrant is furious agaiast Him, and 
the mother with her Child is driven into foreign lands. So 
should you in the beginning of your spiritual career seem to 
have tribulation, you need not to be discouraged, but bear all 


bale things manfully, having this example. BeEpE. The flight 
Nat. in. into Egypt signifies. that the elect are often by the wicked- 
nocent. ness of the bad driven from their homes, or sentenced to 


banishment. Thus He, who, we shall see below, gave the 
command to His own, When they shall persecute you tn one 
city, flee ye to another, first practised what He enjoined, as a 
man flying before the face of man on earth. He whom but 
a little before a star had proclaimed to the Magi to be 
worshipped as from heaven. Remia. Isaiah had foretold 
this flight into Egypt. Lo! the Lord shall ascend on a light 
cloud, and shall come into Egypt, and shall scatter the idols 
of Egypt. tis the practice of this Evangelist to confirm all 
he says; and that because he is writing to the Jews, there- 
fore he adds, that it might be fulfilled, &c. JEROME; This 
is not in the LXX; but in Osee according to the genuine 


VER. 16. ST. MATTHEW. he 


Hebrew text we read; Israel is my child, and I have loved 
him, and, from Egypt have I called my Son; where the LXX 
render, Israel is my child, and I have loved him, and called 

my sons oul of Egypt. Ip. The Evangelist cites this text, Jerom. 
because it refers to Christ typically. For it is to be observed, he oe 
that in this Prophet and in others, the coming of Christ and 

the call of the Gentiles are foreshewn in such a manner, that 

the thread of history is never broken. Curys. It is a law of 
prophecy, that in a thousand places many things are said of 
some and fulfilled of others. As it is said of Simeon and 
Levi, I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Gen. 
Israel; which was fulfilled not in themselves, but in their 49, 7. 
descendants. So here Christ is by nature the Son of God, 

and so the prophecy is fulfilled in Him. JERomE; Let those 

who deny the authenticity of the Hebrew copies, shew us 

this passage in the LXX, and when they have failed to find 

it, we will shew it them in the Hebrew. We may also 
explain it in another way, by considering it as quoted from 
Numbers, God brought him out of Egypt; his glory is as it Num. 
were that of a unicorn. Remic. In Joseph is figured the 2% 2: 
order of preachers, in Mary Holy Scripture ; by the Child the 
knowledge ef the Saviour; by the cruelty of Herod the 
persecution which the Church suffered in Jerusalem; by 
Joseph’s flight into Egypt the passing of the preachers 

to the unbelieving Gentiles, (for Egypt signifies darkness ;) 

by the time that he abode in Egypt the space of time 
between the ascension of the Lord and the coming of Anti- 
Christ; by Herod’s death the extinction of jealousy in the 
hearts of the Jews. 


16. Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked 
of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, 
and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, 
and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and 
under, according to the time which he had diligently 
enquired of the wise men. 


Psgupo-Curys. When the infant Jesus had subdued the 
Magi, not by the might of His flesh, but the grace of His 
VOL. I. G 


Aug. 
non occ. 


Aug. 
Serm. 
220. 


App. 


Aug. 
Serm. 
373. 3. 


Aug. 
Serm. 
132. 
App. 


Gloss. 
ord, 


82 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, II: 


Spirit, Herod was exceeding wrath, that they whom he sitting 
on his throne had no power to move, were obedient to an 
Infant lying ina manger. Then by their contempt of him 
the Magi gave further cause of wrath. For when kings’ 
wrath is stirred by fear for their crowns, it is a great and 
inextinguishable wrath. But what did he? He sent and 
slew all the children. As a wounded beast rends whatso- 
ever meeteth it as if the cause of its smart, so he mocked 
by the Magi spent his fury on children. He said to himself 
in his fury, ‘Surely the Magi have found the Child whom 
they said should be King;’ for a king in fear for his crown 
fears all things, suspects all. Then he sent and slew all 
those infants, that he might sccure one among so many. 
Auc. And while he thus persecutcs Christ, he furnished 
an army (of martyrs) clothed in white robes of the same age 
as the Lord. Ip. Behold how this unrighteous enemy never 
could have so much profited these infants by his love, as he 
did by his hate; for as much as iniquity abounded against 
them, so much did the grace of blessing abound on them. 
Ip. O blessed infants! He only will doubt of your crown 
in this your passion for Christ, who doubts that the baptism 
of Christ has a benefit for infants. He who at His birth had 
Angels to proclaim Him, the heavens to testify, and Magi to 
worship Him, could surely have prevented that these should 
not have died for Him, had He not known that they died not 
in that death, but rather lived in higher bliss. Far be the 
thought, that Christ who came to set men free, did nothing to 
reward those who dicd in His behalf, when hanging on the 
cross He prayed for those who put Him to death. 

Raspanus. He is not satisfied with the massacre at 
Bethlehem, but extends it to the adjacent villages ; sparing 
no age from the child of one night old, to that of two years. 
Auc. The Magi had seen this unknown star in the 
heavens, not a few days, but two years before, as they had 
informed Herod when he enquired. This caused him to fix 
two years old and under; as it follows, according to the 
tame he had enquired of the Magi. Iv. Or because he 
feared that the Child to whom even stars ministered, might 
transform His appearance to greater or under that of His 
own age, or might conceal all those of that age: hence it 


VER, 17, 18, ST. MATTHEW. 83 


seems to be that he slew all from one day to two years old. 
Ava. Or, disturbed by pressure of still more imminent Aug. 
dangers, Herod’s thoughts are drawn to other thoughts than ee 
the slaughter of children, he might suppose that the Magi, !!. 
unable to find Him whom they had supposed born, were 
ashamed to return to him. So the days of purification being 
accomplished, they might go up in safety to Jerusalem. And 

who does not see that that one day they may have escaped 

the attention of a King occupied with so many cares, and 

that afterwards when the things done in the Temple came to 

be spread abroad, then Herod discovered that he had been 
deceived by the Magi, and then sent and slew the children. 
BEDE. In this death of the children the precious death of al] Bede. 
Christ’s martyrs is figured; that they were infants signifies, Nat. In. 
that by the merit of humility alone can we come to the glory 2°e""- 
of martyrdom; that they were slain in Bethlehem and the 
coasts thereof, that the persecution shall be both in Jerusalem 
whence the @hurch originated, and throughout the world; 

in those of two years old are figured the perfect in doctrine 

and works; those under that age the neophytes; that they 

were slain while Christ escaped, signifies that the bodies of 

the martyrs may be destroyed by the wicked, but that Christ 
cannot be taken from them. 


17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by 
Jeremy the prophet, saying, 

18. In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, 
and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping 
for her children, and would not be comforted, because — 
they are not. | 


Curys. The Evangelist by this history of so bloody a Chrys. 
massacre, having filled the reader with horror, now again Pgmaks 
sooths his feelings, shewing that these things were not 
done because God could not hinder, or knew not of them ; 
but as the Prophet had foretold. JEROME; This passage of at 
Jeremiah has been quoted by Matthew neither according to erem. 
the Hebrew nor the LXX version. This shews that the %: 

G2 


Ecclus. 
35, 21. 


Pseudo- 


see 
Judg.20. 


84 GOSPEL ACCURDING TO CHAP. II. 


Evangelists and Apostles did not follow any one’s translation, 
but according to the Hebrew manner expressed in their own 
words what they had read in Hebrew. Ip. By Ramah we 
need not suppose that the town of that name near Gibeah is 
meant; but take it as signifying ‘ high.” A voice was heard 
‘ aloft, that is, spread far and wide.’ Pseupo-Curys. Or, 
it was heard on high, because uttered for the death of the 
innocent, according to that, The voice of the poor entereth 
into the heavens. The ‘ weeping’ means the cries of the 
children; ‘ lamentation,’ refers to the mothers. In the 
infants themselves their death ends their cries, in the mothers 
it is continually renewed by the remembrance of their loss. 
JEROME; Rachel’s son was Benjamin, in which tribe 
Bethlehem is not situated. How then does Rachel weep 
for the children of Judah as if they were her own? We 
answer briefly. She was buried near Bethlehem in Ephrata, 
and was regarded as the mother, because her body was 
there entertained. Or, as the two tribes of Judah and 
Benjamin were contiguous, and Herod’s command extended 
to the coasts of Bethlehem as well as to the town itself, we 
may suppose that many were slain in Benjamin. PsEupo-Av@. 
Or, The sons of Benjamin, who were akin to Rachel, were 


- formerly cut off by the other tribes, and so extinct both 
.then and ever after. Then therefore Rachel began to mourn 


her sons, when she saw those of her sister cut off in such a 
cause, that they should be heirs of eternal life; for he who 
has experienced any misfortune, is made more sensible of his 
losses by the good fortune of a neighbour. Remic. The 
sacred Evangelist adds, to shew the greatness of the 
mourning, that even the dead Rachel was roused to mourn 
her sons, and would not be comforted because they were not. 
JEROME; This may be understood in two ways; either she 
thought them dead for all eternity, so that no consolation 
could comfort her; or, she desired not to receive any 
comfort for those who she knew had gone into life eternal. 
Hixary; It could not be that they were not who seemed 
now dead, but by glorious martyrdom they were advanced to 
eternal life; and consolation is for those who have suffered 
loss, not for those who have reaped a gain. Rachel affords 
a type of the Church long barren now at length fruitful. 


VER. 19, 20. ST. MATTHEW. 85 


She is heard weeping for her children, not because she 
mourned them dead, but because they were slaughtered by 

those whom she would have retained as her first-born sons. 
RaBaNnus; Or, The Church weeps the removal of the saints 

from this earth, but wishes not to be comforted as though 

they should return again to the struggles of life, for they are 

not to be recalled into life. Gtoss. She will not be Gloss. 
comforted in this present life, for that they are not, but 
transfers all her hope and comfort to the life to come. 
RaBANUS; Rachel is well set for a type of the Church, as 

the word signifies ‘ a sheep’ or ‘ seeing;’ her whole thought vid. note 
being to fix her eye in contemplation of God; and she is’””’ 
the hundredth sheep that the shepherd layeth on his 
shoulder. 


19. But when Herod was dead, behold, an Angel 
of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in 


Egypt, 
20. Saying, Arise, and take the young Child and 


His mother, and go into the land of Israel ; for they 
are dead which sought the young Child’s life. 


Evuses. For the sacrilege which Herod had committed Euseb. 
against the Saviour, and his wicked slaughter of the infants Hoe. 
of the same age, the Divine vengeance hastened his end; 
and his body, as Josephus relates, was attacked by a strange 
disease ; so that the prophets declared that they were not 
human ailments, but visitations of Divine vengeance. Filled 
with mad fury, he gives command to seize and imprison the 
heads and nobles out of all parts of Judea; ordering that as 
soon as ever he should breathe his last, they should be all 
put to death, that so Judza though unwillingly might mourn 
at his decease. Just before he died he murdered his son 
Antipater, (besides two boys put to death before, Alexander and 
Aristobulus.) Such was the end of Herod, noticed in those 
words of the Evangelist, when Herod was dead, and such the 
punishment inflicted. JEROME; Many here err from ig- 
norance of history, supposing the Herod who mocked our 


86 GOSPEL ACCORDING To CHAP. II. 


Lord on the day of His passion, and the Herod whose death 
is here related, were the same. But the Herod who was 
then made friends with Pilate was son of this Herod and 
brother to Archelaus; for Archelaus was banished to Lyons 
in Gaul, and his father Herod made king in his room, as we 

read in Josephus. 
er Pseupo-Dionysius; See how Jesus Himself, though far 
De Cal, above all celestial beings, and coming unchanged to our nature, 
Hie. _, shunned not that ordinance of humanity which He had taken 
“on Him, but was obedient to the dispositions of His Father 
made known by Angels. For even by Angels is declared 
to Joseph the retreat of the Son into Egypt, so ordained of 
the Father, and His return again to Judea. Pseupo-CHrys. 
See how Joseph was set for ministering to Mary; when 
she went into Egypt and returned, who would have fulfilled 
to her this so needful ministry, had she not been betrothed ¢ 
For to outward view Mary nourished and Joseph defended 
the Child; but in truth the Child supported His mother and 
protected Joseph. Return into the land of Israel; for He 
went down into Egypt as a physician, not to abide there, 
but to succour it sick with error. But the reason of the 
return is given in the words, They are dead, §c. JEROME ; 
From this we see that not Herod only, but also the Priests 
and Scribes had sought the Lord’s death at that time. 
Remic. But if they were many who sought his destruction, 
how came they all to have died in so short a time? As we 
have related above, all the great men among the Jews were 
slain at Herod’s death. Psrupo-Curys. And that is said 
to have been done by the counsel of God for their con- 
spiring with Herod against the Lord; as it is said, Herod was 
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Remic. Or the 
Evangelist uses a figure of speech, by which the plural is 
or soul, used for the singular. These words, the Child's life, over- 
‘igollie throw those heretics who taught that Christ did not take a 
narians. soul, but had His Divinity in place of a soul. BeEpE; This 
ue. slaughter of the infants for the Lord’s sake, the death of 
Nat. In- [[erod soon after, and Joseph’s return with the Lord and his 
"ess mother to the land of Israel, is a figure shewing that all the 
persecutions moved against the Church will be avenged by 
the death of the persecutor, peace restored to the Church, 


VER. 21—23. ST. MATTHEW. 87 


and the saints who had concealed themselves return to their 
own places. Or the return of Jesus to the land of Israel on 
the death of Herod shews, that, at the preaching of Enoch 
and Elijah‘, the Jews, when the fire of modern jealousy 
shall be extinguished, shall receive the true faith. 


21. And he arose, and took the young Child and 
His mother, and came into the land of Israel. 

22. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign 
in Judza in the room of his father Herod, he was 
afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned 
of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of 
Gahilee : 

23. And he came and dwelt in a city called 
Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Naza- 


rene. 


Goss. Joseph was not disobedient to the angelic warning, 
but he arose, and took the young Child and his mother, and 
came into the land of Israel. The Angel had not fixed the 
particular place, so that while Joseph hesitates, the Angel 
returns, and by the often visiting him confirms his obedience. 
JosEPHUS; Herod had nine wives, by seven of whom he 
had a numerous issue. By Josida, his first born Antipater— 
by Mariamine, Alexander and Aristobulus—by Mathuca, 
a Samaritan woman, Archelaus—by Cleopatra of Jerusalem, 
Herod, who was afterwards tetrarch, and Philip. The three 
first were put to death by Herod; and after his death, Archelaus 
seized the throne by occasion of his father’s will, and the 
question of the succession was carried before Augustus 
Cesar. After some delay, he made a distribution of the whole 
of Herod’s dominions in accordance with the Senate’s advice. 


© That Enoch and especially Elias 
will come at the end of the world and 
by their preaching convert the Jews is 
affirmed by Tertullian, (de Anima 35. 
de Resur. c. 22.) Origen, (in Joann. i. 
tom. 5. in Matt. tom. 13.) Hilary, (in 


Matt. xx. §. 10. xxvi. §. 5.) Chrysostom, 
(in Matt. xvii. 10.) Augustine, (de Civ. 
D. xx. 29. Op. Imp. contra Julian. vi. 
30.) Pope Gregory, (in Job. lib. xiv. 
23. in Joann. Hom. vii. 1.) and Da- 
mascene, (de Fid, Orth, iv. 26 fin.) 


88 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IF. 


To Archelaus he assigned one half, consisting of Idumea and 
Judza, with the title of tetrarch, and a promise of that of 
king if he shewed himself deserving of it. The rest he 
divided into two tetrarchates, giving Galilee to Herod the 
tetrarch, Iturea and Trachonitis to Philip. Thus Archelaus 
was after his father’s death a duarch, which kind of sovereignty 


Aus. Deis here called a kingdom. Ava. Here it may be asked, 


Evan. 
ii. 10. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


Aug. 
De Con. 
Evan. 
it, 9. 


How then could his parents go up every year of Chmist’s 
childhood to Jerusalem, as Luke relates, if fear of Archelaus 
now prevented them from approaching it? This difficulty 
is easily solved. At the festival they might escape notice 
in the crowd, and by returning soon, where in ordinary times 
they might be afraid to live. So they neither became ir- 
religious by neglecting the festival, nor notorious by dwelling 
continually in Jerusalem. Or it is open to us to understand 
Luke when he says, they went up every year, as speaking 
of a time when they had nothing to fear from Archelaus, 
who, as Josephus relates, reigned only nine years. There 
is yet a difficulty in what follows; Being warned in a dream, 
he turned aside into the parts of Galilee. If Joseph was 
afraid to go into Judza because one of Herod’s sons, 
Archelaus, reigned there, how could he go into Galilee, where 
another of his sons Herod was tetrarch, as Luke tells us? 
As if the times of which Luke is speaking were times 
in which there was any longer need to fear for the Child, 
when even in Judea things were so changed, that Ar- 
chelaus no longer ruled there, but Pilate was governor. 
Goss. But then we might ask, why was he not afraid to go 
into Galilee, seeing Archelaus ruled there also? He could 
be better concealed in Nazareth than in Jerusalem, which 
was the capital of the kingdom, and where Archelaus was 
constantly resident. Curys. And when he had once left 
the country of His birth, all the occurrences passed out of 
mind; the rage of persecution had been spent in Bethlehem 
and its neighbourhood. By choosing Nazareth therefore, 
Joseph both avoided danger, and returned to his country. 
Avuc. This may perhaps occur to some, that Matthew 
says His parents went with the Child Jesus to Galilee 
because they feared Archelaus, when it should seem most 
probable that they chose Galilee because Nazareth was 


_ VER. 21—28. ST. MATTHEW. 89 


their own city, as Luke has not forgot to mention. We 
must understand, that when the Angel in the vision in Egypt 
said to Joseph, Go into the land of Israel, Joseph understood 
the command to be that he should go straight into Judea, 
that being properly the land of Israel. But finding 
Archelaus ruling there, he would not court the danger, as 
the land of Israel might be interpreted to extend to Galilee, 
which was inhabited by children of Israel. Or we may 
suppose His parents supposed that Christ should dwell no 
where but in Jerusalem, where was the temple of the Lord, 
and would have gone thither had not the fear of Archelaus 
hindered them. And they had not been commanded from 
God to dwell positively in Judea, or Jerusalem, so as that 
they should have despised the fear of Archelaus, but only in 
the land of Israel generally, which they might understand of 
Galilee. 
Hitary. But the figurative interpretation holds good any 
way. Joseph represents the Apostles, to whom Christ is 
entrusted to be borne about. These, as though Herod were 
dead, that is, his people being destroyed in the Lord’s 
passion, are commanded to preach the Gospel to the Jews; 
they are sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But 
finding the seed of their hereditary unbelief still abiding, 
they fear and withdraw; admonished by a vision, to wit, 
seeing the Holy Ghost poured upon the Gentiles, they carry 
Christ to them. RapaNnus. Or, we may apply it to the last 
times of the Jewish Church, when many Jews having turned 
to the preaching of Enoch and Elijah, the rest filled with 
the spirit of Antichrist shall fight against the faith. So that 
part of Judza where Archelaus rules, signifies the followers 
of Antichrist; Nazareth of Galilee, whither Christ is con- 
veyed, that part of the nation that shall embrace the faith. 
Galilee means ‘ removal;’ Nazareth, ‘ the flower of virtues ;’ 
for the Church the more zealously she removes from the 
earthly to the heavenly, the more she abounds in the flower 
and fruit of virtues. GLoss. To this he adds the Prophet's 
testimony, saying, That it might be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the Prophets, &c. JEROME. Had he meant to 
quote a particular text, he would not have written ‘ Prophets,’ 
but ‘the Prophet.’ By thus using the plural he evidently 


ec. 11, 1. 


John I, 
15. 


90 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. II. 


does not take the words of any one passage in Scripture, but 
the sense of the whole. Nazarene is interpreted ‘ Holy*,’ and 
that the Lord would be Holy, all Scripture testifies. Other- 
wise we may explain that it is found in Isaiah rendered to 
the strict letter of the Hebrew. There shall come a Rod out 
of the stem of Jesse, and a Nazarene shall grow out of His 
roots*. Psrupo-Curys. They might have read this in some 
Prophets who are not in our canon, as Nathan or Esdras. 
That there was some prophecy to this purport is clear from 
what Philip says to Nathanael. Hum of whom Moses in the 
Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth. Hence 
the Christians were at first called Nazarenes, at Antioch 


Aug.Detheir name was changed to that of ‘ Christians.’ AuG. 


Con. 


The whole of this history, from the account of the Magi 
inclusively, Luke omits. Let it be here noticed once for all, 
that each of the Evangelists writes as if he were giving a 
full and complete history, which omits nothing; where he 
really passes over any thing, he continues his thread of 
history as if he had told all. Yet by a diligent comparison 
of their several narratives, we can be at no loss to know 
where to insert any particular that is mentioned by one and 
not by the other. 


ti € Asit¥3 | 


“ 


CHAP. III. 


]. In those days came John the Baptist, preaching 
in the wilderness of Judea, 

2. And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. , 

3. For this is he that was spoken of by the 
Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 
His paths straight. 


Pszupo-Curys. The Sun as he appréaches the horizon, 
and before he is yet visible, sends out his rays and makes 
the eastern sky to glow with light, that Aurora going before 
may herald the coming day. Thus the Lord at His birth in 
this earth, and before He shews Himself, enlightens John by 
the rays of His Spirit’s teaching, that he might go before 
and announce the Saviour that was to come. Therefore 
after having related the birth of Christ, before proceeding to 
lis teaching and baptism, (wherein he received such 
testimony,) he first premises somewhat of the Baptist and 


forerunner of the Lord. Jn those days, §c. REMIG. In yer, 1, 


these words we have not only time, place, and person, 
respecting St. John, but also his office aud employment. 


First the time, generally; Jn those days. AvucG. Luke Aug. De 


describes the time by the reigning sovereigns. But Matthew 4°". 
must be understood to speak of a wider space of timcii. 6. 


by the phrase ‘ those days,’ than the fifteenth year of | 


Tiberius. Having related Christ’s return from Egypt, 
which must be placed in early boyhood or even infancy, to 
make it agree with what Luke has told of His being in the 


uke 3, 


92 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. LII. 


temple at twelve years old, he adds directly, /n those days, 

not intending thereby only the days of His childhood, but 

all the days from His birth to the preaching of John. 
REMIG. The man is mentioned in the words came John, 

that is, shewed himself, having abode so long in obscurity. 
atid Curys. But why must John thus go before Christ with a 
‘witness of deeds preaching Him? First; that we might 
hence learn Christ’s dignity, that He also, as the Father has, 

Luke 1, has prophets, in the words of Zacharias, And thou, Childs; 
shalt be called the Prophet of the Highest. Secondly; That 

the Jews might have no cause for offence; as He declared, 

Luke 7, John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He 
hath a devil. The Son of Man came eating and drinking, 

and they say, Behold a gluttonous man. It needeth more- 

over that the things concerning Christ should be told by 

some other first, and not by Himself; or what would the 

Jews have said, who after the witness of John made com- 

John 8, plaint, Thou bearest witness of thyself, thy witness ie not 
Remig. true. Remic. His office; the Baptist ; in this he prepared 
ap. An- the way of the Lord, for had not men been used to be 
ae: baptized, they would have shunned Christ’s baptism. His 
employment; Preaching; Rasan. For because Christ was 

to preach, as soon as it seemed the fit time, that 1s, about 

thirty years of age, he began by his preaching to make ready 

_ the way for the Lord. Rem. The place; the desert of 
Maxim. Judea. Maximus; Where neither a noisy mob would 


Hom. in. : P F Moet 
"an. interrupt his preaching, and whither no unbelieving hearer 


Joan 
nae would retire; but those only would hear, who sought to his 
Jerom, Preaching from motives of divine worship. JEROME; Con- 


In. Is. sider how the salvation of God, and the glory of the Lord, is 
preached not in Jerusalem, but in the solitude of the 
Church, in the wilderness to multitudes. Hitary; Or, he 
came to Judea, desert by the absence of God, not of 
population, that the place of preaching might witness the 
Gloss. few to whom the preaching was sent. Goss. The desert 
ap: An- typically means a life removed from the temptations of the 
world, such as befits the penitent. 
Aug. Aug. Unless one repent him of his former life, he cannot 
begin a new life. HrLary; He therefore preaches repent- 
ance when the Kingdom of Heaven approaches; by which 


VER. 1—3. ST. MATTHEW. 93 


we return from error, we escape from sin, and after shame 
for our faults, we make profession of forsaking them. 
Pseupo-Curys. In the very commencement he shews 
himself the messenger of a merciful Prince; he comes not 
with threats to the offender, but with offers of mercy. It is 
a custom with kings to proclaim a general pardon on the 
birth of a son, but first they send throughout their kingdom 
officers to exact severe fines. But God willing at the birth 
of His Son to give pardon of sins, first sends His officer 
proclaiming, Repent ye. O exaction which leaves none 
poor, but makes many rich! For even when we pay our just 
debt of nghteousness we do God no service, but only gain 
our own salvation. Repentance cleanses the heart, en- 
lightens the sense, and prepares the human soul for the 
reception of Christ, as he immediately adds, For the 
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Jrrome; John Baptist 
is the first to preach the Kingdom df Heaven, that the 
forerunner of the Lord may have this honourable privilege. 
Curys. And he preaches what the Jews had never heard, 
not even from the Prophets, Heaven, namely, and the 
Kingdom that is there, and of the kingdoms of the earth he 
says nothing. Thus by the novelty of those things of which 
he speaks, he gains their attention to Him whom he preaches. 
Remic. The Kingdom of Heaven has a fourfold meaning. 
It is said, of Christ, as The Kingdom of God is within you. Luke17, 
Of Holy Scripture, as, The Kingdom of God shall be taken ae aa 
from you, and shall be given to a nation bringing forth the43. * 
fruits thereof. Of the Holy Church, as, The Kingdom of Mat.25. 
Heaven is like unto ten virgins. Of the abode above, as, 
Many shall come from the East and the West, and shall sit Mat. 8, 
down in the Kingdom of Heaven. And all these significa- '!* 
tions may be here understood. Gtoss. The Kingdom of Glos. 
Heaven shall come nigh you; for if it approached not, none * 
would be able to gain it; for weak and blind they had not 
the way, which was Christ. Auc. The other Evangelists Aug. 
omit these words of John. What follows, This is He, &c. oe 
it is not clear whether the Evangelist speaks them in !2. 
his own person, or whether- they are part of John’s 
preaching, and the whole from Repent ye, to Esaias the 
prophet, is to be assigned to John. It is of no import- 


Yd - GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. ITI. 


ance that he says, This is he, and not, J am he; for 
Mat.9, Matthew speaking of himself says, He found a man sitting 
ms at the toll-office; not He found me. Though when asked 

what he said of himself, he answered, as is related by John 

the Evangelist, J am the roice of one crying in the wilder- 
Greg. ness. GreG. It is well known that the Only-begotten Son 
poe 7 is called the Word of the Father; as in John, In the 
beginning teas the Word. But it is by our own speech that 
we are known; the voice sounds that the words may be heard. 
Thus John the forerunner of the Lord’s coming is called, 
The voice, because by his ministry the voice of the Father is 
heard by men. Pseupo-Curys. The voice is a confused 
sound, discovering no secret of the heart, only signifying 
that he who utters it desires to say somewhat; it is the word 
that is the speech that openeth the mystery of the heart. Voice 
is common to men and other animals, word peculiar to man. 
John then is called the voice and not the word, because God 
did not discover His counsels through him, but only signified 
that He was about to do something among men; but afterwards 
by His Son he fully opened the mystery of his will. RaBANus. 
He is rightly called, The voice of one crying, on account 
of the loud sound of his preaching. Three things cause 
a man to speak loud; when the person he speaks to is at a 
distance, or 1s deaf, or if the speaker be angry ; and all these 
Gloss. three were then found in the human race. Gtoss. John 
ord. then is, as it were, the voice of the word crying. The word 
Bede. 18 heard by the voice, that is, Christ by John. Breve. In 
ae like manner has He cried from the beginning through the voice 
cap.iv.l.of all who have spoken aught by inspiration. And yet is 

John only called, The voice; because that Word which 
Greg. Others shewed afar off, he declares as nigh. GreEG. Crying 
Hon.in sn the desert, because he shews to deserted and forlorn 
7.2. Judwa the approaching consolation of her Redeemer. REMIG. 

Though as far as historical fact is concerned, he chose the 

descrt, to be removed from the crowds of people. What the 

purport of his cry was is insinuated, when he adds, Make 

ready the way of the Lord. Pstupo-CHrys. As a great 

King going on a progress is preceded by couriers to 

cleanse what is foul, repair what is broken down; so John 

preceded the Lord to cleanse the human heart from the filth 


es 
John 1, 
1. 


VER. 4. ST. MATTHEW. 35) 


of sin, by the besom of repentance, and to gather by an 
ordinance of spiritual precepts those things which had been 
scattered abroad. GreG. Every one who preacheth right Greg. . 
faith and good works, prepares the Lord’s way to the hearts fy, i. 
of the hearers, and makes His paths straight, in cleansing the 2° 3- 
thoughts by the word of good preaching. Gtoss. Or, faith Gloss. 
is the way by which the word reaches the heart; when the'"“""™ 
life is amended the paths are made straight. 


Ver. 4. And the same John had his raiment of 
camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; 
and his meat was locusts and wild honey. 


Pseupo-Curys. Having said that he is the voice of one 
crying in the desert, the Evangelist well adds, John had his 
clothing of camel’s hair ; thus shewing what his life was; for 
he indeed testified of Christ, but his life testified of himself. 
No one is fit to be another’s witness till he has first been his 
own. HiILary. For the preaching of John no place more 
suitable, no clothing more useful, no food more fitted. 
JEROME; His raiment of camel’s hair, not of wool—the one 
the mark of austerity in dress, the other of a delicate luxury. 
Psevpo-Curys. It becomes the servants of God to use a 
dress not for elegant appearance, or for cherishing of the 
body, but for a covering of the nakedness. Thus John wears 
a garment not soft and delicate, but hairy, heavy, rough, 
rather wounding the skin than cherishing it, that even the 
very clothing of his body told of the virtue of his mind. It 
was the custom of the Jews to wear girdles of wool; so he 
desiring something less indulgent wore one of skin. JEROME; 
Food moreover suited to a dweller in the desert, no choice 
viands, but such as satisfied the necessities of the body. 
Razanvs. Content with poor fare; to wit, small insects and 
honey gathered from the trunks of trees. In the sayings of 
Arnulphus*, Bishop of Gaul, we find that there was a very 
small kind of locust in the deserts of Judza, with bodies 
about the thickness of a finger and short; they are easily 
taken among the grass, and when cooked in oil form a poor 

® Arculphus, who visited Palestine written from his mouth by Adam#nnus, 
705; his travels to the Holy Land, Abbot of bindisferne, are still extant. 


Lier og} 
gilt O. a r 4 ‘ 


96 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


kind of food. He also relates, that in the same desert there 
is a kind of tree, with a large round leaf, of the colour of 
milk and taste of honey, so friable as to rub to powder in the 
hand, and this is what is intended by wild honey. ReEmte. 
In this clothing and this poor food, he shews that he sorrows 
for the sins of the whole human race. Razanus. His dress 
and diet express the quality of his inward conversation. 
His garment was of an austere quality, because he rebuked 
the sinner’s life. JEROME; His girdle of skin, which Elias 
also bare, is the mark of mortification. RaBan. He ate 
locusts and honey, because his preaching was sweet to the 
multitude, but was of short continuance; and honey has 
sweetness, locusts a swift flight but soon fall to the ground. 
Remic. In John (which name is interpreted ‘ the grace of 
God,’) is figured Christ who brought grace into the world ; 
in his clothing, the Gentile Church. H1tary; The preacher 
of Christ is clad in the skins of unclean beasts, to which the 
Gentiles are compared, and so by the Prophets’ dress is 
sanctified whatever in them was useless or unclean. The 
girdle is a thing of much efficacy to every good work, that 
we may be girt for every ministry of Christ. For his food 
are chosen locusts, which fly the face of man, and escape 
from every approach, signifying ourselves who were borne 
away from every word or speech of good by a spontaneous 
motion of the body, weak in will, barren in works, fretful in 
speech, foreign in abode, are now become the food of 
the Saints, chosen to fill the Prophets’ desire, furnishing our 
most sweet food not from the hives of the law, but from the 
trunks of wild trees. 


5. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all 
Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, 

6. And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing 
their sins. 


Pseubo-Curys. Having described the preaching of John, 
he goes on to say, There went out to him, for his severe life 
preached yet more loudly in the desert than the voice of 
his crying. Currys. For it was wonderful to see such 


VER. 6. ST. MATTHEW. 97 
fortitude in a human body; this it was that chiefly attracted 
the Jews, seeing in him the great Elias. It also contributed 
to fill them with wonder that the grace of Prophecy had 
long failed among them, and now seemed to have at length 
revived. Also the manner of his preaching being other 
than that of the old prophets had much effect; for now 
they heard not such things as they were wont to hear, 
such as wars, and conquests of the king of Babylon, or of 
Persia; but of Heaven and the Kingdom there, and the 


Goss. This baptism was only a fore- Gloss. 


punishment of hell. baseaiey 
interlin. 


running of that to come, and did not forgive sins". Remie. 
The baptism of John bare a figure of the catechumens. 
As children are only catechized that they may become meet 
for the sacrament of Baptism; so John baptized, that they 
who were thus baptized might afterwards by a holy life 
become worthy of coming to Christ’s baptism. He baptized 
in Jordan, that the door of the Kingdom of Heaven might 
be there opened, where an entrance had been given to the 
children of Israel into the earthly kingdom of promise. 
Psrupo-Curys. Compared with the holiness of John, 
who is there that can think himself righteous? As a white 
—§arment if placed near snow would seem foul by the 
Contrast; so compared with John every man would seem 
impure; therefore they confessed their sins. Confession 
of sin is the testimony of a conscience fearing God. And 
Perfect fear takes away all shame. But there is seen the 
shame of confession where there is no fear of the judgment 
to come. But as shame itself is a heavy punishment, God 
therefore bids us confess our sins that we may suffer 
this shame as punishment; for that itself is a part of the 
judgment. RABANUS; Rightly are they who are to be 
baptized said to go out to the Prophet; for unless one 
depart from sin, and renounce the pomp of the Devil, and 
the temptations of the world, he cannot receive a healing 
baptism. Rightly also in Jordan, which means their 


“So Tertullian (de Bapt. 10. 11.) or implicit remission, to be realized in 
8. Jerome (adv. Lucifer. 7.) S. Gregory the Atonement; and S. Cyril. Hieros. 
(Hom. in Evang. vii. 3.) Theophylact Cat. iii. 7—9. S. Greg. Nyss. in laud. 

482. vid. Dr. Pusey on 


in Mare. ch, i. S. Augustine (de Bapt. Bas. t. 3. i 2 2—271 
. 2. pp. 242—271. 


¢. Donat. v. 10.) considered that S. Baptism, E 
John’s baptism gave a sort of suspensive 


VOL. I. H 


98 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IIT. 


descent, because they descended from the pride of life to the 
humility of an honest confession. Thus early was an 
example given to them that are to be baptized of confessing 
their sins and professing amendment. 


7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, 
O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee 
from the wrath to come ? 

8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repent- 
ance : | 

9. And think not to say within yourselves, We 
have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, 
that God is able of these stones to raise up children 
unto Abraham. 

10. And now also the axe is laid unto the root 
of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth 


not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the 
fire. 


Greg. Grec. The words of the teachers should be fitted to the 
Pe quality of the hearers, that in each particular it should agree 
in prol. with itself and yet never depart from the fortress of general 
Gloss. edification. Gutoss. It was necessary that after the teaching 
non oct. which he used to the common people, the Evangelist should 
give an example of the doctrine he delivered to the more 
advanced; therefore he says, Seeing many of the Pharisees, &c. 
Isit. Istp. The Pharisees and Sadducees opposed to one another ; 
aa Pharisee in the Hebrew signifies ‘ divided;’ because choosing 
viii. 4. the justification of traditions and observances they were 
‘ divided’ or ‘ separated’ from the people by this righteous- 
ness. Sadducee in the Hebrew means ‘ just ;’ for these laid 
claim to be what they were not, denied the resurrection of 
the body, and taught that the soul perished with the body; 
they only received the Pentateuch, and rejected the Prophets. 
Gloss. Loss. When John saw those who seemed to be of great 
non occ. consideration among the Jews come to his baptism, he said 


VER. 7—10. ST. MATTHEW. 99 


to them, O generation of vipers, §c. REMIG. The manner 
of Scripture is to give names from the imitation of deeds, 
according to that of Ezekiel, Thy father was an Amorite ; ne 
so these from following vipers are called generation of vipers. °° 
Pseupo-Curys. As a skilful physician from the colour of 
the skin infers the sick man’s disease, so John understood 
the evil thoughts of the Pharisees who came to him. They 
thought perhaps, We go, and confess our sins; he imposes 
no burden on us, we will be baptized, and get indulgence 
for sin. Fools! if ye have eaten of impurity, must ye not 
needs take physic? So after confession and baptism, a man 
needs much diligence to heal the wound of sin; therefore he 
says, Generation of vipers. It is the nature of the viper as 
soon as it has bit a man to fly to the water, which, if it 
cannot find, it straightway dies; so this progeny of vipers, 
after having committed deadly sin, ran to baptism, that, like 
vipers, they might escape death by means of water. More- 
over it is the nature of vipers to burst the insides of their 
mothers, and so to be bom. The Jews then are therefore 
called progeny of vipers, because by continual persecution of 
the prophets they had corrupted their mother the Synagogue. 
Also vipers have a beautiful and speckled outside, but are filled 
With poison within. So these men’s countenances wore a holy 
appearance. Remia. When then he asks, who will shew you to 
Jlee from the wrath tocome,—‘exceptGod’ must be understood. 
Pseupo-Curys. Or who hath shewed you? Was it Esaias? 
Surely no; had he taught you, you would not put your trust 
in water only, but also in good works; he thus speaks, 
Wash you, and be clean; put your wickedness away from 1s.1,\6. 
your souls, learn to do well. Was it then David? who says, 
Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow; Ps.5|,7. 
surely not, for he adds immediately, The sacrifice of God is 
@ broken spirit. If then ye had been the disciples of David, 
ye would have come to baptism with mournings. Rewmie. 
But if we read, shall shew, in the future, this is the meaning, 
‘ What teacher, what preacher, shall be able to give you 
such counsel, as that ye may escape the wrath of everlasting 
damnation?” Aug. God is describcd in Scripture, from some Aug. 
likeness of effects, not from being subject to such weakness, pe; is. 
as being angry, and yet is He never moved by any passion. 5 
H 2 


100 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


The word ‘ wrath’ is applied to the effects of his vengeance, 
not that God suffers any disturbing affection. Gtoss. If 
then ye would escape this wrath, Bring forth fruits meet for 
Greg. repentance. GreG. Observe, he says not merely fruzts of 
La repentance, but fruits meet for repentance. For he who 
8. has never fallen into things unlawful, is of right allowed the 
use of all things lawful; but if any hath fallen into sin, he 
ought so far to put away from him even things lawful, as far 
as he is conscious of having used unlawful things. It is left 
then to such man’s conscience to seek so much the greater 
gains of good works by repentance, the greater loss he has 
brought on himself by sin. ‘The Jews who gloried in their 
race, would not own themselves sinners because they were 
Abraham’s seed. Say not among yourselves we are Abra- 
i lat _ ham’s seed. Curys. He does not forbid them to say they 
“are his, but to trust in that, neglecting virtues of the soul. 
PsEupo-Curys. What avails noble birth to him whose life 
is disvraceful Or, on the other hand, what hurt is a low 
origin to him who has the lustre of virtue? It is fitter that 
the parents of such a son should rejoice over him, than he — 
over his parents. So do not you pride yourselves on having 
Abraham for your father, rather blush that you inherit his 
blood, but not his holiness. He who has no resemblance 
to his father is possibly the offspring of adultery. These 
words then only exclude boasting on account of birth. 
Rasanus. Because as a preacher of truth he wished to stir 
them up, to bring forth fruit meet for repentance, he invites 
them to humility, without which no one can repent. REMIG. 
There is a tradition, that John preached at that place of the 
Jordan, where the twelve stones taken from the bed of the 
river had been set up by command of God. He might then 
be pointing to these, when he said, Of these stones. 
JEROME. He intimates God's great power, who, as he made 
all things out of nothing, can make men out of the hardest 
Gloss.stone. Goss. It is faith’s first lesson to believe that God is 
ord. able to do whatever He will. Curysost. That men should 
be made out of stones, is like Isaac coming from Sarah’s 
womb; Look into the rock, says Isaiah, whence ye were hewn. 
Reminding them thus of this prophecy, he shews that it is 
possible that the like might even now happen. RaBANUS; 


VER, 7—10. ST. MATTHEW. 101 


Otherwise; the Gentiles may be meant who worshipped 
stones. Pseupo-Curys. Stone is hard to work, but when 
wrought to some shape, it loses it not; so the Gentiles were 
hardly brought to the faith, but once brought they abide in 
it for ever. JEROME. These stones signify the Gentiles 
because of their hardness of heart. See Ezekiel, J will take 
away from you the heart of stone, and give you the heart of 
Jlesh. Stone is emblematic of hardness, flesh of softness. 
Ranan. Of stones there were sons raised up to Abraham ; 
forasmuch as the Gentiles by believing in Christ, who is 
Abraham’s seed, became his sons to whose seed they were 
united. 

PsEupo-Curys, The axe is that most sharp fury of the 
consummation of all things, that is to hew down the whole 
world. But if it be already laid, how hath it not yet cut 
down? Because these trees have reason and free power to 
do good, or leave undone; so that when they see the axe 
laid to their root, they may fear and bring forth fruit. This 
denunciation of wrath then, which is meant by the laying of 
the axe to the root, though it have no effect on the bad, yet 
will sever the good from the bad. JEROME. Or, the preach- 
ing of the Gospel is meant, as the Prophet Jeremiah also Jer. 23, 
compares the Word of the Lord to an axe cleaving the rock. *” 
Gree. Or, the axe signifies the Redéemer, who as an axe of Greg. 
haft and blade, so consisting of the Divine and human nature, gly 
is held by His human, but cuts by His Divine nature. And 9. 
though this axe be laid at the root of the tree waiting in 
patience, it is yet seen what it will do; for each obstinate 
sinner who here neglects the fruit of good works, finds the 
fire of hell ready for him. Observe, the axe is laid to the 
root, not to the branches; for that when the children of 
wickedness are removed, the branches only of the unfruitful 
tree are cut away. But when the whole offspring with their 
parent is carried off, the unfruitful tree is cut down by the 
root, that there remain not whence the evil shoots should 
spring up again. Curys. By saying Every, he cuts off all 
privilege of nobility: as much as to say, Though thou be the 
son of Abraham, if thou abide fruitless thou shalt suffer the 
punishment. Rasanus. There are four sorts of trees ; the 
first totally withered, to which the Pagans may be likened ; 


102 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


the second, green but unfruitful, as the hypocrites; the 
third, green and fruitful, but poisonous, such are heretics ; 
the fourth, green and bringing forth good fruit, to which are 
like the good Catholics. Grec. Therefore every tree that 
bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down, and cast 
into the fire, because he who here neglects to bring forth 
the fruit of good works finds a fire in hell prepared for him. 


11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repent- 
ance: but He that cometh after me is mightier than 
I, Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: He shall 
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire : 

12. Whose fan is in His hand, and He will throughly 
purge His floor, and gather His wheat into the garner ; 
but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable 
fire. 


Gloss) | Gtoss. As in the preceding words John had explained 
neper*more at length what he had shortly preached in the 
words, Repent ye, so now follows a more full enlargement 

Greg. Of the words, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. GRxa. 
ape John baptizes not with the Spirit but with water, because 
he had no power to forgive sins; he washes the body 

with water, but not at the same time the soul with pardon 

Chrys. of sin. CHRysost. For while as yet the sacrifice had 
i “not been offered, nor remission of sin sent, nor the Spirit 
had descended on the water, how could sin be forgiven? But 

since the Jews never perceived their own sin, and this was 

‘the cause of all their evils, John came to bring them to a 

Greg. sense of them by calling them to repentance. GREG. Why 
‘then does he baptize who could not remit sin, but that he 
may preserve in all things the office of forerunner? As his 
birth had preceded Christ’s birth, so his baptism should 
precede the Lord’s baptism. Pszupo-Carys. Or, John 
was sent to baptize, that to such as came to his baptism he 
might announce the presence among them of the Lord in the 
ue flesh, as himself testifies in another place, That He might 
hae in be manifested to Israel, therefore am I come to baptise with 


oe ,,water. Ava. Or, he baptizes, because it behoved Christ 
5. 


VER. 11, 12. ST, MATTHEW. 108 


to be baptized. But if indeed John was sent only to baptize 
Christ, why was not He alone baptized by John? Because 
had the Lord alone been baptized by John, there would not 
have lacked who should insist that John’s baptism was 
greater than Christ’s, inasmuch as Christ alone had the merit 
to be baptized by it. Rasanus; Or, by this sign of baptism 
he separates the penitent from the impenitent, and directs 
them to the baptism of Christ. Psreupo-Cuarys. Because then 
he baptized on account of Christ, therefore to them who came 
to him for baptism he preached that Christ should come, signi- 
fying the eminence of His power in the words, He who cometh 
after me ts mightier than I. Remia. There are five points in 
which Christ comes after John, His birth, preaching, baptism, 
death, and descent into hell. A beautiful expression is that, 
mightier than I, because he is mere man, the other is God 
and man. MRasan. As though he had said, J indeed am 
mighty to invite to repentance, He to forgive sins; I to 
preach the kingdom of heaven, He to bestow it; I to baptize 
with water, He with the Spint. Caurys. When you hear 
for He ts mtghlier than I, do not suppose this to be said by 
way of comparison, for I am not worthy to be numbered 
among his servants, that I might undertake the lowest office. 
Hixary. Leaving to the Apostles the glory of bearing about 
the Gospel, to whose beautiful feet was due the carrying the 
tidings of God’s peace. Psgupo-Curys. Or, by the feet of 
Christ we may understand Christians, especially the Apostles, 
and other preachers, among whom was John Baptist; and the 
shoes are the infirmities with which he loads the preachers. 
These shoes all Christ’s preachers wear; and John also wore 
them; but declares himself unworthy, that he might shew 
the grace of Christ, and be greater than his deserts. JEROME; 
In the other Gospels it is, whose shoe latchet I am not 
worthy to loose. Here his humility, there his ministry is 
intended ; Christ is the Bridegroom, and John is not worthy 
to loose the Bridegroom’s shoe, that his house be not called 
according to the Law of Moses and the example of Ruth, 
The house of him that hath his shoe loosed. PsruDo-CHRYS, Deut. 
But since no one can give a benefit more worthy than he?” !°: 
himself is, nor to make another what himself is not, he adds, 
He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. 


104 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


John who 1s carnal cannot give spiritual baptism; he baptizes 
with water, which is matter; so that he baptizes matter with 
matter. Christ is Spirit, because He is God; the Holy 
Ghost is Spirit, the soul is spirit; so that Spint with 
Spirit baptizes our spirit. The baptism of the Spint 
profits as the Spirit enters and embraces the mind, and 
surrounds it as it were with an impregnable wall, not 
suffering fleshly lusts to prevail against it. It does not 
indeed prevail that the flesh should not lust, but holds the 
will that it should not consent with it. And as Christ is 
Judge, He baptizes in fire, i. e. temptation; mere man cannot 
baptize in fire. Ile alone is free to tempt, who is strong to 
reward. This baptism of tribulation burns up the flesh 
that it does not generate lust, for the flesh does not fear 
spiritual punishment, but only such as is carnal. The Lord 
therefore sends carnal tribulation on his servants, that the 
flesh fearing its own pains, may not lust after evil. See 
then how the Spirit drives away lust, and suffers it not to 
prevail, and the fire burns up its very roots. JEROME; Either 
the Holy Ghost Himself is a fire, as we learn from the Acts, 
when there sat as it were fire on the tongues of the believers ; 


Luke 12, and thus the word of the Lord was fulfilled who said, J am 


come to send fire on the earth, I will that it burn. Or, we 
are baptized now with the Spint, hereafter with fire; as the 


1Cor. Apostle speaks, Fire shall try every man’s work, of what 


3, 13 


sort it is‘. Curys. He does not say, shall give you the 
Holy Ghost, but shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost, 
shewing iu metaphor the abundance of the grace. ‘This 
further shews, that even under the faith there is need of the will 
alone for justification, not of labours and toilings; and even 
as easy a thing as it is to be baptized, even so easy a thing 
it is to be changed and made better. By fire he signifies 
the strength of grace which cannot be overcome, and that it 
may be understood that He makes His own people at once 


e The fire here spoken of is inter- 
preted by S. Austin, (Enchir. 68.) and 
Pope Gregory, (Dial. iv. 40.) of the 
troubles of this life; by S. Ambrose, (in 
Ps. 118, 20. n. 15. apparently, Hil. in 
Ps. 118, 3. n. 12.) of the severity of the 
divine judgment ; by S. Chrysostom, and 
Theophylact, (in loc.) and Pseudo- 


Athanasius, (Quest. in Ep. Paul. 98. 
t. 2. p. 328. Ed. Ben.) of hell-fire; 
by Ambrosiaster, (in loc.) S. Jerome, 
perhaps, (in Isai. |. fin.) and also by 
S. Austin and Pope Gregory, of a 
purgatorial fire. 

‘ This sentence is not here found in 
the original. 


VER. 1], 12. ST. MATTHEW. 105 


like to the great and old prophets, most of the prophetic 
visions were by fire. Psrupo-Carys. It is plain then that 
the baptism * of Christ does not undo the baptism of John, 
but includes it in itself; he who is baptized in Christ’s name 
hath both baptisms, that of water and that of the Spirit. 
For Christ 1s Spirit, and hath taken to Him the body that 
He might give both bodily and spiritual baptism. John’s 
baptism does not include in it the baptism of Christ, because 
the less cannot include the greater. Thus the Apostle having 
found certain Ephesians baptized with John’s baptism, bap- 
tized them again in the name of Christ, because they had not 
been baptized in the Spirit: thus Christ baptized a second 
time those who had been baptized by John, as John himself 
declared he should, J baptize you with water; but- He 
Shall baptize you with the Spirit. And yet they were 
not baptized twice but once; for as the baptism of Christ 
was more than that of John, it was a new one given, not the © 
same repeated. HrLtary; He marks the time of our salvation 
and judgment in the Lord; those who are baptized in the 
Holy Ghost it remains that they be consummated by the 
fire of judgment. Rasanus; By the fan is signified the 
separation of a just trial; that it is in the Lord’s hand, means, 
‘in His power,’ as it is written, The Father hath committed 
all gudgment to the Son. _PsEupo-Curys. The floor, is the 
Church, the barn, is the kingdom of heaven, the field, is the 
world. The Lord sends forth His Apostles and other teachers, 
as reapers to reap all nations of the earth, and gather them 
into the floor of the Church. Here we must be threshed 
and winnowed, for all men are delighted in carnal things as 
grain delights in the husk. But whoever is faithful and has the 
marrow of a good heart, as soon as he has a light tribulation, 
neglecting carnal things runs to the Lord; but if his faith 
be feeble, hardly with heavy sorrow; and he who is altogether 
void of faith, however he may be troubled, passes not over to 
God. The wheat when first thrashed lies in one heap with 
chaff and straw, and is after winnowed to separate it ; so the 

© Two sentences about rebaptizing, posite controversialists upon the Arian 
wanting in some copies of the original, question. It may be observed that the 
are omitted by Aquinas. Thiscomment Eunomians rebaptized, and that the 


on St. Matthew has apparently passed second General Council rejects their 
successively through the hands of op- baptism. 


106 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


faithful are mixed up in one Church with the unfaithful; but 
persecution comes as a wind, that, tossed by Christ’s fan, they 
whose hearts were separate before, may be also now sepa- 
rated in place. He shall not merely cleanse, but throughly 
cleanse; therefore the Church must needs be tried in many 
ways till this be accomplished. And first the Jews winnowed 
it, then the Gentiles, now the heretics, and after a time 
shall Antichrist throughly winnow it. For as when the 
blast is gentle, only the lighter chaff is carried off, but the 
heavier remains; so a slight wind of temptation carries off 
the worst characters only ; but should a greater storm arise, 
even those who seem stedfast will depart. There is need 
then of heavier persecution that the Church should be 
cleansed. Remic. This His floor, to wit, the Church, the 
Lord cleanses in this life, both when by the sentence of the 
Priests the bad are put out of the Church, and when they 
are cut off by death. Rasan. The cleansing of the floor 
will then be finally accomplished, when the Son of Man 
shall send His Angels, and shall gather all offences out of 
Gree. His kingdom. Gree. After the threshing is finished in this 
seta ,,life, in which the grain now groans under the burden of the 
chaff, the fan of the last judgment shall so separate between 
them, that neither shall any chaff pass into the granary, nor 
shall the grain fall mto the fire which consumes the chaff. 
Hirary; The wheat, i. e. the full and perfect fruit of the 
believer, he declares, shall be laid up in heavenly barns; by 
the chaff he means the emptiness of the unfruitful. RaBan. 
There is this difference between the chaff and the tares, that 
the chaff is produced of the same seed as the wheat, but the 
tares from one of another kind. The chaff therefore are 
those who enjoy the sacraments of the faith, but are not 
solid; the tares are those who in profession as well as in 
works are separated from the lot of the good. Remic. The 
unquenchable fire is the punishment of eternal damnation; 
either because it never totally destroys or consumes those it 
has once seized on, but torments them eternally ; or to dis- 
tinguish it from purgatorial fire which is kindled for a time 
and again extinguished. 
Aug.de Ava. If any asks which were the actual words spoken by 


Font’ g,John, whether those reported by Matthew, or by Luke, or by 


VER. 18—15. ST. MATTHEW. 107 


Mark, it may be shewn, that there is no difficulty here to him 
who nightly understands that the sense is essential to our 
knowledge of the truth, but the words indifferent. And it is 
clear we ought not to deem any testimony false, because the 
same fact is related by several persons who were present in 
different words and different ways. Whoever thinks that the 
Evangelists might have been so inspired by the Holy Ghost 
that they should have differed among themselves neither in the 
choice, nor the number, nor the order of their words, he 
does not see that by how much the authority of the Evan- 
gelists is preeminent, so much the more is to be by them 
established the veracity of other men in the same circum- 
stances. But the discrepancy may seem to be in the thing, 
and not only in words, between, J am not worthy to bear His 
shoes, and, to loose His shoe-latchet. Which of these two 
expressions did John use? He who has reported the very 
words will seem to have spoken truth; he who has given 
other words, though he have not hid, or been forgetful, yet 
has he said one thing for another. But the Evangelists 
should be clear of every kind of falseness, not only that of 
lying, but also that of forgetfulness. If then this discrepancy 
be important, we may suppose John to have used both 
expressions, either at different times, or both at the same 
time. But if he only meant to express the Lord’s greatness 
and his own humility, whether he used one or the other the 
sense 1s preserved, though any one should in his own words 
repeat the same profession of humility using the figure of the 
shoes ; their will and intention does not differ. This then is 
a useful rule and one to be remembered, that it is no lie, 
when one fairly represents his meaning whose speech one is 
recounting, though one uses other words; if only one shews 
our meaning to be the same with his. Thus understood it is 
a wholesome direction, that we are to enquire only after the 
meaning of the speaker. 


13. Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan 
unto John, to be baptized of him. 

14. But John forbad Him, saying, I have need to 
be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me? 


108 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


15. And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer 
it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil 
all righteousness. Then he suffered Him. 


Gloss. | Gross. Christ having been proclaimed to the world by the 
non occ: Hreaching of His forerunner, now after long obscurity will 
manifest Himself to men. Remtc. In this verse is contained 
person, place, time, and office. Time, in the word Then. 
RaBaN. That is, when He was thirty years old, shewing 

' that none should be ordained priest, or even to preach till He 

be of full age. Joseph at thirty years was made governor of 
Egypt; David began to reign, and Ezekiel his prophesying at 

Chrys. the same age. Curys. Because after His baptism Christ was to 
om *- put an end to the Law, He therefore came to be baptized at this 
age, that having so kept the Law, it might not be said that He 
cancelled it, because He could not observe it. Pseupo- 
Curys. Then, that is when John preached, that He might 
confirm his preaching, and Himself receive his witness. 

But as when the morning-star has risen, the sun does not 

wait for that star to set, but rising as it goes forward, 
gradually obscures its brightness ; so Christ waited not for 

John to finish his course, but appeared while he yet taught. 
Remic. The Persons are described in the words, cume Jesus 

to John; that is, God to man, the Lord to His servant, the 

King to His soldier, the Light to the lamp. The Place, from 
Galilee to Jordan. Galilee means ‘ transmigration.’ Whoso 

then will be baptized, must pass from vice to virtue, and 
humble himself in coming to baptism, for Jordan means 
Ambro- ‘ descent.’ AMBROSE; Scripture tells of many wonders 
aes wrought at various times in this river; as that, among others, 
x.5. in the Psalms, Jordan was driven backwards; before the 
4 s. 114, water was driven back, now sins are turned back in its 
current; as Elijah divided the waters of old, so Christ the 

Lord wrought in the same Jordan the separation of sin. 

Rite Remic. The office to be performed; that He might be 
non occ, Captized of him; not baptism to the remission of sins, but to 
Lana leave the water sanctified for those after to be baptized. 


Serm. AvuG. The Saviour willed to be baptized not that He might 


xii. 4. 


VER. 13—18. ST. MATTHEW. 109 


Himself be cleansed, but to cleanse the water for us". From 

the time that Himself was dipped in the water, from that 
time has He washed away all our sins in water. And let 
none wonder that water, itself corporeal substance, is said to 

be effectual to the purification of the soul; it 1s so effectual, 
reaching to and searching out the hidden recesses of the 
conscience. Subtle and penetrating in its own nature, made 

yet more so by Christ’s blessing, it touches the hidden 
springs of life, the secret places of the soul, by virtue of its 
all-pervading dew. The course of blessing is even yet more 
penetrating than the flow of waters. Thus the blessing 
which like a spiritual river flows on from the Saviour’s 
baptism, hath filled the basins of all pools, and the courses 

of all fountains. Psrtupo-Currs. He comes to baptism, that 

He who has taken upon Him human nature, may be found to 
have fulfilled the whole mystery of that nature; not that He 

is Himself a sinner, but He has taken on Him a nature that 

is sinful. And therefore though He needed not baptism 
Himself, yet the carnal nature in others needed it. AMBROSE; Ambro- 
Also like a wise master inculcating His doctrines as much oo 
by His own practice, as by word of mouth, He did that xii. 1. 
which He commanded all His disciples to do. Avc. He Aug. in 
deigned to be baptized of John that the servants might see ee " 
with what readiness they ought to run to the baptism of the: % 
Lord, when He did not refuse to be baptized of His servant. 
JEROME; Also that by being Himself baptized, He might 
sanction the baptism of John. Curys. But since John’s Chrys. 
baptisin was to repentance, and therefore shewed the presence a 7 
of sin, that none might suppose Christ’s coming to the 
Jordan to have been on this account, John cried to Him, 

I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me ? 

As if he had said, Pszeupo-Curys. That Thou shouldest 
baptize me there is good cause, that I may be made righteous 

and worthy of heaven; but that I should baptize Thee, what 
cause is there? Every good gift comes down from heaven 
upon earth, not ascends from earth to heaven. HiLary; 
John rejects Him from baptism as God; He teaches him, 


bh This is the doctrine of S. Austin, iv. 63. Ambros. in Luke ii. 83, &c. &c. 
in Joan. iv. 14. Op. Imp. contr. Julian vid. Pusey on Baptism, p. 279. ed. 2. 


Acts\,1. 


110 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III 


that it ought to be performed on Him as man. JEROME ; 
Beautifully said is that mow, to shew that as Christ was 
baptized with water by John, so John must be baptized by 
Christ with the Spirit. Or, suffer now that I who have 
taken the form ofa servant should fulfil all that low estate ; 
otherwise know that in the day of judgment thou must be 
baptized with my baptism. Or, the Lord says, ‘ Suffer this 
now; I have also another baptism wherewithal [ must be 
baptized; thou baptizest Me with water, that I may baptize 
thee for Me with thy own blood.’ Psrupo-Curys. In this 
he shews that Christ after this baptized John; which is 
expressly told in some apocryphal books'. Suffer now that 
I fulfil the righteousness of baptism in deed, and not only in 
word ; first submitting to it, and then preaching it; for so z¢ 
becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Not that by being 
baptized He fulfils all righteousness, but so, in the same 
manner, that is, as He first fulfilled the righteousness of 
baptism by His deeds, and after preached it, so He might all 
other righteousness, according to that of the Acts, All things 
that Jesus began both to do and to teach. Or thus, all 
righteousness, according to the ordinance of human nature ; 
as He had before fulfilled the righteousness of birth, growth, 
and the like. HiLary; Kor by Him must all nghteousness 
have been fulfilled, by whom alone the Law could be 
fulfilled. JEROME; Righteousness; but he adds neither ‘ of 
the Law;’ nor ‘ of nature,’ that we may understand it of both. 
Remia. Or thus; It becometh us to fulfil all righteousness, 
that is, to give an example of perfect justification in baptism, 
without which the gate of the kingdom of heaven is not 
opened. Hence let the proud take an example of humility, 
and not scorn to be baptized by My humble members when 
they see Me baptized by John My servant. That is true 
humility which obedience accompanies; as it continues, then 
he suffered Him, that is, at last consented to baptize 
Him. 


> Apocryphis ap. Aquin. in secretiori- Memoirs St. Joan. B. note 7. It was 
bus libris, in the preseut text of Pseudo- an objection familiar with the heretics 
Chrysost. The same opinion is imputed whether the Apostles were baptized, 
to S. Gregory Naz.S. Austin, &c.butap- vid. Tertull. in Bapt. 12. 
parently without reason, vid. Tillemont 


VER. 16. ST. MATTHEW. 11] 


16. And Jesus, when He was baptized, went up 
straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens 
were opened unto Him, and He saw the Spirit of God 
_ descending like a dove, and lighting upon Him. 


AMBROSE; For, as we have said, when the Saviour was Ambro- 
washed, then the water was cleansed for our baptism, that rea 
a laver might be ministered to the people who were to ii. 4. 
come. Moreover, it behoved that in Christ’s baptism should 
be signified those things which the faithful obtain by baptism. 
Psevpo-Curyrs. This action of Christ’s has a figurative 
meaning pertaining to all who were after Him to be baptized; 
and therefore he says, straightway He ascended, and not 
simply He ascended, for all who are worthily baptized in 
Christ, straightway ascend from the water; that is, make 
progress in virtues, and are carried on towards a heavenly 
dignity. They who had gone down to the water carnal and 
sinful sons of Adam, straightway ascend from the water 
spiritual sons of God. But if some by their own faults 
make no progress after baptism, what is that to the baptism? 
Rasanus; As by the immersion of His body He dedicated 
the laver of baptism, He has shewn that to us also after 
baptism received the entrance to heaven is open, and the 
Holy Spirit is given, as it follows, and the heavens were 
opened. JEROME; Not by an actual cleaving of the visible 
element, but to the spiritual eye, as Ezekiel also in the 
beginning of his book relates that he saw them. Pseupo- 
Curys. For had the actual creation of the heavens been 
opened, he would not have said were opened to Him, for 
a physical opening would have been open to all. But 
" some one will say, What, are the heavens then closed to 
the eye of the Son of God, who even when on earth is 
present in heaven? But it must be known, that as He was 
baptized according to the ordinance of humanity that He 
had taken on Him, so the heavens were opened to His sight 
as to His human nature, though as to His divine He was 
in heaven. Remic. But was this then the first time that 
the heavens were opened to Him according to His human 
nature? The faith of the Church both believes and holds 
that the heavens were no less open to Him before than after. 


Ps.24,7. 


112 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


It is therefore said here, that the heavens were opened, 
because to all them who are born again the door of the 
kingdom of heaven is opened. PsEupo-Curys. Perhaps 
there were before some unseen obstacles which hindered 
the souls of the dead from entering the skies. I suppose 
that since Adam’s sin no soul had mounted the skies, but 
the heavens were continually closed. When, lo! on Christ’s 
baptism they were again opened; after He had overcome 
by the Cross the great tyrant death, henceforward the heaven, 
never more to be closed, needed not gates, so that the Angels 
say not, ‘ Open ye gates,’ for they were open, but take aay 
the gates. Or the heavens are opened to the baptized, and 
they see those things which are in heaven, not by seeing them 
with the bodily eye, but by believing with the spiritual eye 
of faith. Or thus; The heavens are the divine Scriptures, 
which all read but all do not understand, except they who 


have been so baptized as to receive the Holy Spirit. Thus 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Ae 
Pp- 
Serm. 
135. I. 


the Scriptures of the Prophets were at the first sealed to the 
Apostles, but after they had received the Holy Spirit, all 
Scripture was opened to them. However, in whatever way 
we interpret, the heavens were opened to Him, that is to 
all, on His account; as if the Emperor were to say to any 
one preferring a petition for another, This boon I grant not 
to him but to you; that is, to him, for your sake. GLoss. 
Or, so bright a glory shone round about Christ, that the 
blue concave seemed to be actually cloven. Currys. But 
though you see it not, be not therefore unbelieving, for in 
the beginnings of spiritual matters sensible visions are always 
offered, for their sakes who can form no idea of things that 
have no body; which if they occur not in later times, yet 
faith may be established by those wonders once wrought. 
Remic. As to all those who by baptism are born again, 
the door of the kingdom of heaven is opened, so all in 
baptism receive the gifts of the Holy Spirit. 

Aue. Christ after He had been once born among men, is 
born a second time in the sacraments, that as we adore Him 
then born of a pure mother, so we may now receive Him 
immersed in pure water. His mother brought forth her Son, 
and is yet virgin; the wave washed Christ, and is holy. 
Lastly, that Holy Spirit which was present to Him in the 


VER. 16. ST. MATTHEW. 113 


womb, now shone round Him in the water, He who then 
made Mary pure, now sanctifies the waters. Psrupo-CHrys. 
The Holy Ghost took the likeness of a dove, as being more 
than other animals susceptible of love. -All other forms of 
righteousness which the servants of God have in truth and 
verity, the servants of the Devil have in spurious imitation; 
the love of the Holy Spirit alone an unclean spirit cannot 
imitate. And the Holy Ghost has therefore reserved to 
Himself this special manifestation of love, because by no 
testimony is it so clearly seen where He dwells as by the 
grace of love. Raban. Seven excellencies in the baptized are Raban. 
figured by the dove. The dove has her abode near the va 
rivers, that when the hawk is seen, she may dive under 
water and escape; she chooses the better grains of corn; she 
feeds the young of other birds; she does not tear with her 
beak; she lacks a gall; she has her rest in the caverns of the 
rocks ; for her song she has a plaint. Thus the saints dwell 
beside the streams of Divine Scripture, that they may 
escape the assaults of the Devil; they choose wholesome 
doctrine, and not heretical for their food; they nourish by 
teaching and example, men who have been the children of 
the Devil, 1. e. the imitators; they do not pervert good 
doctrine by tearing it to pieces as the heretics do; they are 
without hate irreconcileable; they build their nest in the 
wounds of Christ’s death, which is to them a firm rock, that 
is their refuge and hope; as others delight in song, so do 
they in groaning for their sin. CHurys. It is moreover an 
allusion to ancient history; for in the deluge this creature 
appeared bearing an olive-branch, and tidings of rest to the 
world. All which things were a type of things to come. For 
now also a dove appears pointing out to us our liberator, and 
for an olive-branch bringing the adoption of the human race. 
Ave. It is easy to understand how the Holy Ghost should 4vg. de 
be said to be sent, when as it were a dove in visible shapes. ™ 
descended on the Lord; that is, there was created a certain 
appearance for the time in which the Holy Spirit might be 
visibly shewn. And this operation thus made visible and offered 
to mortal view, is called the mission of the Holy Spirit, not 
that His invisible substance was seen, but that the hearts of 
men might be roused by the external appearance to con- 
VOL. I. I 


114 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


template the unseen eternity. Yet this creature in the shape 
of which the Spirit appeared, was not taken into unity of 
person, as was that human shape taken of the Virgin. For 
neither did the Spirit bless the dove, nor unite it with 
Himself for all eternity, in unity of person. Further, though 
that dove is called the Spirit, so far as to shew that in this 
dove was a manifestation of the Spirit, yet can we not say of 
the Holy Spirit that He is God and dove, as we say of the 
Son that He is God and man; and yet it is not as we say of 
the Son that He is the Lamb of God, as not only has John 
Baptist declared, but as John the Evangelist saw the vision 
of the Lamb slain in the Apocalypse. For this was a 
prophetic vision, not put before the bodily eyes in bodily 
shape, but seen in the Spirit in spiritual images. But con- 
cerning this dove none ever doubted that it was seen with the 
bodily eye; not that we say the Spirit is a dove as we say 
1Cor. Christ is a Rock; (for that Rock was Christ.) For that 
% 4 Rock already existed as a creature, and from the resemblance 
of its operation was called by the name of Christ, (whom it 
figured ;) not so this dove, which was created at the moment 
for this single purpose. It seems to me to be more like the 
flame which appeared to Moses in the bush, or that which 
the people followed in the wilderness, or to the thunderings 
and lightnings which were when the Law was given from the 
mount. For all these were visible objects intended to signify 
something, and then to pass away. For that such forms 
have been from time to time seen, the Holy Spirit is said to 
have been sent; but these bodily forms appeared for the time 
to shew what was required, and then ceased to be. JEROME; 
It sate on the head of Jesus, that none might suppose the 
voice of the Father spoken to John, and not to the Lord. 


17. And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. 


Aug. Ave. Not as before by Moses and the Prophets, neither in 
non e*-type or figure did the Father teach that the Son should 
come, but openly shewed Him to be already come, This is 
my Son. HuLary; Or, that from these things thus fulfilled 
upon Christ, we might learn that after the washing of water 


VER. 17. ST. MATTHEW. 115 


the Holy Spirit also descends on us from the heavenly gates, 
on us also is shed an unction of heavenly glory, and an 
adoption to be the sons of God, pronounced by the Father's 
voice. JEROME; ‘The mystery of the Trinity is shewn in 
this baptism. The Lord is baptized ; the Spirit descends in 
shape of a dove; the voice of the Father is heard giving 
testimony to the Son. AMBRosE; And no wonder that the Ambro- 
mystery of the Trinity is not wanting to the Lord’s laver, aed 
when even our laver contains the sacrament of the Trinity. 1. 
The Lord willed to shew in His own case what He was 
after to ordain for men. PsrEuno-Auc. Though Father, Son, jens 
and Holy Ghost are one nature, yet do thou hold most firmly 4° Fulcent: 
that They be Three Persons; that it is the Father alone de Fide 
who said, This is my beloved Son ; the Son alone over whom ae as 
that voice of the Father was heard; and the Holy Ghost 9. 
alone who in the likeness of a dove descended on Christ at 
His baptism. Aue. Here are deeds of the whole Trinity. Aug. de 
In their own substance indeed Father, Son, and Holy Spirit 3;"" 
are One without interval of either place or time; but in my 
mouth they are three separate words, and cannot be pro- 
nounced at the same time, and in written letters they fill each 
their several places. By this comparison may be understood 
how the Trinity in Itself indivisible may be manifested 
dividedly in the likeness of a visible creation. That the 
voice is that of the Father only is manifest from the words, 
This is my Son. Hivary; He witnesses that He is His Hilar. 
Son not in name merely, but in very kindred. Sons of God oa oo 
are we many of us; but not as He 1s a Son, a proper and true 
Son, in verity, not in estimation, by birth, not adoption. 
AuGc. The Father loves the Son, but as a father should, not Aug. in 
as a master may love a servant; and that as an own Son, not;, 14, 
an adopted ; therefore He adds, zn zhom [am well-pleased. !'. 
Remig. Or if it be referred to the human nature of Christ, 
the sense is, I am pleased in Him, whom alone I have 
found without sin. Or according to another reading, 
It hath pleased me to appoint Him, by whom to 
perform those things I would perform, i. e. the redemption 
of the human race. AvucG. These words Mark and Luke Aug. de 
give in the same way; in the words of the voice that came oe 14. 
from Heaven, their expression varies though the sense is the 

12 


116 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. IIT. 


same. For both the words as Matthew gives them, 77s ts 
my beloved Son, and as the other two, Thou art my beloved 
Son, express the same sense in the speaker; (and the 
heavenly voice, no doubt, uttered one of these,) but one 
shews an intention of addressing the testimony thus borne to 
the Son to those who stood by ; the other of addressing it to 
Himself, as if speaking to Christ He had said, Thzs is my 
Son. Not that Christ was taught what He knew before, but 
they who stood by heard it, for whose sake the voice came. 
Again, when one says, zn whom I am well-pleased ; another, 
in thee it hath pleased me, if you ask which of these was 
actually pronounced by that voice; take which you will, 
only remembering that those who have not related the same 
words as were spoken have related the same sense. That 
God is well-pleased with His Son is signified in the first ; 
that the Father is by the Son pleased with men is conveyed 
in the second form, in thee it hath well-pleased me. Or 
you may understand this to have been the one meaning of all 
the Evangelists, In Thee have I put My good pleasure, i. e. to 
fulfil all My purpose. 


CHAP. IV. 


1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the 
wilderness to be tempted of the Devil. 

2. And when He had fasted forty days and forty 
nights, He was afterward an hungred. 


PsEupo-Curys. he Lord being baptized by John with 
water, is led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be baptized 
by the fire of temptation. ‘ Then, i.e. when the voice of 
the Father had been given from heaven. CuHrys. Whoever Chrys. 
thou art then that after thy baptism sufferest grievous trials, ea 
be not troubled thereat; for this thou receivedst arms, to 
fight, not to sit idle. God does not hold all trial from us; 
first, that we may feel that we are become stronger; secondly, 
that we may not be puffed up by the greatness of the gifts 
we have received; thirdly, that the Devil may have experi- 
ence that we have entirely renounced him; fourthly, that 
by it we may be made stronger; fifthly, that we may 
receive a sign of the treasure entrusted to us; for the 
Devil would not come upon us to tempt us, did he not 
see us advanced to greater honours. Hitary; The Devil’s 
snares are chiefly spread for the sanctified, because a victory 
over the saints is more desired than over others. GREG. Greg. 
Some doubt what Spirit it was that led Jesus into the desert, rey 
for that it is said after, The Devil took him into the holy city. 
But true and without question agreeable to the context 
is the received opinion, that it was the Holy Spirit; that 
His own Spirit should lead Him thither where the evil 
spirit should find Him to try Him. Ave. Why did He Aug. de 
offer Himself to temptation? That He might be our mediator j4." - 
in vanquishing temptation not by aid only, but by example. 
Psreupo-Curys. He was led by the Holy Spirit, not as an 


118 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


inferior at the bidding of a greater. For we say led, not 
only of him who is constrained by a stronger than he, but 
also of him who is induced by reasonable persuasion; as 
Andrew found his brother Simon, and brought him to Jesus. 
JEROME; Led, not against His will, or as a prisoner, but 
as by a desire for the conflict. PsEupo-Curys. The Devil 
comes against men to tempt them, but since He could not 
come against Christ, therefore Christ came against the Devil. 
Greg. Grea. We should know that there are three modes of 
ubi sup. ; ‘ : 
temptation; suggestion, delight, and consent; and we when 
we are tempted commonly fall into delight or consent, because 
being born of the sin of the flesh, we bear with us whence we 
afford strength for the contest; but God who incarnate in the 
Virgin’s womb came into the world without sin, carried 
within Ilim nothing of a contrary nature. He could then 
be tempted by suggestion; but the delight of sin never 
gnawed His soul, and therefore all that temptation of the 
Devil was without not within Him. Curys. The Devilis wont 
to be most urgent with temptation, when he sees us solitary ; 
thus it was in the beginning he tempted the woman when 
he found her without the man, and now too the occasion 
is offered to the Devil, by the Saviour’s being led into the 
desert. 
Gloss. Gtoss. This desert is that between Jerusalem and Jericho, 
al aa where the robbers used to resort. Itis called Hammaim, i. e. 
‘ of blood,’ from the bloodshed which these robbers caused 
there; hence the man was said (in the parable) to have 
fallen among robbers as he went down from Jerusalem to 
Jericho, bearing a figure of Adam, who was overcome by 
demons. It was therefore fit that the place where Christ 
overcame the Devil, should be the same in which the Devil 
in the parable overcomes man. Psevupo-Curys. Not Christ 
only is led into the desert by the Spirit, but also all the 
sons of God who have the Holy Spirit. For they are not 
content to sit idle, but the Eloly Spirit stirs them to take up 
some great work, 1. e. to go out into the desert where they 
shall meet with the Devil; for there is no unrighteousness 
wherewith the Devil is pleased. For all good is without 
the flesh and the world, because it is not according to the 
will of the flesh and the world. To such a desert then all 


VER. 1, 2. ST. MATTHEW. 119 


the sons of God go out that they may be tempted. For 
example if you are unmarried, the Holy Spirit has in that 
led you into the desert, that is, beyond the limits of the 
flesh and the world, that you may be tempted by lust. But 
he who is married is unmoved by such temptation. Let us 
learn that the sons of God are not tempted but when they have 
gone forth into the desert, but the children of the Devil whose 
life is in the flesh and the world are then overcome and obey; 
the good man, having a wife is content; the bad, though he 
have a wife is not therewith content, and so in all other 
things. The children of the Devil go not out to the Devil 
that they may be tempted. For what need that he should 
seek the strife who desires not victory? But the sons of God 
having more confidence and desirous of victory, go forth 
against him beyond the boundaries of the flesh. For this 
cause then Christ also went out to the Devil, that He might 
be tempted of him. Curys. But that you may learn how 
great a good is fasting, and what a mighty shield against the 
Devil, and that after baptism you ought to give attention to 
fasting and not to lusts, therefore Christ fasted, not Himself 
needing it, but teaching us by His example. Psrupo- 
Curys. And to fix the measure of our quadragesimal fast, 
he fasted forty days and forty nights. Cuarys. But He ex- 
ceeded not the measure of Moses and Elias, lest it should 
bring into doubt the reality of His assumption of the flesh. 
Grea. The Creator of all things took no food whatever Greg. 
during forty days. We also, at the season of Lent as much Sg 
as in us lies afflict our flesh by abstinence. The numberé. 
forty is preserved, because the virtue of the decalogue is 
fulfilled in the books of the holy Gospel; and ten taken four 
times amounts to forty. Or, because in this mortal body 
we consist of four elements by the delights of which we go 
against the Lord’s precepts received by the decalogue. And 
as we transgress the decalogue through the lusts of this flesh, 
it is fitting that we afflict the flesh forty-fold. Or, as by the 
Law we offer the tenth of our goods, so we strive to offer the 
tenth of our time. And from the first Sunday of Lent to the 
rejoicing of the paschal festival is a space of six weeks, or 
forty-two days, subtracting from which the six Sundays which 
are not kept there remain thirty-six. Now as the year 


Aug. 
Lib. 83. 
Quest. 
q. 81. 


Aug. 
Seim. 
2 Lo. 2. 


120 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


consists of three hundred and sixty-five, by the affliction 
of these thirty-six we give the tenth of our year to God.. 
Ava. Otherwise; ‘The sum of all wisdom is to be acquainted 
with the Creator and the creature. The Creator is the 
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the creature is partly 
invisible,—as the soul to which we assign a threefold nature, 
(as in the command to love God with the whole heart, mind, 
and soul,)—partly visible as the body, which we divide into 
four elements; the hot, the cold, the liquid, the solid. The 
number ten then, which stands for the whole law of life, 
taken four times, that is, multiplied by that number which 
we assign for the body, because by the body the law is 
obeyed or disobeyed, makes the number forty. All the 
aliquot parts in this number, viz. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 20, taken 
together make up the number 50. Hence the time of our 
sorrow and affliction is fixed at forty days; the state of blessed 
joy which shall be hereafter is figured in the quinquagesimal 
festival, 1. e. the fifty days from Easter to Pentecost. Ava. 
Not however because Christ fasted immediately after having 
received baptism, are we to suppose that He established a 
rule to be observed, that we should fast immediately after 
His baptism. But when the conflict with the tempter is sore, 
then we ought to fast, that the body may fulfil its warfare by 
chastisement, and the soul obtain victory by humiliation. 
Psrupo-Carys. The Lord knew the thoughts of the Devil, 
that he sought to tempt Him; he had heard that Christ had 
been born into this world with the preaching of Angels, the 
witness of shepherds, the inquiry of the Magi, and the 
testimony of John. Thus the Lord proceeded against him, 
not as God, but as man, or rather both as God and man. 
For in forty days of fasting not to have been an hungred was 
not as man; to be ever an hungred was not as God. He was 
an hungred then that the God might not be certainly mani- 
fested, and so the hopes of the Devil in tempting Him be 
extinguished, and His own victory hindered. HtILary; 
He was an hungred, not during the forty days, but after them. 
Therefore when the Lord hungred, it was not that the effects 
of abstinence then first came upon Him, but that His 
humanity was left to its own strength. For the Devil was 
to be overcome, not by the God, but by the flesh. By this 


VER. 3, 4. ST. MATTHEW. 121 


was figured, that after those forty days which He was to 
tarry on earth after His passion were accomplished, He 
should hunger for the salvation of man, at which time He 
carried back again to God His Father the expected gift, the 
humanity which He had taken on Him. 


3. And when the Tempter came to Him, he said, If 
Thou be the Son of God, command that these stones 
be made bread. 

4. But He answered and said, It is written, Man 
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. 


Psgeupo-Curys. The Devil who had begun to despair 
when he saw that Christ fasted forty days, now again began 
to hope when he saw that he was an hungred; and then the 
tempter came to him. If then you shall have fasted and 
after been tempted, say not, I have lost the fruit of my fast; 
for though it have not availed to hinder temptation, it will 
avail to hinder you from being overcome by temptation. 
Grea. If we observe the successive steps of the temptation, Greg. 
we shall be able to estimate by how much we are freed from" *uP- ’ 
temptation. The old enemy tempted the first man through 
his belly, when he persuaded him to eat of the forbidden 
fruit; through ambition when he said, Ye shall be as gods; 
through covetousness when he said, Knowing good and evil; 
for there is a covetousness not only of money, but of great- 
ness, when a high estate above our measure is sought. By 
the same method in which he had overcome the first Adam, 
in that same was he overcome when he tempted the second 
Adam. He tempted through the belly when he said, Com- 
mand that these stones become loaves; through ambition 
when he said, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down 
from hence; through covetousness of lofty condition in the 
words, All these things will I give thee. AMBROSE; He Ambros. 
begins with that which had once been the means of his : rae 
victory, the palate; If thou be the Son of God, command that 
these stones become loaves. What means such a beginning 
as this, but that he knew that the Son of God was to come, 
yet believed not that He was come on account of His fleshly 


Leo; 
Serm. 
39. 3. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


122 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Iv. 


infirmity. His speech is in part that of an enquirer, in part 
that of a tempter; he professes to believe Him God, he 
strives to deceive Him as man. Hibary; And therefore in 
the temptation he makes a proposal of such a double kind by 
which His divinity would be made known by the miracle of 
the transformation, the weakness of the man deceived by the 
delight of food. JEROME; But thou art caught, O Enemy, 
in a dilemma. If these stones can be made bread at His 
word, your temptation is vain against one so mighty. If He 
cannot make them bread, your suspicions that this is the Son 
of God must be vain. 

Pseupo-Curys. But as the Devil blinds all men, so is he 
now invisibly made blind by Christ. He found Him an 
hungred at the end of forty days, and knew not that He had 
continued through those forty without being hungry. When 
he suspected Him not to be the Son of God, he considered 
not that the mighty Champion can descend to things that be 
weak, but the weak cannot ascend to things that are high. 
We may more readily infer from His not being an hungred 
for so many days that He is God, than from His being 
an hungred after that time that He is man. But it may be 
said, Moses and Elias fasted forty days,and were men. But 
they hungred and endured, He for the space of forty days 
hungred not, but afterwards. To be hungry and yet refuse 
food is within the endurance of man; not be hungry belongs 
to the Divine nature only. JEROME; Christ’s purpose was 
to vanquish by humility; Lro; hence he opposed the 
adversary rather by testimonies out of the Law, than by 
miraculous powers; thus at the same time giving more 
honour to man, and more disgrace to the adversary, when 
the enemy of the human race thus seemed to be overcome by 
man rather than by God. Grec. So the Lord when tempted 
by the Devil answered only with precepts of Holy Writ, and 
He who could have drowned His tempter in the abyss, 
displayed not the might of His power; giving us an example, 
that when we suffer any thing at the hands of evil men, 
we should be stirred up to learning rather than to revenge. 
Pseupo-Carys. He said not, ‘I live not,’ but, Man doth not 
live by bread alone, that the Devil might still ask, Jf thou be 
the Son of God. If He be God, it is as though He shunned 


VER. 5—7. ST. MATTHEW. 123 


to display what He had power to do; if man, it is a crafty 

will that His want of power should not be detected. RaBanus; 

This verse is quoted from Deuteronomy. Whoso then feedsc. 8, 3. 
not on the Word of God, he lives not; as the body of man 
cannot live without earthly food, so cannot his soul without 
God’s word. This word is said to proceed out of the mouth 

of God, where he reveals His will by Scripture testimonies. 


5. Then the Devil taketh Him up into the holy 
city, and setteth Him on a pinnacle of the temple, 

6. And saith unto Him, If Thou be the Son of 
God, cast Thyself down; for it is written, He shall 
give His Angels charge concerning Thee: and in 
their hands they shall bear Thee up, lest at any time 
Thou dash Thy foot against a stone. 

7. Jesus said unto Him, It is written again, Thou 
shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. 


Psevpo-CuHrys. From this first answer of Christ, the Devil 
could learn nothing certain whether He were God or man; 
he therefore betook him to another temptation, saying within 
himself; This man who is not sensible of the appetite of 
hunger, if not the Son of God, is yet a holy man; and such 
do attain strength not to be overcome by hunger; but 
when they have subdued every necessity of the flesh, they 
often fall by desire of empty glory. Therefore he began 
to tempt Him by this empty glory. JEROME; Took him, 
not because the Lord was weak, but the enemy proud; he 
imputed to a necessity what the Saviour did willingly. 
RaBaNnus; Jerusalem was called the Holy City, for in it was 
the Temple of God, the Holy of holies, and the worship of 
the one God according to the law of Moses. Remie. This 
shews that the Devil lies in wait for Christ’s faithful people 
even in the sacred places. GREGORY; Behold when it is Greg. 
said that this God was taken by the Devil into the holy a 
city, pious ears tremble to hear, and yet the Devil is head 
and chief among the wicked; what wonder that He suffered 
Himself to be led up a mountain by the wicked one himself, 
who suffered Himself to be crucified by his members. GLoss. Gloss. 

or 


Gloss. 
ord. 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


124 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


The Devil places us on high places by exalting with pride, 
that he may dash us to the ground again. Remic. The 
pinnacle is the seat of the doctors; for the temple had not 
a pointed roof like our houses, but was flat on the top after 
the manner of the country of Palestine, and in the temple 
were three stories. It should be known, that the pinnacle 
was on the floor, and in each story was one pinnacle. 
Whether then he placed Him on the pinnacle in the first 
story, or that in the second, or the third, he placed Him 
whence a fall was possible. GtLoss. Observe here that all 
these things were done with bodily sense, and by careful 
comparison of the context it seems probable that the Devil 
appeared in human form. PsEupo-Curys. Perhaps you 
may say, How could he in the sight of all place Him bodily 
upon the temple? Perhaps the Devil so took Him as though 
He were visible to all, while He, without the Devil being 
aware of it, made Himself invisible. GLoss. He set Him on a 
pinnacle of the temple when he would tempt Him through 
ambition, because in this seat of the doctors he had before 
taken many through the same temptation, and therefore 
thought that when set in the same seat, He might in like 
manner be puffed up with vain pride. JEROME; In the 
several temptations the single aim of the Devil is to find 
if He be the Son of God, but he is so answered as at last 
to depart in doubt; He says, Cast thyself, because the voice 
of the Devil, which is always calling men downwards, has 
power to persuade them, but may not compel them to fall. 
PsEupvo-Curys. How does he expect to discover by this 
proposition whether He be the Son of God or not? For to 
fly through the air is not proper to the Divine nature, for it 
is not useful to any. If then any were to attempt to fly 
when challenged to it, he would be acting from ostentation, 
and would so belong rather to the Devil than to God. If it 
is enough to a wise man to be what he is, and he has no 
wish to seem what he is not, how much more should the 
Son of God hold it not necessary to shew what He is; He 
of whom none can know so much as He is in Himself? 
AMBROSE; But as Satan transfigures himself into an Angel 
of light, and spreads a snare for the faithful, even from the 
divine Scriptures, so now he uses its texts, not to instruct 


VER. 5—7. ST. MATTHEW. 125 


but to receive. JEROME; This verse we read in the ninetieth Ps. 91, 
Psalm, but that is a prophecy not of Christ, but of some holy _ 
man, so the Devil interprets Scripture amiss. PsEupo- 
Curys. For the Son of God in truth is not borne of Angels, 

but Himself bears them, or if He be borne in their arms, 

it is not from weakness, lest He dash His foot against a 
stone, but for the honour. O thou Devil, thou hast read 
that the Son of God is borne in Angels’ arms, hast thou not 

also read that He shall tread upon the asp and basilisk? But 

the one text he brings forward as proud, the other he omits 

as crafty. CHRys. Observe that Scripture is brought forward 

by the Lord only with an apt meaning, but by the Devil 
irreverently; for that where it is written, He shall give his 
Angels charge over thee, is not an exhortation to cast 
Himself headlong. GLoss. We must explain thus; Scripture Gloss. 
says of any good man, that He has given it in charge to His ve 
Angels, that is to His ministering spirits, to bear him in 
their hands, i. e. by their aid to guard him that he dash 

not his foot against a stone, 1. e. keep his heart that it 

_ stumble not at the old law written in tables of stone. Or by 

the stone may be understood every occasion of sin and 
error. RaABAN. It should be noted, that though our Saviour 
suffered Himself to be placed by the Devil on a pinnacle 

of the temple, yet refused to come down also at his command, 
giving us an example, that whosoever bids us ascend the 
strait way of truth we should obey. But if he would again 
cast us down from the height of truth and virtue to the 
depth of error we should not hearken tohim. JEROME; The 
false Scripture darts of the Devil He brands with the true 
shield of Scripture. Hitary; Thus beating down the efforts 

of the Devil, He professes Himself both God and Lord. 
Pseupo-Curys. Yet He says not, Thou shalt not tempt me 

thy Lord God; but, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 
God; which every man of God when tempted by the Devil 
might say; for whoso tempts a man of God, tempts God. 
Rasanvus; Otherwise, it was a suggestion to Him, as man, 
that He should seek by requiring some miracle to know | 

the greatness of God’s power. AUG. It is a part of sound 4 a 
doctrine, that when man has any other means, he should a 
not tempt the Lord his God. THEop. And it is to tempt Theod. 


non occ. 


Orig. 
in Luc. 
Hom.30 


126 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


God, in any thing to expose one’s self to danger without 
cause. JEROME; It should be noted, that the required texts 
are taken from the book of Deuteronomy only, that He might 
shew the sacraments of the second Law. 


8. Again, the Devil taketh Him up into an ex- 
ceeding high mountain, and sheweth Him all the - 
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them ; 

9. And saith unto Him, All these things will I 
give Thee, if Thou wilt fall down and worship me. 

10. Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, 
Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the 
Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve. 

11. Then the Devil leaveth Him, and, behold, 


Angels came and ministered unto Him. 


PsEupo-Curys. The Devil, left in uncertainty by this 
second reply, passes to a third temptation. Christ had broken 
the nets of appetite, had passed over those of ambition, he 
now spreads for Him those of covetousness; He taketh 
him up into a very high mountain, such as in going round 
about the earth he had noticed msing above the rest. The 
higher the mountain, the wider the view from it. He shews 
Him not so as that they truly saw the very kingdoms, cities, 
nations, their silver and their gold; but the quarters of the 
earth where each kingdom and city lay. As suppose from some 
high ground I were to point out to you, see there lies Rome, 
there Alexandria; you are not supposed to see the towns 
themselves, but the quarter in which they lie. Thus the 
Devil might point out the several quarters with his finger, 
and recount in words the greatness of each kingdom and 
its condition; for that is said to be shewn whch is in any 
way presented to the understanding. ORIGEN; We are not to 
suppose that when he shewed Him the kingdoms of the 
“world, he presented before Him the kingdom of Persia, 
for instance, or India; but he shewed his own kingdom, 
how he reigns in the world, that is, how some are governed 


by fornication, some by avarice. Remic. By their glory, 


VER. 8—Il1. ST. MATTHEW. 127 


is meant, their gold and silver, precious stones and temporal 
goods. Rasan. The Devil shews all this to the Lord, not 

as though he had power to extend his vision or shew Him 

any thing unknown. But setting forth in speech as excellent 

and pleasant, that vain worldly pomp wherein himself de- 
lighted, he thought by suggestion of it, to create in Chnst a 

love of it. Gtoss. He saw not, as we see, with the eye of cle: 
lust, but as a physician looks on disease without receiving 
any hurt. JEROME; An arrogant and vain vaunt; for he 

hath not the power to bestow all kingdoms, since many 

of the saints have, we know, been made kings by God. 
Psgupo-Curys. But such things as are gotten by iniquity 

~ in this world, as riches, for instance, gained by fraud or 
perjury, these the Devil bestows. The Devil therefore 
cannot give riches to whom he will, but to those only who 

are willing to receive them of him. Remia. Wonderful 
infatuation in the Devil! To promise earthly kingdoms 

to Him who gives heavenly kingdoms to His faithful people, 

and the glory of earth to Him who is Lord of the glory of 
‘heaven! AmBRosE; Ambition has its dangers at home; that Amb. 
it may govern, it is first others’ slave; it bows in flattery a 
that it may rule in honour; and while it would be exalted, 

it is made to stoop. Gtoss. See the Devil’s pride as of old. Gloss. 
In the beginning he sought to make himself equal with God, °" °° 
now he seeks to usurp the honours due to God, saying, 
If thou wilt fall down and worship me. Who then worships 
the Devil must first fall down. 

Pseupo-Curys. With these words He puts an end to 
the temptations of the Devil, that they should proceed no 
further. JEROME; The Devil and Peter are not, as many 
suppose, condemned to the same sentence. To Peter it is 
said, Get thee behind me, Satan; i. e. follow thou behind 
Me who art contrary to My will. But here it is, Go, Satan, 
and is not added ‘ behind Me,’ that we may understand into 
the fire prepared for thee and thy angels. Remic. Other 
copies read, Get thee behind me; i. e. remember thee in 
what glory thou wast created, and into what misery thou 
hast fallen. PsEupo-Curys. Observe how Christ when 
Himself suffered wrong at the hands of the Devil, being 
tempted of him, saying, If thou be the Son of God, cast 


ae 


128 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


thyself down, yet was not moved to chide the Devil. But 
now when the Devil usurps the honour of God, he is wroth, 
and drives him away, saying, Go thy way, Satan; that we 
may learn by His example to bear injuries to ourselves 
With magnanimity, but wrongs to God, to endure not so 
much as to hear; for to be patient under our own wrongs 
is praiseworthy, to dissemble when God is wronged is 
impiety. JEROME; When the Devil says to the Saviour, 
If thou wilt fall down and worshép me, he is answered 
by the contrary declaration, that it more becomes him to 
worship Jesus as his Lord and God. AucG. The one Lord 
our God is the Holy Trinity, to which alone we justly owe 
the service of piety. Ip. By service is to be understood the 


ree De honour due to God; as our version renders the Greek word 
ov -Dei, ¢ latria,’ wherever it occurs in Scripture, by ‘ service’ (servitus), 


but that service which is due to men (as where the Apostle 
bids slaves be subject to their masters) is in Greek called 
‘dulia;’ while ‘ latria, always, or so often that we say always, 
is used of that worship which belongs to God. PsrEupo- 
Curys. The Devil, we may fairly suppose, did not depart in° 
obedience to the command, but the Divine nature of Christ, 
and the Holy Spirit which was in Him drove him thence, 
and then the Devil left him. Which also serves for our 
consolation, to see that the Devil does not tempt the men 
of God so long as he wills, but so long as Christ suffers. 
And though He may suffer him to tempt for a short time, 
yet in the end He drives him away because of the weakness 


Aug. De Of our nature. Ava. After the temptation the Holy Angels, to 


Civ. Dei, 
ix. 21. 


be dreaded of all unclean spirits, ministered to the Lord, by 
which it was made yet more manifest to the demons how great 
was His power. Psreupo-Curys. He says not ‘ Angels de- 
scended from heaven,’ that it may be known that they were 
ever on the earth to minister to Him, but_had now by the 
Lord’s command departed from Him, to give opportunity 
for the Devil to approach, who perhaps when he saw Him 
surrounded by Angels would not have come near Him. 
But in what matters they ministered to Him, we cannot 
know, whether in the healing diseases, or purifying souls, 
or casting out demons; for all these things He does by 
the ministration of Angels, so that what they do, Himself 


VER. 11. ST. MATTHEW. 129 


appears to do. However it is manifest, that they did not 

now minister to Him because His weakness needed it, but 

for the honour of His power; for it is not said that they 
*succoured Him, but that they ministered to Hin. GREGORY; Greg. 
In these things is shewn the twofold nature in one person; Don oc 


? vid. in 
it is the man whom the Devil tempts; the same is God to Eek, i. 


whom Angcls minister. Pseupo-Curys. Now Ict us shortly © ea 
review what is signified by Christ’s temptations, Thei.1.2.1. 
fasting is abstinence from things evil, hunger is the desire ” 

of evil, bread is the gratification of the desire. Ife who 
indulges himself in any evil thing, turns stones into bread. 

Let him answer to the Devil’s persuasions that man does 

not live by the indulgence of desire alone, but by keeping 

the commands of God. When any is puffed up as though 

he were holy he is led to the temple, and when he esteems 
himself to have reached the summit of holiness he is sct on 

a pinnacle of the temple. And this temptation follows the 

first, because victory over temptation begets conceit. But 
observe that Christ had voluntarily undertaken the fasting ; 

but was led to the temple by the Devil; therefore do you 
voluntarily use praiseworthy abstinence, but suffer yourself 

not to be exalted to the summit of sanctity; fly high-minded- 

ness, and you will not suffer a fall. The ascent of the moun- 

tain is the going forward t& great riches, and the glory of 

this world which springs from pride of heart. When you 
desire to become rich, that is, to ascend the mountain, you 

begin to think of the ways of gaining wealth and honours, 

then the prince of this world is shewing you the glory of his 
kingdom. In the third place He provides you reasons, that 

if vou seek to obtain all these things, you should serve him, 

and neglect the righteousness of God. HiLtary; When we 

have overcome the Devil and bruised his head, we see that 
Angels’ ministry and the offices of heavenly virtues will not 

be wanting tous. AvuG. Luke has not given the temptations Aug. De 
in the same order as Matthew; so that we do not know oe 
whether the pinnacle of the temple, or the ascent of the 
mountain, was first in the action; but it is of no importance, 

so long as it is only clear that all of them were truly done. 
Gtioss. Though Luke’s order seems the morc historical ; are 
Matthew relates the temptations as they were done to Adam. oe 

VOL. I. K 


Ne 


130 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


12. Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast 
into prison, He departed into Galilee ; 

13. And leaving Nazareth, He came and dwelt in 
Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the 
borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim : 

14. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken 
by Esaias the prophet, saying, 

15. The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephtha- 


lim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of 
the Gentiles ; 


16. The people which sat in darkness saw great 
light; and to them which sat in the region and 
shadow of death light is sprung up. 


Rasanus; Matthew having related the forty days’ fast, the 
temptation of Christ, and the ministry of Angels, proceeds, 

Jesus having heard that John was cast into prison. PsEupo- 
Currys. By God without doubt, for none can effect any 

thing against a holy man, unless God deliver him up. He 
withdrew into Galilee, that is, out of Judxa; both that He 
might reserve His passion to the fit time, and that He might 

Chrys. Set us an example of flying from danger. Curys. It is not 
ie blameworthy not to throw one’s self into peril, but when one 
' has fallen into it, not to endure manfully. He departed from 
Judza both to soften Jewish animosity, and to fulfil a 
prophecy, seeking moreover to fish for those masters of the 
world who dwelt in Galilee. Note also how when He 
would depart to the Gentiles, He received good cause from 

the Jews; His forerunner was thrown into prison, which 

Gloss. compelled Jesus to pass into Galilee of the Gentiles. Gross. 
ea He came as Luke writes to Nazareth, where He had been 
brought up, and there entering into the synagogue, He read 

and spoke many things, for which they sought to throw Him 

down from the rock, and thence He went to Capernaum; for 
which Matthew has only, And leaving the town of Nazareth, 

Gloss. He came and dwelt at Capernaum. Gutoss; Nazareth is 
ord. a village in Galilee near Mount Tabor; Capernaum a town 
in Galilee of the Gentiles near the Lake of Gennesaret ; and 


VER. 12—16. ST. MATTHEW. 13] 


this is the meaning of the word, on the sea coast. He 
adds further in the borders of Zabulon and Naphtali, where 

was the first captivity of the Jews by the Assyrians. Thus 
where the Law was first forgotten, there the Gospel was first 
preached; and from a place as it were between the two it 

was spread both to Jews and Gentiles. Remic. He left one, 

viz. Nazareth, that He might enlighten more by His preaching 

and miracles. Thus leaving an example to all preachers 

that they should preach at a time and in places where they 

may do good, to as many as possible. In the prophecy, the 
words are these, At that first time the land of Zabulon and \s.9, 1. 
the land of Naphtali was lightened, and at the last time was 
increased the way of the sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the 
Gentiles. JEROME; They are said at the first time to be fieron, 
lightened from the burden of sin, because in the country of u et 
these two tribes, the Saviour first preached the Gospel; 
at the last time their faith was increased, most of the Jews 
remaining in error. By the sea here is meant the Lake 

of Gennesaret, a lake formed by the waters of the Jordan, on 

its shores are the towns of Capernaum, Tiberias, Bethsaida, 

and Corozaim, in which district principally Christ preached. 

Or, according to the interpretation of those Hebrews who 
believe in Christ, the two tribes Zabulon and Naphtali were 
taken captive by the Assyrians, and Galilee was left desert; 

and the prophet therefore says that it was lightened, because 

it had before suffered the sins of the people; but afterwards 

the remaining tribes who dwelt beyond Jordan and in 
Samaria were led into captivity; and Scripture here means 

that the region which had been the first to suffer captivity, 

now was the first to see the light of Christ’s preaching. The 
Nazarenes again interpret that this was the first part of the 
country that, on the coming of Christ, was freed from the 
errors of the Pharisees, and after by the Gospel of the 
Apostle Paul, the preaching was imcreased or multiplied 
throughout all the countries of the Gentiles. GLoss. But Gjoss. 
Matthew here so quotes the passage as to make them all *p- An- 
nominative cases referring to one verb. The land of 
Zabulon, and the land of Naphtali, which is the way of the 

sea, and which is beyond Jordan, viz. the people of Galilee of 

the Gentiles, the people which walked in darkness. GLOSS. Gjoce, 

K 2 ord. 


Hieron. 
ubi sup. 


Raban. 
ap. An- 


selm. 


132 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


Note that there are two Galilees; one of the Jews, the other 
of the Gentiles. This division of Galilee had existed from 
Solomon’s time, who gave twenty cities in Galilee to Hyram, 
King of Tyre; this part was afterwards called Galilee of the 
Gentiles; the remainder, of the Jews. JEROME; Or we must 
read, beyond Jordan, of Galilee of the Gentiles ; so, Y mean, that 
the people who either sat, or walked in darkness, have seen 
light, and that not a faint light, as the light of the Prophets, 
buta great light, as of Him who in the Gospel speaks thus, J am 
the light of the world. Between death and the shadow of death 
I suppose this difference; death is said of such as have gone 
down to the grave with the works of death; the shadow of 
such as live in sin, and have not yct departed from’ this 
world; these may, if they will, yet turn to repentance. 
Psreupo-Curys. Otherwise, the Gentiles who worshipped 
idols, and demons, were they who sat in the region of the 
shadow of death; the Jews, who did the works of the Law, 
were in darkness, because the righteousness of God was not 
yet manifested to them. Curys. But that you may learn 
that he spcaks not of natural day and night, he calls the 
light, a great light, which is in other places called the true 
light; and he adds, the shadow of death, to explain what he 
means by darkness. The words arose, and shined, shew, 
that they found it not of their own seeking, but God Himself 
appeared to them, they did not first run to the light; for 
men were in the greatest miseries before Christ’s coming; 
they did not walk but sate in darkness; which was a sign 
that they hoped for deliverance; for as not knowing what 
way they should go, shut in by darkness they sate down, 
having now no power to stand. By darkness he means here, 
error and ungodliness. 

RaBan. In allegory, John and the rest of the Prophets 
were the voice going before the Word. When prophecy 
ceased and was fettered, then came the Word, fulfilling 
what the Prophet had spoken of it, He departed into 
Galilee, i. e. from figure to verity. Or, into the Church, 
which is a passing from vice to virtue. Nazareth is in- 
terpreted ‘a flower,’ Capernaum, ‘ the beautiful village ;’ 
He left therefore the flower of figure, (in which was 
mystically intended the fruit of the Gospel,) and came 


VER. 12—16. ST. MATTHEW. 183 


into the Church, which was beautiful with Christ’s virtues. 

It 1s by the sea-coast, because placed near the waves of 

this world, it is daily beaten by the storms of persecution. 

It is situated between Zabulon and Naphtali, i. e. common 

to Jews and Gentiles. Zabulon is interpreted, ‘ the abode 

of strength ;’ because the Apostles, who were chosen from 
Judza, were strong. Nephtali, ‘ extension,’ because the 
Church of the Gentiles was extended through the world. 
Auc. John relates in his Gospel the calling of Peter, Aug. de 
Andrew, and Nathanael, and the miracle in Cana, before yy ;; 17. 
Jesus’ departure into Galilee; all these things the other 
Evangelists have omitted, carrying on the thread of their 
narrative with Jesus’ return into Galilee. We must 
understand then that some days intervened, during which 

the things took place concerning the calling of the disciples 
which John relates. RrmiG. But this should be considered 

with more care, viz. that John says that the Lord went 

into Galilee, before John the Baptist was thrown into 
prison. According to John’s Gospel after the water turned 

into wine, and his going down to Capernaum, and after 

his going up to Jerusalem, he returned into Juda and 
baptized, and John was not yet cast into prison. But 
here it is after John’s imprisonment that He retires into 
Galilee, and with this Mark agrees. But we need not 
suppose any contradiction here. John speaks of the Lord’s 

first coming into Galilee, which was before the imprisonment 

of John. He speaks in another place of His second coming John 4, 
into Galilee, and the other Evangelists mention only this* 
second coming into Galilee which was after John’s im- 
prisonment. Evses. It is related that John preached the Euseb, 
Gospel almost up to the close of his life without setting Fv 
forth any thing in writing, and at length came to write for 

this reason. The three first written Gospels having come to 

his knowledge, he confirmed the truth of their history by his 

own testimony; but there were yet some things wanting, 
especially an account of what the Lord had done at the first 
beginning of His preaching. And it is true that the other 
three Gospels seem to contain only those things which 
were done in that year in which John the Baptist was 

put into prison, or executed. For Matthew, after the 


1 Cor. 
14, 30. 


134 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


temptation, proceeds immediately, Hearing that John was 
delivered up; and Mark in like manner. Luke again, 
even before relating one of Christ’s actions, tells that Herod 
had shut up John in prison. The Apostle John then was 
requested to put into writing what the preceding Evangelists 
had left out before the imprisonment of John; hence he says 
in his Gospel, this beginning of miracles did Jesus. 


17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to 
say, Repent: for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. 


Pseupo-Curys. Christ’s Gospel should be preached by 
him who can control his appetites, who contemns the 
goods of this life, and desires not empty honours. From 
this time began Jesus to preach, that is, after having been 
tempted, He had overcome hunger in the desert, despised 
covetousness on the mountain, rejected ambitious desires 
in the temple. Or from the time that John was delivered 
up; for had He begun to preach while John was yet 
preaching, He would have made John be lightly accounted 
of, and John’s preaching would have been thought super- 
fluous by the side of Christ’s teaching; as when the sun 
rises at the same time with the morning star, the star’s 
brightness is hid. Curys. For another cause also He 
did not preach till John was in prison, that the multitude 
might not be split into two parties; or as John did no 
miracle, all men would have been drawn to Christ by His 
miracles. RaBaN. In this He further teaches that none 
should despise the words of a person inferior to Him; 
as also the Apostle, If any thing be revealed to him that 
sits, let the first hold his peace. Psreupo-Curys. He did 
wisely in making now the beginning of His preaching, 
that He should not trample upon John’s teaching, but 
that He might the rather confirm it and demonstrate him 
to have been a true witness. JEROME; Shewing also 
thereby that He was Son of that same God whose pruphet 
John was; and therefore He says, Repent ye. Psrupo- 
Currys. He does not straightway preach righteousness 
which all knew, but repentance, which all needed. Who 
then dared to say, ‘I desire to be good, but am not able?” 


VER. 18—22. ST. MATTHEW. 135 


For repentance corrects the will; and if ye will not 
repent through fear of evil, at least ye may for the pleasure 
of good things; hence He says, the kingdom of heaven 
ts at hand; that is, the blessings of the heavenly kingdom. 
As if He had said, Prepare yourselves by repentance, for the 
time of eternal reward is at hand. Remiac. And note, He does 
not say the kingdom of the Canaanite, or the Jebusite, is 
at hand; but the kingdom of heaven. The law promised 
worldly goods, but the Lord heavenly kingdoms. Curys. 
Also observe how that in this His first address He says 
nothing of Himself openly; and that very suitably to 
the case, for they had yet no right opinion concerning 
Him. In this commencement moreover He speaks nothing 
severe, nothing burdensome, as John had concerning the 
axe laid to the root of the condemned tree, and the like; 
but he puts first things merciful, preaching the glad tidings 
of the kingdom of heaven. JEROME; Mystically interpreted, 
Christ begins to preach as soon as John was delivered to 
prison, because when the Law ceased, the Gospel com- 
menced. 


18. And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw 
two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his 
brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were 
fishers. 

19. And He saith unto them, Follow Me, and I will 
make you fishers of men. 

20. And they straightway left their nets, and 
followed Him. 

21. And going on from thence, he saw other two 
brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his 
brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending 
their nets; and He called them. 

22. And they immediately left the ship and their 
father, and followed Him. 


Pseupo-Curys. Before He spoke or did any thing, Christ 
called Apostles, that neither word nor deed of His should be 


136 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, IV. 


hid from their knowledge, so that they may afterwards say 

acts 4, with confidence, TFhat we have seen and heard, that we 
cannot but speak. RasBaxus; The sea of Galilee, the lake 

of Gennesareth, the sea of Tiberias, and the salt lake, are one 

Gloss. and the same. Gtoss. He rightly goes to fishing places, 
when about to fish for fishermen. Rermic. Sav, that 1s, not 
so much with the bodily eve, as spiritually viewing their 
hearts. Curys. He calls them wlnle actually working at 

— their employment, to shew that to follow Him ought to be 
preferred to all occupations. They were just then casting 

a net into the sea, which agreed with their future office. 

Aug. AuG. IIe chose not kings, senators, philosophers, or 
ai 9, orators, but he chose common, poor, and untaught fisher- 
Aug. men. Ip. Had one learned been chosen, he might have 
sct attributed the choice to the merit of his learning. But our 
viii. 7. Lord Jesus Christ, willing to bow the necks of the proud, 
sought not to gain fishermen by orators, but gained an 
Emperer by a fisherman. Great was Cyprian the pleader, 

but Peter the fisherman was before him. Psrvupo-Curys. 

The operations of their secular craft were a prophecy of their 
future dignity. As he who casts his net into the water 
knows not what fishes he shall take, so the teacher casts the 

net of the divine word upon the people, not knowing who 
among them will come to God. Those whom God shall stir 

abide in his doctrine. Remic. Of these fishermen the Lord 
Jer..16, speaks by Jeremiah. feild send my fishers among you, and 
Gloss, Ceey shall caich you. Gross. Follow me, not so much with 
jnterlin. your fect as in your hearts and your hfe. Pseupo-Carys. 
Fishers of men, that is, teachers, that with the net of God's 

word you may catch men out of this world of storm and 
danger, in which men do not walk but are rather borne 
along, the Devil by pleasure drawing them into sin where 

men devour one another as the stronger fishes do the weaker, 
withdrawn from hence they may hve upon the land, being 

Greg. made inembers of Christ’s body. Greco. Peter and Andrew 
ae had seen Christ work no miracle, had heard from him no 
v-t. word of the promise of the eternal reward, yet at this single 
bidding of the Lord they forgot all that they had seemed to 
possess, and straighticay left their nets, and folloued Him. 

In which deed we ought rather to consider their wills than 


VER. 18—22. ST. MATTHEW. 137 


the amount of their property. He leaves much who keeps 
nothing for himself, he parts with much, who with his 
possessions renounces his lusts. Those who followed Christ 
gave up enough to be coveted by those who did not follow. 
Our outward goods, however small, are enough for the Lord; 
He does not weigh the sacrifice by how much is offered, but 
out of how much it is offered. The kingdom of God is not to 
be valued at a certain price, but whatever a man has, much or 
little, is equally available. Psrupo-Curys. These disciples 
did not follow Christ from desire of the honour of a doctor, 
but because they coveted the labuur itself; they knew how 
precious is the soul of man, how pleasant to God is his 
salvation, and how great its reward. Cunrys. To so great a 
promise they trusted, and belicved that they should catch 
others by those same words by which themselves had been 
caught. Psrupo-Curys. These were their desires, for 
which they left ail and follo:ced; teaching us thereby that 
none can possess earthly things and perfectly attain to 
heavenly things. 

Gtoss. These last disciples were an example to sich: as Glos, 
leave their property for the love of Christ; now follows an toe 
example of others who postponed earthly affection to God. 
Observe how He calls them two and two, as He afterwards 
sent them two and two to preach. Grea. Hereby we are se " 
also silently admonished, that he who wants affection towards Ex, uli. 
others, ought not to take on hii the office of preaching. !- 
The precepts of charity are two, and between less than two 
there can be no love. Pseuno Currys. Rightly did He 
thus build the foundations of the brotherhood of the Church 
on love, that from such roots a copious sap of love might 
flow to the branches; and that too on natural or human love, 
that nature as well as grace might bind their love more 
firmly. They were moreover brothers; and so did God in 
the Old Testament lay the foundations of His building on 
Moses and Aaron, brothers. But as the grace of the New 
Testament 1s more abundant than that of the Old, therefore 
the first people were built upon one pair of brethren, but the 
new people upon two., They were eashing their nets, a ~ 
proof of the extremest indigence; they repaired the old 
because they had not whence they should buy new. And 


138 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


what shews their great filial piety, in this their great poverty 
they deserted not their father, but carried him with them in 
their vessel, not that he might aid in their labour, but have 
the enjoyment of his sons’ presence. Curys. It is no small 
sign of goodness, to bear poverty easily, to live by honest 
labour, to be bound together by virtue of affection, to keep 
their poor father with them, and to toil in his service. 
Pseupo-Curys. We may not dare to consider the former 
disciples as more quick to preach, because they were casting 
their nets; and these latter as less active, because they were 
yet making ready only; for it is Christ alone that may know 
their differences. But perhaps we may say that the first 
were casting their nets, because Peter preached the Gospel, 
but committed it not to paper—the others were making ready 
their nets, because John composed a Gospel. He called 
them together, for by their abode they were fellow-towns- 
men, in affection attached, in profession agreed, and united 
by brotherly tenderness. He called them then at once, that 
united by so many common blessings they might not be 
separated by a separate call. Currys. He made no promise 
to them when He called them, as He had to the former, 
- for the obedience of the first had made the way plain for 
them. Besides, they had heard many things concerning 
Him, as being friends and townsmen of the others. 
Psrupo-Curyrs. There are three things which we must 
leave who would come to Christ; carnal actions, which 
‘are signified in the fishing nets; worldly substance, in 
the ship; parents, which are signified in their father. 
They left their own vessel, that they might become governors 
of the vessel of the Church; they left their nets, as having 
no longer to draw out fishes on to the earthly shore, but 
men to the heavenly ; they left their father, that they might 
__ become the spiritual fathers of all. Huisary; By this 
that they left their occupation and their father's house 
we are taught, that when we would follow Christ we 
should not be holden of the cares of secular life, or of 
the society of the paternal mansion. Rema. Mystically, 
by the sea is figured this world, because of its bitterness 
and its tossing waves. Galilee is interpreted, ° rolling’ 
or ‘a wheel,’ and shews the changeableness of the world. 


VER. ]8—22. ST. MATTHEW. 139 


Jesus walked by the sea when He came to us by in- 
carnation, for He took on Him of the Virgin not the 
flesh of sin, but the likeness of the flesh of sin. By the 
two brothers, two people are signified born of one God 
their Father; He saw them when He looked on them in 
His mercy. In Peter, (which is interpreted ‘ owning,’ 
who is called Simon, (i. e. obedient,) is signified the 
Jewish nation, who acknowledged God in the Law, and 
obeyed His commandments; Andrew, which is interpreted 
“manly’ or ‘ graceful, signifies the Gentiles, who after 
they had come to the knowledge of God, manfully abode . 
in the faith. He called us His people when He sent the 
preachers into the world, saying, Follow me; that is, 
leave the deceiver, follow your Creator. Of both people 
there were made fishers of men, that is, preachers. Leaving 
their ships, that is, carnal desires, and their nets, that 
is, love of the world, they followed Christ. By James 
is understood the Jewish nation, which through their 
knowledge of God overthrew the Devil; by John the 
Gentile world, which was saved of grace alone. Zebedee 
whom they leave, (the name is interpreted flying or falling,) 
signifies the world which passes away, and the Devil 
who fell from Heaven. By Peter and Andrew casting 
their net into the sea, are meant those who in their early 
youth are called by the J.ord, while from the vessel of 
their body they cast the nets of carnal concupiscence 
into the sea of this world. By James and John mending 
their nets are signified those who after sin before adversity 
come to Christ recovering what they had lost. Rasan. The 
two vessels signify the two Churches; the one was called 
out of the circumcision, the other out of the uncircumcision. 
Any one who believes becomes Simon, i. e. obedient to 
God; Peter by acknowledging his sin, Andrew by en- 
during labours manfully, James by overcoming vices, 
Goss. and John that he may ascribe the whole to God’s Gloss. 
grace. The calling of four only is mentioned, as those 2P = 
preachers by whom God will call the four quarters of 
the world. HtLary; Or, the number that was to be of 
the Evangelists is figured. Remic. Also, the four principal 
virtues are here designed; Prudence, in Peter, from his 


Aug. 
de Cons. 
Ev.ii.17. 


140 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


confession of God; Justice, we may refer to Andrew 
for his manful deeds; Fortitude, to James, for his overthrow 
of the Devil; Temperance, to John, for the working in him 
of divine grace. 

AuG. It might move enquiry, why John relates that near 
Jordan, not in Galilee, Andrew followed the Lord with 
another whose name he does not mention; and again, that 
Peter received that name from the Lord. Whereas the other 
three Evangelists write that they were calléd from their 
fishing, sufficiently agreeing with one another, especially 
Matthew and Mark; Luke not naming Andrew, who is 
however understood to have been in the same vessel with 
him. There is a further seeming discrepancy, that in Luke 
it is to Peter only that it is said, Henceforth thou shalt catch 
men; Matthew and Mark write that it was said to both. 
As to the different account in John, it should be carefully 
considered, and it will be found that it is a different time, 
place, and calling that is there spoken of. For Peter and 
Andrew had not so scen Jesus at the Jordan that they 
adhered inseparably ever after, but so as only to have known 
who Ile was, and wondering at Hii to have gone their way. 
Perhaps he is returning back to something he had omitted, 
for he proceeds without marking any difference of time, ./s 
he walked by the sea of Galilee. It may be further asked, 
how Matthew and Mark ielate that He called them 
separately two and two, when Luke relates that James 
and John being partners of Peter were called as it were 
to aid him, and bringing their barks to land followed Christ. 
We may then understand that the narrative of Luke relates 
to a prior time, after which they returned to their fishing as 
usual. For it had not been said to Peter that he should no 
more catch fishes, as he did do so again after the resurrection, 
but that he should caich men. Again, at a time after this 
happened that call of which Matthew and Mark speak; for 
they draw their ships to land to follow Him, not as careful to 
return again, but only anxious to fullow Him when He bids 
them. 


23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching 
in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of 


VER. 28—25. 8ST. MATTHEW. 14] 


the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness 
and all manner of disease among the people. 

24. And His fame went throughout all Syria: 
and they brought unto Him all sick people that 
were taken with divers diseases and torments, and 
those which were possessed with devils, and those 
which were lunatick, and those that had the palsy; 
and He healed them. 

25. And there followed Him great multitudes 
of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and 
from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond 
Jordan. 


PsEuDo-Curys. Kings, when about to go to war with 
their enemies, first gather an army, and so go out to battle; 
thus the Lord when about to war against the Devil, first 
collected Apostles, and then began to preach the Gospel. 
Rreic. An example of life for doctors; that they should not 
be inactive, they are instructed in these words, And Jesus 
went about. Pseupo-Curys. Because they being weak 
could not come to their physician, He as a zealous Physician 
went about to visit those who had any grievous sickness. 
The Lord went round the several regions, and after His 
example the pasturs of each. region ought to go round to 
study the several dispositions of their people, that for the 
remedy of each disease some medicine may be found in the 
Church. Remic. That they should not be acceptors of 
persons the preachers are instructed in what follows, the 
whole of Galilee. That they should not go about empty, by 
the word teaching. That they should seek to benefit not 
few but many, in what follows, zn their synagogues. CHRYS.* 
By which too He shewed the Jews that He came not as an 
enemy of God, or a seducer of souls, but as consenting with 
his Father. Remic. That they should not preach error nor 
fable, but sound doctrine, is inculcated in the words, preach- 
ing the Gospel of the kingdom. ‘ Teaching’ and ‘ preaching’ 


s A passage is here inserted in original. It is of no doctrinal import- 
Nicolai’s edition which is not in the ance. 


142 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


differ; teaching refers to things present, preaching to things 
to come; He taught present commandments and preached 
future promises. PsEupo-Curys. Or, He taught natural 
righteousness, those things which natural reason teaches, 
as chastity, humility, and the like, which all men of them- 
selves sce to be goods. Such things are necessary to be 
taught not so much for the sake of making them known 
as for stirring the heart. For beneath the prevalence of 
carnal delights the knowledge of natural righteousness sleeps 
forgotten. When then a teacher begins to denounce carnal 
sins, his teaching does not bring up a new knowledge, but 
recalls to memory one that had been forgotten. But He 
preached the Gospel, in telling of good things which the 
ancients had manifestly not heard of, as the happiness of 
heaven, the resurrection of the dead, and the like. Or, He 
taught by interpreting the prophecies concerning Himself; 
He preached by declaring the benefits that were to come 
from Himself. Remic. That the teacher should study to 
commend his teaching by his own virtuous conduct is 
conveyed in those words, healing every sort of disease and 
malady among the people; maladics of the body, diseases of 
the soul. Psrupo-Curys. Or, by disease we may understand 
any passion of the mind, as avarice, lust, and such like, by 
malady unbelief, that is, weakness of faith. Or, the diseases 
are the more grievous pains of the body, the maladies the 
slighter. As He cured the bodily pains by virtue of His divine 
power, so He cured the spiritual by the word of His mercy. 
He first teaches, and then performs the cures, for two reasons. 
First, that what is needed most may come first; for it is the 
word of holy instruction, and not miracles, that edify the soul. 
Secondly, because teaching is commended by miracles, not 
the converse. Currys. We must consider that when some 
great change is being wrought, as the introduction of a new 
polity, God is wont to work miracles, giving pledges of His 
power to those who are to receive His laws. Thus when He 
would make man, He first created a world, and then at 
length gave man in paradise a law. When He would dis- 
pense a law to the holy Noah, he shewed truly great . 
wonders; and again when He was about to ordain the Law 
for the Jews, He first shewed great prodigies, and then at 


VER, 23—25. ST. MATTHEW. 143 


length gave them the commandments. So now when about 

to introduce a sublime discipline of life, He first provided a 
sanction to His instructions by mighty signs, because the 
eternal kingdom He preached was not seen, by the things 
which did appear, He made sure that which as yet did not 
appear. Goss. Because preachers should have good testi- eee 
mony from those who are without, lest if their life is open to alee 
censure, their preaching be contemned, he adds, And the 
fame of him went abroad through all Syria. Rawan. Syria 
here is all the region from Euphrates to the Great sea, from 
Cappadocia to Egypt, in which is the country of Palcstine, 
inhabited by Jews. Curys. Observe the reserve of the 
Evangelist; he does not give an account of any one of the 
various cases of healing, but passes in one brief phrase an 
abundance of miracles, they brouyht to him all their sick. 
Remic. By these he would have us understand various bat 
slighter diseases; but when he says, seized with divers stck- 
nesses and torments, he would have those understood, of 
whom it is subjoined, and who had demons. Goss. ‘ Sick- 
ness’ means a lasting ailment; ‘ torment’ is an acute pain, as 
pleurisy, and such like; they who had demons are they who 
were tormented by the demons. Remic. ‘ Lunatics’ are so 
called from the moon; for as it waxes in its monthly seasons 
they are tormented. JEROME; Not really smitten by the 
moon, but who were believed to be so through the subtlety 

of the demons, who by observing the seasons of the moon, 
sought to bring an evil report against the creature, that it 
might redound to the blasphemy of the Creator. AUG. Aug.De 
Demons are enticed to take up their abode in many creatures, me a ares 
(created not by themselves but God,) by delights adapted to 

their various natures; not that they are animals, drawn by 
meats ; but spirits attracted by signs which agree with each 
one’s taste. RaBANn. Paralytics are those whose bodies have 

their nerves slackened or resolved from a Greek word, signi- 
fying this. PsEupo-Curys. In some places it is, He cured 
many; but here, He cured them, meaning ‘ all;’ as a new 
physician first entering a town cures all who come to him 

to beget a good opinion concerning himself. Currys. He 
requires no direct profession of faith from them, both because 

He had not yet given them any proofs of His miraculous 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


144 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. IV. 


power, and because in bringing their sick from far they had 
shewn no small faith. Rasax. The crowds that followed 
Him consisted of four sorts of men, some followed for the 
heavenly teaching as disciples, some for the curing of their 
diseases, some from the reports concerning Him alone, and 
curiosity to find whether they were truce; others from envy, 
wishing to catch Him in some matter that they might accuse 
Him. Mystically, Svria is interpreted ‘ lofty,’ Galilee, 
‘turning:’ or ‘a wheel;’ that is, the Devil and the world; the 
Devil is both proud and always turned round to the bottom ; 
the world in which the fame of Christ went abroad through 
preaching: the dimoniacs are the idolaters; the lunatics, 
the unstable ; the paralytics, the slow and careless.’ GLoss. 
The crowds that follow the Lord, are they of the Church, 
which is spiritually designated by Galilee, passing to virtu- 
ousness; Decapolis 1s he who keeps the Ten Commandments; 
Jerusalem and Judwa, he who is enlightened by the vision 
of peace and corfession; and beyond Jordan, he who having 
passed the waters of Baptism entcrs the land of promise. 
Remia. Or, they follow the Lord from Galilee, that is, from 
the unstable world; from Decapolis, (the country of ten 
towns,) signifying those who break the Ten Commandments; 
and from Jerusalem, because before it was preserved unhurt 
in peace; and from Jordan, that is, from the confession of 
the Devil; and from beyond Jordan, they who were first 
planted in paganism, but passing the water of Baptism came 
to Christ, 


CHAP. V. 


1. And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a 
mountain: and when He was set, His disciples came 
unto Him. 

2. And He opened His mouth, and taught them, 
saying, 

3. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven. 


Pseupo-Curys. Every man in his own trade or profession 
rejoices when he sees an opportunity of exercising it; the 
carpenter if he sees a goodly tree desires to have it to cut 
down to employ his skill on, and the Priest when he sees a 
full Church, his heart rejoices, he is glad of the occasion to 
teach. So the Lord seeing a great congregation of people 
was stirred to teach them. Aue. Or He may be thought to Aug. de 
have sought to shun the thickest crowd, and to have ascended Bia: 
the mountain that He might speak to His disciples alone. 
Currys. By not choosing His seat in the city, and the market Chrys, 
place, but on a mountain in a desert, He has taught us to do me 
nothing with ostentation, and to depart from crowds, above 
all when we are to be employed in philosophy, or in speaking 
of serious things. Remic. This should be known, that the 
Lord had three places of retirement that we read of, the 
ship, the mountain, and the desert; to one of these He was 
wont to withdraw whenever He was pressed by the mul- 
titude. JEROME; Some of the less learned brethren suppose 
the Lord to have spoken what follows from the Mount of 
Olives, which is by no means the case; what went before 
and what follows fixes the place in Galilee. *Mount Tabor. 


2 Mount Tabor is asserted by the Mount. The mount of the Beatitudes 


Fathers and by tradition coming down 
to the present day to be the scene of 
the Transfiguration. But S. Jerome 
seems to be the only author who speaks 
of it as the scene of the Sermon on the 


VOL. I. 


according to modern travellers lies 
near to Capernaum, and ten miles 
north of Mount Tabor. See Greswell 
Diss. vol. ii. 294. Pococke’s Descrip. of 
the East, vol. ii. 67. 


Is. 40, 9. 


Ps. 68, 
15. 


Aug. de 
Serm. 
Dom. in 
Mont. 
Feds 


Aug. de 
Cons. 
Ev.i.19. 


146 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VY. 


we may suppose, or any other high mountain. Currys. He 
ascended a mountain, first, that He might fulfil the pro- 
phecy of Esaias, Get thee up into a mountain; secondly, 
to shew that as well he who teaches, as he who hears the 
righteousness of God should stand on an high ground of 
spiritual virtues; for none can abide in the valley and speak 
from a mountain. If thou stand on the earth, speak of 
the earth; if thou speak of heaven, stand in heaven. Or, 
He ascended into the mountain to shew that all who would 
learn the mysteries of the truth should go up into the Mount 
of the Church of which the Prophet speaks, The hill of God 
is a hill of fatness. Uttary; Or, Ife ascends the mquntain, 
because it is placed in the loftiness of His Father’s Majesty 
that He gives the commands of heavenly life. Aue. Or, He 
ascends the mountain to shew that the precepts of nghteous- 
ness given by God through the Prophets to the Jews, who 
were yet under the bondage of fear, were the lesser com- 
mandments; but that by His own Son were given the ercater 
commandments to a people which He had determined to 
deliver by love. JEROME; Ile spoke to them sitting and not 
standing, for they could not have understood Him had He 
appeared in His own Majesty. Avge. Or, to teach sitting is 
the prerogative of the Master. His disciples came to him, 
that they who in spirit approached more nearly to keeping 
His commandments, should also approach Hin nearest with 
their bodily presence. Rananus; Mystically, this sitting 
dcewn of Christ is His incarnation; had He not taken flesh 
on Him, mankind could not have come unto Him. Avge. 
It causes a thought how it is that Matthew relates this 
sermon to have been delivered by the Lord sitting on the 
mountain; Luke, as He stood in the plain. This diversity 
in their accounts would lead us to think that the occasions 
were different. Why should not Christ repeat once more 
what Ile said before, or do once more what He had done 
before? Although another method of reconciling the two 
may occur to us; namely, that our Lord was first with His 
disciples alone on some more lofty peak of the mountain 
when He chosc the twelve; that He then descended with 
them not from the mountain entirely, but from the top to 
some expanse of level ground in the side, capable of holding 


VER. ]1—3. ST. MATTHEW. 147 


a great number of people; that He stood there while the 
crowd was gathering around Him, and after when He had 
sate down, then His disciples came near to Him, and so to 
them and in the presence of the rest of the multitude He 
spoke the same sermon which Matthew and Luke give, ina 
different manner, but with equal truth of facts. 

Grec. When the Lord on the mountain is about to utter Greg. 
His sublime precepts, it is said, Opening his mouth he;,°\.’ 
taught them, He who had before opened the mouth of the 
Prophets. Remia. Wherever it is said that the Lord opened 
His mouth, we may know how great things are to follow. 
Ave.. Or, the phrase is introductory of an address longer Aug. de 
than ordinary. Curys. Or, that we may understand that in Mont. 
He sometimes teaches by opening His mouth in specch,i. 1. 
sometimes by that voice which resounds from His works. 

Aue. Whoever will take the trouble to examine with a Aug. 
pious and sober spirit, will find in this sermon a perfect” “nP- 
code of the Christian life as far as relates to the conduct 

of daily life. Accordingly the Lord concludes it with 
the words, Every man who heareth these words of mine 
and doeth them, [ will liken him to a wise man, &c. 

Auc. The chief good is the only motive of philosophical Aug. 
enquiry; but whatever confers blessedness, that is_ the p,; ce 
chief good; therefore He begins, Blessed are the poor in}. 
spirit. Ip. Augmentation of ‘ spirit’ generally, implies Id. de 
insolence and pride. For in common speech the proud jr” i 
are said to have a great spirit, and rightly—for wind |l. 
is a spirit, and who does not know that we say of proud 
men that they are ‘ swollen,’ ‘ puffed up.’ Here therefore 
by poor in spirit are rightly understood ‘ lowly,’ ‘ fearing 
God,’ not having a puffed up spirit. Currys. Or, He 
here calls all loftiness of soul and temper spirit; for as 
there are many humble against their will, constrained by 
their outward condition, they have no praise ; the blessing 
is on those who humble themselves by their own choice. 

Thus He begins at once at the root, pulling up pride 

which is the root and source of all evil, setting up as its 

opposite humility as a firm foundation. If this be well 

laid, other virtues may be firmly built thereon; if that be 

sapped, whatever good you gather upon it perishes. 
L 2 


148 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VY, 


Pseupo-Curys. Blessed are the poor in spirit*, or, ac- 
cording to the literal rendering of the Greek, ‘ they who 
beg,’ that the humble may learn that they should be ever 
begging at God’s almshouse. For there are many naturally 
humble and not of faith, who do not knock at God’s 
almshouse; but they alone are humble who are so of 
faith, Currys. Or, the poor in spirit may be those who 
fear and tremble at God’s commandments, whom the Lord 
by the Prophet Isaiah commends. Though why more 
than simply humble? Of the humble there may be in 
Aug. this place but few, in that again an abundance. Ave. The 
aene ‘proud seek an earthly kingdom, of the humble only is 
the kingdom of Heaven. Pseupo-Curys. For as all other 
vices, but chiefly pride, casts down to hell; so all other 
virtues, but chicfly humility, conduct to Heaven; it 1s 
proper that he that humbles himself should be exalted. 
JEROME; The poor in spirit are those who embrace a 
Ambros. voluntary poverty for the sake of the Holy Spint. AMBROSE; 
ne Hi In the eye of Heaven blessedness begins there where 
Gloss. misery begins in human estimation. Gtoss. The riches 
interlin. of Heaven are suitably promised to those who at this 
present are in poverty. 


5. "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit 


the earth. 
Ambros. AMBROSE; When I have learned contentment in poverty, 
in Lut, the next lesson is to govern my heart and temper. For 


what good is it to me to be without worldly things, unless 
I have besides a meek spirit? It suitably follows therefore, 
Aug. Blessed are the meek. Avuc. The meek are they who 
ily resist not wrongs, and give way to evil; but overcome 
2. evil of good. AmBRose; Soften therefore your temper 
or apitey that you be not angry, at least that you be angry, and 
sin not. It is a noble thing to govern passion by reason; 


® The Bened. ed. reads ‘ beati verses 4 and 5 according to the Greek; 
egeni’—and has this marginal note, all the Latin Fathers (with single 
‘ Hine sequitur hune Grece non scrip- exception of Hilary on Ps. 118.) fol- 
sisse’—hut S. Thos. reads ‘beati wesyes lowing the order of the Vulg. 
ptochi;’ it may be remarked moreover > Verses 4 and 6 are transposed in 
that the author follows the order of the Vulg. 


VER. 5. ST. MATTHEW. 149 


nor is it a less virtue to check anger, than to be entirely 
without anger, since one is esteemed the sign of a weak, 

the other of a strong, mind. Auc. Let the unyielding Aug. 
then wrangle and quarrel about earthly and temporal"? 
things, the meek are blessed, for they shall inherit the 
earth, and not be rooted out of it; that earth of which 

it is said in the Psalms, Thy lot is in the land of the Ps. 142, 
living, meaning the fixedness of a perpetual inheritance, ”” 

in which the soul that hath good dispositions rests as 

in its own place, as the body does in an earthly possession, 

it is fed by its own food, as the body by the earth; such 

is the rest and the life of the saints. Pseupo-Curys. This 
earth as some interpret, so long as it is in its present 
condition is the land of the dead, seeing it is subject to 
vanity; but when it is freed from corruption it becomes 

the land of the living, that the mortal may inherit an immortal 
country. I have read another exposition of it, as if the 
heaven in which the saints are to dwell is meant by 

the land of the living, because compared with the regions 

of death it is heaven, compared with the heaven above 

it is earth. Others again say, that this body as long as 

it is subject to death is the land of the dead, when it 
shall b made like unto Christ’s glorious body, it will 

be the land of the living. HuiLary; Or, the Lord promises 

the inheritance of the earth to the meek, meaning of that 
Body, which Himself took on Him as His tabernacle; 

and as by the gentleness of our minds Christ dwells in 

us, we also shall be clothed with the glory of His renewed 
body. Curyvs. Otherwise; Christ here has mixed things 
sensible with things spiritual. Because it is commonly 
supposed that he who is meek loses all that he possesses, 
Christ here gives a contrary promise, that he who is not 
forward shall possess his own in security, but that he of 

a contrary disposition many times loses his soul and his 
paternal inheritance. But because the Prophet had said, 

The meek shall inherit the earth, He used these well- px. 36, 
known words in conveying His meaning. Gtoss. The Ais 
meek, who have possessed themselves, shall possess hereafter ord. 
the inheritance of the Father; to possess is more than to 
have, for we have many things which we lose immediately. 


150 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


4. Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be 
comforted. 


ae AmBRosE; When you have done thus much, attained both 
poverty and meekness, remember that you are a sinner, 
mourn your sins, as He proceeds, Blessed are they that 
mourn. And it is suitable that the third blessing should be 

of those that mourn for sin, for it is the Trinity that forgives 

sin. HiLarny; Those that mourn, that is, not loss of kindred, 
affrouts, or losses, but who weep for past sins. Psrupo- 
Curys. And they who weep for their own sins are blessed, 

but much more so who weep for others’ sins; so should all 
teachers do. JEROME; For the mourning here meant is not 

for the dead by common course of nature, but for the dead 

in sins, and vices. Thus Samuel mourned for Saul, thus the 
Apostle Paul mourned for those who had not performed 
penance after uncleanness. Psrupo-Curys. The comfort 

of mourners is the ceasing of thpir mourning; they then who 
mourn their own sins shall be consoled when they have 
received remittance thereof. Crys. And though it were 
enough for such to receive pardon, yet He rests not His 
mercy only there, but makes them partakers of many com- 

forts both here and hereafter. God’s mercies are always 
greater than our troubles. - PseEupo-Curys. But they also 

who mourn for others’ sins shall be comforted, inasmuch as 

they shall own God’s providence in that worldly generation, 
understanding that they who had perished were not of God, 

out of whose hand none can snatch. For these leaving to 
mourn, they shall be comforted in their own blessedness. 

Aug. AuG. Otherwise; mourning is sorrow for the loss of what is 
pe dear ; but those that are turned to God lose the things that 
2. they held dear in this world; and as they have now no 
longer any joy in such things as before they had joy in, their 
sorrow may not be healed till there is formed within them a 

love of eternal things. They shall then be comforted by the 

Holy Spirit, who is therefore chicfly called, The Paraclete, 

that is, ‘ Comforter;’ so that for the loss of their temporal 

Gloss. joys, they shall gain eternal joys. GLoss. Or, by mourning, 
eis two kinds of sorrow are intended; one for the miseries of 
this world, one for lack of heavenly things; so Caleb’s 


VER. 6. - ST. MATTHEW. 151 


daughter asked both the upper and the lower springs. This 
kind of mourning none have but the poor and the meek, who 
as not loving the world acknowledge themselves miserable, 
and therefore desire heaven. Suitably, therefore, consolation 
is promised to them that mourn, that he who has sorrow at 
this present may have joy hereafter. But the reward of the 
mourner is greater that that of the poor or the meek, for to | 
rejoice in the kingdom is more than to have it, or to possess 
it; for many things we possess in sorrow. CHrRys. We may 
remark that this blessing is given not simply, but with great 
force and emphasis; it is not simply, ‘who have grief,’ but 
who mourn. And indeed this command is the sum of all 
philosophy. For if they who mourn for the death of children 
or kinsfolk, throughout all that season of their sorrow, are 
touched with no other desires, as of money, or honour, burn 
not with envy, feel not wrongs, nor are open to any other 
vicious passion, but are solely given up to their grief; much 
more ought they, who mourn their own sins in such manner 
as they ought to moum for them, to shew this higher 
philosophy. 


6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness: for they shall be filled. 


AMBROsE; As soon as I have wept for my sins, I begin to Ambros. 
hunger and thirst after righteousness. He who is afflicted" %P- 
with any sore disease, hath no hunger. JEROME; It is not 
enough that we desire righteousness, unless we also suffer 
hunger for it, by which expression we may understand that 
we are never righteous enough, but always hunger after works 
of righteousness. Pseupo-CHrys. All good which men do 
not from love of the good itself is unpleasing before God. 

He hungers after righteousness who desires to walk according 

to the righteousness of God; he thirsts after righteousness 

who desires to get the knowledge thereof. Currys. He may 

mean either general righteousness, or that particular virtue 4 s«é- 
which is the opposite of covetousness. As He was going on 7 — 
to speak of mercy, He shews beforehand of what kind our 
mercy should be, that it should not be of the gains of plunder 

er covetousness, hence He ascribes to righteousness that 


Aug. 


ubi sup. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


miseri- 
cors. 


Aug. 
ubi sup, 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


152 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


which is peculiar to avarice, namely, to hunger and thirst. 
Hitary; The blessedness which He appropriates to those 
who hunger and thirst after righteousness shews that the 
deep longing of the saints for the doctrine of God shall 
receive perfect replenishment in heaven; then they shall be 
jilled. Pseupo-Curys. Such is the bounty of a rewarding 
God, that His gifts are greater than the desires of the saints. 
Ava. Or He speaks of food with which they shall be filled at 
this present; to wit, that food of which the Lord spake, My 
food ts to do the will of my Father, that is, righteousness, 
and that water of which whoever drinks it shall be in him 
a well of water springing up to life eternal. CuHRys. Or, 
this is again a promise of a temporal reward; for as covet- 
ousness is thought to make many rich, He affirms on the 
contrary that righteousness rather makes rich, for He who 
loves righteousness possesses all things in safety. 


7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain 
mercy. 


Goss. Justice and mercy are so united, that the one 
ought to be mingled with the other; justice without mercy is 
cruelty; mercy without justice, profusion—hence He goes on 
to the one from the other. Remic. The merciful is he who 
has a sad heart; he counts others’ misery his own, 
and is sad at their grief as at his own. JEROME; Mercy 
here is not said only of alms, but is in every sin of a brother, 
if we bear one another's burdens. Auc. He pronounces 
those blessed who succour the wretched, because they are 
rewarded in being themselves delivered from all misery; as 
it follows, for they shall obtain mercy. HtLary; So greatly 
is God pleased with our feelings of benevolence towards all 
men, that He will bestow His own mercy only on the merci- 
ful. Curys. The reward here seems at first to be only 
an equal return; but imdeed it is much more; for human 
mercy and divine mercy are not to be put on an equality. 
Goss. Justly is mercy dealt out to the merciful, that they 
should receive more than they had deserved; and as he 
who has more than enough receives more than he who has 


VER. &, ST. MATTHEW. 153 


only enough, so the glory of mercy is greater than of the 
things hitherto mentioned. 


8. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall 
see God. 


AMBROSE; The merciful loses the benefit of his mercy, Ambros. 
unless he shews it from a pure heart; for if he seeks to have ae 
whereof to boast, he loses the fruit of his deeds; the next 
that follows therefore is, Blessed are the pure in heart. 
Goss. Purity of heart comes properly in the sixth place, Gloss. 
because on the sixth day man was created in the image ope 
God, which image was shrouded by sin, but is formed anew 
in pure hearts by grace. It follows rightly the before- 
mentioned graces, because if they be not there, a clean heart 
is not created in a man. Currys. By the pure are here 
meant those who possess a perfect goodness, conscious to 
themselves of no evil thoughts, or again those who live in 
such temperance as is mostly necessary to seeing God ac- 
cording to that of St. Paul, Follow peace with all men, and 
holiness, without which no man shall see God. For as there 
are many merciful, yet unchaste, to shew that mercy alone 
is not enough, he adds this concerning purity. JEROME; 

The pure is known by purity of heart, for the temple of God 
cannot be impure. Pseuno-Curys. He who in thought 
and deed fulfils all righteousness, sees God in his heart, for 
righteousness is an image of God, for God is righteousness. 
So far as any one has rescued himself from evil, and works 
things that are good, so far does he see God, either hardly, 
or fully, or sometimes, or always, according to the capa- 
bilities of human nature. But in that world to come the 
pure in heart shall see God face to face, not in’a glass, and 
in enigma as here. AuG. They are foolish who seek to see Aug. | 
God with the bodily eye, seeing He is seen only by the lies 
heart, as it is elsewhere written, Jn singleness of heart seek i. 2. 
ye Him; the single heart is the same as is here called the ;.- 
pure heart. Ip. Butif spiritual eyes in the spiritual body shall Aug. _ 
be able only to see so much as they we now have can see, wee 99: 
undoubtedly God will not be able to be seen of them. Ib. Aug. de 
This seeing God is the reward of faith; to which end our 1" "8 


oe 


154 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


Acts 15, hearts are made pure by faith, as it is written, cleansing their 
hearts by faith; but the present verse proves this still more 
Aug.de strongly. Ip. No one seeing God can be alive with the life 
ae men have on earth, or with these our bodily senses. Unless 
ie xii. one die altogether out of this life, either by totally departing 
from the body, or so alienated from carnal lusts that he 
may truly say with the Apostle, «whether in the body or out 
of the body, [ cannot tell, he is not translated that he should 
Gloss. see this vision. Gtoss. The reward of these is greater than 
nonecc- the reward of the first; being not merely to dine in the 


King’s court, but further to see His face. 


9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be 
called the children of God. 


Ambros. AMBROSE; When you have made your inward parts clean 
ubi sup. from every spot of sin, that dissentions and contentious may 
not proceed from your temper, begin peace within yourself, 

Aug. that so you may extend it to others. Ava. Peace is the 
ae fixedness of order; by order, I mean an arrangement of 
things like and unlike giving to each its own place. And 

as there is no man who would not willingly have joy, so is 

there no man who would not have peace; since even those 

who go to war desire nothing more than by war to come 
pacifici, to a glorious peace. JEROME; The peacemakers are pro- 
nounced blessed, they namely who make peace first within 

their own hearts, then between brethren at variance. For 

what avails it to make peace between others, while in your 

Aug. own heart are wars of rebellious vices. Aua. The peace- 
aia ‘4makers within themselves are they who having stilled all 
i.2. disturbances of their spirits, having subjected them to reason, 
have overcome their carnal desires, and become the kingdom 

of God. There all things are so disposed, that that which 

- is most chief and excellent in man, governs those parts 
which we have in common with the brutes, though they 
struggle against it; nay even that in man which is excellent 

is subjected to a yet greater, namely, the very Truth, the 

Son of God. For it would not be able to govern what 

is inferior to it, if it were not subject to what is above 


VER. 10. ST. MATTHEW. 155 


it. And this is the peace which is given on earth to men 

of good will. Ip. No man can attain in this life that there Aug. 
be not in his members a law resisting the law of his mind. . aa 
But the peacemakers attain thus far by overcoming the lusts 

of the flesh, that in time they come to a most perfect peace. 
Pseupo-Curys. The peacemakers with others are not only 
those who reconcile enemies, but those who unmindful of 
wrongs cultivate peace. That peace only is blessed which 

is lodged in the heart, and does not consist only in words. 
And they who love peace, they are the sons of peace. 
‘Hitary; The blessedness of the peacemakers is the reward 

of adoption, they shall be called the sons of God. For God 

is OUr Common parent, and no other way can we pass into 

His family than by living in brotherly love together. CHRys. 

Or, if the peacemakers are they who do not contend one with 
another, but reconcile those that are at strife, they are 
rightly called the sons of God, seeing this was the chief 
employment of the Only-begotten Son, to reconcile things 
separated, to give peace to things at war. Aug. Or, because 
peace is then perfect when there is no where any opposition, 

the peacemakers are called the sons of God, because nothing 
resists God, and the children ought to bear the likeness of 
their Father. GtLoss. The peacemakers have thus the place Gloss. 
of highest honour, inasmuch as he who is called the king’s ®P- 4% 
son, is the highest in the king’s house. This beatitudeis 
placed the seventh in order, because in the sabbath shall 

be given the repose of true peace, the six ages being passed 
away. 


10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for 
righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven. 


Currys. Blessed are they who suffer persecution for righte- 
ousness’ sake, that is for virtue, for defending others, for piety, 
for all these things are spoken of under the title of righteous- 
ness. This follows the beatitude upon the peacemakers, that 
we may not be led to suppose that it is good to seek peace at Aug. 


alltimes. Auc. When peace is once firmly established within, Mont. - 
i. 2. 


vid. Phil. 
3, 2.3. 


Ambros. 
in Luc. 
vi. 23. 


156 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


whatever persecutions he who has been cast without raises, or 
carries on, he increases that glory which is in the sight of God. 
JEROME; For righteousness’ sake He adds expressly, for many 
suffer persecution for their sins, and are not therefore 
righteous. Likewise consider how the eighth beatitude 
of the true circumcision is terminated by martyrdom. 
Pseupo-Curys. He said not, Blessed are they who suffer 
persecution of the Gentiles; that we may not suppose the 
blessing pronounced on those only who are persecuted for 
refusing to sacrifice to idols; yea, whoever suffers persecution 
of heretics because he will not forsake the truth is likewise 
blessed, seeing he suffers for righteousness. Moreover, if any 
of the great ones, who seem to be Christians, being corrected 
by you on account of his sins, shall persecute you, you are 
blessed with John the Baptist. For if the Prophets are 
truly martyrs when they are killed by their own countrymen, 
without doubt he who suffers in the cause of God has the 
reward of martyrdom though he suffers from his own people. 
Scripture therefore does not mention the persons of the 
persecutors, but only the cause of persecution, that you may 
learn to look, not by whom, but why you suffer. HUIcary ; 
Thus, lastly, He includes those in the beatitude whose will 
is ready to suffer all things for Christ, who 1s our righteous- 
ness. For these then also is the kingdom preserved, for they 
are in the contempt of this world poor in spirit. Ava. Or, 
the eighth beatitude, as it were, returns to the commencement, 
because it shews the perfect complete character. In the 
first then and the eighth, the kingdom of heaven is named, 
for the seven go to make the perfect man, the eighth manifests 
and proves his perfectness, that all may be conducted to 
perfection by these steps. 

AMBROSE; Otherwise; the first kingdom of heaven was 
promised to the Saints, in deliverance from the body ; thesecond, 
that after the resurrection they should be with Christ. For 
after your resurrection you shall begin to possess the earth 
delivered from death, and in that possession shall find com- 
fort. Pleasure follows comfort, and Divine mercy pleasure. 
But on whom God has mercy, him He calls, and he whom He 
calls, beholds Him that called him. He who beholds God 
is adopted into the rights of divine birth, and then at length 


VER. 10. ST. MATTHEW. ~ 157 


as the son of God is delighted with the riches of the heavenly 
kingdom. The first then begins, the last is perfected. Curys. 
Wonder not if you do not hear ‘the kingdom’ mentioned 
under each beatitude ; for in saying shall be comforted, shall 
Jind mercy, and the rest, in all these the kingdom of heaven 
is tacitly understood, so that you must not look for any of 
the things of sense. For indeed he would not be blessed 
who was to be crowned with those things which depart with 
this life. Auc. The number of these sentences should be Aug. 
carefully attended to; to these seven degrees of blessedness Bee 
agree the operation of that seven-form Holy Spirit which 
Isaiah described. But as He began from the highest, so here 
He begins from the lowest; for there we are taught that the 
Son of God will descend to the lowest; here that man will 
ascend from the lowest to the likeness of God. Here the 
first place is given to fear, which 1s suitable for the humble, 
of whom itis said, Blessed are the poor in spirit, that is, those 
who think not high things, but who fear. The second is 
piety, which belongs to the meek ; for he who seeks piously, 
reverences, does not find fault, does not resist ; and this is to 
become meek. The third is knowledge, which belongs to 
those that mourn, who have learned to what evils they are 
enslaved which they once pursued as goods. The fourth, 
which is fortitude, nightly belongs to those who hunger and 
thirst, who seeking joy im true goods, labour to turn away 
from earthly lusts. The fifth, counsel, is appropriate for the 
merciful, for there is one remedy to deliver from so great 
evils, viz. to give and to distribute to others. ‘The sixth 
is understanding, and belongs to the pure in heart, who 
with purged eye can see what eye seethnot. The seventh 
is wisdom, and may be assigned to the peacemakers, in whom 
is no rebellious motion, but they obey the Spirit. Thus the 
one reward, the kingdom of heaven, is put forth under various 
names. In the first, as was right, is placed the kingdom of 
heaven, which is the beginning of perfect wisdom; as if it 
should be said, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of 
wisdom. To the meek, an inheritance, as to those who with 
piety seek the execution of a father’s will. To those that 
mourn, comfort, as to persons who know what they had 
lost, and in what they were immersed. To the hungry, 


158 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 
Serm. in 
Mont. 

i. 5. 


plenty, as a refreshment to those who labour for salvation. 
To the merciful, mercy, that to those who have followed the 
best counsel, that may be shewed which they have shewed 
to others. To the pure in heart the faculty of seeing God, 
as to men bearing a pure eye to understand the things of 
eternity. To the peacemakers, the likeness of God. And 
all these things we believe may be attained in this life, as 
we believe they were fulfilled in the Apostles; for as to 
the things after this life they cannot be expressed in any 
words. 


11. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and 
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against 
you falsely, for My sake. 

12. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is 
your reward in heaven: for so persecutcd they the 
prophets which were before you. 


RaBanus; The preceding blessings were general; He 
now begins to address His discourse to them that were 
present, foretelling them the persecutions which they should 
suffer for His name. AuaG. It may be asked, what difference 
there is between ‘ they shall revile you,’ and ‘ shall speak 
all manner of evil of you;’ to revile, it may be said, being but 
to speak evil of. But a reproach thrown with insult in the 
face of one present is a different thing from a slander cast on 
the character of the absent. To persecute includes both 
open violence and secret snares. PsrEupo-Curys. But if it 
be true that he who offers a cup of water does not lose his 
reward, consequently he who has been wronged but by a 
single word of calumny, shall not be without a reward. But 
that the reviled may have a claim to this blessing, two things 
are necessary, it must be false, and it must be for God's sake; 
otherwise he has not the reward of this blessing ; therefore 
He adds, fulsely for mysake. AuG. This I suppose was added 
because of those who wish to boast of persecutions and evil 
reports of their shame, and therefore claim to belong to Christ 
because many evil things are said of them; but either these 


VER. 1], 12. ST. MATTHEW. 159 


are true, or when false yet they are not for Christ’s sake. 

Grea. What hurt can you receive when men detract from Greg. 
you, though you have no defence but only your own con- fyech ie 
science? But as we ought not to stir up wilfully the tongues. !7- 
of slanderers, lest they perish for their slander, yet when 

their own malice has instigated them, we should endure it 

with equanimity, that our merit may be added to. Rejoice, 

He says, and exult, for your reward is abundant in heaven. 
Goss. Rejoice, that is, in mind, exult with the body, for Gloss. 
your reward is not great only but abundant in heaven. Ave. | Beane? 


se 
Do not suppose that by heaven here is meant the upper Aug. 


regions of the sky of this visible world, for your reward is Mont. = 
not to be placed in things that are seen, but by in heaveni-5. 
understand the spiritual firmament, where everlasting ngh- 
teousness dwells. Those then whose joy is in things spiritual 

will even here have some foretaste of that reward; but it 

will be made perfect in every part when this mortal shall 

have put on immortality. JeRoME; This it is in the power 

of any one of us to attain, that when our good character is 
injured by calumny, we rejoice in the Lord. He only who 

seeks after empty glory cannot attain this. Let us then 
rejoice and exult, that our reward may be prepared for us in 
heaven. Pseupo-Curys. For by how much any is pleased 

with the praise of men, by so much is he grieved with their 

evil speaking. But if you seek your glory in heaven, you 

will not fear any slanders on earth. GRreGcory; Yet ought Greg. 
we sometimes to check our defamers, lest by spreading evi Erg 4 
reports of us, they corrupt the innocent hearts of those who9. 17. 
might hear good from us. Gtoss. He invites them to Gloss. 
patience not only by the prospect of reward, but by example, °" 
when He adds, for so persecuted they the Prophets who were 
before you. Remic. For a man in sorrow receives great 
comfort from the recollection of the sufferings of others, 

who are set before him as an example of patience; as if He 

had said, Remember that ye are His Apostles, of whom also 

they were Prophets. Curys. At the same time He signifies 

His equality in honour with His Father, as if He had 

said, As they suffered for my Father, so shall ye suffer 
forme. And in saying, Zhe Prophets who were before you, 

He teaches that they themselves are already become Prophets. 


160 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


Aug. AvuG. Persecuted He says generally, comprehending both 
ubi sup. renroaches and defamation of character. 


13. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt 
have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted ? 
it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, 
and to be trodden under foot of men. 


Curys. When He had delivered to His A postlessuch sublime 
precepts, so much greater than the precepts of the Law, 
that they might not be dismayed and say, How shall we 
be able to fulfil these things? He sooths their fears by 
mingling praises with His instructions, saying, Ye are the 
salt of the earth. This shews them how necessary were 
these precepts for them. Not for your own salvation 
merely, or for a single nation, but for the whole world is 
this doctrine committed to you. It is not for you then 
to flatter and deal smoothly with men, but, on the contrary, 
to be rough and biting as salt is) When for thus offending 
men by reproving them ye are reviled, rejoice; for this 
is the proper effect of salt to be harsh and grating to the 
depraved palate. Thus the evil-speaking of others will 
bring you no inconvenience, but will rather be a testimony 
of your firmness. HriLtary; There may be here seen a 
propriety in our Lord’s language which may be gathered 
by considering the Apostles’ office, and the nature of 
salt. This, used as it 1s by men for almost every purpose, © 
preserves from decay those bodies which are sprinkled 
with it; and in this, as well as in every sense of its 
flavour as a condiment, the parallel is most exact. The 
Apostles are preachers of heavenly things, and thus, as 
it were, salters with eternity; mghtly called the salt of 
the earth, as by the virtue of their teaching, they, as it 
were, salt and preserve bodies for eternity. REmic. More- 
over, salt is changed into another kind of substance by 
three means, water, the heat of the sun, and the breath 
of the wind. Thus Apostolical men also were changed 
into spiritual regeneration by the water of baptism, the 
heat of love, and the breath of the Holy Spirit. That 
heavenly wisdom also, which the Apostles preached, dries 


VER. 13. ST. MATTHEW. 161 


up the humours of carnal works, removes the foulness and 

putrefaction of evil conversation, kills the work of lustful 

thoughts, and also that worm of which it is said their worm a 66, 

dieth not. Remic. The Apostles are the salt of the earth, 

that is, of worldly men who are called the earth, because they 

love this earth. JEROME; Or, because by the Apostles the 

Whole human race is seasoned. Pseupo-CuHrys. A doctor 

when he is adorned with all the preceding virtues, then is 

like good salt, and his whole people are salted by sceing 

and hearing him. Remic. It should be known, that in the 

Old Testament no sacrifice was offered to God unless it were 

first sprinkled with salt, for none can present an acceptable 

sacrifice to God without the flavour of heavenly wisdom. 

Hinary; And because man is ever liable to change, He 

therefore warns the Apostles, who have been entitled the salt 

of the earth, to continue stedfast in the might of the power 

committed to them, when He adds, [f the salt have lost its 

savour, wherewith shall it be salted? JEROME; That is, if 

the doctor have erred, by what other doctor shall he be cor- 

rected? AuG. If you by whom the nations are to be Aus. 

salted shall lose the kingdom of heaven through fear of Monta. 

temporal persecution, who are they by whom your error® 

shall be corrected. Another copy has, /f the salt have lost 

all sense, shewing that they must be esteemed to have lost 

their sense, who either pursuing abundance, or fearing lack 

of temporal goods, lose those which are eternal, and which 

men can neither give nor take away. Huvary. But if the 

doctors having become senseless, and having lost all the 

savour they once enjoyed, are unable to restore soundness to 

things corrupt, they are become useless; and are thenceforth 

fit only to be cast out and trodden by men. JEROME. The 

illustration is taken from husbandry. Salt, though it be 

necessary for seasoning of meats and preserving flesh, has no 

further use. Indeed we read in Scripture of vanquished 

cities sown with salt by the victors, that nothing should 

thenceforth grow there. Gtoss. When then they who are Gloss. 

the heads have fallen away, they are fit for no use but to be ae 

cast out from the office of teacher. HiLary. Or even cast 

out from the Church’s store rooms to be trodden under foot 

by those that walk. Avuc. Not he that suffers perse- aoe 7 
VOL. I. M 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


162 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


cution is trodden under foot of men, but he who through fear 
of persecution falls away. For we can tread only on what 
is below us; but he is no way below us, who however much 
he may suffer in the body, yet has his heart fixed in heaven. 


14. Ye are the light of the world. A city that is 
set on an hill cannot be hid. 


Gross. As the doctors by their good conversation are the salt 
with which the people is salted; so by their word of doctrine 
they are the light by which the ignorant are enlightened. 
Psevupo-Curys. But to live well must go before to teach well ; 
hence after He had called the Apostles the salt, He goes on 
to call them the light of the world. Or, for that salt pre- 
serves a thing in its present state that it should not change 
for the worse, but that light brings it into a better state by 
enlightening it; therefore the Apostles were first called salt 
with respect to the Jews and that Christian body which had 
the knowledge of God, and which they keep in that know- 
ledge; and now light with respect to the Gentiles whom 
they bring to the light of that knowledge. Auc. By the 
world here we must not understand heaven and earth, but 
the men who are in the world; or those who love the world for 
whose enlightenment the Apostles were sent. Hrtary. It is 
the nature of a light to emit its ravs whithersoever it is carried 
about, and when brought into a house to dispel the darkness 
of that house. Thus the world, placed beyond the pale of 
the knowledge of God, was held in the darkness of ignorance, 
till the light of knowledge was brought to it by the Apostles, 
and thenceforward the knowledge of God shone bright, and 
from their small bodies, whithersoever they went about, light 
is ministered to the darkness. Remic. For as the sun 
sends forth his beains, so the Lord, the Sun of righteousness, 
sent forth his Apostles to dispel the night of the human race. 
Curysost. Mark how great His promise to them, men who 
were scarce known in their own country that the fame of 
them should reach to the ends of the earth. The persecutions 
which He had foretold, were not able to dim their light, yea 
they made it but more conspicuous. J&ROME. He instructs 
them what should be the boldness of their preaching, that as 


VER. 14. ST. MATTHEW. 163 


Apostles they should not be hidden through fear, like lamps 
under a corn-measure, but should stand forth with all con- 
fidence, and what they have heard in the secret chambers, 
that declare upon the house tops. Curysost. Thus shewing 
them that they ought to be careful of their own walk and 
conversation, seeing they were set in the eyes of all, like a 
city on a hill, or a lamp on a stand. Psrupo-Curys. This 
city is the Church of which it is said, Glorious things are Ps. 87, 
spoken of thee, thou city of God. Its citizens are all the* 
faithful, of whom the Apostle speaks, Ye are fellow-citizens Eph. 2, 
of the saints. It is built upon Christ the hill, of whom /” 
Daniel thus, A stone heed without hands became a great Dan. 2, 
mountain. Aug. Or, the mountain is the great righteousness, ae 
which is signified by the mountain from which the Lord is vbi sup. 
now teaching. Pseupo-Curys. A city set on a hill cannot 
be hidden though it would; the mountain which bears 
makes it to be seen of all men; so the Apostles and Priests 
who are founded on Christ cannot be hidden even though 
they would, because Christ makes them manifest. TH1Lary; 
Or, the city signifies the flesh which He had taken on Him ; 
because that in Him by this assumption of human nature, 
there was as it were a collection of the human race, and we 
by partaking in His flesh become inhabitants of that city. 
He cannot therefore be hid, because being set in the height 
of God’s power, He is offered to be contemplated of all men 
in admiration of his works. Pseupo-Carys. How Christ 
manifests His saints, suffering them not to be hid, He shews 
by another comparison, adding, Neither do men light a lamp 
to put tt under a corn-measure, but on a stand. Cuarys. Or, 
in the illustration of the city, He signified His own power, 
by the lamp He exhorts the Apostles to preach with boldness; 
as though He said, ‘ I indeed have lighted the lamp, but that 
it continue to burn will be your care, not for your own sakes 
only, but both for others who shall receive its light and for 
God’s glory.” Pseupo-Curys. The lamp is the Divine word, 
of which it is said, Thy word ws a lamp unto my feet. They Ps. 119, 
who light this lamp are the Father, the Son, and the Holy se 
Spirit. Auc. With what meaning do we suppose the words, Aug. 
to put it under a corn-measure, were said? To express con-" ‘P- 
cealment simply, or that the corn-measure has a special 

M 2 


vid. Phil. 


2,15 


164 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


signification ? The putting the lamp under the corn-measure 
means the preferring bodily ease and enjoyment to the duty 
of preaching the Gospel, and hiding the light of good teaching 
under temporal gratification. The corn-measure aptly denotes 
the things of the body, whether because our reward shall be 


- measured out to us, as each one shall receive the things done 


in the body; or because worldly goods which pertain to the 
body come and go within a certain measure of time, which is 
signified by the corn-measure, whereas things eternal and 
spiritual are contained within no such limit. He places his 
lamp upon a stand, who subdues his body to the ministry of 
the word, setting the preaching of the truth highest, and sub- 
jecting the body beneath it. For the body itself serves to 
make doctrine shine more clear, while the voice and other 
motions of the body in good works serve to recommend it 
to them that learn. Pseupo-CuHrys. Or, men of the world 
may be figured in the corn-measure as these are empty above, 
but full beneath, so worldly men are foolish in spiritual things, 
but wise in earthly things, and therefore like a corn-measure 
they keep the word of God hid, whenever for any worldly 
cause he had not dared to proclaim the word openly, and 
the truth of the faith. The stand for the lamp is the Church 
which bears the word of life, and all ecclesiastical persons. 
Hiitary. Or, the Lord likened the Synagogue to a corn- 
measure, which only receiving within itself such fruit as was 
raised, contained a certain measure of limited obedience. 


-AMBROSE; And therefore let none shut up his faith within 
"the measure of the I.aw, but have recourse to the Church in 


which the grace of the sevenfold Spirit shines forth. Bspg; 
Or, Christ Himself has lighted this lamp, when He filled the 
earthen vessel of human nature with the fire of His Divinity, 
which He would not either hide from them that believe, nor 
put under a bushel that is shut up under the measure of the 
Law, or confine within the limits of any one oration. The 
Jampstand is the Church, on which He set the lamp, when 
He affixed to our foreheads the faith of His incarnation. 
Hivary ; Or, the lamp, 1.e. Christ Himself, is set on its stand 
when He was suspended on the Cross in His passion, to 
give light for ever to those that dwell in the Church ; to give 
light, He says, to all that ure in the house. AvuG. For it 


VER. 17—19. ST. MATTHEW. 165 


is not absurd if any one will understand the house to be the 
Church. Or, the house may be the world itself, according to 
what He said above, Ye are the light of the world. H1tary; 
He instructs the Apostles to shine with such a light, that in 
the admiration of their work God may be praised, Let your 
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works. 
Pseupo-Carys. That is, teaching with so pure a light, that 
men may not only hear your words, but see your works, that 
those whom as lamps ye have enlightened by the word, as 
salt ye may season by your example. For by those teachers 
who do as well as teach, God is magnified; for the discipline 
of the master is seen in the behaviour of the family. And. 
therefore it follows, and they shall glority your Father which 
tsin heaven. AuG. Had He only said, That they may see Aug. — 
your good works, He would have seemed to have set up aS Mont 
an end to be sought the praises of men, which the hypo-i. 7. 
crites desire; but by adding, and glorify your Father, he 
teaches that we should not seek as an end to please men 
with our good works, but referring all to the glory of God, 
therefore seek to please men, that in that God may be glorified. 
Hitary; He means not that we should seek glory of men, 
but that though we conceal it, our work may shine forth in 
honour of God to those among whom we live. 


17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, 
or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to 
fulfil. 

18. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and 
earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass 
from the law, till all be fulfilled. 

19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these 
least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall 
be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but 
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be 
called great in the kingdom of heaven. 


Goss. Having now exhorted His hearers to undergo all Gloss. 
things for righteousness’ sake, and also not to hide what they 
should receive, but to learn more for others’ sake, that they 


166 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


may teach others, He now goes on to tell them what they 
should teach, as though He had been asked, ‘ What is this 
which you would not have hid, and for which you would 
have all things endured? Are you about to speak any thing 
beyond what is written in the Law and the Prophets;’ hence 
itis He says, Think not that [am come to subvert the Law 
or the Prophets. Pseupo-Carys, And that for two reasons. 
First, that by these words He might admonish His disciples, 
that as He fulfilled the Law, so they should strive to fulfil 
it. Secondly, because the Jews would falsely accuse them 
as subverting the Law, therefore he answers the calumny 
beforehand, but in such a manner as that He should not be 
thought to come simply to preach the Law as the Prophets 
had done. Remia. He here asserts two things ; He denies 
that He was come to subvert the Law, aud affirms that He 
Aug. Was come to fulfil it. Aug. In this last sentence again there 
a "is a double sense; to fulfil the Law, either by adding 
8. something which it had not, or by doing what it com- 
Chrys, mands. Cunrys. Christ then fulfilled the Prophets by 
ora accomplishing what was therein foretold concerning Him- 
self—and the Law, first, by transgressing none of its pre- 
cepts; secondly, by justifying by faith, which the Law could 
not do by the letter. 
Aug. AvuG, And lastly, because even for them who were under 
Feut, grace, it was hard in this mortal life to fulfil that of the Law, 
ea Thou shalt not lust, He being made a Priest by the sacrifice 
| of His flesh, obtained for us this indulgence, even in this ful- 
filling the Law, that where through our infirmity we could 
not, we should be strengthened through His perfection, of 
whom as our head we all are members. For so I think must be 
taken these words, fo fulfil the Law, by adding to it, that is, 
such things as either contribute to the explanation of the old 
glosses, or to enable to keep them. For the Lord has shewed 
us that even a wicked motion of the thoughts to the wrong 
of a brother is to be accounted a kind of murder. The Lord 
also teaches us, that it is better to keep near to the truth 
without swearing, than with a true oath to come near to 
blasphemy. Ip. But how, ye Manichzans, do you not receive 
the Law and the Prophets, seeing Christ here says, that He 
is come not to subvert but to fulfil them? To this the heretic 


VER. 17—19. ST. MATTHEW. 167 


Faustus * replies, Whose testimony is there that Christ spoke 
this? That of Matthew. How was it then that John does 
not give this saying, who was with Him in the mount, but 
only Matthew, who did not follow Jesus till after He had 
come down from the mount? To this Augustine replies, 
If none can speak truth concerning Christ, but who saw and 
heard Him, there is no one at this day who speaks truth con- 
cerning Him. Why then could not Matthew hear from 
John’s mouth the truth as Christ had spoken, as well as we 
who are born so long after can speak the truth out of John’s 
book? In the same manner also it is, that not Matthew’s 
Gospel, but also these of Luke and Mark are received by us, 
and on no inferior authority. Add, that the Lord Himself 
might have told Matthew the things He had done before He 
called him. But speak out and say that you do not believe 
the Gospel, for they who believe nothing in the Gospel but 
what they wish to believe, believe themselves rather than the 
Gospel. To this Faustus rejoins, We will prove that this 
was not written by Matthew, but by some other hand, un- 
known, in his name. For below he says, Jesus saw a man Mat. 9, 
sitting at the toll-office, Matthew by name. Who writing of i. 
himself says, ‘saw a man,’ and not rather ‘saw me?’ Augus- 
tine; Matthew does no more than John does, when he says, 
Peter turning round saw that other disciple whom Jesus loved; 
and it is well known that this is the common manner of 
Scripture writers, when writing their own actions. Faustus 
again, But what say you to this, that the very assurance that 
He was not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, was 
the direct way to rouse their suspicions that He was? For 
He had yet done nothing that could lead the Jews to think 
that this was His object. Augustine; This is a very weak 
objection, for we do not deny that to the Jews who had no 
understanding, Christ might have appeared as threatening 
the destruction of the Law and the Prophets. Faustus; But 
what if the Law and the Prophets do not accept this fulfil- 
ment, according to that in Deuteronomy, These command- 
* Faustus waa of Milevis in Africa ponent; and in his work against him 
and a Bishop and controversialist of the he answers him seriafim. In this 
Manichees. He was a ian of con- way the treatise of Faustus is preserved 


siderable abilities. Augustine was first to us. 
his hearer, and in after years his op- 


Gal. 1, 
8. 


168 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


ments that I give unto thee, thou shalt keep, thou shalt not add 
any thing to them, nor take away. Augustine; Here Faustus 
does not understand what it is to fulfil the Law, when he 
supposes that it must be taken of adding words to it. The 
fulfilment of the Law is love, which the Lord hath given in 
sending His Holy Spirit. The Law is fulfilled either when 
the things there communded are done, or when the things 
there prophesied come to pass. Faustus; But in that we 
confess that Jesus was author of a New Testament, what 
else is it than to confess that He has done away with the 
Old? Augustine; In the Old Testament were figures of things 
to come, which, when the things themselves were brought in 
by Christ, ought to have been taken away, that in that very 
taking away the Law and the Prophets might be fulfilled 
wherein it was written that God gave a New ‘Testament. 
Faustus ; Therefore if Christ did say this thing, He either 
said it with some other meaning, or He spoke falsely, (which 
God forbid,) or we must take the other alternative, He did 
not speak it at all. But that Jesus spoke falsely none will 
aver, therefore He either spoke it with another meaning, or 
He spake it not at all. For myself 1 am rescued from the 
necessity of this alternative by the Manichan belief, which 
from the first taught me not to believe all those things which 
are read in Jesus’ name as having been spoken by Him; 
for that there be many tares which to corrupt the good 
seed some nightly sower has scattered up and down through 
nearly the whole of Scripture. Augustine; Manichzus taught 
an impious error, that you should receive only so much 
of the Gospel as does not conflict with your heresy, and 
not receive whatever does conflict with it. We have 
learned of the Apostle that religious caution, Whoever 
preaches unio you another Gospel than that we have 
preached, let him be accursed. The Lord also has ex- 
plained what the tares signify, not things false mixed 


with the true Scriptures, as you interpret, but men who 


are children of the wicked one. Faustus; Should a Jew 
then enquire of you why you do not keep the precepts 
of the Law and the Prophets which Christ here declares 
He came not tu destroy but to fulfil, you will be driven 
either to accept an empty superstition, or to repudiate 


VER. 17—19. ST. MATTHEW. 169 


this chapter as false, or to deny that you are Christ’s 
disciple. Augustine; The Catholics are not in any difficulty 
on account of this chapter as though they did not observe 
the Law and the Prophets; for they do cherish love to 
God and their neighbour, on which hang all the Law and 
the Prophets. And whatever in the Law and the Prophets 
was foreshewn, whether in things done, in the celebration 
of sacramental rites, or in forms of speech, all these they 
know to be fulfilled in Christ and the Church. Wherefore 
we neither submit to a false superstition, nor reject the 
chapter, nor deny ourselves to be Christ’s disciples. He 
then who says, that unless Christ had destroyed the Law and 
the Prophets, the Mosaic rites would have continued along 
with the Christian ordinances, may further affirm, that 
unless Christ had destroyed the Law and the Prophets, 
He would yet be only promised as to be born, to suffer, 
to rise again. But inasmuch as He did not destroy, but 
rather fulfil them, His birth, passion, and _ resurrection, 
are now no more promised as things future, which were 
signified by the Sacraments of the Law; but He is preached 
as already born, crucified, and risen, which are signified by 
the Sacraments now celebrated by Christians. It is clear then 
how great is the error of those who suppose, that when the 
signs or sacraments are changed, the things themselves are 
different, whereas the same things which the Prophetic ordi- 
nance had held forth as promiscs, the Evangelic ordinance 
points to as completed. Faustus; Supposing these to be 
Christ’s genuine words, we should enquire what was His 
motive for speaking thus, whether to soften the blind hostility 
of the Jews, who when they saw their holy things trodden 
under foot by Him, would not have so much as given 
Him a hearing; or whether He really said them to instruct 
us, who of the Gentiles should believe, to submit to the 
yoke of the Law. If this last were not His design, 
then the first must have been; nor was there any deceit 
or fraud in such purpose. For of laws there be three 
sorts. The first that of the Hebrews, called the law of Rom. 8, 
sin and death, by Paul; the second that of the Gentiles, a 
which he calls the law of nature, saying, By nature the Rom. 2, 
Gentiles do the deeds of the law; the third, the law of a 


170 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


truth, which he names, Zhe law of the Spirit of life. 
Also there are Prophets some of the Jews, such as are 

Tit.1, well known; others of the Gentiles as Paul speaks,- 4 
prophet of their own hath said; and others of the truth, 

Mat: 23,0f whom Jesus speaks, J send unto you wise men and 
prophets. Now had Jesus in the following part of this 
Sermon brought forward any of the Hebrew observances 
to shew how he had fulfilled them, no one would have 
doubted that it was of the Jewish Law and Prophets 
that He was now speaking; but when He brings forward 
in this way only those more ancient precepts, Thou shalt 
not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery, which were pro- 
mulged of old to Enoch, Seth, and the other righteous 
men, who does not see that He is here speaking of the 
Law and Prophets of truth? Wherever He has occasion 
to speak of any thing merely Jewish, He plucks it up 
by the very roots, giving precepts directly the contrary ; 
for example, in the case of that precept, An eye for an 
eye, a tooth for a tooth. Augustine; Which was the Law 
and which the Prophets, that Christ came not lo subvert 
but to fulfil, is manifest, to wit, the Law given by Moses. 
And the distinction which Faustus draws between the 
precepts of the righteous men before Moses, and the 
Mosaic Law, affirming that Christ fulfilled the one but 
annulled the other, is not so. We affirm that the Law 
of Moses was both well suited to its temporary purpose, and 
was now not subverted, but fulfilled by Christ, as will 
be seen in each particular. This was not understood by 
those who continued in such obstinate error, that they 
compelled the Gentiles to Judaize—those heretics, I mean, 
who were called Nazarenes. 

PsEupo-CuHrys. But since all things which should befal 
from the very beginning of the world to the end of it, were 
in type and figure foreshewn in the Law, that God may not 
be thought to be ignorant of any of those things that take 
place, He therefore here declares, that heaven and earth 
should not pass till all things thus foreshewn in the Law 
should have their actual accomplishment. Remic. Amen 
is a Hebrew word, and may be rendered in Latin, ‘ vere,’ 
‘ fidenter,’ or ‘ fiat;’ that is, ‘ truly,’ ‘ faithfully,’ or ‘ so be 


VER. 17—19. ST. MATTHEW. 171 


it. The Lord uses it either because of the hardness of 
heart of those who were slow to believe, or to attract 
more particularly the attention of those that did believe. 
HiLary; From the expression here used pass, we may 
suppose that the constituting elements of heaven and earth 
shall not be annihilated’. Rermic. But shall abide in their 
essence, but pass through renewal. Ava. By the words, Avg. 
one tuta or one point shall not pass from the Law, we must a 
understand only a strong metaphor of completeness, drawn * ®- 
from the letters of writing, iota being the least of the letters, 
made with one stroke of the pen, and a point being a slight 
dot at the end of the same letter. -The words there shew 
that the Law shall be completed to the very least matter. 
Ranan. He fitly mentions the Greek iota, and not the 
Hebrew jod, because the iota stands in Greek for the number 
ten, andl so there is an allusion to the Decalogue of which 
the Gospel is the point and perfection. Pseupo-Curys. If 
even an honourable man blushes to be found in a falsehood, 
and a wise man lets not fall empty any word he has once 
spoken, how could it be that the words of heaven should fall 
to the ground empty? Hence He concludes, Whoso shall 
break the least of these commandments, §c. And, I sup- 
pose, the Lord goes on to reply Himself to the question, 
Which are the least commandments? Namely, these which 
I am now about to speak. Curys. He speaks not this of 
the old laws, but of those which He was now going to enact, 
of which he says, the least, though they were all great. For 
as He so oft spoke humbly of Himself, so does He now speak 
humbly of His precepts. Psetupo-Curys. Otherwise; the 
precepts of Moses are easy to obey; Thou shalt not kill. 
Thou shalt not commit adultery. The very greatness of the 
crime is a check upon the desire of comiitting it; therefore 
the reward of observance is small, the sin of transgression 
great. But Christ’s precepts, Zhou shall not be angry, 
Thou shalt not lust, are hard to obey, and therefore in their 
reward they are great, in their transgression, ‘ least.’ It 
is thus He speaks of these precepts of Christ, such as Thou 
shalt not be angry, Thou shalt not lust, as ‘ the least;’ and 


» The text of Hil. has ‘ maxima, ut arbitraimur, elementa esse solvenda.’ 


172 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Y. 


they who commit these lesser sins, are the least in the 
kingdom of God; that is, he who has been angry and 
not sinned grievously is secure from the punishment of 
eternal damnation; yet he does not attain that glory which 
Aug. they attain who fulfil even these least. Auc. Or, the 
ub! SUP: Drecepts of the Law are called ‘ the least,’ as opposed to 
Christ’s precepts which are great. The least command- 
ments are signified by the iota and the point. He, therefore, 
who breaks them, and teaches men so, that is, to do as 
he does, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven. 
Hence we may perhaps conclude, that it is not true that 
Gloss. there shall none be there except they be great. Gtoss. By 
we 4 break,’ is meant, the not doing what one understands 
rightly, or the not understanding what one has corrupted, or 
the destroying the perfectness of Christ’s additions. CuHurys. 
Or, when you hear the words, least in the kingdom of heaven, 
imagine nothing less than the punishment of hell. For He 
oft uses the word ‘ kingdom,’ not only of the joys of heaven, 
but of the time of the resurrection, and of the terrible coming 
Greg. of Christ. Grec. Or, by the kingdom of heaven is to 
ea be understood the Church, in which that teacher who breaks 
1. a commandment is called least, because he whose life is 
despised, it remains that his preaching be also despised. 
Hitary; Or, He calls the passion, and the cross, the least, 
which if one shall not confess openly, but be ashamed of 
them, he shall be least, that is, last, and as it were no man; 
but to him that confesses it He promises the great glory of a 
heavenly calling. JERoME; This head is closely connected 
with the preceding. It is directed against the Pharisees, who, 
despising the commandments of God, set up traditions of their 
own, and means that their teaching the people would not avail 
themselves, if they destroyed the very least commandment in 
the Law. We may take it in another sense. The learning 
of the master if joined with sin however small, loses him the 
highest place, nor does it avail any to teach righteousness, if 
he destroys it in his life. Perfect bliss is for him who fulfils 
Aug. in deed what he teaches in word. Avge. Otherwise; he who 
ubi sup. breaks the least of these commandments, that is, of Moses’ 
Law, and teaches men so, shall be called the least; but he 
who shall do (these least), and so teach, shall not indeed 


VER. 20—22. ST. MATTHEW. 173 


be esteemed great, yet not so little as he who breaks them. 
That he should be great, he ought to do and to teach the 
things which Christ now teaches. 


20. For I say unto you, That except your righte- 
ousness shal] exceed the righteousness of the Scribes 
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. 

21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old 
time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill 
shall be in danger of the judgment : 

22. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry 
with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of 
the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, 
Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whoso- 
ever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell 
fire. 


Hivary; Beautiful entrance He here makes to a teaching 
beyond the works of the Law, declaring to the Apostles that 
they should have no admission to the kingdom of heaven 
without a righteousness beyond that of Pharisees. Curys. 
By righteousness is here meant universal virtue. But 
observe the superior power of grace, in that He requires of 
His disciples who were yet uninstructed to be better than 
those who were masters under the Old Testament. Thus 
He does not call the Scribes and Pharisees unrighteous, but 
speaks of their righteousness. And see how even herein He 
confirms the Old Testament that He compares it with the 
New, for the greater and the less are always of the same kind. 
Pseupo-Curys. The righteousness of the Scribes and Phari- 
sees are the commandments of Moses; but the commandments 
of Christ are the fulfilment of that Law. This then is His 
meaning ; Whosoever in addition to the commandments of the 
Law shall not fulfil My commandments, shall not enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. For those indeed save from the punish- 
ment due to transgressors of the Law, but do not bring into the 
kingdom; but My commandments both deliver from punish- 


Aug. 
De Civ. 
Dei, xx. 


Mat. 23, 


Td. cont. 
Faust. 
xix. 31. 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


174 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


ment, and bring into the kingdom. But seeing that to break 
the least commandments and not to keep them are one and the 
same, why does He say above of him that breaks the command- 
ments, that he shall be the least in the kingdom of heaven, 
and here of him who keeps them not, that he shall not enter 
into the kingdom of heaven? See how to be the least in the 
kingdom is the same with not entering into the kingdom. 
For a man to be in the kingdom 1s not to reign with Christ, 
but only to be numbered among Christ’s people; what Ile 
says then of him that breaks the commandments is, that he 
shall indeed be reckoned among Christians, yet the least of 
them. But he who enters into the kingdom, becomes par- 
taker of His kingdom with Christ. Therefore he who does 
not enter into the kingdom of heaven, shall not indeed have 
a part of Christ’s glory, yet shall he be in the kingdom of 
heaven, that is, in the number of those over whom Christ 
reigns as King of heaven. Ava. Otherwise, unless your 
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and 
Pharisees, that is, exceed that of those who break what 
themselves teach, as it is elsewhere said of them, They say, 
and do not; just as if He had said, Unless your righteous- 
ness exceed in this way that ye do what ye teach, you shall 
not enter the kingdom of heaven. We must therefore under- 
stand something other than usual by the kingdom of heaven 
here, in which are to be both he who breaks what he teaches, 
and he who does it, but the one least, the other great; this 
kingdom of heaven is the present Church. In another sense 
is the kingdom of heaven spoken of that place where none 
enters but he who does what he teaches, and this is the 
Church as it shall be hereafter. Ip. This expression, the 
kingdom of heaven, so often used by our Lord, I know not 
whether any one would find in the books of the Old Testa- 
ment. It belongs properly to the New Testament revelation, 
kept for His mouth whom the Old Testament figured as a 
King that should come to reign over His servants. This 
end, to which its precepts were to be referred, was hidden in 
the Old Testament, though even that had its saints who 
looked forward to the revelation that should be made. 
Guioss. Or, we may explain by referring to the way in 
which the Scribes and Pharisees understood the Law, not to 


VER. 20—22. ST. MATTHEW. 175 


the actual contents of the Law. Ave. For almost all the Aug. 
precepts which the Lord gave, saying, But I say unto you, Soi, 
are found in those ancient books. But because they knew «ix. 30. 
not of any murder, besides the destruction of the body, the 

Lord shews them that every evil thought to the hurt of a 
brother is to be held for a kind of murder. Pseupo-CHrys. 
Christ willing to shew that He is the same God who spoke 

of old in the Law, and who now gives commandments in 
grace, now puts first of all his commandments, that one vil.Mat. 
which was the first in the Law, first, at least, of all those '* '®: 
that forbade injury to our neighbour. AvG. We do not, Aug. De 
because we have heard that, Thou shalt not kill, deem it ao 
therefore unlawful to pluck a twig, according to the error of 

the Manichces, nor consider it to extend to irrational brutes; 

by the most mghteous ordinance. of the Creator their life and 
death is subservient to our needs. There remains, therefore, 

only man of whoin we can understand it, and that not any 
other man, nor you only; for he who kills himself does 
nothing else but killa man. Yet have not they in any way 

done contrary to this commandment who have waged wars 
under God’s authority, or they who charged with the admin- 
istration of civil power have by most just and reasonable 
orders inflicted death upon criminals. Also Abraham was not 
charged with cruelty, but even received the praise of piety, 

for that he was willing to obey God in slaying his son. 
Those are to be excepted from this command whom God 
commands to be put to death, either by a general law given, 

or by particular admonition at any special time. For he is 

not the slayer who ministers to the command, like a hilt 

to one smiting with a sword, nor is Samson otherwise 

to be acquitted for destroying himself along with his enemies, 

than because he was so instructed privily of the Holy Spirit, 

who through him wrought the miracles. Curys. This, it 

wcas said by them of old time, shews that it was long ago 

that they had received this precept. He says this that He 
might rouse His sluggish hearers to proceed to more sublime 
precepts, as a teacher might say to an indolent boy, Know 

you not how long time you have spent already in merely 
learning to spell? In that, J suy unto you, mark the authority 

of the legislator, none of the old Prophets spoke thus; but 


176 "GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


rather, Thus saith the Lord. They as servants repeated 
the commands of their Lord; He as a Son declared the 
will of His Father, which was also His own. They preached 
to their fellow servants; He as master ordained a law 
Aug. de for his slaves. Auc. There are two different opinions among 
vtv-Del, philosophers concerning the passions of the mind: the Stoics 
do not allow that any passion is incident to the wise man; 
the Peripatetics affirm that they are incident to the wise man 
but in a moderate degree and subject to reason; as, for 
example, when mercy is shewn in such a manner that 
justice is preserved. But in the Christian rule we do not 
enquire whether the mind is first affected with anger or with 
sorrow, but whence. Psrupo-Curys. He who is angty 
without cause shall be judged; but he who is angry with 
cause shal] not be judged., For if there were no anger, 
neither teaching would profit, nor judgments hold, nor crimes 
be controlled. So that he who on just cause is not angry, 1s 
in sin; for an unreasonable patience sows vices, breeds 
carelessness, and invites the good as well as the bad to do 
evil. J&ROME; Some copies add here the words, without 
cause; but by the true reading* the precept is made uncon- 
ditional, and anger altogether forbidden. For when we 
are told to pray for them that persecute us, all occasion of 
anger is taken away. ‘The words without cause then 
must be erased, for the wrath of man worketh not the righ- 
leousness of God. Psrupo-Curys. Yet that anger which 
arises from just cause is indeed not anger, but a sentence of 
judgment. For anger properly means a feeling of passion ; 
but he whose anger arises from just cause does not suffer 
any passion, and is rightly said to sentence, not to be angry 
Au with. Ava. This also we affirm should be taken into con- 
tetact: sideration, what is being angry with a brother ; for he is not 
angry with a brother who is angry at his offence. He then 
it is who is angry without cause, who is angry with his 
Aug. de brother, and not with the offence. Ip. But to be angry 


ahd *’ with a brother to the end that he may. be corrected, there is 


¢ Vid. also in Eph. iv. 31. Augustine keep tie word on the ground of a 
says the same speaking of Greek codd. ‘‘ consensus,” of Greek and Latin 
Retract. i. 19. Caasian rejects it too, Fathers and Versions. There is an 
Institut. viii. 20. Erasmus, Bengel. agreement of existing MSS. also. 
follow. vid. Wetstein. in loc. who would 


VER. 20—22. ST. MATTHEW. 177 


no man of sound mind who forbids. Such sort of motions 

as come of love of good and of holy charity, are not to be 
called vices when they follow right reason. Psrupo-Curys. 
But I think that Christ does not speak of anger of the flesh, 
but anger of the heart; for the flesh cannot be so disciplined 

as not to feel the passion. When then a man is angry but 
refrains from doing what his anger prompts him, his flesh 1s 
angry, but his heart is free from anger. AvuG. And there Is Aug. 
this same distinction between the first case here put by the en 
Saviour and the second: in the first case there is one thing, i. 9. 
the passion ; in the second two, anger and speech following 
thereupon, He «cho saith to his brother, Raca, isin danger of 
the council. Some seek the interpretation of this word in 
the Greek, and think that Raca means ragged, from the 
Greek fexos,a rag. But more probably it is not a word of 
any meaning, but a mere sound expressing the passion of 
the mind, which grammarians call an interjection, such as 
the cry of pain, ‘ heu.’ Curys. Or, Racha is a word signi- 
fying contempt, and worthlessness. For where we in speaking 

to servants or children say, Go thou, or, Tell thou him; in 
Syriac they would say Racha for ‘ thou.’ For the Lord 
descends to the smallest trifles even of our behaviour, and 
bids us treat one another with mutual respect. JEROME; Or, 
Racha is a Hebrew word signifying, ‘ empty,’ ‘ vain ;’ as we 
might say in the common phrase of reproach, ‘ empty-pate.’ 
Observe that He says brother ; for who is our brother, but 
he who has the same Father as ourselves? PsEupo-Curys. 
And it were an unworthy reproach to him who has in him 
the Holy Spirit to call him ‘empty.’ Avc. In the third ayy. 
case are three things; anger, the voice expressive of anger, Ubi sup. 
and a word of reproach, Thou fool. Thus here are three 
different degrees of sin; in the first when one is angry, but 
keeps the passion in his heart without giving any sign of it. 

If again he suffers any sound expressive of the passion to 
escape him, it is more than had he silently suppressed the 
rising anger; and if he speaks a word which conveys a 
direct reproach, it is a yet greatersin. Psgupo-Curys. But 

as none is empty who has the Holy Spirit, so none is a fool 
who has the knowledge of Christ; and if Racha signifies 
“empty, it is one and the same thing, as far as the 

VOL. I. N 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


178 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


meaning of the word goes, to say Racha, or ‘ thou fool.’ 
But there is a difference in the meaning of the speaker; 
for Racha was a word in common use among the Jews, 
not expressing wrath or hate, but rather in a light careless 
way expressing confident familiarity, not anger. Dut you 
will perhaps say, if Racha is not an expression of wrath, 
how is it then a sin? Because it is said for contention, 
not for edification; and if we ought not to speak even 
good words but for the sake of edification, how much 
more not such as are in themselves bad? Atsc. Here we 
have three arraignments, the judgment, the council, and 
hell-fire, being different stages ascending from the lesser 
to the greater. For in the judgment there is yet opportunity 
for defence; to the council belongs the respite of the 
sentence, what time the judges confer among themselves 
what sentence ought to be inflicted; in the third, hell-fire, 
condemnation is certain, and the punishment fixed. Hence 
is seen What a difference is between she righteousness of 
the Pharisees and Christ; in the first, murder subjccts a 
man to judgment; in the second, anger alone, which 1s 
the least of the three degrees of sin. Raban. The Saviour 
here names the torinents of hell, Gehenna, a name thought 
to be derived from a valley consecrated to idols near 
Jerusalem, and filled of old with dead bedies, and defiled by 
Josiah, as we read in the Book of Kings. Curys. This 
is the first mention of hell, though the kingdom of Heaven 
had been mentioned some time before, which shews that 
the gifts of the one comes of His love, the condemnation 
of the other of our sloth. Many thinking this a punishment 
too severe for a mere word, say that this was said 
figuratively. But I fear that if we thus cheat ourselves 
with words here, we shall suffer punishment in deed 
there. Think not then this too heavy a punishment, when 
so many sufferings and sins have their beginning in a 
word; a little word has often begotten a murder, and 
overturned whole citics. And yet it is not to be thought 
a little word that denies a brother reason and understanding 
by which we are men, and differ from the brutes. Psruno- 
Currys. In danger of the council; that is, (according to 
the interpretation given by the Apostles in their Con- 


VER. 23, 24. ST. MATTHEW. 179 


stitutions,) in danger of being onc of that Council which 
condemned Christ®. Httary; Or, he who reproaches with 
emptiness one full of the Holy Spirit, will be arraigned 
in the assembly of the Saints, and by their sentence will 
be punished for an affront against that Holy Spirit Himself. 
AvuG. Should any ask what greater punishment is reserved Auz. 
for murder, if evil-speaking is visited with hell-fire? This" *"™ 
obliges us to understand, that there are degrees in hell. 
Carrs. Or, the judgment and the council denote punish- 
ment in this word; hell-fire future punishment. He 
denounces punishment against anger, yet does not mention 
any special punishment, shewing therein that it is not 
possible that a man should be altogcther free from the 
passion. The Council here means the Jewish senate, for 
He would not seem to be always superseding all their 
established institutions, and introducing foreign’. Auc. In Avg. 
ubi sup. 
all these three sentences there are some words understood. 
In the first indeed, as many copies read rithout cause, 
there is nothing to be supplied. In the second, He who 
saith to his brother, Racha, we must supply the words, 
without cause ; and again, in He who says, Thou fool, two 
things are understood, to his brother, and, without cause. 
And this forms the defence of the Apostle, when he calls 
the Galatians fools, though he considers them his brethren ; 
for he did it not without cause. 


23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, 
and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought 
against thee ; 

24. Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go 
thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then 
come and offer thy gift. 


Acc. If it be not lawful to be angry with a brother, Aug. 
oerm. in 
Mont. 
€ This remark is not found in the 14. The passage quoted in Matt. xxvii. 10. 
Apostolical Constitutions as we now 18, is found in Constit. vill. 2. vid. 
have them. The text in question, how- also Usser. Dissert. ix. Pearson. Vind. 
ever, is quoted in ii.32 and50. Soagain Ign. p. 1. c. 4 fin. 
the comment on Matt. vi. 3. is not found f In this quotation only the last 
in the Constitutions, though the text sentence is found in Chrys. 
is quoted. vid. Coteler. in Constit. ii. 


Ge? 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
Hom. I. 
ioEzech. 
vill. 9. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


180 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VY. 


or to say to him Racha, or Thou fool, much less is it lawful 
to keep in the memory any thing which might convert 
anger into hate. JEROME; It is not, If thou hast ought 
against thy brother; but, If thy brother has ought against 
thee, that the necessity of reconciliation may be more im- 
perative. Auc. And he has somewhat against us when 
we have wronged him; and we have somewhat against 
him when he has wronged us, in which case there were 
no need to go to be reconciled to him, secing we had 
only to forgive him, as we desire the Lord to forgive us. 
PsEupo-Curys. But if it is he that hath done you the 
wrong, and yet you be the first to seek reconciliation, 
you shall have a great reward. Curys. If love alone is 
not enough to induce us to be reconciled to our neighbour, 
the desire that our work should not remain imperfect, and 
especially in the holy place, should induce us. Grea. Lo 
He is not willing to accept sacrifice at the hands of 
those who are at variance. Jlence then consider how great 
an evil is strife, which throws away what should be the 
means of remission of sin. Psrupo-Curys. See the mercy of 
God, that He thinks rather of man’s benefit than of His 
own honour; He loves concord in the faithful more than 
offerings at His altar; for so long as there are dis- 
sensions among the faithful, their gift is not looked upon, 
their prayer is not heard. For no one can be a true 
friend at the same time to two who are enemies to each 
other. In like manner, we do not keep our fealty to 
God, if we do not love His friends and hate His enemies. 
But such as was the offence, such should also be the recon- 
ciliation. If you have offended in thought, be reconciled in 
thought; if in words, be reconciled in words; if in deeds, in 
deeds be reconciled. For so it is in every sin, in whatsoever 
kind it was committed, in that kind is the penance done. 
Hitary; He bids us when peace with our fellow-men is 
restored, then to return to peace with God, passing from the 
love of men to the love of God; then go and offer thy gift. 
Ava. If this direction be taken literally, it might lead some to 
suppose that this ought indeed to be so done if our brother 
is present, for that no long time can be meant when we are 
bid to leave our offering there before the altar. For if he be 


VER. 25, 26. ST. MATTHEW. 18] 


absent, or possibly beyond sea, it is absurd to suppose that 
the offering must be left before the altar, to be offered after 
we have gone over land and sea to seek him. Wherefore we 
must embrace an inward, spiritual sense of the whole, if we 
would understand it without involving any absurdity. The 
gift which we offer to God, whether learning, or speech, or 
whatever it be, cannot be accepted of God unless it be 
supported by faith. If then we have in aught harmed a 
brother, we must go and be reconciled with him, not with 
the bodily feet, but in thoughts of the heart, when in humble 
contrition you may cast yourself at your brother's feet in 
sight of Him whose offering you are about to offer. For 
thus in the same manner as though He were present, you 
may with unfeigned heart seek His forgiveness; and return- 
ing thence, that is, bringing back again your thoughts to 
what you had first begun to do, may make your offering. 


25. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles 
thou art in the way with him; lest at any time 
the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the 
judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast 
into prison. 

26. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no 
means come out thence, till thou hast paid the utter- 
most farthing. 


Hitary; The Lord suffers us at no time to be wanting in 
peaceableness of temper, and therefore bids us be reconciled 
to our adversary quickly, while on the road of life, lest we 
be cast into the season of death before pcace be joined 
between us. JEROME; The word here in our Latin books is 
‘ consenticns,’ in Greek, edvowy, which means, ‘ kind,’ ¢ bene- 
volent.’ Auc. Let us see who this adversary is to whom we Aug. 
are bid to be benevolent. It may then be either the Devil, Skt 
or man, or the flesh, or God, or His commandments. But 111. 
do not sce how we can bc bid be benevolent, or agreeing 
with the Devil; for where there is good will, there is friend- 
ship, and no one will say that friendship should be made 
with the Devil, or that it is well to agree with him, having 


Aug. 


o 


ubi sup. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


| Eades GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


once proclaimed war against him when we renounced him ; 
nor ought we to consent with him, with whom had we never 
consented, we had never come into such circumstances. 
JEROME; Some, from that verse of Peter, Your adversary 
the Devil, §c. will have the Saviour’s command to be, that 
we should be merciful to the Devil, not causing him to 
endure punishment for our sakes. For as he puts in our 
way the incentives to vice, if we yield to his suggestions, he 
will be tormented for our sakes. Some follow a more forced 
interpretation, that in baptism we have each of us made 
a compact with the Devil by renouncing hin. If we observe 
this compact, then we are agreeing with our adversary, and 
shall not be cast into prison. Ava. I do not see again how 
it can be understood of man. For how can man be said 
to deliver us to the Judge, when we know only Christ as the 
Judge, before whose tribunal all must be sisted. How then 
can he deliver to the Judge, who has himself to appear before 
Him? Moreover if any has sinned against any by killing 
him, he has no opportunity of agreeing with him in the way, 
that is in this life; and yet that hinders not but that he may 
be rescued from judgment by repentance. Much less do I see 
how we can be bid be agreeing with the flesh; for they are 
sinners rather who agree with it; but they who bring it into 
subjection, do not agree with it, but compel it to agree with 
them. JERoME; And how can the body be cast into prison 
if it agree not with the spirit, seeing soul and body must go 
together, and that the flesh can do nothing but what the soul 
shall command? Ava. Perhaps then it is God with whom 
we are here enjoined to agree. He may be said to be our 
adversary, because we have departed from Him by sin, and 
He resisteth the proud. Whosoever then shall not have 
been reconciled in this life with God through .the death 
of His Son, shall be by Him delivered to the Judge, that is, 
the Son, to whom He has committed all judgment. And 
man may be said to be in the way with God, because He is 
every where. Dut if we like not to say that the wicked are 
with God, who is every where present, as we do not say that 
the blind are with that light which is every where around 
them, there only remains the law of God which we can 
understand by our adversary. For this law is an adversary 


VER. 25, 26. ST. MATTHEW, 183 


to such as love to sin, and is given us for this life that it may 

be with us in the way. To this we ought to agree quickly, 

by reading, hearing, and bestowing on it the summit of 
authority, and that when we understand it, we hate it 

not because it opposes our sins, but rather love it because 

it corrects them; and when it is obscure, pray that we mav 
understand it. JerRoME; But from the context the sense is 
manifest; the Lord is exhorting us to peace and concord with 

our neighbour; as it was said above, Go, be reconciled to thy 
brother. Pseupo-Curys. The Lord is urgent with us to 
hasten to make friends with our enemies while we are yet in 

this life, knowing how dangerous for us that one of our cnemies 
should die befcre peace is made with us. For if death bring 

us while yet at enmity to the Judge, he will deliver us to 
Christ, proving us guilty by his judgment. Our adversary 

also delivers us to the Judge, when he is the first to seek 
reconciliation; for he who first submits to his enemy, brings 

him in guilty before God. Hu1tary; Or, the adversary 
delivers you to the Judge, when the abiding of your wrath 
towards him convicts you. AuG. By the Judge I under- Aug. 
stand Christ, for, the Father hath committed all judgment to ihe: 
the Son; and by the officer, or minister, an Angel, for, 22. 
Angels came and ministered unto Him; and we believe that 

He will come with his Angels to judge. Psrupo-Curys. 

The officer, that is, the ministering Angel of punishment, and 

he shall cast you into the prison of hell. Auc. By the Aug. 
prison I understand the punishment of the darkness. And" SYP: 
that none should despise that punishment, Ile adds, Verily I 

say unto thee, thou shalt not come out thence till thou hast 

paid the very last farthing. Jerome; A farthing is a coin 
containing two mites. What He says then is, ‘ Thou shalt 

not go forth thence till thou hast paid for the smallest sins.’ 

Au. Or it is an expression to denote that there is nothing Aug. 
that shall go unpunished; as we say ‘ To the dregs,’ when mer eee. 
we are speaking of any thing so empticd that nothing is left 

init. Or by the last farthing may be denoted earthly sins. qua- 
For the fourth and last element of this world is earth. Paid, one 
that is in eternal punishment; and wzézd used in the same 
sense as in that, Sit thou on my right hand until [ make Ps. 110, 
thy enemies thy footstool; for He does not cease to reign 


Rom. 
13, 4. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
xvii. 
Aug. 
Serm.ix. 
3and 10. 


184 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


when His enemies are put under His feet. So here, untel 
thou hast paid, is as much as to say, thou shalt never come 
out thence, for that he is always paying the very last farthing 
while he is enduring the everlasting punishment of earthly 
sins. Psrupo-Curys. Or, If you will make your peace yet 
in this world, you may receive pardon of even the heaviest 
offences; but if once damned and cast into the prison of hell, 
punishment will be exacted of you not for grievous sins only, 
but for each idle word, which may be denoted by the very 
last farthing. itary; For because charity covereth a 
multitude of sins, we shall therefore pay the last farthing of 
punishment, unless by the expense of charity we redeem the 
fault of our sin. PsEupo-Curys. Or, the prison is worldly 
misfortune which God often sends upon sinners. CHRYs. 
Or, He here speaks of the judges of this world, of the way 
which leads to this judgment, and of human prisons; thus 
not only employing future but present inducements, as those 
things which are before the eyes affect us most, as St. Paul 
also declares, If thou doest evil fear the power, for he beareth 
not the sword in vain. 


27. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old 
time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: 

28. But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh 
on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery 
with her already in his heart. 


Curys. The Lord having explained how much is con- 
tained in the first commandment, namely, Thou shalt not 
kill, proceeds in regular order to the second. Aue. Thou 
shalt no! commit adultery, that is, Thou shalt go no where 
but to thy lawful wife. Tor if you exact this of your wife, 
you ought to do the same, for the husband ought to go before 
the wife in virtue. It 1s a shame for the husband to say that 
this is impossible. Why not the husband as well as the 
wife? And let not him that is unmarried suppose that he 
does not break this commandment by fornication; you know 
the price wherewith you have been bought, you know what 


VER. 27, 28. ST. MATTHEW. 185 


you eat and what you drink‘, therefore keep yourself from 
fornications. Forasmuch as all such acts of lust pollute and 
destroy God’s image, (which you are,) the Lord who knows 
what is good for you, gives you this precept that you may 

not pull down His temple which you have begun to he. Ip. Aug. 
He then goes on to correct the error of the Pharisees, oe 
declaring, Whoso looketh upon a woman to lust after her, ™*- 23. 
hath committed adultery already with her in his heart. For 

the commandment of the Law, Thou shalt not lust after thy Exod. 
neighbour's wife, the Jews understood of taking her away,” yt 
not of committing adultery with her. JEROME; Between 
xa$oc and xporadea, that is between actual passion and the 
first spontancous movement of the mind, there is this differ- 
ence: passion is at once a sin; the spontaneous movement 

of the mind, though it partakes of the evil of sin, is yet not 
held for an offence committed". When then one looks upon 

a woman, and his mind is therewith smitten, there is pro- 
passion; if he yields to this he passes from propassion to 
passion, and then it is no longer the will but the opportunity 

to sin that is wanting. Whosoever, then, looketh on a woman 

to lust after her, that is, so looks on her as to lust, and cast 
about to obtain, he is rightly said to commit adultery with 
her in his heart. Auc. For there are three things which Aug. 
make up a sin; suggestion either through the memory, oo i 
the present sense; if the thought of the pleasure ofi. 12. 
indulgence follows, that is an unlawful thought, and to 

be restrained; if you consent then, the sin is complete. 

For prior to the first consent, the pleasure is either none or 

very slight, the consenting to which makes the sin. But if 
consent proceeds on into overt act, then desire scems to be 
satiated and quenched. And when suggestion is again re- 
peated, the contemplated pleasure is greater, which previous 

to habit formed was but small, but now more difficult to over- 


Grec. But whoso casts his cycs about without caution Greg. 
Mor. 


The word ismore commonly applied to our X%!. 2 


come. 


« Nic. inserts here, from the original, 


‘immo quem manduces, quem bibay.’ 

h In this passage S. Jeroine. who 
seeins to have introduced the word pro- 
passio, weowabua, into theology, uses it 
somewhat in a sense of hisown; viz. as 
involving something of the nature of 
sin; vid. also Comm. in Ezek. xviii. 1, 2. 


Lord, as denoting the mode and extent 
in which His soul was affected by what 
in others became waéos. In us passion 
precedes reason, in Him it followed, or 
was a wgeradue. vid. S. Jerome in 
Matt. xxvi. 37. Leon. Ep. 35. Damasc. 
F. O. iii. 20. &e. &e. 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Ps, 38, 
3. 


186 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO |. CHAP. V. 


will often be taken with the pleasure of sin, and ensnared 
by desires begins to wish for what he would not. Great 
is the strength of the flesh to draw us downwards, and 
the charm of beauty once admitted to the heart through 
the eye, is hardly banished by endeavour. We must 
thercfore take leed at the first, we ought not to look 
upon what it is unlawful to desire. For that the heart 
may be kept pure in thought, the eyes, as being on the 
watch to hurry us to sin, should be averted froin wanton 
looks. Curys. If you permit yourself to gaze often on 
fair countenances you will assuredly be taken, even though 
you may be able to command your mind twice or thrice. 
For you are not exalted above nature and the strength 
of humanity. She too who dresses and adorns herself 
for the purpose of attracting men’s eyes to her, though 
her endeavour should fail, yet shall she be punished 
hereafter; seeing she mixed the poison and offered the 
cup, though none was found who would drink thercof. 
For what the Lord seems to speak only to the man, is 
of equal application to the woman; imasmuch as when 
He speaks to the head, the warning is meant for the whole 


body. 


29. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, 
and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee 
that one of thy members should perish, and not that 
thy whole body should be cast into hell. 

30. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, 
and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee 
that one of thy members should perish, and not that 
thy whole body should be cast into hell. 


Goss. Because we ought not only to avoid actual sin, 
but even put away every occasion of sin, therefore having 
taught that adultery is to be avoided not in deed only, 
but in heart, He next teaches us to cut off the occasions 
of sin. Vseupo-Curys. : But if according to that of the 
Prophet, there is no whole part in our body, it is necdful 
that we cut off every limb that we have that the punishment 


VER. 29, 30. ST. MATTHEW. 187 


may be equal to the depravity of the flesh. Is it then 
possible to understand this of the bodily eye or hand? 
As the whole man when he is turned to God is dead to 
sin, so likewise the eye when it has ceased to look evil 
is cut off from sin. But this explanation will not suit 
the whole; for when He says, thy right eye offends thee, 
what does the left eye? Does it gontradict the right eye, 
and it is preserved innocent? JEROME; Therefore by the 
nght eye and the right hand we must understand the love 
of brethren, husbands and wives, parents and kinsfolk ; 
which if we find to hinder our view of the true light, we 
ought to sever from us. Avuc6. As the eye denotes con- Avg. | 
templation, so the hand aptly denotes action. By the eve Now. 
we must understand our most cherished friend, as they? !3. 
are wont to say who wculd express ardent affection, ‘ I 
love him as my own eye. And a friend too who gives 
counsel, as the eye shews us our way. The right eye, 
perhaps, only cans to express a higher degree of affection. 
for it is the one which men most fear to lose. Or, by 
the right eye may be understood one who counsels us 
in heavenly matters, and by the left one who counsels in 
earthly matters. And this will be the sense; Whatever 
that is which vou love as you would your own right eye, 
if it offend you, that is, if it be an hindrance to your true 
happiness, cut it off and cast it from you. For if the 
right eye was not to be spared, it was superfluous to 
speak of the left. The right hand also is to be taken of 
a beloved assistant in divine actions, the left hand in 
earthly actions. Psruvo-Curys. Otherwise; Christ would 
have us careful not only of our own sin, but likewise 
that even they who pertain to us should keep themselves 
from evil. Have you any fricnd who looks to your matters 
as your own eye, or manages them as your own hand, if 
you know of any scandalous or base action that he has 
done, cast him from you, he is an offence; for we shall 
give account not only of our own sins, but also of such 
of those of our neighbours as it is in our power to 
hinder. Hitary; Thus a more lofty step of innocence is 
appointed us, in that we are admonished to keep free, not 
only from sin ourselves, but from such as might touch us 


Gloss. 


ord. 


188 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


from without. JEROME; Otherwise; As above He had 
placed lust in the looking on a woman, so now the thought 
and sense straying hither and thither He calls ‘ the eye.’ 
By the nght hand and the other parts of the body, He 
means the initial movements of desire and affection. 
PsEupo-Curys. The eye of flesh is the mirror of the inward 
eye. The body also has its own sense, that is, the left 
eye, and its own appetite, that is, the left hand. But 
the parts of the soul are called right, for the soul was 
created both with free-will and under the law of righteous- 
ness, that it might both see and do rightly. But the 
members of the body being not with free-will, but under 
the law of sin, are called the left.. Yet He does not bid 
us cut off the sense or appetite of the flesh; we may 
retain the desires of the flesh, and yet not do thereafter, 
but we cannot cut off the having the desires. Dut when 
we wilfully purpose and think of evil, then our right 
desires and right will offend us, and therefore He bids 
us cut them off. And these we can cut off, because our 
will is free. Or otherwise; Every thing, however good in 
itself that offends ourselves or others, we ought to cut off 
from us. For example, to visit a woman with religious 
purposes, this good intent towards her may be called a 
right eye, but if often visiting her I have fallen into the 
net of desire, or if any looking on are offended, then the 
right eye, that is, something in itself good, offends me. For 
the right eye is good intention, the right hand is good desire. 
Goss. Or; the right eye is the contemplative life which 
offends by being the cause of indolence or self-conceit, or 
in our weakness that we are not able to support it unmixed. 
The riyht hand is good works, or the active life, which 
offends us when we arc ensnared by society and the business 
of life. If then any one is unable to sustain the contem- 
plative life, let him not slothfully rest from all action; or on 
the other hand while he is taken up with action, dry up the 
fountain of swect contemplation: Remic. The reason why 
the right eye and the right hand are to be cast away is 
subjoined in that, For it is better, $c. Psevpo-Curys. For 
as we are every one members one of another, it is better that 
we should be saved without some one of these members, 


VER. 31, 32. ST. MATTHEW. 189 


than that we perish together with them. Or, it is better 
that we should be saved without one good purpose, or one 
good work, than that while we seek to perform all good 
works we perish together with all. 


31. It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away 
his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement : 

32. But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put 
away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, 
causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall 
marry her that is divorced committeth adultery. 


Gtoss. The Lord had taught us above that our neigh- Gloss. 
bour’s wife was not to be coveted, He now proceeds to teach 279°C 
that our own wife is not to be put away. JEROME; Tor 
touching Moses’s allowance of divorce, the Lord and Saviour 
more fully explains in conclusion, that it was because of the 
hardness of the hearts of the husbands, not so much sanc- 
tioning discord, as checking bloodshed. Psrupo-Curys. 

For when Moses brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, 

they were indeed Ilebrews in race, but Egyptians in manners. 

And it was caused by the Gentile manners that the husband 
hated the wife; and if he was not permitted to put her away, 

he was ready either to kill her or ill-treat her. Moses there- 

fore suffered the bill of divorcement, not because it was a 
good practice in itself, but was the prevention of a worse 
evil. HiLary; But the Lord who brought peace and good- 

will on earth, would have it reign especially in the matri- 
monial bond. Avuc. The Lord’s command here that a wife Aug. 
is not to be put away, is not contrary to the command in the}, 
Law, as Manichezus affirmed. Had the Law allowed any xix. 26 
who would to put away his wife, to allow none to put away 
were indeed the very opposite of that. But the difficulty 
which Moses is careful to put in the way, shews that he was 

no good friend to the practice at all. For he required a bill 

of divorcement, the delay and difficulty of drawing out 
which would often cool headlong rage and disagreement, 
especially as by the Hebrew custom, it was the Scribes 
alone who were permitted to use the Hebrew letters, in 


Aug. 
Serm. in 
Mont. 
i. 14, 


Gal.6,2. 


ubi sup. 


190 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


which they professed a singular skill. To these then the 
law would send him whom it bid to give a writing of 
divorcement, when he would put away his wife, who 
mediating between him and his wife, might set them at one 
again, unless in minds too wayward to be moved by counsels 
of peace. Thus then He neither completed, by adding 
words to it, the law of them of old time, nor did He destroy 
the Law given by Moses by enacting things contrary to it, as 
Manichzus affirmed; but rather repeated and approved all 
that the Hebrew Law contained, so that whatever IIe spoke 
in His own person more than it had, had in view either 
explanation, which in divers obscure places of the Law was 
greatly needed, or the more punctual observance of its enact- 
ments. Ip. By interposing this delay in the mode of 
putting away, the lawgiver shewed as clearly as it could be 
shewn to hard hearts, that he hated strife and disagreement. 
The Lord then so confirms this backwardness in the Law, as 
to except only one case, the cause of fornication; every 
other inconvenience which may have place, He bids us bear 
with patience in consideration of the plighted troth of 
wedlock. PsEupo-Curys. If we ought to bear the burdens 
of strangers, in obedience to that of the Apostle, Bear ye 
one another's burdens, how much more that of our wives and 
husbands? The Christian husband ought not only to keep 
himself from any defilement, but to be careful not to give 
others occasion of defilement; for so is their sin imputed to 
him who gave the occasion. Whoso then by putting away 
his wife gives another man occasion of committing adultery, 
is condemned for that crime himself. Aug. Yea more, He 
declares the man who marries her who is put away an 
adulterer. Curys. Say not here, It is enough her husband 
has put her away; for even after she is put away she 
continucs the wife of him that put her away. Ava. The 
Apostle has fixed the limit here, requiring her to abstain 
from a fresh marriage as long as her husband lives. 
After his death he allows her to marry. But if the woman 
may not marry while her former husband is alive, much 
less may she yield herself to unlawful indulgences. But 
this command of the Lord, forbidding to put away a 
wife, is not breken by him who lives with her not carnally 


VER. 31, 32. ST. MATTHEW. 191 


but spiritually, in that more blessed wedlock of those 

that keep themselves chaste. A question also here arises 

as to what is that fornication which the Lord allows as 

a cause of divorce; whether carnal sin, or, according to the 
Scripture use of the word, any unlawful passion, as idolatry, 
avarice, in short all transgression of the Law by forbidden 
desires. For if the Apostle permits the divorce of a wife if 

she be unbelieving, (though indeed it is better not to put her 
away,) and the Lord forbids any divorce but for the cause of 
fornication, unbelief even must be fornication. And if un- 
belief be fornication, and idolatry unbelief, and covetousness 
idolatry, it is not to be doubted that covetousness is forni- 
cation. And if covetousness be fornication, who may say of 

any kind of unlawful desire that it is not a kind of forni- 
cation? Ip. Yet I would not have the reader think this Se 
disputation of ours sufficient in a mattcr so arduous; for noti. 19. 6. 
every sin 1s spiritual fornication, nor does God destroy every 
sinner, for He hears His saints daily crying to Him, Forgive 

us our debts; but every man who goes a whoring and for- 
sakes Him, him IIe destroys. Whether this be the fornication 

for which divorce is allowed is a most knotty question—for 

it is no question at all that it is allowed for the fornication 

by carnal sin. Ip. If any affirm that the only fornication Aug. 
for which the Lord allows divorce is that of carnal sin, he oo 
may say that the Lord has spoken of believing husbands and 4. ult. 
wives, forbidding either to leave the other except for forni- 
cation. Ip. Not only does He permit to put away a wife Aug. 
who commits fornication, but whoso puts away a wife by Si 
whom he is driven to commit fornication, puts her away for? 16. 
the cause of fornication, both for his own sake and hers. 

Ip. He also rightly puts away his wife to whom she shall mise 
say, I will not be your wife unless you get me money by op. 6. 
robbery; or should require any other crime to be done by 
him. If the husband here be truly penitent, he will cut off 
the limb that offends him. Ip. Nothing can be more unjust Aug. | 
than to put away a wife for fornication, and yourself to be Mont. 
guilty of that sin, for then is that happened, Wherein thou. 16. 
: a Rom. 2, 
yudgest another, thou condemnest thyself. When He says, }, 
And he who marrieth her who is put away, committeth 
adultery, a question arises, does the woman also in this case 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


c. 19,12. 


192 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, V. 


commit adultery? For the Apostle directs either that she 
remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. There 
is this difference in the separation, namely, which of them 
was the cause of it. If the wife put away the husband and 
marry another, she appears to have left her first husband 
with the desire of change, which is an adulterous thought. 
But if she have been put away by her husband, yet he who 
marries her commits adultery, how can she be quit of the 
same guilt? And further, if he who marries her commits 
adultery, she is the cause of his committing adultery, which 
is what the Lord is here forbidding. 


33. Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by 
them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but 
shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths: 

34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither 
by Heaven; for it is God’s throne; 

35. Nor by the earth; for it is His footstool: 
neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great 
King. 

36. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because 
thou canst not make one hair white or black. 

37. But Jet your communication be, Yea, yea; 
Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh 
of evil. 


Goss. The Lord has hitherto taught to abstain from 
injuring our neighbour, forbidding anger with murder, lust 
with adultery, and the putting away a wife with a bill of 
divorce. He now proceeds to teach to abstain from injury 
to God, forbidding not only perjury as an evil in itself, but 
even all oaths as the cause of evil, saying, Ye have heard il 
said by them of old, Thou shalt not forswear thyself. It is 
written in Leviticus, Thou shalt not forswear thyself in my 
name; and that they should not make gods of the creature, 
they are commanded to render to God their oaths, and not to 
swear by any creature, Render to the Lord thy oaths; that 
is, if you shall have occasion to swear, you shall swear by 


VER. 33—37. ST. MATTHEW. 193 


the Creator and not by the creature. As it is written in 
Deuteronomy, Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and shalt. 6.13. 
swear by his name. JEROME; This was allowed under the 
Law, as to children; as they offered sacrifice to God, that 
they might not do it to idols, so they were permitted to 
swear by God; not that the thing was right, but that it were 
better done to God than to demons. Psrupo-Curys. For 
no man can swear often, but he must sometimes forswear 
himself; as he who has a custom of much speaking will 
sometimes speak foolishly. AucG. Inasmuch as the sin of Aug. 
perjury is a grievous sin, he must be further removed from it cout, 
who uses no oath, than he who is ready to swear on every xix. 23. 
occasion, and the Lord would rather that we should not 
swear and keep close to the truth, than that swearing we 
should come near to perjury. Ip. This precept also con- Aug. 
firms the righteousness of the Pharisees, not to forsw ear;yn : 
inasmuch as he who swears not at all cannot forswear him- 17. 
self. But as to call God to witness is to swear, does not the 
Apostle break this commandment when he says several times 
to the Galatians, The things which I write unto you, behold, Gal. 1, 
before God, I lie not. So the Romans, God is my witness, > fasts 
whom I serve in my spirit. Unless perhaps some one may 9. 
say, it is no oath unless I use the form of swearing by some 
object; and that the Apostle did not swear in saying, God 7s 
my witness. Itis ridiculous to make such a distinction; yet the 
Apostle has used even this form, J die daily, by your boasting. 1 Cor. 
That this does nut mean, your boasting has caused my dying !*» 3!- 
daily, but is an oath, is clear from the Greek, which is vy) riyv 
juerégay xatyyow. Ip. But what we could not understand by q,,. 
mere words, from the conduct of the saints we may gather inde ape 
what sense should be understood what might easily be drawn 
the contrary way, unless explained by example. The Apostle 
has used oaths in his Epistles, and by this shews us how 
that ought to be taken, J say unto you, Swear not at all, 
namely, lest by allowing ourselves to swear at all we come to 
readiness in swearing, from readiness we come to a habit of 
swearing, and from a habit of swearing we fall into perjury. 
And so the Apostle is not found to have used an oath but 
only in writing, the greater thought and caution which that 
requires not allowing of slip of the tongue. Yet is the 
VOL. I. Oo 


Aug. 
cont. 
Faust. 
xix. 23. 


Aug. 
Serm. in 
Mont. 

i. 17. 


1 Cor. 
2,15 


194 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO , CHAP. V 


Lord’s command so universal, Swear not at all, that He 
would seem to have forbidden it even in writing. But since 
it would be an impiety to accuse Paul of having violated this 
precept, especially in his Epistles, we must understand the 
word at all as implying that, as far as lays in your power, 
you should not make a practice of swearing, not aim at it as 
a good thing in which you should take delight. Ip. There- 
fore in his writings, as writing allows of greater circum- 
spection, the Apostle is found to have uscd an oath in 
several places, that none might suppose that there is any 
direct sin in swearing what is true; but only that our weak 
hearts are better preserved from perjury by abstaining from 
all swearing whatever. JEROME; Lastly, consider that the 
Saviour does not here forbid to swear by God, but by the 
Heaven, the Earth, by Jerusalem, by a man’s head. For 
this evil practice of swearing by the elements the Jews had 
always, and are thereof often accused in the prophetic 
writings. For he who swears, shews either reverence or 
love for that by which he swears. Thus when the Jews 
swore by the Angels, by the city of Jerusalem, by the temple 
and the elements, they paid to the creature the honour and 
worship belonging to God ; for it is commanded in the Law 


that we should not swear but by the Lord our God. Avg. 


Or; Itis added, By the Heaven, Sc. because the Jews did 
not consider themselves bound when they swore by such 
things. As if He had said, When you swear by the Heaven 
and the Earth, think not that you do not owe your oath 
to the Lord your God, for you are proved to have sworn 
by Him whose throne the heaven is, and the earth His 
footstool; which is not meant as though God had such 
limbs set upon the heaven and the earth, after the manner of 
a man who is sitting; but that seat signifies God’s judgment 


of us. And since in the whole extent of this universe it 


is the heaven that has the highest beauty, God is said to sit 
upon the heavens as shewing divine power to be more 
excellent than the most surpassing show of beauty; and He 
is said to stand upon the earth, as putting to lowest use 
a lesser beauty. Spiritually by the heavens are denoted 
holy souls, by the earth the sinful, seeing He that ts spiritual 


Gen. 3, judgeth all things. But to the sinner it is said, Earth thou 
19. 


» 


VER. 33—$7. ST. MATTHEW. 195 


art, and unto eurth thou shalt return. And he who would 
abide under a law, is put under a law, and therefore He 
adds, it is the footstool of His feet. Neither by Jerusalem, 
Sor vt ts the city of the Great King; this is better said than 
“it is mine;’ though it is understood to mean the same. 
And because He is also truly Lord, whoso swears by Jeru- 
salem, owes his oath to the Lord. Neither by thy head. 
What could any think more entirely his own property than 
his own head? But how is it ours when we have not 
power to make one hair black or white? Whoso then 
swears by his own head also owes his vows to the Lord; and 
by this the rest may be understood. CuHrys. Note how 
He exalts the elements of the world, not from their own 
nature, but from the respect which they have to God, so that 
there is opened no occasion of idolatry. RaBanus; Having 
forbidden swearing, He instructs us how we ought to speak, 
Let your speech be yea, yea; nay, nay. That is, to affirm 
any thing it 1s sufficient to say, ‘ It is so:’ to deny, to say, 
‘It is not so.’ Or, yea, yea; nay, nay, are therefore twice 
repeated, that what you affirm with the mouth you should 
prove in deed, and what you deny in word, you should not 
establish by your conduct. Hrtary; Otherwise ; They who 
live in the simplicity of the faith have not need to swear, 
with them ever, what is is, what is not is not; by this their 
life and their conversation are ever preserved in truth. 
JEROME; Therefore Evangelic verity does not admit an 
oath, since the whole discourse of the faithful is instead 
of an oath. Auc. And he who has learned that an oath Avg. 
is to be reckoned not among things good, but among things "! *P- 
necessary, will restrain himself as much as he may, not to 
use an oath without necessity, unless he sees men loth to 
believe what it is for their good they should believe, without 
the confirmation of an oath. This then is good and to be 
desired, that our conversation be only, yea, yea; nay, nay; 
Sor what is more than this cometh of evil. That is, if you are 
compelled to swear, you know that it is by the necessity 
of their weakness to whom you would persuade any thing; 
which weakness is surely an evil. What is more than this is 
thus evil; not that you do evil in this just-use.of an oath to 
0 2 


196 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


persuade another to something beneficial for him; but it is 
an evil in him whose weakness thus obliges you to use 
an oath. Curys. Or; of evil, that is, from their weakness 
to whom the Law permitted the use of an oath. Not that 
by this the old Law is signified to be from the Devil, but 
He leads us from the old imperfection to the new abundance. 


38. Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye 
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: 

39. But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil : 
but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, 
turn to him the other also. 

40. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and 
take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. 

41. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, 
go with him twain. 

42. Give to him that askcth thee, and from him 
that would borrow of thee turn not thou away. 


Gloss. Goss. The Lord having taught that we are not to offer 
een pe injury to our neighbour, or irreverence to the Lord, now 
procecds to shew how the Christian should demean himself 
Aug. to those that injure him. Avuc. This law, Eye for eye, tooth 
Faust. for tooth, was enacted to repress the flames of mutual hate, 
xix. 25. and to be a check on their undisciplined spirits. For who 
when he would take revenge, was ever content to return 
just so much harm as he had received? Do we not see men 
who have suffered some trifling hurt, straightway plot murder, 
thirst for blood, and hardly find evil enough that they can 
do to their enemies for the satisfying their rage? To this 
immeasured and cruel fury the Law puts bounds when it 
enacts a lex talionis; that is, that whatever wrong or hurt 
any man has done to another, he should suffer just the same 
in return. This is not to encourage but to check rage; for 
it does not rekindle what was extinguished, but hinders the 
flames already kindled from further spread. It enacts a just 


VER, 38—42. ST. MATTHEW. 197 


retaliation, properly due to him who has suffered the wrong. 

But that mercy forgives any debt, does not make it unjust 

that payment had been sought. Since then he sins who 
seeks an unmeasured vengeance, but he does not sin who 
desires only a just one; he is therefore further from sin 

who seeks no retribution at all. I might state it yet thus; 

It was said to them of old time, Thou shalt not take unequal 
retaliation; But I say unto you, Ye shall not retaliate ; this 

is a completion of the Law, if in these words something is 
added to the Law which was wanting to it; yea, rather that 
which the Law sought to do, namely, to put an end to 
unequal revenge, is more safely secured when there is no 
revenge at all. Pseupo-Curys. For without this command, 

the commands of the Law could not stand. For if according 

to the Law we begin all of us to render evil for evil, we 
shall all become evil, since they that do hurt abound. But 

if according to Christ we resist not evil, though they that 

are evil be not amended, yet they that are good remain good. 
JEROME; Thus our Lord by doing away all retaliation, cuts 

off the beginnings of sin. So the Law corrects faults, the 
Gospel removes their occasions. GLoss. Or it may be said Gloss, 
that the Lord said this, adding somewhat to the rightcous- °° °° 
ness of the old Law. Ava. For the righteousness of the Aug. — 
Pharisees is a less righteousness, not to transgress the Staley 
measure of equal retribution; and this is the beginning of19. 
peace; but perfect peace is to refuse all such retribution. 
Between that first manner then, which was not according to 

the Law, to wit, that a greater evil should be returned for a 
less, and this which the Lord enjoins to make Llis disciples 
perfect, to wit, that no evil should be returned for evil, a 
middle place is held by this, that an equal evil should be 
returned, which was thus the passage from extremest discord 

to extremest peace. Whoso then first does evil to another 
departs furthest from righteousness ; and who does not first 

do any wrong, but when wronged repays with a heavier 
wrong, has departed somewhat from extreme injustice ; he 
who repays only what he has received, gives up yet some- 
thing more, for it were but strict nght that he who is the 
first aggressor should receive a greater hurt than he inflicted. 
This righteousness thus partly begun, He perfects, who is 


198 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


come to fulfil the Law. The two steps that intervene He 
leaves to be understood ; for there is who does not repay so 
much, but less; and there is yet above him, he who repays 
not at all; yet this seems too little to the Lord, if you be not 
also ready to suffer wrong. Therefore He says not, Render 
not evil for evil, but, Resist not against evil, not only repay 
not what is offered to you, but do not resist that it should 
not be done to you. For thus accordingly Ie explains 
that saying, Z[f any man smite thee on thy right cheek, 
offer to him the left also. Which as being a high part 
of mercy, is known to those who serve such as they love 
much; from whom, being morose, or insane, they endure 
many things, and if it be for their health they offer themselves 
to endure more. ‘She Lord then, the Physician of souls, 
teaches His disciples to endure with patience the sick- 
nesses of those for whose spiritual health they should 
provide. For all wickedness comes of a sickness of the 
mind; nothing is more innocent than he who is sound and 
Aug.deof perfect health in virtue. Ip. The things which are 
is, done by the Saints in the New Testament profit for 
examples of understanding those Scriptures which are 
modelled into the form of precepts. Thus we read in Luke; 
Luke 6, Whoso smiteth thee on the one cheek, turn to him the 
other also. Now there is no example of patience more 
perfect than that of the Lord; yet He, when He was 
ra smitten, said not, ‘ Behold the other cheek,’ but, Jf I 
have spoken amiss, accuse me wherein it ts amiss; but tf 
well, why smitest thou me? hereby shewing us that that 
ra _ turning of the other check should be in the heart. Ip. For 
Mont. the Lord was ready not only to be smitten on the other 
19. Cheek for the salvation of men, but to be crucified with 
His whole body. It may be asked, What does the right 
cheek expressly signify? As the face is that whereby 
any man is known, to be smitten on the face is according 
to the Apostle to be contemned and despised. But as 
we cannot say ‘right face,’ and ‘ left face,’ and yet we 
have a name twofold, one before God, and one before 
the world, it is distributed as it were into the right cheek, 
and left cheek, that whoever of Christ’s disciples is despised 
for that he is a Christian, may be ready to be yet more 


VER. 38—42. ST. MATTHEW. 199 


despised for any of this world’s honours that he may 
have. All things wherein we suffer any wrong are divided 
into two kinds, of which one is what cannot be restored, 
the other what may be restored. In that kind which cannot 
be restored, we are wont to seek the solace of revenge. 
For what does it boot if when smitten you smite again, 
is the hurt done to your body thereby repaid to you? 
But the mind swollen with rage seeks such assuagements. 
Pseupo-Carys. Or has your return blow at all restrained 
him from striking you again?’ It has rather roused him 
to another blow. For anger is not checked by meeting 
anger, but is only more irritated. AuG. Whence the Lord Aug. | 
judges that others’ weakness should rather be borne with Sala 
compassion, than that our own should be soothed by 20. 
others’ pain. For that retribution which tends to cor- 
rection is not here forbidden, for such is indeed a part of 
mercy ; nor does such intention hinder that he, who seeks 
to correct another, is not at the same time ready himself 
to take more at his hands. But it is required that he 
should inflict the punishment to whom the power is given 
by the course of things, and with such a mind as the 
father has to a child in correcting him whom it is impossible 
he should hate. And holy men have punished some sins 
with death, in order that a wholesome fear might be struck 
into the living, and so that not his death, but the likelihood 
of increase of his sin had he lived, was the hurt of the criminal. 
Thus Elias punished many with death, and when the disciples 
would take example from him they were rebuked by the 
Lord, who did not censure this example of the Prophet, 
but their ignorant use of it, seeing them to desire the 
punishment not for correction’s sake, but from angry hate. 
But after He had inculcated love of their neighbour, and 
had given them the Holy Spirit, there wanted not instances 
of such vengeance; as Ananias and his wife who fell 
down dead at the words of Peter, and the Apostle Paul 
delivered some to Satan for the destruction of the flesh. 
Yet do some, with a kind of blind opposition, rage against 
the temporal punishments of the Old Testament, not know- 
ing with what mind they were inflicted. Ip. But who Aug. 


that is of sober mind would say to kings, It is nothing ee. 


Aug. 
Serm. in 
Moot. 1. 
20. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


200 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


of your concern who will live religiously, or who pro- 
fanely? It cannot even be said to them, that it is not 
their concern who will live chastely, or who unchastely. 
Tt is indeed better that men should be led to serve God 
by right teaching than by penalties; yet has it benefitted 
many, as experience has approved to us, to be first coerced 
by pain and fear, that they might be taught after, or to 
be made to conform in deed to what they had learned 
in words. The better men indeed are led of love, but 
the more part of men are wroughton by fear. Let them learn 
in the case of the Apostle Paul, how Christ first constrained, 
and after taught him. Ip. Thercfore in this kind of injures 
which are wont to rouse vengeance Christians will observe 
such a mean, that hate shall not be caused by the injuries 
they may receive, and yet wholesome correction be not 
foregone by Him who has right of either counsel] or 
power. J&noME; Mystically interpreted; When we are 
smitten on the right check, He said not, offer to him 
thy left, but the other; for the righteous has not a left. 
That is, if a heretic has smitten us in disputation, and 
would wound us in a right hand doctrine, let him be met 
with another testimony from Scripture. Ato. The other 
kind of injuries are those in which full restitution can 
be made, of which there are two kinds; one relates to 
money, the other to work; of the first of these it is He 
speaks when He continues, /Vhoso will sue thee for thy 
coat, let him have thy cloak likewise. As by the cheek 
are denoted such injuries of the wicked as admit of no 
restitution but revenge, so by this similitude of the gar- 
ments is denoted such injury as admits restitution. And 
this, as the former, is rightly taken of preparation of 
the heart, not of the show of the outward action. And 
what is commanded respecting our garments, is to be 
observed in all things that by any right we call our own 
in worldly property. For if the command be expressed in 
these necessary articles of life, how much more does it 
hold in the case of superfluities and luxuries? And 
when He says, He who will sue thee, He clearly intends 
to include every thing for which it is possible that we 
should be sued. It may be made a question whether it 


VER. 38—4?2. ST. MATTHEW. 201 


is to be understood of slaves, for a Christian ought not to 
possess his slave on the same footing as his horse; though 

it might be that the horse was worth the more money. And 

if your slave have a milder master in you than he would 
have in him who seeks to take him from you, I do not know 
that he ought to be given up as lightly as your coat. 
Pseupo-Curys. For it were an unworthy thing that a be- 
liever should stand in his cause before an unbelieving judge. 

Or if one who is a believer, though (as he must be) a 
worldly man, though he should have reverenced you for the 
worthiness of the faith, sues you because the cause is a 
necessary one, you will lose the worthiness of Christ for the 
business of the world. Further, every lawsuit irritates the | 
heart and excites bad thoughts ; for when you see dishonesty 

or bribery employed against you, you hasten to support your 
own cause by like means, though originally you might have 
intended nothing of the sort. Auc. The Lord here forbids Aug. 
his disciples to have lawsuits with others for worldly pro- 7, Sache: 
perty. Yet as the Apostle allows such kind of causes to be 
decided between brethren, and before arbiters who are 
brethren, but utterly disallows them without the Church, it 

is manifest what is conceded to infirmity as pardonable. 
Grec. There are, who are so far to be endured, as they rob Greg. 
us of our worldly goods; but there are whom we ought to,,5; 19, 
hinder, and that without breaking the law of charity, not 
only that we may not be robbed of what is ours, but lest they 

by robbing others destroy themselves. We ought to fear 
much more for the men who rob us, than to be eager to save 
the inanimate things they take from us. When peace with 
our neighbour is banished the heart on the matter of worldly 
possessions, it is plain that our estate is more loved than our 
neighbour. 

AuG. The third kind of wrongs, which is in the matter of Aug. 
labour, consists of both such as admit restitution, and such sais a 
as do not—or with or without revenge—for he who forcibly i. 19. 
presses a man’s service, and makes him give him aid against 
his will, can either be punished for his crime, or return the 
labour. In this kind of wrongs then, the Lord teaches that 
the Christian mind is most patient, and prepared to endure 
yet more than is offered; [fa man constrain thee to go with 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
XViil. 
Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 
Epist. 
93. 2. 


202 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V, 


him a mile, go with him yet other two. This likewise 1s 
meant not so much of actual service with your feet, as of 
readiness of mind. Curys. The word here used signifies to 
drag unjustly, without cause, and with insult. Auc. Let us 
suppose it therefore said, Go with him other two, that the 
number three might be completed; by which number per- 
fection is signified; that whoever does this might remember 
that he is fulfilling perfect righteousness. For which reason 
he conveys this precept under three examples, and in this 
third example, he adds a twofold measure to the one single 
measure, that the threefold number may be complete. Or 
we may so consider as though in enforcing this duty, He 
had begun with what was easiest to bear, and had advanced 
gradually. For first He commanded that when the right 
cheek was smitten we should turn the other also; therein 
shewing ourselves ready to endure another wrong less than 
that you have already received. Secondly, to him that would 
take your coat, he bids you part with your cloak, (or garment, 
as some copies read,) which is either just as great a loss, or 
perhaps a little greater. In the third He doubles the ad- 
ditional wrong which He would have us ready to endure. 
And seeing it is a small thing not to hurt unless you further 
shew kindnesses, He adds, To him that asketh of thee, give. 
Pseupo-Curys. Because wealth is not ours but God’s; 
God would have us stewards of His wealth. and not lords. 
JeEROME; If we understand this only of alms, it cannot stand 
with the estate of the most part of men who are poor; even 
the rich if they have been always giving, will not be able to 
continue always to give. AucG. Therefore, He says not, 
‘Give all things to him that asks;’ but, Give fo every one 
thal asketh; that you should only give what you can give 
honestly and rightly. For what if one ask for money to 
employ in oppressing the innocent man? What if he ask 
your consent to unclean sinf We must give then only what 
will hurt neither ourselves or others, as far as man can judge; 
and when you have refused an inadmissible request, that you 
may not send away empty him that asked, shew the righteous- 
ness of your refusal; and such correction of the unlawful peti- 
tioner will often be a better gift than the granting his suit. 
Ip. For with more benefit is food taken from the hungry, if 


VER. 38—42. ST. MATTHEW. 203 


certainty of provision causes him to neglect righteousness, 

than that food should be supplied to him that he may consent 

to a deed of violence and wrong. JEROME; But it may be 
understood of the wealth of doctrine: wealth which never 

fails but the more of it is given away, the more it abounds. 

Aue. That He commands, And from him that would borrow Aug. 
of thee, turn not away, must be referred to the mind; forSe™™-8 


Mont. i. 
God loveth a cheerful giver. And every one that receives, 20. 


indeed borrows, though it is not he that shall pay, but God, a 
who restores to the merciful many fold. Or, if you like 
to understand by borrowing, only taking with promise to 
repay, we must understand the Lord’s command as em- 
bracing both these kinds of affording aid; whether we give 
outright, or lend to receive again. And of this last kind of 
shewing mercy it is well said, Turn not away, that is, do not 
be therefore backward to lend, as though, because man shall 
repay you, therefore God shall not; for what you do by 
God’s command cannot be without fruit. Psrupo-Curys. 
Christ bids us lend but not on usury; for he who gives on 
such terms does not bestow his own, but takes of another; 
he looses from one chain to bind with many, and gives not 
for God’s righteousness sake, but for his own gain. For 
money taken on usury is like the bite of an asp ; as the asp’s 
poison secretly consumes the limbs, so usury turns all our 
possessions into debt. Ate. Some object that this command Aug. 
of Christ is altogether inconsistent with civil life in Common- ae 
wealths; Who, say they, would suffer, when he could hinder 
it, the pillage of his estate by an enemy; or would not repay 
the evil suffered by a plundered province of Rome on the 
plunderers according to the rights of war? But these 
precepts of patience are to be observed in readiness of the 
heart, and that mercy, not to return evil for evil, must be 
always fulfilled by the will. Yet must we often use a merci- 
ful sharpness in dealing with the headstrong. And in this 
way, if the earthly commonwealth will keep the Christian 
commandments, even war will not be waged without good 
charities, to the establishing among the vanquished peaceful 
harmony of godliness and righteousness. For that victory is 
beneficial to him from whom it snatches licence to sin; 
since nothing is more unfortunate for sinners, than the good 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Aug. de 
Doctr. 
Christ. 
1. 30. 


204 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO’ CHAP. V. 


fortune of their sins, which nourishes an impunity that brings 
punishment after it, and an evil will is strengthened, as it 
were some internal eremy. 


43. Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. 

44. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, 
bless them that curse you, do good to them that 
hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use 
you and persecute you; 

45. That ye may be the children of your Father 
which is in heaven: for He maketh His sun to 
rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on 
the just and on the unjust. 

46. For if ye love them which love you, what 
reward have ye? do not even the Publicans the 
same ? 

47. And if ye salute your brethren only, what 
do ye more than others? do not even the Publicans 
so? 

48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father 
which is in heaven is perfect. 


Goss. The Lord has taught above that we must 
not resist one who offers any injury, but must be ready 
even to suffer more; He now further requires us to shew 
to them that do us wrong both love and its effects. And 
as the things that have gone before pertain to the com- 
pletion of the righteousness of the Law, in like manner 
this last precept is to be referred to the completion of the 
law of love, which, according to the Apostle, is the fulfilling 
of the Law. Atuc. That by the command, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour, all mankind were intended, the Lord 
shewed in the parable of the man who was left half dead, 
which teaches us that our neighbour is every one who 
may happen at any time to stand in need of our offices 
of mercy; and this who does not sce must be denied to 


VER. 43—48. ST. MATTHEW. 205 


none, when the Lord says, Do good to them that hale 
you. Ip. That there were degrees in the righteousness of Aug. 
the Pharisees which was under the old Law is seen oe 
herein, that many hated even those by whom they were2I. 
loved. He therefore who loves his neighbour, has ascended 

one degrec, though as yet be hate his enemy; which is 
expressed in that, and shalt hate thy enemy; which is 

not to be understood as a command to the justified, but a 
concession to the weak. Ip. I ask the Manicheans why Aus. 
they would have this peculiar to the Mosaic Law, that{t. 
was said by them of old time, thou shalt hate thy enemy ? xix. 24. 
Has not Paul said of certain men that they were hateful to 
God? We must enquire then how we may understand 
that, after the example of God, to whom the Apostle here ° 
affirms some men to be hateful, our enemies are to be hated; 

and again after the same pattern of Him who maketh his sun 

to rise on the evil and the good, our enemies are to be 
loved. Here then is the rule by which we may at once hate 

our enemy for the evil’s sake that is in him, that is, his 
iniquity, and love him for the good’s sake that is in him, 
that is, his rational part. This then, thus uttered by them 

of old, being heard, but not understood, hurried men on 

to the hatred of man, when they should have hated nothing 
but vice. Such the Lord corrects as He proceeds, saying, 

I say unto you, Love your enemies. He who had just 
declared that He came not to subvert the Law, but to 
Julfil it, by bidding us love our enemies, brought us to 

the understanding of how we may at once hate the same 
man for his sins whom we love for his human nature. 
Goss. But it should be known, that in the whole body gj... 
of the Law itis no where wntten, Thou shalt hate thy enemy. ord. 
But it is to be referred to the tradition of the Scribes, who 
thought good to add this to the Law, because the Lord 
bade the children of Israel pursue their enemies, and 
destroy Amalek from under heaven. Pstupo-Curys. As 
that, Thou shalt not lust, was not spoken to the flesh, 
but to the spirit, so in this the flesh indeed is not able 

to love its enemy, but the spirit is able; for the love 
and hate of the flesh is in the sense, but of the spirit is 

in the understanding. If then we feel hate to one who 


Gloss. 
ord. 


206 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


has wronged us, and yet will not to act upon that feeling, 
know that our flesh hates our enemy, but our soul loves 
him. Grec. Love to an enemy is then observed when 


‘1, We are not sorrowful at bis success, or rejoice in his fall. 


We hate him whom we wish not to be bettered, and 
pursue with ill-wishes the prosperity of the man in whose 
fall we rejoice. Yet it may often happen that without 
any sacrifice of charity, the fall of an enemy may gladden 
us, and again his exaltation make us sorrowful without 
any suspicion of envy; when, namely, by his fall any 
deserving man is raised up, or by his success any un- 
deservedly depressed. But herein a strict measure of 
discernment must be observed, lest in following out our 
own hates, we hide it from ourselves under the specious 
pretence of others’ benefit. We should balance how much 


we owe to the fall of the sinner, how much to the justice 


of the Judge. For when the Almighty bas struck any 
hardened sinner, we must at once magnify His justice as 
Judge, and feel with the other’s suffering who perishes. 
Gtioss. They who stand against the Church oppose her 
in three ways; with hate, with words, and with bodily 
tortures. The Church on the other band loves them, as 
it is here, Lore your enemies; does good to them, as it 
is, Do good to them that hate you; and prays for them, 
as it is, Pray for them that persecute you and accuse you 
falsely. JEROME; Many measuring the commandments of 
God by their own weakness, not by the strength of the 
saints, hold these commands for impossible, and say that 
it is virtue enough not to hate our enemies; but to love 
them is a command beyond human nature to obey. But 
it must be understood that Christ enjoins not impossibilities 
but perfection. Such was the temper of David towards 
Saul and Absalom; the Martyr Stephen also prayed for 


Rom.9,his enemies while they stoned him, and Paul wished 


himself anathema for the sake of his persecutors. Jesus 


panels both taught and did the same, saying, Father, forgive them, 


Aug. 


for they know not what they do. Ava. These indeed 


Enchir. are examples of the perfect sons of God; yet to this 


should every believer aim, and seek by prayer to God, and 
struggles with himself to raise his human spirit to this 


VER. 43—48. ST. MATTHEW. 207 


temper. Yet this so great blessing is not given to all 
those multitudes which we believe are heard when they 
pray, Forgive us our debis, as we forgive our debtors. 
Ip. Here arises a question, that this commandment of ae: 
the Lord, by which He bids us pray for our enemies, Moat. 
seems opposed by many other parts of Scripture. Ini: 21. 
the Prophets are found many imprecations upon enemies ; 

such as that in the 108th Psalm, Let his children be Ps. 109, 
orphans. But it should be known, that the Prophets are © 
wont to foretel things to come in the form of a prayer or 
wish. This has more weight as a difficulty that John 
says, There ts a sin unto death, I say not that he shall pray \ John 
for it; plainly shewing, that there are some brethren for ’ 
whom he does not bid us pray; for what went before was, 

If any know his brother sin a sin, §c. Yet. the Lord 

bids us pray for our persecutors. This question can only 

be resolved, if we admit that there are some sins in brethren 

more grievous than the sin of persecution in our enemies. 

For thus Stephen prays for those that stoned him, because 

they had not yet believed on Christ; but the Apostle Paul 2 Tim. 
does not pray for Alexander though he was a brother, but ce 
had sinned by attacking the brotherhood through jealousy. 

But for whom you pray not, you do not therein pray 
against him. What must we say then of those against 
whom we know that the saints have prayed, and that not 

that they should be corrected, (for that would be rather 

to have prayed for them), but for their eternal damnation ; 

not as that prayer of the Prophet against the Lord’s 
betrayer, for that is a prophecy of the future, not an im- 
precation of punishment; but as when we read in the 
Apocalypse the Martyrs’ prayer that they may be avenged. Rev. 6, 
But we ought not to let this affect us. For who may _ 
dare to affirm that they prayed against those persons them- 
selves, and not against the kingdom of sin? For that would 

be both a just and a merciful avenging of the Martyrs, 

to overthrow that kingdom of sin, under the continuance 

of which they endured all those evils. And it is overthrown 

by correction of some, and damnation of such as abide in 

sin. Does not Paul seem to you to have avenged Stephen 

on his own body, as he speaks, J chastise. my body, and bring \ Cor. 


208 GOSPEL ACCORDiNG TO CHAP, V. 


Hil. it into subjection. PsEupo-AvucG. And the souls of them 
vue that are slain cry out to be avenged; as the blood of Abet 
N. Test.cried out of the ground not with a voice, but in spirit?. 
ae the work is said to laud the workman, when he delights 
himself in the view thereof; for the saints are not so 
impatient as to urge on what they know will come to 
pass at the appointed time. Curys. Note throngh what 
steps we have now ascended hither, and how He has set 
us on the very pinnacle of virtue. The first step is, not 
to begin to do wrong to any; the second, that in avenging 
a wrong done to us we be content with retaliating equal ; 
the third, to return nothing of what we have suffercd ; 
the fourth, to offer one’s self to the endurance of evil; the fifth, 
to be ready to suffer even more evil than the oppressor desires 
to inflict; the sixth, not to hate him of whom we suffer 
such things; the seventh, to love him; the eighth, to 
do him good; the ninth, to pray for him. And because 
the command is great, the reward proposed is also great, 
namely, to be made like unto God, Ye shall be the sons 

of your Father which ts in heaven. 
JEROME; For whoso keeps the commandments of God 
is thereby made the son of God; he then of whom he here 

Aug. Speaks is not by nature His son, but by his own will. Avs. 

Scim. 10 After that rule we must here understand of which John 

Mont. 

i.23. speaks, He gave them power to be made the sons of God. 
One is His Son by nature; we are made sons by the power 
which we have received; that is, so far as we fulfil those 
things that we are commanded. So He says not, Do these 
things because ye are sons; but, do these things that ye may 
become sons. In calling us-to this then, He calls us to 
His likeness, for He saith, He maketh His sun to rise on 
the righteous and the unrighteous. By the sun we may 
understand not this visible, but that of which it is said, 

Mal. 4, To you that fear the name of the Lord, the Sun of righteous- 

= ness shall arise; and by the rain, the water of the doctrine of 
truth; for Christ was seen, and was preached to good as 
well as bad. HuLary; Or, the sun and rain have reference 

Aug. to the baptism with water and Spirit. Auc. Or we may 

ubi sup: take it of this visible sun, and of the rain by which the fruits 
are nourished, as the wicked mourn in the book of Wisdom, 


VER. 43-—48. ST. MATTHEW. 209 


The Sun has not risen for us. And of the rain it is said, Wid. 
I will command the clouds that they rain not on it. Butis.5,6. 
whether it be this or that, it is of the great gooduess of God, 
which is set forth for our imitation. He says not, ‘ the sun,’ 
but, His sun, that is, the sun which Himself has made, that 
hence we may be admonished with how great liberality we 
ought to supply those things that we have not created, but 
have received as a boon from Him. Ip. But as we laud Avg. 
Him for His gifts, let us also consider how He chastises ey 
those whom He loves. For not every one who spares is 
a friend, nor every one who chastises an enemy; it is better Me 
to love with severity, than to use lenity wherewith to deceive. 27 6. 
Pseupo-Curys. He was careful to say, On the righteous and 
the unrighteous, and not ‘on the unrighteous as on the 
righteous ;’ for God gives all good gifts not for men’s sake, 
but for the saints’ sake, as likewise chastisements for the 
sake of sinners. In bestowing His good gifts, He does not 
separate the sinners from the righteous, that they should 
not despair; so in His inflictions, not the righteous from 
sinners that they should be made proud; and that the 
more, since the wicked are not profited by the good things 
they receive, but turn them to their hurt by their evil lives; 
nor are the good hurt by the evil things, but rather profit to 
increase of righteousness. Aua. For the good man is not Aug. De 
puffed up by worldly goods, nor broken by worldly calamity. ; ae et 
But the bad man is punished in temporal losses, because he 
is corrupted by temporal gains. Or for another reason Ele 
would have good and evil common to both sorts of men, that 
good things might not be sought with vehement desire, when 
they were enjoyed even by the wicked; nor the evil things 
shamefully avoided, when even the righteous are afflicted by 
them. Gtoss. To love one that loves us is of nature, but to Gloss. 
love our enemy of charity. Jf ye love them who love you," °° 
what reward have ye? to wit,in heaven. None truly, for of 
such it is said, Ye have received your reward. But these 
things we ought to do, and not leave the other undone. 
RaBan. If then sinners be led by nature to shew kindness to 
those that love them, with how much greater shew of 
affection ought you not to embrace even those that do not 
love you? For it follows, Do not even the publicans so? 

VOL. I. P 


Gloss. 


non occ. 


Josh. 1, 
&, 


210 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. V. 


The publicans are those who collect the public imposts; or 
perhaps those who pursue the public business or the gain of 
this world. Gtoss. But if you only pray for them that are 
your kinsfolk, what more has your benevolence than that of 
the unbelieving? Salutation is a kind of prayer. RaBAn. 
Ethnic, that is, the Gentiles, for the Greek word é§vos is 
translated ‘ gens’ in Latin ; those, that is, who abide such as 
they were born, to wit, under sin. Remic. Because the 
utmost perfection of love cannot go beyond the love of 
enemies, therefcre as soon as the Lord has bid us love our 
enemies, He proceeds, Be ye then perfect, as your Father 
which is in hearen is perfect. He indeed is perfect, as 
being omnipotent; man, as being aided by the Omnipotent. 
For the word ‘as’ is used in Scripture, sometimes for 
identity, and equality, as in that, As I was with Moses, so 
will I be with thee; sometimes to express hkeness only 
as here. Psrupo-Curys. For as our sons after the flesh 
resemble their fathers in some part of their bodily shape, 
so do spiritual sons resemble their father God, in holiness. 


CHAP. VI. 


]. Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, 
to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of 
your Father which is in Heaven. 


Gtoss. Christ having now fulfilled the Law in respect of Gloss. 
commandments, begins to fulfil it in respect of promises, "°° °° 
that we may do God’s commandments for heavenly wages, 
not for the earthly which the Law held out. All earthly 
things are reduced to two main heads, viz. human glory, and 
abundance of earthly goods, both of which seem to be 
promised in the Law. Concerning the first is that spoken 
in Deuteronomy, The Lord shall make thee higher than all c. 28, 1. 
the nations who dwell on the face of the earth. And in the 
same place it is added of earthly wealth, The Lord shall 
make thee abound in all good things. ‘Therefore the Lord 
now forbids these two things, glory and wealth, to the atten- 
tion of believers. CuHrys. Yet be it known that the desire of Chrys, 
fame is near a kin to virtue. Pszupo-Curys. For when any 2°" 
thing truly glorious is done, there ostentation has its readiest 
occasion; so the Lord first shuts out all intention of seeking 
glory; as He knows that this is of all fleshly vices the most 
dangerous to man. The servants of the Devil are tormented 
by ail kinds of vices; but it is the desire of empty glory that 
torments the servants of the Lord more than the servants of 
the Devil. Avuc. How great strength the love of human Avg. 
glory has, none feels, but he who has proclaimed war against oe i‘ 
it. Far though it is easy for any not to wish for praise ar 
when it is denied him, it is difficult not to be pleased — 
with it when it is offered. Currys. Observe how He has 
begun as it were describing some beast hard to be dis- 

P 2 


212 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


cerned, and ready to steal upon him who is not greatly 
on his guard against it; it enters in secretly, and carries off 
insensibly all those things that are within. Pseupo-CHrys. 
And therefore he enjoins this to be more carefully avoided, 
Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men. It 
is our heart we must watch, for it is an invisible serpent that 
we have to guard against, which secretly enters in and 
seduces ; but if the heart be pure into which the enemy has 
succeeded in entering in, the righteous man soon feels that 
he is prompted by a strange spirit; but if his heart were full 
of wickednesses, he does not readily perceive the suggestion 
of the Devil, and therefore He first taught us, Be nol angry, 
Lust not, for that he who is under the yoke of these evils 
cannot attend to his own heart. But how can it be that we 
should not do our alms before men. Or if this may be, how 
can they be so done that we should not know of it. For ifa 
poor man come before us in the presence of any one, how 
shall we be able to give him alms in secret? If we lead him 
aside, it must be seen that we shall give him. Observe 
then that He said not simply, Do not before men, but 
added, fo be seen of them. He then who does righteousness 
not from this motive, even if he does it before the eyes of 
men, is not to be thought to be herein condemned; for he 
who does any thing for God’s sake, sees nothing in his heart 
but God, for whose sake he does it; as a workman has 
always before his eyes him who has entrusted him with the 
Greg. work todo. Gree. If then we seek the fame of giving, we 
Mor, make even our public deeds to be hidden in His sight; for if 
herein we seek our own glory, then they are already cast out 
of His sight, even though there be many by whom they are yet 
unknown. It belongs only to the thoroughly perfect, to suffer 
their deeds to be seen, and to receive the praise of doing them 
in such sort that they are lifted up with no secret exultation; 
whereas they that are weak, because they cannot attain to 
this perfect contempt of their own fame, must needs hide 
Aug. those good deeds that they do. Aue. In saying only, That 
ye be seen of men, without any addition, He seems to have 
ii1. forbidden that we should make that the end of our actions. 
oe 1, For the Apostle who declared, [f J yet pleased men, I should 


1 Cor. mot be the servant of Christ; says in another place, / please 
10, 33. 


VER. 2—4. ST. MATTHEW. 213 


all men in all things. This he did not that he might please 
men, but God, to the love of whom he desires to turn the 
hearts of men by pleasing them. As we should not think 
that he spoke absurdly, who should say, In this my pains 

in seeking a ship, it is not the ship I seek, but my country. 

Ip. He says this, that ye be seen of men, because there are Aug. 
some who so do their nghteousness before men that them- Pe 
selves may not be seen, but that the works themselves may 

be seen, and their Father who is in heaven may be glorified; 

for they reckon not their own righteousness, but His, in the 
faith of whom they live. Ip. That He adds, Otherwise ye shall Avg. _ 
nol have your reward before your Father who is in heaven, stelle 
signifies no more than that we ought to take heed that we". !. 
seek not praise of men in reward of our works. Psrupo- 
Curys. What shall you receive from God, who have given 
God nothing? What is done for God’s sake is given to God, 

and received by Him; but what is done because of men is 
cast to the winds. But what wisdom is it, to bestow our 
goods, to reap empty words, and to have despised the reward 

of God? Nay you deceive the very man for whose good 
word you look; for he thinks you do it for God’s sake, 
otherwise he would rather reproach than commend you. 
Yet must we think him only to have done his work because 

of men, who does it with his whole will and intention 
governed by the thought of them. But if,an idle thought, 
seeking to be seen of men, mount up in any one’s heart, but 

is resisted by the understanding spirit, he is not thereupon 

to be condemned of man-pleasing; for that the thought 
came to him was the passion of the flesh, what he chose was 

the judgment of his soul. 


2. Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not 
sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do 
in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may _ 
have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They 
have their reward. | : 

3. But when thou doest alms, let not thy left 
hand know what thy right hand doeth: 


214 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


4. That thine alms may be in secret: and thy 
Father which seeth in secret Himself shall reward 


thee openly. 


Aug. | AucG. Above the Lord had spoken of righteousness in 
Mon, general. He now pursues it through its different parts. 
i.2. Pszupe-CHrys. He opposes three chief virtues, alms, 
Pseudo~- ‘ F ‘ : ‘ 
Chrys. Prayer, and fasting, to three evil things against which the 
Hom.xv. Tiord undertook the war of temptation. For He fought for 
us in the wilderness against gluttony; against covetousness 
on the mount; against false glory on the temple. It is alms 
that scatter abroad against covetousness which heaps up; 
fasting against gluttony which is its contrary; prayer against 
false glory, seeing that all other evil things come out of evil, 
this alone comes out of good; and therefore it is not over- 
thrown but rather nourished of good, and has no remedy that 
Ambro may avail against it but prayer only. AMBROSIASTER; The 
Cav, sum of all Christian discipline is comprehended in mercy 
i ‘Tim. and piety, for which reason He begins with almsgiving. 
4, 8. 

Psrupo-Carys. The trumpet stands for every act or word 
that tends to a display of our works; for instance, to do 
alms if we know that some other person is looking on, or 
at the request of another, or to a person of such condition 
that he may make us return; and unless in such cases not to 
do them. Yea, even if in some secret place they are done 
with intent to be thought praiseworthy, then is the trumpet 

Bae: sounded. Auc. Thus what He says, Do not sound a 
P* trumpet before thee, refers to what He had said above, Take 
heed that ye do not your righteousness before men. JEROME; 

He who sounds a trumpet before him when he does alms 

is a hypocrite. Whence he adds, as the hypocrites do. 

sid. Istp. The name ‘ hypocrite’ is derived from the appearance 
es of those who in the shows are disguised in masks, variously 
Serm.- coloured according to the character they represent, some- 
times male, sometimes female, to impose on the spectators 

Aug. while they act in the games. Ave. As then the hypocrites, 
“bisUP- (a word meaning ‘one who feigns,’) as personating the 
characters of other men, act: parts which are not naturally 

their own—for he who personates Agamemnon, is not really 


VER. 2—4. . $T. MATTHEW. 215 


Agamemnon, but feigns to be so—so likewise in the 
Churches, whosoever in his whole conduct desires to seem 

what he is not, is a hypocrite; he feigns himself righteous 

and is not really so, seeing his only motive is praise of men. 
Gross. In the words, in the streets and villages, he marks Gloss. 
the public places which they selected; and in those, tha/™" °° 
they may receive honour of men, he marks their motive. 
GreG. It should be known, that there are some who wear Greg. 
the dress of sanctity, and are not able to work out the merit sso" 13, 
of perfection, yet who must in no wise be numbered among 

the hypocrites, because it is one thing to sin from weakness, 
another from crafty affectation. Auc. And such sinners 4%: | 
receive from God the Searcher of hearts none other reward Mont, " 
than punishment of their deceitfulness; Verily I say unto": 2- 
you, they have their reward. JeROME; A reward not of 

God, but of themselves, for they receive praise of men, for 

the sake of which it was that they practised their virtues. 

Aue. This refers to what He had said above, Otheririse ye Aug. 
shall have no reward of your Father which is in heaven; a 
and He goes on to shew them that they should not do their 

alms as the hypocrites, but teaches them how they should do 

them. Curys. Let not thy left hand know what thy right 

hand doeth, is said as an extreme expression, as much as to 

say, If it were possible, that you should not know yourself, 

and that your very hands should be hid from your sight, that 

is what you should most strive after. Pseupo-CHrys. The * 
Apostles in the book of the Constitutions, interpret thus; 

The right hand is the Christian people which is at Christ’s 

right hand; the left hand is all the people who are on 

His left hand. He means then, that when a Christian does 

alms, the unbeliever should not see it. Auc. But according Aug. 
to this interpretation, it will be no fault to have a respect to oer 
pleasing the faithful; and yet we are forbidden to propose as 

the end of any good work the pleasing of any kind of men. 

Yet if you would have men to imitate your actions which 

may be pleasing to them, they must be done before unbe- 
lievers as well as believers. If again, according to another 
interpretation, we take the left hand to mean our enemy, and 

that our enemy should not know when we do our alms, why 


216 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI, 


did the Lord Himself mercifully heal men when the Jews 
were standing round Him? And how too must we deal 
Prov.25, With our enemy himself according to that precept, Jf thy 
enemy hunger, feed him. A third interpretation is ridiculous; 
that the left hand signifies the wife, and that because women 
are wont to be more close in the matter of expense out of 
the family purse, therefore the charities of the husband 
should be secret from the wife, for the avoiding of domestic 
strife. But this command is addressed to women as well as 
to men, what then is the left hand, from which women are 
bid to conceal their alms? Is the husband also the left 
hand of the wite? And when it is commanded such that 
they enrich each other with good works, it is clear that 
they ought not to hide their good deeds; nor is a theft to 
be committed to do God service. But if in any case some- 
thing must needs be done covertly, from respect to the 
weakness of the other, though it is not unlawful, yet that 
we cannot suppose the wife to be intended by the left hand 
here is clear from the purport of the whole paragraph; no, 
not even such an one as he might well call left. But that 
which is blamed in hypocrites, namely, that they seek praise 
of men, this you are forbid to do; the left hand therefore 
seems to signify the delight in inen’s praisc; the right hand 
denotes the purpose of fulfilling the divine commands. 
Whenever then a desire to gain honour from men mingles 
itself with the conscience of him that does alms, it is then 
the left hand knowing what the right hand, the right con- 
science, does. Let not the left hand know, therefore, what 
the right hand doecth, means, let not the desire of men’s praise 
mingle with your conscience. But our Lord does yet more 
strongly forbid the left hand alone to work in us, than its 
mingling in the works of the right hand. The intent with 
which He said all this is shewn in that He adds, that your 
alms may be tn secret; that is, in that your good conscience 
only, which human eye cannot see, nor words discover, though 
many things are said falsely of many. But your good con- 
science itself is enough for you towards deserving your reward, 
if you look for your reward from Him who alone can see your 
conscience. This is that He adds, And your Father which 


VER. 5, 6. ST. MATTHEW. 217 


seeth in secret shall reward you. Many Latin copies have, 
openly*, PsEupo-Curys. For it is impossible that God should 
leave in obscurity any good work of man; but He makes it 
manifest in this world, and glorifies it in the next world, be- 
cause it is the glory of God; as likewise the Devil manifests 
evil, in which is shewn the strength of his great wickedness. 
But God properly makes public every good deed only in 
that world the goods of which are not common to the righ- 
teous and the wicked ; therefore to whomsoever God shall 
there shew favour, it will be manifest that it was as reward 
of his righteousness. But the reward of virtue is not mani- 
fested in this world, in which both bad and good are alike in 
their fortunes. ‘Auc. But in the Greek copies, which are 
earlier, we have not the word openly. > Curys. If therefore 
you desire spectators of your good deeds, behold you have 
not merely Angels and Archangels, but the God of the universe. 


5. And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as 
the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in 
the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that 
they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, 
They have their reward. 

6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy 
closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy 
Father which is in secret; and thy Father which 
seeth in secret shall reward thee openly. 


Pseupo-Curys. Solomon says, Before prayer, prepare thy Pseado- 
soul. This he does who comes to prayer dcing alms; for pon sec. 
good works stir up the faith of the heart, and give the soul eC 
confidence in prayer to God. Almsthen area preparation for © 
prayer, and therefore the Lord after speaking of alms proceeds 
accordingly to instruct us concerning prayer. AucG. He does Aug. 

é ; Serm. 
not now bid us pray, but instructs us how we should pray ; iy Mont. 
as above He did not command us to do alms, but shewed #3. 
the manner of doing them. Pseupo-Curys. Prayer is as it 

* openly omit Clement. Hom. iii. 55. loc. Augustine adds that the Greek 
on verse 6. Origen on v. 6. (in Ezek. MSS. omit, but all the present Greek 


viii. 12.) but retains in Joan.tom. 13.n. MSS. retain. He omits it also in 
45. Jerome in loc. &c. vid. Wetstein in v. 18. 


Ps. 68, 
26. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


A 


ug. 
ubi sup. 


218 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


were a spiritual tribute which the soul offers of its own 
bowels. Wherefore the more glorious it is, the more watch- 
fully ought we to guard that it is not made vile by being 
done to be seen of men. Curys. He calls them hypocrites, 
because feigning that they are praying to God, they are 
looking round to men; and, He adds, they lore to pray tn 
the synagogues. PseEvupo-Curys. But I suppose that it is 
not the place that the Lord here refers to, but the motive of 
him that prays; for it is praiseworthy to pray in the congre- 
gation of the faithful, as it 1s said, Jn your Churches bless ye 
God. Whoever then so prays as to be seen of men dves not 
look to God but to man, and so far as his purpose is con- 
cerned he prays in the synagogue. But he, whose mind in 
prayer is wholly fixed on God, though he pray in the 
synagogue, yet seems to pray with himself iu secret. Jn the 
corners of the streets, namely, that they may seem to be 
praying retiredly; and thus earn a twofold praise, both that 
they pray, and that they pray in retirement. Gtoss. Or, the 
corners of the streets, are the places where one way crosses 
another, and makes four cross-ways. Pstupvo-CHrys. He 
forbids us to pray in an assembly with the intent of being 
seen of that assembly, as He adds, that they may be seen 
of men. He that prays therefore should do nothing singular 
that might attract notice; as crying out, striking his breast, 
or reaching forth his hands. Ava. Not that the mere being 
seen of men is an impiety, but the doing this, in order to be 
seen of men. Curys. It is a good thing to be drawn away 
from the thought of empty glory, but especially in prayer. 
For our thoughts are apt to stray of themselves; if then we 
address ourselves to prayer with this disease upon us, how shall 
we understand those things that are said by us? Aue. The 
privity of other men is to be so far shunned by us, as it leads 
us to do any thing with this mind that we look for the fruit 
of their applause. Psrtupo-Curys. Verily I say unto you, 
they have received their reward, for every man where he 
sows there he reaps, therefore they who pray because of men, 
not because of God, receive praise of men, not of God. 
Curys. He says, have received, because God was ready to 
give them that reward which comes from Himself, but they 
prefer rather that which comes from men. He then goes on 


vER. 5, 6. ST. MATTHEW. 219 


to teach how we should pray. Jerome; This if taken in its 
plain sense teaches the hearer to shun all desire of vain 
honour in praying. Pseupo-Curys. That none should be 
there present save he only who is praying, for a witness im- 
pedes rather than forwards prayer. Cyprian; The Lord has Cypr. 
bid us in His instructions to pray secretly in remote and with- 5" “ 
drawn places, as best suited to faith; that we may be assured 

that God who is present every where hears and sees all, 

and in the fulness of His Majesty penetrates even hidden 
places. Pszupo-Curys. We may also understand by the 
door of the chamber, the mouth of the body; so that we 
should not pray to God with loudness of tone, but with 
silent heart, for three reasons. First, because God is not 

to be gained by vehement crying, but by a right conscience, 
seeing He is a hearer of the heart; secondly, because none 

but thyself and God should be privy to your secret prayers ; 
thirdly, because if you pray aloud, you hinder any other 
from praying near you. Casstan; Also we should observe Cassian, 
close silence in our prayers, that our enemies, who are er 
ever most watchful to ensnare us at that time, may not 
know the purport of our petition. AuG. Or, by our Ang. 
chambers are to be understood our hearts, of which it is ubheup 
spoken in the fourth Psalm; What things ye utter in your Ps. 4, 4. 
hearts, and wherewith ye are pricked in your chambers. 

The door is the bodily senses; without are all worldly 
things, which, enter into our thoughts through the senses, 

and that crowd of vain imaginings which beset us in 
prayer. Cyprian; What insensibility is it to be snatched Cypr. 
wandering off by light and profane imaginings, when you a a 
are presenting your entreaty to the Lord, as if there were 
aught else you ought rather to consider than that your 
converse is with God! How can you claim of God to 
attend to you, when you do not attend to yourself? This is 
altogether to make no provision against the enemy ; this is 
when praying to God, to offend God’s Majesty by the 
negiectfulness of your prayer. AuG. The door then must Aug. 
be shut, that is, we must resist the bodily sense, that we ">! *P- 
may address our Father in such spiritual prayer as is made 

in the inmost spirit, where we pray to Him truly in secret. 
Remic. Let it be enough for you that He alone know your 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


220 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


petitions, who knows the sccrets of all hearts; for He Who 
sees all things, the same shall listen to you. Currys. He 
said not ‘ shall freely give thee,’ but, shall reward thee ; 
thus He constitutes Himself your debtor. 


7. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, 
as the heathen do: for they think that they shall 
be heard for their much speaking. 

8. Be ye not therefore like unto them: for your 
Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before 
ye ask Him. 


Aue. As the hypocrites use to set themselves so as to be 
seen in their prayers, whose reward is to be acceptable to 
men; so the Ethnici (that is, the Gentiles) use to think 
that they shall be heard for their much speaking; therefore He 


Cassian, adds, When ye pray, do not ye use many words. CaASSIAN ; 


Collat. 
ix. 36. 


We should indeed pray often, but in short form, lest if we 
be long in our prayers, the enemy that lies in wait for us, 
might suggest something for our thoughts. Avuc. Yet to 


jo, continue long in prayer is not, as some think, what is here 


meant, by using many words. For much speaking is one 
thing, and an enduring fervency another. For of the Lord 
Himself it is written, that He continued a whole night in 
prayer, and prayed at great length, setting an example to us. 
The brethren in Egypt are said to use frequent prayers, but 
those very short, and as it were hasty ejaculations, lest that 
fervency of spirit, which is most behoveful for us in prayer, 
should by longer continuance be violently broken off. 
Herein themselves sufficiently shew, that this fervency of 
spirit, a8 it is not to be forced if it cannot last, so if it has 
lasted is not to be violently broken off. Let prayer then be 
without much speaking, but not without much entreaty, if 
this fervent spirit can be supported; for much speaking 
In prayer is to use in a necessary matter more words than 
necessary. But to entreat much, is to importune with 
enduring warmth of heart Him to whom our entreaty is 
made; for often is this business effected more by groans than 
words, by weeping more than speech. Currys. Hereby He 


VER. 7, 8. ST. MATTHEW. 221 


dissuades from empty speaking in prayer; as, for example, 
when we ask of God things improper, as dominions, fame, 
overcoming of our enemies, or abundance of wealth. He 
commands then that our prayers should not be long; long, 

that is, not in time, but in multitude of words. For it is 
right that those who ask should persevere in their asking ; 
being instant in prayer, as the Apostle instructs; but does 

not thereby enjoin us to compose a prayer of ten thousand 
verses, and speak it all; which He secretly hints at, when 

He says, Do not ye use many words. GtLoss. What He oie 
condemns is many words in praying that come of want” 

of faith ; as the Gentiles do. For a multitude of words were 
needful for the Gentiles, seeing the demons could not know 

for what they petitioned, until instructed by them; they 
think they shall be heard for their much speaking. Aue. inet 
And truly all superfluity of discourse has come from the 
Gentiles, who labour rather to practise their tongues than to 
cleanse their hearts, and introduce this art of rhetoric into 

that wherein they need to persuade God. Grea. True Greg.” 
prayer consists rather in the bitter groans of repentance, arti. 
than in the repetition of set forms of words. Ava. For we a 
use many words then,when we have to instruct one who 1s ubi sup. 
In ignorance, what need of them to Him who is Creator 

of all things; Your heavenly Father knoweth what ye have 

need of before you ask Him. JEROME; On this there starts 

up a heresy of certain Philusophers who tayght the mistaken a 
dogma, that If God knows for what we shall pray, and, before Om 

we ask, knows what we need, our prayer is needlessly made 

to one who has such knowledge. To such we shortly reply, 

That in our prayers we do not instruct, but entreat; it is one 
thing to inform the ignorant, another to beg of the under- 
standing: the first were to teach; the latter is to perform a 
service of duty. CHkrys. You do not then pray in order to 
teach God your wants, but to move Him, that you may be- 
come His friend by the importunity of your applications to 
Him, that you may be humbled, that you may be reminded 

of your sins. AvuG. Nor ought we to use words in seeking to aus 
obtain of God what we would, but to seek with intense and is 
fervent application of mind, with pure love, and suppliant aug. 


spirit. Ip. But even with words we ought at certain periods ier 


222 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


to make prayer to God, that by these signs of things we may 
keep ourselves in mind, and may know what progress we 
have made in such desire, and may stir up ourselves more 
actively to increase this desire, that after it have begun to 
wax warm, it may not be chilled and utterly frozen up by 
divers cares, without our continual care to keep it alive. 
Words therefore are needful for us that we should be moved 
by them, that we should understand clearly what it is we 
ask, not that we should think that by them the Lord is either 
Aug. instructed or persuaded. Ib. Still it may be asked, what is 
Serm. in 
Mont. ” the use of prayer at all, whether made in words or in medi- 
ti. 3. tation of things, if God knows already what is necessary for 
us. The mental posture of prayer calms and purifies the 
soul, and makes it of more capacity to receive the divine 
gifts which are poured into it. For God does not hear us 
for the prevailing force of our pleadings; He 1s at all times 
ready to give us His light, but we are not ready to receive it, 
but prone to other things. There is then in prayer a turning 
of the body to God, and a purging of the inward eye, whilst 
those worldly things which we desired are shut out, that the 
eye of the mind made single might be able to bear the single 
light, and in it abide with that joy with which a happy life 
is perfected. 


9. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our 
Father which drt in Heaven, Hallowed be thy name. 


Gloss.e. GxLoss. Amongst His other saving instructions and divine 
Cypr. lessons, wherewith He counsels believers, He has set forth 
for us a form of prayer in few words; thus giving us con- 
fidence that that will be quickly granted, for which He 

Cypr. would have us pray so shortly. Cyprian; He who gave 
ville tg us to live, taught us also to pray, to the end, that speaking 
to the Father in the prayer which the Son hath taught, we 

may receive a readier hearing. It is praying like friends and 
familiars to offer up to God of His own. Let the Father 
recognize the Son’s words when we offer up our prayer; 

and seeing we have Him when we sin for an Advocate with 

the Father, let us put forward the words of our Advocate, 


VER. 9. ST. MATTHEW. 223 


when as sinners we make petition for our offences. GLOSS. Gloss. 
Yet we do not confine ourselves wholly to these words, but °™ 
use others also conceived in the same sense, with which our 
heart is kindled. Ava. Since in every entreaty we have first Aug. 
to propitiate the good favour of Him whom we entreat, and oe 
after that mention what we entreat for; and this we com-ii. 4. 
monly do by saying something in praise of Him whom we 
entreat, and place it in the front of our petition; in this the 
Lord bids us say no more than only, Our Father «tchich art 

tr Heaven. Many things were said of them to the praise of 
God, yet do we never find it taught to the children of Israel 

to address God as‘ Our Father; He is rather set before 
them as a Lord over slaves. But of Christ’s people the 
Apostle says, We have received the Spirtt of adoption, where- roe 8, 
by we cry Abba, Father, and that not of our deservings, but > 

of grace. This then we express in the prayer when we say, 
Father; which name also stirs up love. For what can be 
dearer than sons are to a father? Anda suppliant spirit, in 

that men should say to God Our Father. And a certain 
presumption that we shall obtain; for what will He not 
give to His sons when they ask of Him, who has given them 

that first that they should be sons? Lastly, how great anxiety 
possesses his mind, that having called God his Father, he 
should not be unworthy of such a Father. By this the rich 

and the noble are admonished when they have become 
Christians not to be haughty towards the poor or truly born, 

who like themselves may address God as Our Father; and 
they therefore cannot truly or piously say this unless they 
acknowledge such for brethren. CHrys. For what hurt 
does such kindred with those beneath us, when we are 

all alike kin to One above us? For who calls God Father, 

in that one title confesses at once the forgiveness of sins, 

the adoption, the heirship, the brotherhood, which he has 
with the Only-begotten, and the gift of the Spirit. For 
none can call God Father, but he who has obtained 

all these blessings. In a two-fold manner, therefore, he 
moves the feeling of them that pray, both by the dignity 

of Him who is prayed to, and the greatness of those benefits 
which we gain by prayer. Cyprian; We say not My Cypr. 
Father, but Our Father, for the teacher of peace and master?" * 


224 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


of unity would not have men pray singly and severally, since 

when any prays, he is not to pray for himself only. Our 
prayer is general and for all, and when we pray, we pray 

not for one person but for us all, because we all are one. 

So also He willed that one should pray for all, according as 
Himself in one did bear us all. Pseupo-Curys. To pray 

for ourselves it is our necessity compels us, to pray for 

Gloss. Others brotherly charity instigates. GLoss. Also because 
ord. He is a common Father of all, we say, Our Father; 
not My Father which is appropriate to Christ alone, who 

is His Son by nature. Pseupo-Curys. Which art in 
heaven, is added, that we may know that we have a heavenly 
Father, and may blush to immerse ourselves wholly in 
Cassian, Carthly things when we have a Father in heaven. Cassin ; 
oe And that we should speed with strong desire thitherward 
where our Father dwells. CuHRys. Jn heaven, not con- 
fining God’s presence to that, but withdrawing the thoughts 

of the petitioner from earth and fixing them on things above. 

Aug. AUG. Or; tn heaven is among the saints and the righteous 
Mont, inmen; for God is not contained in space. “For the heavens 
ii 5. literally are the upper parts of the universe, and if God 
be thought to be in them, then are the birds of more desert 

than men, seeing they must have their habitation nearer to 

Ps34, God. But, God is nigh, it is not said to the men of lofty 
stature, or to the inhabitants of the mountain tops; but, 

to the broken in heart. But as the sinner is called ‘ earth,’ 

Gen. 3, a8 earth thou art, and unto earth thou must return, so 
might the righteous on the other hand be called ‘ the heaven.’ 

Thus then it would be rightly said Who art in heaven, for 

there would seem to be as much difference spiritually be- 
tween the righteous and sinners, as locally, between heaven 

and earth. With the intent of signifying which thing it 

is, that we turn our faces in prayer to the east, not as though 

God was there only, deserting all other parts of the earth ; 

but that the mind may be reminded to turn itself to that 
nature which is more excellent, that is to God, when his 
body, which is of earth, is turned to the more excellent body 
which is of heaven. For it is desirable that. all, both small 

and great; should have right conceptions of God, and there- 

fore for such as cannot fix their thoughts on spiritual natures, 


VER. 10. ST. MATTHEW. 225 


it is better that they should think of God as being in heaven 
than in earth. 

Ava. Having named Him to whom prayer is made and Avg. 
where He dwells, let us now see what things they are for eee 
which we ought to pray. But the first of all the things that 
are prayed for is, Hallowed he thy name, not implying that 
the name of God is not holy, but that it may be held sacred 
of men; that is, that God may be so known that nothing 
may be esteemed more holy. Curys. Or; He bids us 
in praying beg that God may be glorified in our life; as 
if we were to say, Make us to live so that all things may 
glorify Thee through us. For hallowed signifies the same 
as glorified. It is a petition worthy to be made by man 
to God, to ask nothing before the glory of the Father, but to 
postpone all things to His praise. Cyprian; Otherwise, we Cypr. 
say this not as wishing for God to be made holy by our Paee 
prayers, but asking of Him for His name to be kept holy in 
us. For seeing He Himself has said, Be ye holy, for I also Lev. 20, 
am holy, it is this that we ask and request that we who have “’ 
been sanctified in Baptism, may persevere such as we have 
begun. Ava. But why is this perseverance asked of God, Aug. 
if, as the Pelagians say, it is not given by God? Is it not ino 
mocking petition to ask of God what we know is not given by 
Him, but is in the power of man himself to attain? CyPRIAN; Cypr. 
For this we daily make petition, since we need a daily *P- 
sanctification, in order that we who sin day by day, may 
cleanse afresh our offences by a continual sanctification. 


10. Thy kingdom come. 


Gross. It follows suitably, that after our adoption as sons, Gloss. 
we should ask a kingdom which is due to sons. AuG. This yo 
is not so said as though God did not now reign on earth, or Serm. in 
had not reigned over it always. Come, must therefore be ea 
taken for be manifested to men. For none shall then be 
ignorant of His kingdom, when His Only-begotten not in 
understanding only, but in visible shape shall come to judge 
the quick and dead. This day of judgment the Lord teaches 
shall then come, when the Gospel shall have been preached to 
all nations; which thing pertains to the hallowing of God’s 

VOL. I. Q 


226 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


name. JEROME; Hither it is a general prayer for the king- 
dom of the whole world that the reign of the Devil may 
cease; or for the kingdom in each of us that God may reign 
there, and that sin may not reign in our mortal body. 
rier ‘ Cyprian; Or; it is that kingdom which was promised to us 
"by God, and bought with Christ’s blood; that we who before 
in the world have been servants, may afterwards reign under 
Aug. the dominion of Christ. AuG. For the kingdom of God will 
rpist. come whether we desire it or not. But herein we kindle our 
’ “desires towards that kingdom, that it may come to us, and 
Cassian.that we may reign in it. Casstan; Or; because the Saint 
oe knows by the witness of his conscience, that when the 
kingdom of God shall appear, he shall be partaker therein. 
JEROME; But be it noted, that it comes of high con- 
fidence, and of an unblemished conscience only, to pray 
for the kingdom of God, and not to fear the judgment. 
Cypr. CypriaAN; The kingdom of God may stand for Christ 
sa Himself, whom we day by day wish to come, and for whose 
advent we pray that it may be quickly manifested to us. 
As He is our resurrection, because in Him we rise again, 
so may He be called the kingdom of God, because we are to 
reign in Him. Rightly we ask for God’s kingdom, that is, 
for the heavenly, because there is a kingdom of this earth 
beside. He, however, who has renounced the world, is 
superior to its honours and to its kingdom; and hence he 
who dedicates himself to God and to Christ, longs not for 
the kingdom of earth, but for the kingdom of Heaven. 
nue bs Auc. When they pray, Let thy kingdom come, what else 
Pers. 2, do they pray for who are already holy, but that they may 
persevere in that holiness they now have given unto them? 
For no otherwise will the kingdom of God come, than as 
it is certain it will come to those that persevere unto the 

end. 


Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. 


Aug. Ip. In that kingdom of blessedness the happy life will 
Sealy be made perfect in the Saints as it now is in the heavenly 
i. 6. Angels; and therefore after the petition, Thy kingdom come, 


follows, Thy will be done as tn heaven, so in earth. That 


VER. 10. ST. MATTHEW. 227 


is, as by the Angels who are in Heaven Thy will is done 

so as that they have fruition of Thee, no error clouding 
their knowledge, no pain marring their blessedness; so 

may it be done by Thy Saints who are on earth, and who, 

as to their bodies, are made of earth. So that, Thy will be 
done, is rightly understood as, ‘ Thy commands be obeyed ;’ 

as tn heaven, so in earth, that is, as by Angels, so by men; 

not that they do what God would have them do, but they do 
because He would have them do it; that is, they do after 

His will. Curys. See how excellently this follows; having 
taught us to desire heavenly things by that which He said, 

Thy kingdom come, before we come to Heaven He bids us 
make this earth into Heaven, in that saying, Thy will be done 

as in heaven, so in earth. JEROME; Let them be put to 
shame by this text who falsely affirm that there are daily 
falls in Heaven’. Auc. Or; as by the righteous, so ha 
sinners; as if He had said, As the righteous do Thy will, 4° shin sins 
so also may sinners; either by turning to Thee, or in 
receiving every man his just reward, which shall be in the 

last judgment. Or, by the heaven and the earth we may 
understand the spirit and the flesh. As the Apostle says, 

In my mind I obey the law of God, we see the will of God Rom. 7, 
done in the spirit. But in that change which is promised’ 
to the righteous there, Let thy will be done as in heaven, so in 
earth ; that is, as the spirit does not resist God, so let the 
body not resist the spirit. Or; as in heaven, so in earth, as 

in Christ Jesus Himself, so in His Church; as in the Man 
who did His Father's will, so in the woman who is espoused 

of Him. And heaven and earth may be suitably understood 

as husband and wife, seeing it is of the heaven that the earth 
brings forth her fruits. Cyprian; Weask not that God may Cypr. 
do His own will, but that we may be enabled to do what" ‘¥P- 
He wills should be done by us; and that it may be done in 

us we stand in need of that will, that is, of God’s aid and 
protection; for no man is strong by his own strength, but is 

safe in the indulgence and pity of God. CuHrys. For 


b There were various opinions inthe in Cyril. Hier. iii. 5. Huet. Origenian. 
first ages about the cecal and ii. 6.n. 16. Nat. Alex. in prim. mund. 
eae ection of good spirits, vid. Petav. et. Diss. 7. 

Angelis iii. 2, &c. Dissert. Bened. 


Q 2 


| Aug. 
De Don. 
Pers. 3. 


228 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. YI. 


virtue is not of our own efforts, but of grace from above. 
Here again is enjoined on each one of us prayer for the 
whole world, inasmuch as we are not to say, Thy will be 
done in me, or in us; but throughout the earth, that error 
may cease, truth be planted, malice be banished, and virtue 
return, and thus the earth not differ from heaven. AUvG. 
From this passage is clearly shewn against the Pelagians 
that the beginning of faith is God’s gift, when Holy Church 
prays for unbelievers that they may begin to have faith. 
Moreover, seeing it is done already in the Saints, why do 
they yet pray that it may be done, but that they pray that 
they may persevere in that they have begun to be? PsgEupo- 
Curys. These words, As in heaven so in earth, must be 
taken as common to all three preceding petitions. Observe 
also how carefully it is worded; He said not, Father, hallow 
Thy name in us, Let Thy kingdom come on us, Do Thy will 
in us. Nor again; Let us hallow Thy name, Let us enter 
into Thy kingdom, Let us do Thy will; that it should not 
seem to be either God’s doing only, or man’s doing only. 
But He used a middle form of speech, and the impersonal 
verb; for as man can do nothing good without God's 
aid, so neither does God work good in man unless man 
wills it. 


11. Give us this day our daily bread. 


Aua. These three things therefore which have been asked 


i, in the foregoing petitions, are begun here on earth, and 


according to our proficiency are increased in us; but in 
another life, as we hope, they shall be everlastingly possessed 
in perfection. In the four remaining petitions we ask for 
temporal blessings which are necessary to obtaining the 
eternal; the bread, which is accordingly the next petition in 
order, is a necessary. JEROME; The Greek word here 
which we render ‘ supersubstantialis,’ is éxovois. The 
LXX often make use of the word zepiovess, by which we 
find, on reference to the Hebrew, they always render the 
word sogola‘. Symmachus translates it é£aigeros, that is, 


€ TTDI on Ieudews vid. note c on Dogm. t. iv. pp. 200, 201. ed. Antwerp. 
Cyr. Cat. xxiii. 15. Tr. and Petav, 1700. 


VER. 11. 8ST. MATTHEW. 229 


‘chief,’ or ‘ excellent,’ though in one place he has inter- 
preted ‘ peculiar.’ When then we pray God to give us our 

‘ peculiar’ or ‘ chief’ bread, we mean Him who says in the 
Gospel, f am the living bread which came down from John 6, 
heaven. Cyprian; For Christ is the bread of life, and this Cypr. 
bread belongs not to all men, but to us. This bread we ¥>i sup. 
pray that it be given us day by day, lest we who are in 
Christ, and who daily receive the Eucharist for food of 
salvation, should by the admission of any grievous crime, 

and our being therefore forbidden the heavenly bread, be 
separated from the body of Christ. Hence then we pray, 

that we who abide in Christ, may not draw back from His 
sanctification and His body. Ave. Here then the saints Aug. 
ask for perseverance of God, when they pray that they may p°?% 
not be separated from the body of Christ, but may abide in 

that holiness, committing no crime. PsEupo-Curys*. Or by 

‘ supersubstantialis’ may be intended ‘ daily.” Casstan; In Cassian. 
that He says, tis day, He shews that it is to be daily taken, ti me: 
and that this prayer should be offered at all seasons, seeing 

there is no day on which we have not need, by the receiving 

of this bread, to confirm the heart of the inward man. AUG. Aug. | 
There is here a difficulty created by the circumstance of yi" 
there being many in the East, who do not daily communicate ii. 7. 
in the Lord’s Supper. And they defend their practice on 

the ground of ecclesiastical authority, that they do this with- 

out offence, and are not forbidden by those who preside over 

the Churches. But not to pronounce any thing concerning 

them in either way, this ought certainly to occur to our 
thoughts, that we have here received of the Lord a rule for 
prayer which we ought not to transgress. Who then will 

dare to affirm that we ought to use this prayer only once? 

Or if twice or thrice, yet only up to that hour at which 

we communicate on the Lord’s body? For after that we 
cannot say, Give us this day that which we have already 
received. Or will any one on this account be able to 
compel us to celebrate this sacrament at the close of the 

day? Casstan; Though the expression to-day may be Cassian. 
understood of this present life; thus, Give us this bread eas 


d Pseudo-Chrys. reads or translates the word ‘ supersubstantialis’ at all. . 
‘ quotidianus,’ he does not introduce 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
Mor. 
xxiv. 7, 


Aug. 
Fpist. 
130. 1). 


Aug. 
Serm. in 
Mont. 
in. 7. 


Aug. 
Epist. 
130. 6. 


230 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


while we abide in this world. JEROME; We may also inter- 
pret the word ‘ supersubstantialis’ otherwise, as that which 
is above all other substances, and more excellent than all 
creatures, to wit, the body of the Lord. Auac. Or by datly 
we may understand spiritual, namely, the divine precepts 
which we ought to meditate and work. Grec. We call 
it our bread, yet pray that it may be given us, for it is God’s 
to give, and is made ours by our receiving it. JEROME; 
Others understand it literally according to that saying of the 
Apostle, Having food and raiment, let us therewith be 
content, that the saints should have care only of present 
food; as it follows, Take no thought for the morrow. AvuG. 
So that herein we ask for a sufficiency of all things necessary 
under the one name of bread. Pseuno-Curys. We pray, 
Give us this day our daily bread, not only that we may 
have what to eat, which is common to both righteous and 
sinners; but that what we eat we may receive at the hand of 
God, which belongs only to the saints. For to him God 
giveth bread who carns it by righteous means; but to him 
who earns it by sin, the Devil it is that gives. Or that inas- 
much as it is given by God, it is received sanctified; and 
therefore He adds our, that is, such bread as we have 
prepared for us, that do Thou give us, that by Thy giving it 
may be sanctified. Like as the Priest taking bread of the 
laic, sanctifies it, and then offers it to him; the bread indeed 
is his that brought it in offering, but that it is sanctified 
is the benefit from the Priest. He says Our for two reasons. 
First, because all things that God gives us He gives through 
us to others, that of what we receive of Him we may impart 
to the helpless. Whoso then of what he gains by his own 

toil bestows nothing on others, eats not his own bread only, — 
but others’ bread also. Secondly, he who cats bread got 
righteously, eats his own bread; but he who eats bread got 
with sin, eats others’ bread. Auc. Some one may perhaps 
find a difficulty in our here praying that we may obtain 
necessarics of this life, such as food and raiment, when the 
Lord has instructed us, Be not ye careful what ye shall eat, 
or wherewithal ye shall be clothed. But it is impossible not 
to be careful about that for the obtaining which we pray. 
Ip. But to wish for the necessaries of life and no more, 


VER. 12. ST. MATTHEW. 231 


is not improper; for such sufficiency is not sought for its 
own sake, but for the health of the body, and for such garb 
and appliances of the person, as may make us to be not 
disagreeable to those with whom we have to live in all good 
reputation. For these things we may pray that they may be 
had when we are in want of them, that they may be kept 
when we have them. Curys. It should be thought upon 
how when He had delivered to us this petition, Thy will be 
done as in heaven so in earth, then because He spake to men in 
the flesh, and not like angelic natures without passion or 
appetite, He now descends to the needs of our bodies. And He 
teaches us to pray not for money or the gratification of lust, but 
for daily bread ; and as yet further restriction, He adds, this 
day, that we should not trouble ourselves with thought for 
the coming day. Psrupo-Curys. And these words at first 
_ sight might seem to forbid our having it prepared for the 
morrow, or after the morrow. If this were so, this prayer 
could only suit a few; such as the Apostles who travelled 
hither and thither teaching—or perhaps none among us, 
Yet ought we so to adapt Christ’s doctrine, that all men may 
profit in it. Cyprian; Justly therefore does the disciple of Cypr. 
Christ make petition for to-day’s provision, without indulging 14°" 
excessive longings in his prayer. It were a sclf-contradict- 
ing and incompatible thing for us who pray that the kingdom 
of God may quickly come, to be looking unto long life in 
the world below. Pseupo-Carys. Or; He adds, duily, 
that a man may eat so much only as natural reason requires, 
not as the lust of the flesh urges. For if you expend on 
one banquet as much as would suffice you for a hundred 
days, you are not eating to-day’s provision, but that of many 
days. JEROME; In the Gospel, entitled The Gospel accord- 
ing to the Hebrews, ‘ supersubstantialis’ is rendered ‘ mohar,’ 
that is ‘ to-morrow’s;’ so that the sense would be, Give us to- 
day to-morrow’s bread ; i. e. for the time to come. 


12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our 
debtors. 


Cyprian; After supply of food, next pardon of sin is asked Cypr. 
r. Vil. 


for, that he who is fed of God muy live in God, and not ys 


Mat. 18, 
32, 


Aug. 
De Don. 
Pers. 5. 


Cypr. 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
Moe x. 
15. 
Aug. 
Serm. io 
Mont. ii. 
8. 


232 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


only the present and passing life be provided for, but the 
eternal also; whereunto we may come, if we receive the 
pardon of our sins, to which the Lord gives the name of 
debts, as he speaks further on, J foryave thee all that debt, 
because thou desiredst me. How well is it for our need, how 
provident and saving a thing, to be reminded that we are 
sinners compelled to make petition for our offences, so that 
in claiming God's indulgence, the mind is recalled to a 
recollection of its guilt. That no man may plume himself 
with the pretence of innocency, and perish more wretchedly 
through self-exaltation, he is instructed that he commits sin 
every day by being commanded to pray for his sins. AUG. 
With this weapon the Pelagian heretics received their death- 
blow, who dare to say that a righteous man is free altogether 
from sin in this life, and that of such is at this present time 
composed a Church, having neither spot nor wrinkle. 
Curys. That this prayer is meant for the faithful, both the 
laws of the Church teach, and the beginning of the prayer 
which instructs us to call God Father. In thus bidding the 
faithful pray for forgiveness of sin, He shews that even after 
baptism sin can be remitted (against the Novatians.) Cyprian; 
He then who taught us to pray for our sins, has promised us 
that His fatherly mercy and pardon shall ensue. But He 
has added a rule besides, binding us under the fixed con- 
dition and responsibility, that we are to ask for our sins to 
be forgiven in such sort as we forgive them that are in debt 
to us. GrReEG. That good which in our penitence we ask of 
God, we should first turn and bestow on our neighbour. 
Aua. This is not said of debts of money only, but of all 
things in which any sins against us, and among these also of 
money, because that he sins against you, who does not 
return money duc to you, when he has whence he can return 
it. Unless you forgive this sin you cannot say, Forgive us 
our debts, as we forgive our debtors. PsEupo-Curys. With 
what hope then does he pray, who cherishes hatred against 
another by whom he has been wronged? As he prays with 
a falsehood on his lips, when he says, I forgive, and does 
not forgive, so he asks indulgence of God, but no indulgence 
is granted him. There are many who, being unwilling to 
forgive thosc that trespass against them, will not use this 


VER. 18. ST. MATTHEW. 2338 


prayer. How foolish! First, because he who does not pray 

in the manner Christ taught, is not Christ’s disciple; and 
secondly, because the Father does not readily hear any 
prayer which the Son has not dictated; for the Father 
knows the intention and the words of the Son, nor will He 
entertain such petitions as human presumption has suggested, 

but only those which Christ’s wisdom has set forth. Aug. Avg. 
Forasmuch as this so great goodness, namely, to forgive aa ee 
debts, and to love our enemies, cannot be possessed by so 
great a number as we suppose to be heard in the use of this 
prayer; without doubt the terms of this stipulation are ful- 
filled, though one have not attained to such proficiency as 

to love his enemy; yet if when he is requested by one, who 

has trespassed against him, that he would forgive him, he 

do forgive him from his heart; for he himself desires to be 
forgiven then at least when he asks forgiveness. And if one 
have been moved by a sense of his sin to ask forgiveness of 
him against whom he has sinned, he is no more to be thought 

on as an enemy, that there should be any thing hard in 
loving him, as there was when he was in active enmity. 


13. And lead us not into temptation. 


Pseupo-Curys. As He had above put many high things 
into men’s mouths, teaching them to call God their Father, 
to pray that His kingdom might come; so now He adds a 
lesson of humility, when He says, and lead us not into 
temptation. AuG. Some copies read, Carry us not', an Aug. 
equivalent word, both being a translation of one Greek St 
word, sicevéyxys. Many in interpreting say, ‘Suffer us notii.9. 
to be led into temptation,’ as being what is implied in ee 
the word lead. For God does not of Himself lead a man, 
but suffer him to be led from whom He has withdrawn 
His aid. Cyprian; Herein it is shewn that the adver- Cypr. 
sary can nothing avail against us, unless God first permit 17, ne 
him; so that all our fear and devotion ought to be ad- 
dressed to God. Avuc. But it is one thing to be led into Aug. 

‘ . - __ ubi sup. 

temptation, another to be tempted; for without temptation 
none can be approved, either to himself or to another; but 
every man is fully known to God before all trial. Therefore 


Aug. 
Epist. 


130, 11. 


Cypr. 


ubi sup. 


Aug. 
De Don. 
Pers. 5. 


234 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


we do not here pray that we may not be tempted, but that 
we may not be led into temptation. As if one who was to be 
burnt alive should pray not that he should not be touched by 
fire, but that he should not be burnt. For we are then led 
into temptation when such temptations befal us as we are not 
able to resist. Auc. When then we say, Lead us not into 
temptation, what we ask is, that we may not, deserted by 
His aid, either consent through the subtle snares, or yield to 
the forcible might, of any temptation. Cyprian; And in so 
praying we are cautioned of our own infirmity and weakness, 
lest any presumptuously exalt himself; that while a humble 
and submissive confession comes first, and all is referred to 
God, whatever we suppliantly apply for may by His gracious 
favour be supplied. AuG. When the Saints pray, Lead us 
not into temptation, what else do they pray for than that they 
may persevere in their sanctity. This once granted—and 
that it is God’s gift this, that of Him we ask it, shews—none 
of the Saints but holds to the end his abiding holiness ; for 
none ceases to hold on his Chmistian profession, till he be 
first overtaken of temptation. Therefore we seek not to be 
led into temptation that this may not happen to us; and if it 
does not happen, it is God that does not permit it to happen; 
for there is nothing done, but what He either does, or suffers 
to be done. He is therefore able to turn our wills from evil 
to good, to raise the fallen and to direct him into the way 
that is pleasing to Himself, to whom not in vain we plead, 
Lead us not into temptation. For whoso is not led into 
temptation of his own evil will, is free of all temptation ; for, 


Jamesi1,each man is tempted of his own lust. God would have us 


14. 


Aug. 


ubi sup. 


pray to Him that we may not be led into temptation, though 
He could have granted it without our prayer, that we might 
be kept in mind who it is from whom we receive all benefits. 
Let the Church therefore observe her daily prayers; she 
prays that the unbelieving may believe, therefore it is God 
that turns men to the faith ; she prays that the believers may 
persevere ; God gives them perseverance even unto the end. 


But deliver us from evil. Amen. 


Aug. We ought to pray not only that we may not be led 


VER. 13. ST. MATTHEW. 235 


into evil from which we are at present free; but further that 

we may be set free from that into which we have already 

been led. Therefore it follows, Deliver us from evil. 
Cyprian; After all these preceding petitions at the con- Cypr. 
clusion of the prayer comes a sentence, comprising shortly 14°" 
and collectively the whole of our petitions and desires. For 

there remains nothing beyond for us to ask for, after petition 

made for God’s protection from evil; for that gained, we 
stand secure and safe against all things that the Devil and 

the world work against us. What fear hath he from this 

life, who has God through life for his guardian? Ava. This Aug. 
petition with which the Lord’s Prayer concludes is of such i a 
extent, that a Christian man in whatever tribulation cast, will 

in this petition utter groans, in this shed tears, here begin and 

here end his prayer. And therefore follows Amen, by which is 
expressed the strong desire of him that prays. JEROME; 
Amen, which appears here at the close, is the seal of the 
Lord’s Prayer. Aquila rendered ‘ faithfully—we may per- 

haps ‘ truly... Cyprian; We need not wonder, dearest Cypr. 
brethren, that this is God’s prayer, seeing how His instruction" *"?’ 
comprises all our petitioning, in one saving sentence. This 

had already been prophesied by Isaiah the Prophet, A short Is. 10, 
cord will God make in the whole earth. For when our’” 
Lord Jesus Christ came unto all, and gathering together the 
learned alike and the unlearned, did to every sex and age sct 

forth the precepts of salvation, He made a full compendium 

of His instructions, that the memory of the scholars might 

not labour in the heavenly discipline, but accept with 
readiness whatsoever was necessary into a simple faith. - 
Auc. And whatever other words we may use, either intro- Aug. 
ductory to quicken the affections, or in conclusion to add to Ho 12. 
them, we say nothing more than is contained in the Lord’s 
Prayer if we pray rightly and connectedly. For he who 
says, Glorify thyself in all nations, as thou art glorified Ecclus. 
among us, what else docs he say than, Hallowed be thy? 
name? "We who prays, Shew thy face and we shall be safe, t Ps. 80, 
what is it but to say, Let thy kingdom come? To say, Dir ect Ps, 119, 
my steps according to thy word, what is it more than, Thy 133. 
will be done? To say, Give me neither poverty nor riches, Prov. 
what else is it than, Give us this day our daily bread? pore: 


236 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


Ps.131, Lord, remember Darid and all his mercifulness! and, 
ae 7,4.4f L have returned evil for evil, what else but, Forgive 
us our debts even as we forgive our debtors? He who 

says, Remove far from me all greediness of belly, what 

else does he say, but Lead us not into temptation? 

Ps.59, He who says, Save me, O my God, from my enemies, 
what else does he say but Deliver us from evil? And if you 

thus go through all the words of the holy prayers, you will 

find nothing that is not contained in the Lord’s Prayer. 
Whoever then speaks such words as have no relation to this 
evangelic prayer, prays carnally ; and such prayer I know 

not why we should not pronounce unlawful, seeing the Lord 
instructs those who are born again only to pray spiritually. 

But whoso in prayer says, Lord, increase my riches, add 

to my honours; and that from desire of such things, not 

with a view to doing men service after God’s will by such 
things; I think that he finds nothing in the Lord’s Prayer on 
which he may build such petitions. Let such an one then 

be withheld by shame from praying for, if not from desiring, 

such things. But if he have shame at the desire, yet desire 
overcomes, he will do better to pray for deliverance from the 

evil of desire to Him to whom we say, Deliver us from evil. 

Aug. In. This number of petitions seems to answer to the seven-fold 
serm-!2 number of the beatitudes. If it is the fear of God by which 
ii. 11. are made blessed the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom 
of heaven, let us ask that the name of God be hallowed 
among men, a reverent fear abiding for ever and ever. If it 

be piety by which the meek are blessed, \et us pray that His 

- kingdom may come, that we may become meek, and not 
resist Him. If it be knowledge by which they that mourn 

are blessed, let us pray that His will may be done as in 
heaven so in earth; for if the body consent with the spirit as 

does earth with heaven, we shall not mourn. If fortitude be 

that by which they that hunger are blessed, let us pray that 

our daily bread be this day given us, by which we may come 

to full saturity. If it is counsel by which blessed are the 
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, let us forgive debts, 

that our debts may be forgiven us. If it be understanding 

by which they of pure heart are blessed, let us pray that we 

be not led into temptation, lest we have a double heart 


VER. 14,15. ST. MATTHEW. 237 


in the pursuit of temporal and earthly things which are for 
our probation. If it be wisdom by which blessed are the 
peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God, let 
us pray to be delivered from evil; for that very deliverance 
will make us free as sons of God. Curys. Having made us 
anxious by the mention of our enemy, in this that He has 
said Deliver us from evil, He again restores confidence by 
that which is added in some copies, For thine is the kingdom, 
and the power, and the glory, since if His be the kingdom, 
none need fear, since even he who fights against us, must be 
His subject. But since His power and glory are infinite, He 
can not only deliver from evil, but also make glorious. 
Pseupo-Curys. This is also connected with the foregoing. 
Thine is the kingdom has reference to Thy kingdom come, 
that none should therefore say, God has no kingdom on 
earth. The power, answers to Thy will be done, as in 
earth so in heaven, that none should say thereon that God 
canuot perform whatever He would. dnd the glory, answers 
to all that follows, in which God’s glory is shewn forth. 


14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your 
heavenly Father will also forgive you: 

15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, 
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. 


RaBan. By the word Amen, He shews that without 
doubt the Lord will bestow all things that are rightly asked, 
and by those that do not fail in observing the annexed 
condition, For if ye forgive men thetr sins, your heavenly 
Father will also forgive you your sins. Avuc. Here we Avg. — 
should not overlook that of all the petitions enjoined by the wee as 
Lord, He judged that most worthy of further enforcement, ii. 11. 
which relates to forgiveness of sins, in which He would have 
us merciful; which is the only means of escaping misery. 
Pszeupo-Curys. He does not say that God will first forgive 
us, and that we should after forgive our debtors. For God 
knows how treacherous the heart of man is, and that though 
they should have received forgiveness themselves, yet they 
do not forgive their debtors; therefore He instructs us first 


Aug. 
Enchir. 
74. 


Cypr. 
Tr. vil. 
16. 


Ps. 83, 
6. 7. 


238 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


to forgive, and we shall be forgiven after. AtG. Whoever 
does not forgive him that in true sorrow seeks forgiveness, 
let him not suppose that his sins are by any means forgiven 
of the Lord. Cyprian; For no excuse will abide you in the 
day of judgment, when you will be judged by your own 
sentence, and as you have dealt towards others, will be dealt 
with yourself. JEROME; But if that which is written, J said, 
Ye are gods, but ye shall die like men, is said to those who 
for their sins deserve to become men instead of gods, then 
they to whom sins are forgiven are rightly called men. 
Cuarys. He mentions heaven and the Father to claim our 
attention, for nothing so likens you to God, as to forgive him 
who has injured you. And it were indced unmeet should 
the son of such a Father become a slave, and should one 
who has a heavenly vocation live as of this earth, and of this 
life only. 


16. Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypo- 
crites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their 
faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily 
I say unto you, They have their reward. 


Pszupo-Curys. Forasmuch as that prayer which is 
offered in a humble spirit and contrite heart, shews a 
mind already strong and disciplined; whereas he who 
is sunk in self-indulgence cannot have a humble spirit 
and contrite heart; it is plain that without fasting prayer 
must be faint and feeble; therefore, when any would pray 
for any need in which they might be, they joined fasting 
with prayer, because it is an aid thereof. Accordingly the 
Lord, after His doctrine respecting prayer, adds doctrine 
concerning fasting, saying, When ye fast, be not ye as the 
hypocrites, of sad countenance. The Lord knew that vanity 
may spring from every good thing, and therefore bids us 
root out the bramble of vain-gloriousness which springs in 
the good soil, that it choke not the fruit of fasting. For 
though it cannot be that fasting should not be discovered in 
any one, yet is it better that fasting should shew you, than 
that you should shew your fasting. But it is impossible 


VER. 16. ST. MATTHEW. 239 


that any in fasting should be gay, therefore He said not, Be 

not sad, but Be not made sad; for they who discover them- 
selves by any false displays of their affliction, they are not 

sad, but make themselves; but he who is naturally sad in 
consequence of continued fasting, does not make himself sad, 

but is so. JgROME; The word exterminare, so often used 

in the ecclesiastical Scriptures through a blunder of the 
translators, has a quite different meaning from that in which 

it is commonly understood. It is properly said of exiles 

who are sent beyond the boundary of their country. Instead 

of this word, it would seem better to use the word demolirt, 

‘ to destroy,’ in translating the Greek agavigev. The hypo- 

crite destroys his face, in order that he may feign sorrow, 

and with a heart full of joy wears sorrow in his countenance. 
Greco. For by the pale countenance, the trembling limbs, Greg. 
and the bursting sighs, and by all so great toil and trouble, \°"%44 
nothing is in the mind but the esteem of men. LEo; But Leo, 
that fasting is not pure, that comes not of reasons of conti- Sa 
nence, but of the arts of deceit. Pszupo-Curys. If then heiv. 5. 
who fasts, and makes himself of sad countenance, is a hypo- 
crite, how much more wicked is he who does not fast, yet 
assumes a fictitious paleness of face as a token of fasting. 
Ava. On this paragraph it is to be specially noted, that not Aug. — 
only in outward splendor and pomp, but even in the dress of $'™. 
sorrow and mourning, is there room for display, and that theii. 12. 
more dangerous, inasmuch as it deceives under the name of 
God’s services. For he who by inordinate pains taken with 

his person, or his apparel, or by the glitter of his other 
equipage, is distinguished, is easily proved by these very 
circumstances to be a follower of the pomps of this world, 

and no man is deceived by any semblance of a feigned 
sanctity in him. But when any one in the profession of 
Christianity draws men’s eyes upon him by unwonted beggary 

and slovenliness in dress, if this be voluntary and not com- 
pulsory, then by his other conduct may be scen whether he 

does this to be seen of men, or from contempt of the refine- 
ments of dress. Remic. The reward of the hypocrites’ fast 

is shewn, when it is added, That they may seem to men to 
fast ; verily I say unto you, They have their reward; that is, 

that reward for which they looked. 


240 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


17. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, 
and wash thy face ; 

18. That thou appear not unto men to fast, but 
unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, 
which seeth in secret, shal] reward thee openly. 


Gloss. |§ Gross. The Lord having taught us what we ought not to 
oe do, now proceeds to teach us what we ought to do, saying, 
When thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face. 
Aug. Ava. A question is here wont to be raised; for none surely 
ub sP- would literally enjoin, that, as we wash our faces from daily 
habit, so we should have our heads anointed when we fast; 
a thing which all allow to be most disgraceful. PsEupo- 
Curys. Also if He bade us not to be of sad countenance 
that we might not seem to men to fast, yet if anointing of 
the head and washing of the face are always observed in 
fasting, they will become tokens of fasting. JEROME; But 
He speaks in accordance with the manners of the province 
of Palestine, where it is the custom on festival days to 
anoint the head. What He enjoins then is, that when we 
are fasting we should wear the appearance of joy and glad- 
ness. Pseupo-Curys. Therefore the simple interpretation 
of this is, that is added as an hyperbolical explanation of 
the command; as though He had said, Yea, so far should 
ye be from any display of your fasting, that if it might be 
(which yet it may not be) so done, ye should even do such 
ory things as are tokens of luxury and feasting. CuHurys. In alms- 
xx. giving indeed, He did not say simply, ‘Do not your alms 
before men,’ but added, ‘ to be seen of them.’ But in fasting 
and prayer He added nothing of this sort; because alms 
cannot be so done as to be altogether hid, fasting and prayer 
can be so done. The contempt of men’s praise is no small 
fruit, for thereby we are freed from the heavy slavery of 
human opinion, and become properly workers of virtue, 
loving it for itself and not for others. For as we esteem it 
an affront if we are loved not for ourselves but for others’ 
sake, so ought we not to follow virtue on the account of 
these men, nor to obey God for men’s sake but for His own. 
Therefore it follows here, But to thy Father which seeth tn 


VER. 17, 18. ST. MATTHEW. 241 


secret. GtLoss. That is, to thy heavenly Father, who is un- Gloss. 
seen, or who dwells in the heart through faith. He fasts to 
God who afflicts himself for the love of God, and bestows on 
others what he denies himself. Remiac. For it is enough for 
you that He who sees your conscience should be your 
rewarder. Psrupo-Curys. Spiritually interpreted—the face 
may be understood to mean the mental conscience. And as 
in the eyes of man a fair face has grace, so in the eyes of 
God a pure conscience has favour. This face the hypocrites, 
fasting on man’s account, disfigure, seeking thereby to cheat 
both God and man; for the conscience of the sinner is 
' always wounded. If then you have cast out all wickedness 
from your heart, you have washed your conscience, and fast 
well. Leo; Fasting ought to be fulfilled not in abstinence Leo. 
of food only, but much more in cutting off vices. For when sonata 
we submit ourselves to that discipline in order to withdraw vi. 2. 
that which is the nurse of carnal desires, there is no sort of 
good conscience more to be sought than that we should 
keep ourselves sober from unjust will, and abstinent from 
dishonourable action. This is an act of religion from which 
the sick are not excluded, seeing integrity of heart may be 
found in an infirm body. Psrvupo-Curys. Spiritually again, 
thy head denotes Christ. Give the thirsty drink and feed 
the hungry, and therein you have anointed your head, that 
is, Christ, who cries out in the Gospel, Jn that ye have done Mat. 25 
this to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to‘ 
me. GREG. For God approves that fasting, which before Greg. 
His eyes opens the hands of alms. This then that you deny mo i. 
yourself, bestow on another, that wherein your flesh is6. 
afflicted, that of your needy neighbour may be refreshed. 
Ave. Or; by the head we mghtly understand the reason, Aug. 
because it is preeminent in the soul, and rules the other™! *P- 
members of the man. Now anointing the head has some 
reference to rejoicing. Let him therefore joy within himself 
because of his fasting, who in fasting turns himself from 
doing the will of the world, that he may be subject to Christ. 
Goss. Behold how every thing in the New Testament is Gloss. 
not to be taken literally. It were ridiculous to be smeared 
with oil when fasting ; but it is behoveful for the mind to be 
anointed with the spirit of His love, in whose sufferings we 

VOL. I. R 


242 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VI. 


ought to partake by afflicting ourselves. Psrupo-CHrys. 
And truly we ought to wash our face, but to anoint, and not 
to wash, our head. For as long as we are in the body, our 
conscience is foul with sin. But Christ who is our head 
has done no sin. 


19. Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon 
earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where 
thieves break through and steal : 

20. But lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where 
thieves do not break through nor steal : 

21. For where your treasure is, there will your 
heart be also. 


Curys. When He has driven away the disease of vanity, 

He does well to bring in speech of contempt of riches. 

For there is no greater cause of desire of money than love of 
praise ; for this men desire troops of slaves, horses accoutred 

in gold, and tables of silver, not for use or pleasure, but that 

they may be seen of many; therefore He says, Lay not up 

Aug. for yourselves treasure on earth. AuG. For if any does a 
Serm. 10 ork with the mind of gaining thereby an earthly good, how 
i. 13. will his heart be pure while it is thus walking on earth? 
For any thing that is mingled with an inferior nature is 
polluted therewith, though that inferior be in its kind pure. 

Thus gold is alloyed when mixed with pure silver; and in 

like manner our mind is defiled by lust of earthly things, 
though earth is in its own kind pure. PsEupo-CHrys. Other- 

wise; As the Lord had above taught nothing concerning 

alms, or prayer, or fasting, but had only checked a pretence 

of them, He now procecds to deliver a doctrine of three 
portions, according to the division which He had _ before 
made, in this order. First, a counsel that alms should be 
done ; second, to shew the benefit of almsgiving; third, that 

the fear of poverty should be no hindrance to our purpose of 
almsgiving. Cuyrys. Saying, Lay not up for yourselves 
treasure on earth, He adds, where rust and moth destroy, 

in order to shew the insecurity of that treasure that is here, 


VER. 19—2I1., ST. MATTHEW. 243 


and the advantage of that which is in Heaven, both from 
the place, and from those things which harm. As though 
He had said; Why fear you that your wealth should be 
consumed, if you should give alms? Yea rather give alms, 
and they shall receive increase, for those treasures that are in 
Heaven shall be added to them, which treasures perish if ye 
do not give alms. He said not, You leave them to others, 
for that is pleasant to men. RasBan. Here are three precepts Raban. 
according to the three different kinds of wealth. Metals are eae 
destroyed by rust, clothes by moth; but as there are other 
things which fear neither rust nor ai as precious stones, 
He therefore names a common damage, that by thieves, who 
may rob wealth of all kinds. *Psrupo-Curys. Another 
reading 1s, Where moth and banqueting consume. For a 
threefold destruction awaits all the goods of this life. They 
either decay and are eaten of moths as cloth; or are consumed 
by their master’s luxurious living; or are plundered by 
strangers, either by violence, or pilfering, or false accusation, 
or some other unjust doing. For all may be called thieves 
who hasten by any unlawful means to make other men’s 
goods their own. But you will say, Do all who have these 
things, perforce lose them ? I would answer by the way, that 
if all do not, yet many do. But ill-hoarded wealth, you 
have lost spiritually if not actually, because it profits you 
not to your salvation. Rapan. Allegorically; Rust denotes 
pride which obscures the brightness of virtue. Moth which 
privily eats out garments, is jealousy which frets into good 
intention, and destroys the bond of unity. Thieves denote 
heretics and demons, who are ever on the watch to rob men 
of their spiritual treasure. HiLtary; But the praise of 
Heaven is eternal, and cannot be carried off by invading 
thief, nor consumed by the moth and rust of envy. Auc. By Aug. 
heaven in this place I understand not the material heavens, ve" '* 
for every thing that has a body is earthly. But it behoves#- 13. 
that the whole world be despised by him who lays up his 
treasure in that Heaven, of whieh it is said, The heaven of Fs Ps. 115, 
heavens 1s the Lord’s, that is, in the spiritual firmament. 
For heaven and earth shall pass away; but we ought not to Mat. 24, 
place our treasure in that which passes away, but in that ‘tik 

* Pseudo-Chrys. reads ‘ comestura.’ 


R2 


244 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


which abides for ever. Pseupo-Carys. Which then 1s 
better? To place it on earth where its security is doubtful, 
or in Heaven where it will be certainly preserved? What 
folly to leave it in this place whence you must soon depart, 
and not to send it before you thither, whither you are to gof 
Therefore place your substance there where your country is. 
Curys. But forasmuch as not every earthly treasure 1s 
destroyed by rust or moth, or carried away by thieves, He 
therefore brings in another motive, For where your treasure 
is, there will your heart be also. Asmuchas to say; Though 
none of these former losses should befal you, you will yet 
sustain no small loss by attaching your affections to things 
beneath, and becoming a slave to them, and in falling from 
Heaven, and being unable to think of any lofty thing. 
JEROME; This must be understood not of money only, but of 
all our possessions. The god of a glutton is his belly; of a 
lover his lust; and so every man serves that to which he is 
in bondage; and has his heart there where his treasure 1s. 
PsEupo-Curyrs. Otherwise; He now teaches the benefit of 
almsgiving. He who places his treasure on earth has 
nothing to look for in Heaven; for why should he look up 
to Heaven where he has nothing laid up for himself? Thus 
he doubly sins; first, because he gathers together things 
evil ; secondly, because he has his heart in earth ; and so on 
the contrary he does right in a twofold manner who lays up 
his treasure in Heaven. 


22. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore 
thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of 
light. 

23. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall 
be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in 
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! 


Curys. Having spoken of the bringing the understanding 
into captivity because it was not easy to be understood of 
many, He transfers it to a sensible instance, saying, Zhe light 
of thy body is thy eye. As though He had said, If you do 
not know what is meant by the loss of the understanding, 


VER. 22, 23. ST. MATTHEW. 245 


learn a parable of the bodily members; for what the eye is 
to the body, that the understanding is to the soul. As by 
the loss of the eyes we lose much of the use of the other 
limbs, so when the understanding is corrupted, your life is 
filled with many evils. JERoME; This is an illustration 
drawn from the senses. As the whole body is in darkness, 
where the eye is not single, so if the soul has lost her 
original brightness, every sense, or that whole part of the 
soul to which sensation belongs, will abide in darkness. 
Wherefore He says, If then the light which is in thee be 
darkness, how great is that darkness! that is, if the senses 
which are the soul’s light be darkened by vice, in how great 
darkness do you suppose the darkness itself will be wrap- 
ped? Pseupo-Curys. It seems that He is not here speaking 
of the bodily eye, or of the outward body that is seen, or He 
would have said, If thine eye be sound, or weak; but He 
says, single, and, evil. But if one have a benign yet diseased 
eye, 18 his body therefore in light? Or if an evil yet a sound, 
is his body therefore in darkness? JEROME; Those who 
have thick eye-sight see the lights multiplied ; but the single 
and clear eye sees them single and clear. Curys. Or; The 
eye Ife speaks of is not the external but the internal eye. 
The light is the understanding, through which the soul sees 
God. He whose heart is turned to God, has an eye full of 
light; that is, his understanding is pure, not distorted by 
the influence of worldly lusts. The darkness in us is our 
bodily senses, which always desire the things that pertain 
to darkness. Whoso then has a pure eye, that is, a spiritual 
understanding, preserves his body in light, that is, without 
sin; for though the flesh desires evil, yet by the might of 
divine fear the soul resists it. But whoever has an eye, that 
is, an understanding, either darkened by the influence of the 
malignant passions, or fouled by evil lusts, possesses his 
body in darkness; he does not resist the flesh when it lusts 
after evil things, because he has no hope in Heaven, which 
hope alone gives us the strength to resist desire. HILARY ; 
Otherwise ; from the office of the light of the eye, He 
calls it the light of the heart; which if it continue single and 
brilliant, will confer on the body the brightness of the eternal 
light, and pour again into the corrupted flesh the splendor of 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Col.3, 5. 


Aug. 
cont. 
Mendac. 
7. 


Greg. 
Mor. 
XXVill. 
ll. 


Remig. 


ci 
loss. 


ord. 
Ps. 119, 


246 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


its origin, that is, in the resurrection. But if it be obscured — 
by sin, and evil in will, the bodily nature will yet abide 
subject to all the evils of the understanding. Aue. Other- 
wise; by the eye here we may understand our purpose; if 
that be pure and right, all our works which we work 
according thereto are good. These He here calls the body, 
as the Apostle speaks of certain works as members; Mortz/y 
your members, fornication and uncleanness. We should look 
then, not to what a person does, but with what mind he 
does it. For this is the light within us, because by this we 
see that we do with good intention what we do. For all 
which doth make manifest is light. But the deeds them- 
selves, which go forth to men’s society, have a result to 
us uncertain, and therefore He calls them darkness; as 
when I give money to one in need, I know not what he will 
do with it. If then the purport of your heart, which you can 
know, is defiled with the lust of temporal things, much more 
is the act itself, of which the issue is uncertain, defiled. 
For even though one should reap good of what you do with 
@ purport not good ; it will be imputed to you as you did it, 
not as it resulted to him. If however our works are done 
with a single purport, that is with the aim of charity, then 
are they pure and pleasing in God’s sight. Aue. But acts 
which are known to be in themselves sins, are not to be done 
as with a good purpose; but such works only as are either 
good or bad, according as the motives from which they are 
done are either good or bad, and are not in themselves sins ; 
as to give food to the poor is good if it be done from merciful 
motives, but evil if it be done from ostentation. But such 
works as are in themselves sins, who will say that they are 
to be done with good motives, or that they are not sins? 
Who would say, Let us rob the rich, that we may have to 
give to the poor? Grea. Otherwise; if the light that zs in 
thee, that is, if what we have begun to do well, we overcloud 
with evil purpose, when we do things which we know to be 
in themselves evil, how great is the darkness! Remia. 
Otherwise; faith is likened to a light, because by it the 
goings of the inncr man, that is, action, are lightened, that he 
should not stumble according to that, Thy word is a light to 
my feet. If that then be pure and single, the whole body is 


VER. 24. ST. MATTHEW. 247 


light; but if defiled, the whole body will be dark. Yet 
otherwise; by the light may be understood the ruler of the 
Church, who may be well called the eye, as he it is that 
ought to see that wholesome things be provided for the 
people under him, which are understood by the body. If 
then the ruler of the Church err, how much more will the 
people subject to him err? 


24. No man can serve two masters: for either 
he will hate the one, and love the other; or else 
he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon. 


Psrvupo-Curys. The Lord had said above, that he that has 
a spiritual mind is able to keep his body free from sin; and 
that he who has not, is not able. Of this He here gives the 
reason, saying, No man cun serve two masters. GLOSS. Gloss. 
Otherwise; it had been declared above, that good things"" °° 
become evil, when done with a worldly purpose. It might 
therefore have been said by some one, I will do good works 
from worldly and heavenly motives at once. Against this 
the Lord says, No man can serve two masters. Curys. Or Chrys. 
otherwise ; in what had gone before He had restrained the ae 
tyranny of avarice by many and weighty motives, but He 
now adds yet more. Riches do not only harm us in that 
they arm robbers against us, and that they cloud our under- 
standing, but they moreover turn us away from God’s 
service. This He proves from familiar notions, saying, No 
man can serve two masters; two, He means, whose orders are 
contrary ; for concord makes one of many. This is proved 
by what follows, for ether he will hate the one. He men- 
tions two, that we may see that change for the better is easy. 
For if one were to give himself up in despair as having been 
made a slave to riches, namely, by loving them, he may 
hence learn, that it is possible for him to change into a 
better service, namely, by not submitting to such slavery, but 
by despising it. Gross. Or; He seems to allude to two Gloss. 
different kinds of servants; one kind who serve freely for” 
Jove, another who serve servilely from fear. If then one 


248 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI 


serve two masters of contrary character from love, it must be 
that he hate the one; if from fear, while he trembles before 
the one, he must despise the other. But as the world or 
God predominate in a man’s heart, he must be drawn 
contrary ways; for God draws him who serves Him to 
things above; the earth draws to things beneath ; therefore 
He concludes, Ye cannot serve God and mammon. JEROME; 
Mammon—riches are so termed in Syriac. Let the covetous 
man who is called by the Christian name, hear this, that he 
cannot serve both Christ and riches. Yet He said not, 
he who has riches, but, he who is the servant of riches. 
For he who is the slave of money, guards his money as 
a slave; but he who has thrown off the yoke of his slavery, 
Gloss, dispenses them as a master. GLoss. By mammon is meant 
ord. the Devil, who is the lord of money, not that he can bestow 
them unless where God wills, but because by means of them 
ALE _he deceives men. Ava. Whoso serves mammon, (that is, 
Mont, Tiches,) verily serves him, who, being for desert of his 
ii. 14. perversity set over these things of earth, is called by the 
Lord, The prince of this world. Or otherwise; who the two 
masters are He shews when He says, Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon, that is to say, God and the Devil. Either 
then man zill hate the one, and love the other, namely God ; 
or, he will endure the one and despise the other. For he 
who is mammon’s servant enduresahard master; for ensnared 
by his own lust he has been made subject to the Devil, and 
loves him not. As one whose passions have connected him 
with another man’s handmaid, suffers a hard slavery, yet 
loves not him whose handmaid he loves. But He said, eld 
despise, and not will hate, the other, for none can with a 
right conscience hate God. But he despises, that is, fears 
Him not, as being certain of His goodness. 


25. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for 
your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; 
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not 
the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? 

Aug. 2 Auc. The Lord had taught above, that whoso desires to 


Mont. love God, and to take heed not to offend, should not think 
ii. 18. 


VER. 25. ST. MATTHEW. 249 


that he can serve two masters; lest though perhaps he may 

not look for superfluities, yet his heart may become double 

for the sake of very necessaries, and his thoughts bent to 
obtain them. Therefore I say unto you, Be not ye careful for 

your ‘life what ye shall eat, or for your body what ye shall puxr 
put on. Curys. He does not hereby mean that the 'spint 
needs food, for it is incorporeal, but He speaks according to 
common usage, for the soul cannot remain in the body 
unless the body be fed. Auc. Or we may understand the Aug. 
soul in this place to be put for the animal life. Jerome; ubi sup. 
Some MSS. add here, nor what ye shall drink’. That which 
belongs naturally to all animals alike, to brutes and beasts 

of burden as well as to man, from all thought of this we are 

not freed. But we are bid not to be anxious what we 
should eat, for in the sweat of our face we earn our bread ; 

the toil is to be undergone, the anxiety put away. This 

Be not careful, is to be taken of bodily food and clothing; 

for the food and clothing of the spirit it becomes us to be 
always careful. Aug. There are certain heretics called Aug. De 
Euchite‘, who hold that a monk may not do any work even B™* 
for his support; who embrace this profession that they 

may be freed from necessity of daily labour. Auc. For they Aug. 
say the Apostle did not speak of personal labour, such as Noa, 
that of husbandmen or craftsmen, when he said, Who will not \ et seq. 
work, neither let him eat. For he could not be so contrary 3 cite 
to the Gospel where it is said, Therefore I say unto you, Be 

not careful. Therefore in that saying of the Apostle we are 

to understand spiritual works, of which it is elsewhere said, 

I have planted, Apollos watereth. And thus they think them- 1 Cor. 
selves obedient to the Apostolic precept, interpreting the a 
Gospel to speak of not taking care for the needs of the body, 

and the Apostle to speak of spiritual labour and food. First 

let us prove that the Apostle meant that the servants of God 
should labour with the body. He had said, Ye yourselves 
know how ye ought to imitate us in that we were not trouble- 


b vid. Exod. xv. 34. and infra v. 31. properly fanatical Monks of the fourth 
The clause is also omitted by other and following centuries, but their name 
versions, by Erasmus, Mill, and Bengel. is often taken as synonymous with 
Wetstein retains. Mystics. They were of oriental origin, 

© The Euchites, who were so called and disparaged, if not denied, the effi- 
from their profession of prayer, were cacy of Baptism. 


250 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


some among you, nor did we eat any man’s bread for nought ; 
but travailing in labour and weariness day and night, that we 
might not be burdensome to any of you. Not that we have 
not power, but that we might offer ourselves as a pattern to 
you which ye should imitate. For when we were among 
you, this we taught among you, that if a man would not 
work, neither should he eat. What shall we say to this, 
since he taught by his example what he delivered in precept, 
in that he himself wrought with his own hands. This is 
Acts 18, proved from the Acts, where it is said, that he abode with 
Aquila and his wife Priscilla, labouring with them, for they 
were tent-makers. And yet to the Apostle, as a preacher of 
the Gospel, a soldier of Christ, a planter of the vineyard, a 
shepherd of his flock, the Lord had appointed that he should 
live of the Gospel, but he refused that payment which was 
justly his due, that he might present himself an example to 
those who exacted what was not due to them. Let those 
hear this who have not that power which he had; namely, 
of eating bread for nought, and only labouring with spiritual 
labour. If indeed they be J‘vangelists, if ministers of the 
Altar, if dispensers of the Sacraments, they have this power. 
Or if they had had in this world possessions, whereby 
they might without labour have supported themselves, and 
had on their turning to God distributed this to the needy, 
then were their infirmity to be believed and to be borne 
with. And it would not import whatever placc it was in 
which he made the distribution, seeing there is but one 
commonwealth of all Christians. But they who enter the 
profession of God’s service from the country life, from the 
workman’s craft, or the common labour, if they work not, are 
not to be excused. For it is by no means fitting that in 
that life in which senators become labourers, there should 
labouring men become idle; or that where lords of farms 
come having given up their luxuries, there should rustic 
slaves come to find luxury. But when the Lord says, 
Be not ye careful, He does not mean that they should not 
procure such things as they have nccd of, wherever they 
may honestly, but that they should not look to these things, 
and should not for their sake do what they are commanded 
to do in preaching the Gospel; for this intention He had a 


VER. 26, 27. ST. MATTHEW. 251 


little before called the eye. Curys. Or we may connect the 
context otherwise ; When the Lord had inculcated contempt 
of money, that none might say, How then shall we be able 
to live when we have given up our all? He adds, Therefore 
I say unto you, Take no thought for your life. Gutoss. That Gloss. 
is, Be not withdrawn by temporal cares from things eternal. '™""™ 
JEROME; The command is therefore, not to be anxious what 
we shall eat. For it is also commanded, that in the sweat of 
our face we must eat bread. Toil therefore is enjoined, 
carking forbidden. Pseupo-Crrys. Bread may not be 
gained by carefulness of spirit, but by toil of body; and to 
them that will labour it abounds, God bestowing it as a 
reward of their industry; and is lacking to the idle, God 
withdrawing it as punishment of their sloth. The Lord also 
confirms our hope, and descending first from the greater to 
the less, says, /s not the life more than meat, and the body 
than raiment? JEROME; He who has given the greater, 
will He not also give the less? Psrupo-CuHrys. For had 
He not willed that that which was should be preserved, He 
had not created it; but what He so created that it should be 
preserved by food, it is necessary that He give it food, as 
long as He would have it to be preserved. Hitary; Otherwise; 
Because the thoughts of the unbelievers were ill-employed 
respecting care of things future, cavilling concerning what is 
to be the appearance of our bodies in the resurrection, what 
the food in the eternal life, therefore He continues, Is not the 
life more than food ? He will not endure that our hope should 
hang in care for the meat and drink and clothing that is to 
be in the resurrection, lest there should be affront given to 
Him who has given us the more precious things, in our being 
anxious that He should also give us the lesser. 


26. Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, 
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet 
your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not 
much better than they ? 

27. Which of you by taking thought can add one 
cubit unto his stature ? 


Psgunbo-Curys. Having confirmed our hope by this 


Aug. 

De O 

Monat! 
23. 


252 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


arguing from the greater to the less, He next confirms it 
by an argument from less to greater, Behold the fowls of the 
air, they sow not, neither do they reap. Avuc. Some argue 


,, that they ought not to labour, because the fowls of the air 


neither sow nor reap. Why then do they not attend to that 
which follows, neither gather into barns? Why do they 
seek to have their hands idle, and their storehouses full? 
Why indeed do they grind corn, and dress it? For this do 
not the birds. Or even if they find men whom they can 
persuade to supply them day by day with victuals ready 
prepared, at least they draw water from the spring, and set 
on table for themselves, which the birds do not. But if 
neither are they driven to fill themselves vessels with water, 
then have they gone one new step of righteousness beyond 


vid. Acts those who were at that time at Jerusalem, who of corn sent 


11, 29. 


Ps. 50, 


15. 


to them of free gift, made, or caused to be made, loaves, 
which the birds do not. But not to lay up any thing for the 
morrow cannot be observed by those, who for many days 
together withdrawn from the sight of men, and suffering 
none to approach to them, shut themselves up, to live in 
much fervency of prayer. What? will you say that the 
more holy men become, the more unlike the birds of the air 
in this respect they become? What He says respecting the 
birds of the air, He says to this end, that none of His 
servants should think that God has no thought of their 
wants, when they see Him so provide even for these inferior 
creatures. Neither is it not God that feeds those that earn 
their bread by their own labour; neither because God hath said, 
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, 
ought the Apostle therefore not to have fled, but to have 
remained still to have been seized, that God might save him 
as He did the Three Children out of the midst of the fire. 
Should any object in this sort to the saints in their flight 
from persecution, they would answer that they ought not to 
tempt God, and that God, if He pleased, would so do to 
deliver them as He had done Daniel from the lions, Peter 
from prison, then when they could no longer help them- 
selves; but that in having made flight possible to them, 
should they be saved by flight, it was by God that they 
were saved. In like manner, such of God’s servants as have 


VER. 26, 27. ST. MATTHEW. 253 


strength to earn their food by the labour of their hands, 
would easily answer any who should object to them this out of 
the Gospel concerning the birds of the air, that they neither 
sow nor reap; and would say, If we by sickness or any 
other hindrance are not able to work, He will feed us as He 
feeds the birds, that work not. But when we can work, we 
ought not to tempt God, seeing that even this our ability 1s 
His gift; and that we live here we live of His goodness that 
has made us able to live; He feeds us by whom the birds of 
the air are fed; as He says, Your heavenly Father feedeth 
them. Are not ye of much greater value? Ave. Ye are of Aug. 
more value, because a rational animal, such as man is, is in Mont. 
higher in the scale of nature than an irrational, such as areii. 15. 
the birds of the air. Ip. Indeed a higher price is often Aug. De 
given for a horse than a slave, for a jewel than for a waiting -. wae ort 
maid, but this not from reasonable valuation, but from the 
need of the person requiring, or rather from his pleasure 
desiring it. Psrvpo-Curys. For God created all animals 

for man, but man for himself; therefore by how much 

the more precious is the creation of man, so much the 
greater is God’s care for him. If then the birds without 
toiling find food, shall man not find, to whom God has given 
both knowledge of labour and hope of fruitfulness? JEROME; 
There be some who, seeking to go beyond the limits of their 
fathers, and to soar into the air, sink into the deep and are 
drowned. ‘These will have the birds of the air to mean the 
Angels, and the other powers in the ministry of God, who 
without any care of their own are fed by God’s providence. 
But if this be indeed as they would have it, how follows it, 
said to men, Are not ye of more worth than they? It must 

be taken then in the plain sense; If birds that to-day are, and 
to-morrow are not, be nourished by God’s providence, without 
thought or toil of their own, how much more men to whom 
eternity is promised! HrLary; It may be said, that under 
the name of birds, He exhorts us by the example of the 
unclean spirits, to whom, without any trouble of their own in 
seeking and collecting it, provision of life 1s given by the power 
ofthe Eternal Wisdom. And to lead us to refer this to the un- 
clean spirits, He suitably adds, Are not ye of much more value 
than they? Thus shewing the great interval between piety 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Aug. 
Serm. in 
Mont. 
ii. 15. 


254 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAY. VI. 


and wickedness. Gtoss. He teaches us not only by the 
instance of the birds, but adds a further proof, that to our 
being and life our own care is not enough, but Divine 
Providence therein works; saying, Which of you by taking 
thought can add one cubit to his stature? Psrupo-Curys. 
For it is God who day by day works the growth of your 
body, yourself not fecling it. If then the Providence of God 
works thus daily in your very body, how shall that same 
Providence withhold from working in necessaries of life? 
And if by taking thought you cannot add the smallest part 
to your body, how shall you by taking thought be altogether 
saved? Avo. Or it may be connected with what follows it ; 
as though He should say, It was not by our care that our 
body was brought to its present stature; so that we may 
know that if we desired to add one cubit to it, we should not 
be able. Leave then the care of clothing that body to Him 
who made it to grow to its present stature. HaLary; Other- 
wise; As by the example of the spirits He had fixed our 
faith in the supply of food for our lives, so now by a decision 
of common understanding He cuts off all anxiety about 
supply of clothing. Sccing that He it is who shall raise in 
one perfect man every various kind of body that ever drew 
breath, and is alone able to add one or two or three cubits 
to each man’s stature; surely in being anxious concerning 
clothing, that 1s, concerning the appearance of our bodies, 
we offer affront to lim who will add so much to each man’s 


Aug. De stature as shall bring all to an equality. Avuc. But if Christ 


Civ. Dei, 


xxil. 15. 


rose again with the same stature with which He died, it is 
impious to say that when the time of the resurrection of all 
shall come, there shall be added to His body a bigness that 
it had not at His own resurrection, (for He appeared to His 
disciples with that body in which He had been known 
among them,) such that He shall be equalled to the tallest 
among men. If again we say that all men’s bodies, whether 
tall or short, shall be alike brought to the size and stature of 
the Lord’s body, then much will perish from many bodies, 
though He has declared that not a hair shall fall. It 
remains therefore that each be raised in his own stature— 
that stature which he had in youth, if he died in old age; if 
in childhood that stature to which he would have attained 


VER. 28—30. ST. MATTHEW. 255 


had he lived. For the Apostle says not, ‘ To the measure of 

the stature,’ but, Jo the measure of the full age of Christ. Eph. 4, 
For the bodies of the dead shall rise in youth and maturity * 

to which we know that Christ attained *. 


28. And why take ye thought for raiment? Con- 
sider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil 
not, neither do they spin: 

29. And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon 
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 

30. Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the 
field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the 
oven, shall He not much more clothe you, O ye of 
little faith ? 


Currys. Having shewn that it is not right to be anxious Chrys. 
about food, He passes to that which is less; (for raiment is 777" 
not so necessary as food;) and asks, And why are ye careful 
wherewith ye shall be clothed? He uses not here the 
instance of the birds, when He might have drawn some 
to the point, as the peacock, or the swan, but brings forward 
the lilies, saying, Consider the lilies of the field. He would 
prove in two things the abundant goodness of God; to wit, 
the richness of the beauty with which they are clothed, and 
the mean value of the things so clothed with it. AuG. The Aug. — 
things instanced are not to be allegorized so that we enquire erg 
what is denoted by the birds of the air, or the lilies of thei 15. 
field; they are only examples to prove God’s care for the 
greater from His care for the less. Pskupo-Curys. For 
hlies within a fixed time are formed into branches, clothed in 
whiteness, and endowed with sweet odour, God conveying by 
an unseen operation, what the earth had not given to the 
root. But in all the same perfectness is observed, that they 
may not be thought to have been formed by chance, but may 
be known to be ordered by God's providence. When He says, 
Fhey toil not, He speaks for the comfort of men; Nether do 
they spin, for the women. CuHrys. He forbids not labour 


4 Hence the Roman Catholics teach which is thirty-three ;” vid. Bp. Doyle’s 
that ‘‘ men shall rise at a perfect age, Christian Doctrine. 


Gloss. 
Don occ. 


Gen. 30, 


33. 
1 Sam. 
28, 19. 


256 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI- 


but carefulness, both here and above when He spoke of 
sowing. Gross. And for the greater exaltation of 
God’s providence in those things that are beyond human 
industry, He adds, J say unto you, that Solomon in all his 
glory was not arrayed like one of these. JEROME; For, 
in sooth, what regal purple, what silk, what web of divers 
colours from the loom, may vie with flowers? What work of 
man has the red blush of the rose? the pure white of the 
lily? How the Tyrian dye yields to the violet, sight alone 
and not words can express.- Curys. As widely as truth 
differs from falsehood, so widely do our clothes differ from 
flowers. If then Solomon, who was more eminent than all 
other kings, was yet surpassed by flowers, how shall you 
exceed the beauty of flowers by your garments? And 
Solomon was exceeded by the flowers not once only, or 
twice, but throughout his whole reign; and this is that 
He says, Jn all his glory; for no one day was he arrayed as 
are the flowers. Psrupo-Cuarys. Or the meaning may be, 
that Solomon though he toiled not for his own raiment, yet 
he gave command for the making of it. But where command 
is, there is often found both offence of them that minister, 
and wrath of him that commands. When then any are 
without these things, then they are arrayed as are the lilies. 
Hitary; Or; By the lilies are to be understood the emi- 
nences of the heavenly Angels, to whom a surpassing 
radiance of whiteness is communicated by God. They toil 
not, neither do they spin, because the angelic powers received 
in the very first allotment of their existence such a nature, 
that as they were made so they should ever continue to be; 
and when in the resurrection men shall be like unto Angels, 
He would have them look for a covering of angelic glory by 
this example of angelic excellence. Pseupo-Curys. If 
God then thus provides for the flowers of the earth which 
only spring up, that they may be seen and die, shall He 
overlook men whom He has created not to be seen for a time, 
but that they should be for ever? J&RoME; To-morrow 
in Scripture is put for time future in general. Jacob says, 
So shall my righteousness answer for me to-morrow. And in 
the phantasm of Samuel, the Pythoness says to Saul, Zo- 
morrow shalt thou be with me. Gtoss. Some copies have 


VER. 31—83. ST. MATTHEW. 257 


tnto the fire, or, into an heap, which has the appearance of 
an oven. CaHrys. He calls them no more lilies, but the 
grass of the field, to shew their small worth; and adds 
moreover another cause of their small value; which to-day is. 
And He said not, and to-morrow is not, but what is yet 
greater fall, ts cast into the oven. Inthat He says How much 
more you, is implicitly conveyed the dignity of the human 
race, as though He had said, You to whom He has given a 
soul, for whom He has contrived a body, to whom He has 
sent Prophets and gave His Only-begotten Son. GLoss. 
He says, of little faith, for that faith is little which is not 
sure of even the least things. Hitary; Or, under the 
signification of grass the Gentiles are pointed to. If then 
an eternal existence is only therefore granted to the Gentiles, 
that they may soon be handed over to the judgment fires ; 
how impious it is that the saints should doubt of attaining 
to eternal glory, when the wicked have eternity bestowed on 
them for their punishment. Remia. Spiritually, by the 
birds of the air are meant the Saints who are born again in 
the water of holy Baptism*; and by devotion raise them- + 
selves above the earth and seek the skies. The Apostles are 
said to be of more value than these, because they are the 
heads of the Saints. By the lilies also may be understood 
the Saints, who without the toil of legal ceremonies pleased 
God by faith alone; of whom it is said, My Beloved, who he 2, 
feedeth among the lilies. Holy Church also is understood by 
the lilies, because of the whiteness of its faith, and the 
odour of its good conversation, of which it is said in the 
same place, As the lily among the thorns. By the grass 
are denoted the unbelievers, of whom it is said, Zhe Is.40,7. 
grass hath dried up, and the flowers thereof fuded. By 
the oven eternal damnation; so that the sense be, If God 
bestows temporal goods on the unbelievers, how much 
more shall He bestow on you eternal goods! 


31. Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall 
we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal 
shall we be clothed ? 


S ° Vid. the Breviary Hymn, Magne: Deus Potentiz. 
VOL. I. 8 


258 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


32. (For after all these things do the Gentiles 
seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things. 

33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and His 
righteousness; and all these things shall be added 
unto you. 


Gtioss. Having thus expressly cut off all anxiety con- 
cerning food and raiment, by an argument drawn from 
observation of the inferior creation, He follows it up by 
a further prohibition; Be not ye therefore careful, saying, 
What shall we eat, what shall we drink, or wherewithal 
shall we be clothed? Remie. The Lord repeated this, that 
He might shew how highly necessary this precept is, and 
that He might inculcate it more strongly on our hearts. 
RaBAN. It should be observed that He does not say, Do 
not ye seek, or be thoughful for, food, drink, and raiment, 
but what ye shall eat, what ye shall drink, or wherewithal 
ye shall be clothed. Wherein they seem to me to be con- 
victed, who, using themselves the usual food and clothing, 
require of those with whom they live either greater 
sumptuousness, or greater austerity in both. GLoss. 
There is also a further needless solicitude wherein men 
sin, when they lay by of produce or money more than 
necessity requires, and leaving spiritual things, are intent 
on these things, as though despairing of the goodness of 
God; this is what is forbidden; for after all these things do 
the Gentiles seek. Pseupo-Curys. Since their belief is that 
it is Fortune and not Providence that has place in human 
affairs, and think not that their lives are directed by God’s 
counsel, but follow the uncertain chance, they accordingly 
fear and despair, as having none to guide them. But he who 
believes that he is guided by God’s counsel, entrusts his 
provision of food to God’s hand; as it follows, for your 
Father knoweth that ye have need of these things. Curys. 
He said not ‘God knoweth,’ but, Your Father knoweth, in 
order to lead them to higher hope; for if He be their Father, 
Hie will not endure to forget his children, since not even 
human fathers could do so. He says, That ye have need of 


VER. 31—33. ST. MATTHEW. 259 


all these things, in order that for that very reason, because 
they are necessary, ye may the more lay aside all anxiety. 
For he who denies his son bare necessaries, after what 
fashion is he a father? But for superfluities they have no 
right to look with the like confidence. Aue. God did not Aug. | 
gain this knowledge at any certain time, but before all time, sy oe 
without beginning of knowledge, foreknew that the things of 
the world would be, and among others, both what and when 
we should ask of Him. Ip. As to what some say that these Aug. De 
things are so many that they cannot be compassed by the rae 
knowledge of God; they ought with like reason to maintain 
further that God cannot know all numbers which are cer- 
tainly infinite. But infinity of number is not beyond the 
compass of His understanding, who is Himself infinite. 
Therefore if whatever is compassed by knowledge, is bounded 
by the compass of him that has the knowledge, then is all 
infinity in a certain unspeakable way bounded by God, 
because it is not incomprehensible by His knowledge. 
Nemesius; That there is a Providence, is shewn by such Nemes. 
signs as the following; The continuance of all things, of y)\** 
those things especially which are in a state of decay and 42. 
reproduction, and the place and order of all things that exist 
is ever preserved in one and the same state; and how could 
this be done unless by some presiding power? But some 
affirm that God does indeed care for the general continuance 
of all things in the universe, and provides for this, but that 
all particular events depend on contingency. Now there are 
but three reasons that can be alleged for God excercising no 
providence of particular events; either God is ignorant that 
it is good to have knowledge of particular things; or He is 
unwilling; or He is unable. But ignorance 1s altogether alien 
from blessed substance; for how shall God not know what 
every wise man knows, that if particulars were destroyed, the 
whole would be destroyed? But nothing prevents all indi- 
viduals from perishing; when no power watches over them. If, 
again, He be unwilling, this must be from one of two reasons ; 
inactivity, or the meanness of the occupation. But inac- 
tivity is produced by two things; either we are drawn aside 
by some pleasure, or hindered by some fear, neither of which 
can be piously supposed of God. If they affirm that it 

8 2 


260 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


would be unbecoming, for that it is beneath such blessed- 
ness to stoop to things so trifling, how is it not inconsistent 
that a workman overseeing the whole of any machine, leaves 
no part however insignificant without attention, knowing the 
whole is but made up of the parts, and thus pronounce God 
the Creator of all things to be less wise than craftsmen? 
But if it be that He is unable, then is He unable to bestow ~ 
benefits on us. But if we are unable to comprehend the 
manner of special Providence, we have not therefore any 
right to deny its operation; we might as well say that, 
because we did not know the number of mankind, therefore 
there were no men. PsEupo-Curys. Thus then let him 
who believes himself to be under the rule of God’s counsel, 
commit his provision into God’s hand ; but let him meditate of 
good and evil, which if he do not, he will neither shun the 
evil, nor lay hold of the good. Therefore it is added, Seek 
ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness. The 
kingdom of God is the reward of good works; Hisrighteous- 
ness is the way of piety by which we go to that kmgdom. 
If then you consider how great is the glory of the Saints, 
you will either through fear of punishment depart from evil, 
or through desire of glory hasten to good. And if you 
consider what is the righteousness of God, what He loves, 
and what He hates, the righteousness itself will shew you 
His ways, as it attends on those that love it. And the 
account we shall have to render is not whether we have 
been poor or rich, but whether we have done well or 
Gloss. ill, which is in our own power. GLoss. Or, He says 
interlin. 7 55 righteousness, as though He were to say, ‘ Ye are 
made righteous through Him, and not through yourselves.” 
Pseupo-CuHrys. The earth for man’s sin is accursed that it 
should not put forth fruit, according to that in Genesis, 
Gen. 3, Cursed is the ground in thy works; but when we do well, 
17. then it is blessed. Seek righteousness therefore, and thou 
shalt not lack food. Wherefore it follows, and al) these 
Aug. things shall be added unto you. Avc. To wit, these 
Serm-'" temporal goods which are thus manifestly shewn not to 
ii. 16. be such goods as those goods of ours for the sake of which 
we ought to do well; and yet they are necessary. The 
kingdom of God and His righteousness is our good which 


VER. 34. ST. MATTHEW. 261 


we ought to make our end. But since in order to attain 
this end we are militant in this life, which may not be lived 
without supply of these necessaries, He promises, These 
things shall be added unto you. That He says, jirst, implies 
that these are to be sought second not in time, but in value; 

the one is our good, the other necessary to us. For example, 

we ought not to preach that we may eat, for so we should 
hold the Gospel as of less value than our food; but we 
should therefore eat that we may preach the Gospel. But 

if we seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, 
that is, set this before all other things, and seek other things 

for the sake of this, we ought not to be anxious lest we 
should lack necessaries; and therefore He says, All these 
things shall be added unto you; that is, of course, without 
being an hindrance to you: that you may not in seeking 
them be turned away from the other, and thus set two ends 
before you. Curys. And He said not, Shall be given, but, 
Shall be added, that you may learn that the things that are 
now, are nought to the greatness of the things that shall be. 
Avuc. But when we read that the Apostle suffered hunger Avg. | 
and thirst, let us not think that God’s promises failed him; Monk 
for these things are rather aids. That Physician to whom’: !7. 
we have entirely entrusted ourselves, knows when He will 
give and when He will withhold, as He judges most for our 
advantage. So that should these things ever be lacking to 

us, (as God to exercise us often permits,) it will not weaken 

our fixed purpose, but rather confirm it when wavering. 


34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: 
for the morrow shall take thought for the things 
of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, 


Gross. Having forbid anxiety for the things of the day, Gloss. 
He now forbids anxiety for future things, such a fruitlesss4n, 
care as proceeds from the fault of men, in these words, Be 
not ye anxious about the morrow. JEROME; To-morrow in 
Scripture signifies time future, as Jacob in Genesis says, 
To-morrow shall my righteousness hear me. And in the aa 
phantasm of Samuel the Pythoness says to Saul, To-morrow or 


Aug. 


wbi sup. 


262 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


shalt thou be with me. He yields therefore unto them that 
they should care for things present, though He forbids them 
to take thought for things to come. For sufficient for us 1s 
the thought of time present; let us leave to God the future 
which is uncertain. And this is that He says, The morrow 
shall be anxious for itself; that is, it shall bring its own 
anxiety with it. For sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. 
By evil He means here not that which is contrary to virtue, 
but toil, and affliction, and the hardships of life. CHrys. 
Nothing brings so much pain to the spint as anxiety and 
cark. That He says, The morrow shall be anazious for 
itself, comes of desire to make more plain what He speaks; 
to that end employing a prosopopeia of time, after the 
practice of many in speaking to the rude populace; to 
impress them the more, He brings in the day itself com- 
plaining of its too heavy cares. Has not every day a burden 
enough of its own, in its own cares? why then do you add 
to them by laying on those that belong to another day ? 
Psrupo-Curys. Otherwise; By fo-day are signified such things 
as are needful for us in this present life ; To-morrow denotes 
those things that are superfluous. Be not ye therefore anxious 


for the morrow, thus means, Seck not to have aught beyond that 


which is necessary for your daily life, for that which is over 
and above, 1. e. To-morrow, shall care for itself. To-morrow 
shall be anxious for itself, is as much as to say, when you 
have heaped up superfluities, they shall care for themselves, 
you shall not enjoy them, but they shall find many lords 
who shall care for them. Why then should you be anxious 
about those things, the property of which you must part with? 
Sufficient for the day is its own evil, as much as to say, The toil 
you undergo for necessaries is enough, do not toil for things 
superfluous. AuG. Or otherwise; To-morrow is said only of 
time where fulure succeeds to past. When then we work 
any good work, we think not of earthly but of heavenly 
things. The morrow shall be anxious for itself, that is, Take 
food and the like, when you ought to take it, that is when 
necessity begins to call for it. For sufficient for the day is 
tis own evil, that is, it is enough that necessity shall compel 
to take these things; He calls it eril, because it is penal, 
inasmuch as it pertains to our mortality, which we earned 


VER. 34. ST. MATTHEW. 963 


by sinning. To this necessity then of worldly punishment, 
add no further weight, that you may not only fulfil it, but 
may even so fulfil it as to shew yourself God’s soldier. 
But herein we must, be careful, that, when we see any 
servant of God endeavouring to provide necessaries either 
for himself, or those committed to his care, we do not 
straight judge him to sin against this command of the Lord 
in being anxious for the morrow. For the Lord Himself, to 
whom Angels ministered, thought good to carry a bag 
for example sake. And in the Acts of the Apustles it is 
written, that food necessary for life was provided for future 
time, at a time when famine threatened. What the Lord 
condemns therefore, is not the provision of these things after 
the manner of men, but if a man because of these things does 
not fight as God’s soldier. HiLary; This is further com- 
prehended under the full meaning of the Divine words. 
We are commanded not to be careful about the future, 
because sufficient for our life is the evil of the days wherein 
we live, that is to say, the sins, that all our thought and 
pains be occupied in cleansing this away. And if our care 
be slack, yet will the future be careful for itself, in that there 
is held out to us a harvest of eternal love to be provided 
by God. 


CHAP. VII. 


1. Judge not, that ye be not judged. 

2. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be 
judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be 
measured to you again. 


Aug. Ava. Since when these temporal things are provided 
ubi SUP- beforehand against the future, it is uncertain with what 
purpose it is done, as it may be with a single or double 
mind, He opportunely subjoins, Judge not. PsrEupo-CuRry¥s. 
Otherwise ; He has drawn out thus far the consequences 
of his injunctions of almsgiving; He now takes up those 
respecting prayer. And this doctrine is in a sort a con- 
tinuation of that of the prayer; as though it should run, 
Forgive us our debts, and then should follow, Judge not, that 
ye be not judged. JEROME; But if He forbids us to 
judge, how then does Paul judge the Corinthian who 
had committed uncleanness? Or Peter convict Ananias 
and Sapphira of falsehood? Psrupo-Cuarys. But some 
explain this place after a sense, as though the Lord 
did not herein forbid Christians to reprove others out 
of good will, but only intended that Christians should 
not despise Christians by making a show of their own 
righteousness, hating others often on suspicion alone, con- 
demning them, and pursuing private grudges under the 
show of piety. CHurys. Wherefore He does not say, ‘ Donot 
cause a sinner to cease,’ but do not judge; that is, be not 
a bitter judge; correct him indeed, but not as an enemy 
seeking revenge, but as a physician applying a remedy. 
Psgupo-Curys. But that not even thus should Christians 
correct Christians is shewn by that expression, Judge not. 


VER. 1, 2. GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. 265 


But if they do not thus correct, shall they therefore obtain 
forgiveness of their sins, because it is said, and ye shali not be 
judged ? For who obtains forgiveness of a former sin, by 
not adding another thereto? This we have said, desiring to 
shew that this is not here spoken concerning not judging 
our neighbour who shall sin against God, but who may sin 
against ourselves. For whoso does not judge his neighbour 
who has sinned against him, him shall not God judge for his 
sin, but will forgive him his debt even as he forgave. 
Curys. Otherwise; He does not forbid us to judge all sin 
absolutely, but lays this prohibition on such as are them- 
selves full of great evils, and judge others for very small 
evils. In hke manner Paul does not absolutely forbid to 
judge those that sin, but finds fault with disciples that 
judged their teacher, and instructs us not to judge those 
that are above us. HrLary; Otherwise; He forbids us to 
judge God touching His promises; for as judgments among 
men are founded on things uncertain, so this judgment 
against God is drawn from somewhat that is doubtful. And 
He therefore would have us put away the custom from us 
altogether ; for it is not here as in other cases where it is 
sin to have given a false judgment; but here we have 
begun to sin if we have pronounced any judgment at all. 
AvuG. I suppose the command here to be no other than Aug. | 
that we should always put the best interpretation on such ce 
actions as seem doubtful with what mind they were done. ii. 18. 
But concerning such as cannot be done with good purpose, 
as adulteries, blasphemies, and the like, He permits us to 
judge ; but of indifferent actions which admit of heing done 
with either good or bad purpose, it is rash to judge, but 
especially so to condemn. There are two cases in which 
we should be particularly on our guard against hasty judg- 
ments, when it docs not appear with what mind the action 
was done; and when it does not yet appear, what sort of 
man any one may turn out, who now seems either good or 
bad. Wherefore we should neither blame those things of 
which we know with what mind they are done, nor so blame 
those things which are manifest, as though we despaired of 
recovery. Here one may think there is difficulty in what 
follows, With what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged. 


266 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO: CHAP. VII. 


If we judge a hasty judgment, will God also judge us with 
the like? Or if we have measured with a false measure, 1s 
there with God a false measure whence it may be measured 
to us again? For by measure I suppose is here meant judg- 
ment. Surely this is only said, that the haste in which you 
punish another shall be itself your punishment. For 
injustice often does no harm to him who suffers the wrong ; 

Aug. Debut must always hurt him who does the wrong. Ip. Some 

ac say, How is it true that Christ says, dnd with what measure 
ye shall mete it shall be measured to you aguin, if temporal 
sin is to be punished by eternal suffering? They do not 
observe that it is not said the same measure, because of the 
equal space of time, but because of the equal retribu- 
tion—namely, that he who has done evil should suffer evil, 
though even in that sense it might be said of that of which 
the Lord spoke here, namely of judgments and condemna- 
tions. Accordingly, he that judges and condemns unjustly, 
if he is judged and condemned, justly receives in the same 
measure though not the same thing that he gave; by judg- 
ment he did what was unjust, by judgment he suffers what 
is just. 


3. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy 
brother’s eye, but considerest not the beam that is in 
thine own eye? 

4. Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me 
pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a 
beam is in thine own eye? 

5. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of 
thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to 
cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye. 


Aug. Ip. The Lord having admonished us concerning hasty and 
arity “unjust judgment; and because that they are most given to 
ii. 18. rash judgment, who judge concerning things uncertain ; and 
they most readily find fault, who love rather to speak evil 
and to condemn than to cure and to correct; a fault 


that springs either from pride or jealousy—therefore He 


VER. 3—5. ST. MATTHEW. 267 


subjoins, Why seest thou the mote in thy brother's eye, and 
seest not the beam in thy own eye? JEROME; He speaks of 
such as though themselves guilty of mortal sin, do not 
forgive a trivial fault in their brother. Ava. As if he per- Aug. 
haps have sinned in anger, and you correct him with settled MONOUE: 
hate. For as great as is the difference between a beam and 
a mote, so great is the difference between anger and hatred. 
For hatred is anger become inveterate. It may be if you are 
angry with a man that you would have him amend, not so if 
you hate him. Curys. Many do this, if they see a Monk 
having a superfluous garment, or a plentiful meal, they break 
out into bitter accusation, though themselves daily seize and 
devour, and suffer from excess of drinking. Psruno-CuHrys. 
Otherwise; This is spoken to the doctors. For every sin is 
either a great or a small sin according to the character of the 
sinner. If he is a laic, it is small and a mote in comparison 
of the sin of a priest, which is the beam. Hu tary; Other- 
wise; The sin against the Holy Spirit is to take from God 
power which has influences, and from Christ substance 
which is of eternity, through whom as God came to man, 
so shall man likewise! come to God. As much greater then! al. fiet 
as is the beam than the mote, so much greater is the sin 
against the Holy Spirit than all other sins. As when un- 
believers object to others carnal sins, and secrete in themselves 
the burden of that sin, to wit, that they trust not the promises 
of God, their minds being blinded as their eye might be by 
a beam. 

PsEvpo-Curys. That is, with what face can you charge 
your brother with sin, when yourself are living in the same 
or a yet greater sin? Aua. When then we are brought Aug. | 
under the necessity of finding fault with any, let us first }7"™ 3? 
consider whether the sin be such as we have never had; 19. 
secondly that we are yet men, and may fall into it; then, 
whether it be one that we have had, and are now without, 
and then let our common frailty come into our mind, that 
pity and not hate may go before correction. Should we find 
ourselves in the same fault, let us not reprove, but groan 
with the offender, and invite him to struggle with us. 
Seldom indeed and in cases of great necessity is reproof to 
be employed; and then only that the Lord may be served 


268 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


and not ourselves. Pseupo-Carys. Otherwise; How sayest 
thou to thy brother; that is, with what purpose? From 
charity, that you may save your neighbour? Surely not, for you 
would first save yourself. You desire therefore not to heal 
others, but by good doctrine to cover bad life, and to gain 
praise of learning from men, not the reward of edifying from 
God, and you are a hypocrite; as it follows, Thou hypocrite, 
Aug. cast first the beam out of thine own eye. Avuc. For to 
le reprove sin is the duty of the good, which when the bad do, 
i.19. they act a part, dissembling their own character, and as- 
suming one that does not belong to them. Curys. And it 
is to be noted, that whenever He intends to denounce any 
great sin, He begins with an epithet of reproach, as below, 
Mat.18, Thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt; aud so 
here, Thou hypocrite, cast out first. For each one knows 
better the things of himself than the things of others, 
and sees more the things that be great, than the things that 
be lesser, and loves himself more than his neighbour. 
Therefore He bids him who is chargeable with many sins, 
not to be a harsh judge of another’s faults, especially if they 
be small. Herein not forbidding to arraign and correct; 
but forbidding to make light of our own sins, and magnify 
those of others. For it behoves you first diligently to 
examine how great may be your own sins, and then try 
those of your neighbour; whence it follows, and then shalt 
thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother’s eye. 
Aug. AuG. For having removed from our own eye the beam of 
ubi sup- envy, of malice, or hypocrisy, we shall see clearly to cast the 
beam out of our brother’s eye. 


6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, 
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they 
trample them under their feet, and turn again and 
rend you. 


Aug. AuG. Because the simplicity to which He had been 
ubi sup. directing in the foregoing precepts might lead some wrongly 
to conclude that it was equally wrong to hide the truth as to 
utter what was false, He well adds, Give not that which és 


VER. 6. ST. MATTHEW. 269 


holy to the dogs, and cast not your pearls before swine. 
Pseupo-Curys. Otherwise; The Lord had commanded us 
to love our enemies, and to do good to those that sin against 
us. That from this Priests might not think themselves 
obliged to communicate also the things of God to such, He 
checked any such thought saying, Give not that which is 
holy to the dogs; as much as to say, I have bid you love 
your enemies, and do them good out of your temporal goods, 
but not out of My spiritual goods, without distinction. Forthey 
are your brethren by nature but not by faith, and God gives 
the good things of this life equally to the worthy and the 
unworthy, but not so spiritual graces. Aue. Let us see Aug. | 
now what is the holy thing, what are the dogs, what the s"™"'" 
pearls, what the swine? The holy thing is all that it were ii. wv. 
impiety to corrupt; asin which may be committed by the 
will, though the thing itself be undone. The pearls are all 
spiritual things that are to be highly esteemed. Thus though 

one and the same thing may be called both the holy thing and 

a pearl, yet it is called holy because it is not to be corrupted ; 

and called a pearl because it is not to be contemned. PsEupo- 
Curys. Otherwise; That which is holy denotes baptism, the 
grace of Christ’s body, and the like; but the mysteries of 
the truth are intended by the pearls. For as pearls are 
inclosed in shells, and such in the deeps of the sea, so the 
divine mysteries inclosed in words are lodged in the deep 
meaning Of Holy Scripture. CuHrys. And to those that are 
right-minded and have understanding, when revealed they 
appear good ; but to those without understanding, they seem 

to be more deserving reverence because they are not under- 
stood. Aue. The dogs are those that assault the truth ; the Aug. 
swine we may not unsuitably take for those that despise the ™™! ™P- 
truth. Therefore because dogs leap forth to rend in pieces, 

and what they rend, suffer not to continue whole, He said, 
Give not that which is holy to the dogs; because they strive 

to the utmost of their power to destroy the truth. The 
swine though they do not assault by biting as dogs, yet do 
they defile by trampling upon, and therefore He said, Casé 

not your pearls before swine. Ranpan. Or; The dogs are 
returned to their vomit; the swine not yet returned, but 
wallowing in the mire of vices. Pseupo-Curys. Otherwise; 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Gloss. 
interlin. 
Aug. 
ubi sup. 


270 GOSPEL ACCORDING To CHAP. VII. 


The dog and the swine are unclean animals; the dog indeed 
in every respect, as he neither chews the cud, nor divides 
the hoof; but swine in one respect only, seeing they divide 
the hoof, though they do not chew the cud. Hence I think 
that we are to understand by the dog, the Gentiles who are 
altogether unclean, both in their life, and in their faith; but 
by the swine are to be understood heretics, because they 
seem to call upon the name of the Lord. Give not therefore 
that which is holy to the dogs, for that baptism and the other 
sacraments are not to be given but to them that have the faith. 
In like manner the mysteries of the truth, that is, the pearls, 
are not to be given but to such as desire the truth and live with 
human reason. If then you cast them to the swine, that is, 
to such as are grovelling in impurity of life, they do not 
understand their preciousness, but value them like to other 
worldly fables, and tread them under foot with their carnal 
life. Aug. That which is despised is said to be trodden under 
foot: hence itis said, Lest perchance they tread them under foot. 
Gtoss. He says, Lest perchance, because it may be that they 
will wisely turn from their uncleanness*. Auc. That which 
follows, Turn again and rend you, He means not the pearls 
themselves, for these they tread under foot, and when they 
turn again that they may hear something further, then they 
rend him by whom the pearls on which they had trode had 
been cast. For you will not easily find what will please him 
who has despised things got by great toil. Whoever then 
undertake to teach such, I see not how they shall not be trode 
upon and rent by those they teach. PsEupo-Curys. Or; The 
swine not only trample upon the pearls by their carnal life, 
but after a little they turn, and by disobedience rend those 
who offend them. Yea often when offended they bring false 
accusation against them as sowers of new dogmas. The 
dogs also having trode upon holy things by their impure 
actions, by their disputings rend the preacher of truth. 
Currs. Well is that said, Lest they turn; for they feign 
meekness that they may learn; and when they have learned, 
they attack. Psrupo-Curys. With good reason He forbade 
pearls to be given to swine. For if they are not to be set 
before swine that are the less unclean, how much more are 


4 The Gloss. has ‘ quia non possunt.’ 


VER. 7, 8. ST. MATTHEW. 271 


they to be withheld from dogs that are so much more 
unclean. But respecting the giving that which is holy, we 
cannot hold the same opinion; seeing we often give the 
benediction to Christians who live as the brutes; and that 
not because they deserve to receive it, but lest perchance 
being more grievously offended they should perish utterly. 
Aug. We must be careful therefore not to explain ought to Aug. 
him who does not receive it; for men the rather seek that ee 
which is hidden than that which is opened. He either 
attacks from ferocity as a dog, or overlooks from stupidity as 
swine. But it docs not follow that if the truth be kept hid, 
falsehood is uttered. The Lord Himself who never spoke 
falsely, yet sometimes concealed the truth, as in that, J have John16, 
yet many things to say unto you, the which ye are not now |* 
able to bear. But if any is unable to receive these things 
because of his filthiness, we must first cleanse him as far as 
lays in our power either by word or deed. But in that the 
Lord is found to have said some things which many who heard 
Him did not receive, but either rejected or contemned them, 
we are not to think that therein He gave the holy thing to 
the dogs, or cast His pearls before swine. He gave to those 
who were able to receive, and who were in the company, 
whom it was not fit should be neglected for the uncleanness 
of the rest. And though those who tempted Him might 
perish in those answers which He gave to them, yet those 
who could receive them by occasion of these inquiries heard 
many useful things. He therefore who knows what should 
be answered ought to make answer, for their sakes at least 
who might fall into despair should they think that the 
question proposed is one that cannot be answered. But 
this only in the case of such matters as pertain to instruction 
of salvation; of things superfluous or harmful nothing should 
be said; but it should then be explained for what reason we 
ought not to make answer in such points to the enquirer. 


7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye 
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: 

8. For every one that asketh receiveth; and he 
that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it 
shall be opened. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


1 virtus 


vid. Ps. 


18, 1. 


272 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


JEROME; Having before forbidden us to pray for things of 
the flesh, He now shews what we ought to ask, saying, Ask, 
and it shall be given you. Ava. Otherwise; when He com- 
manded not to give the holy thing to dogs, and not to cast 
pearls before swine, the hearer conscious of his own igno- 
rance might say, Why do you thus bid me not give the holy 
thing to dogs, when as yet [ see not that I have any holy 
thing? He therefore adds in good season, Ask, and ye shall 
receive. PseEupo-Carys. Otherwise; Having given them 
some commands for the sanctification of prayer, saying, 
Judge not, He adds accordingly, Ask, and it shall be given 
unto you, as though He were to say, If ye observe this mercy 
towards your enemies, whatever seems to you shut, knock, 
and it shall be opened to you. Ask therefore in prayer, 
praying day and night; seek with care and toil; for neither 
by toiling only in the Scriptures do we gain knowledge 
without God’s grace, nor do we attain to grace without 
study, lest the gift of God should be bestowed on the 
careless. But knock with prayer, and fasting, and alms. 
For as one who knocks at a door, not only cries out with his 
voice, but strikes with his hand, so he who does good works, 
knocks with his works. But you will say, this is what 
I pray that T may know and do, how then can I do it, before 
I receive? Do what you can that you may become able to 
do more, and keep what you know that you may come to 
know more. Or otherwise; having above commanded all 
men to love their enemies, and after enjoined that we should 
not under pretext of love give holy things to dogs; He here 
gives good counsel, that they should pray God for them, and 
it shall be granted them; let them seek out those that are 
lost in sins, and they shall find them; let them knock at those 
who are shut up in errors, and God shall open to them that 
their word may have access to their souls. Or otherwise; 
Since the precepts given above were beyond the reach 
of human virtue, He sends them to God to whose grace 
nothing is impossible, saying, Ask, and it shall be given you, 
that what cannot be performed by men may be fulfilled 
through the grace of God. For when God furnished the other 
animals with swift foot, or swift wing, with claws, teeth, 
or horns, He so made man that He Himself should be man’s 
only ‘strength, that forced by reason of his own weakness, 


VER. 7, 8. ST. MATTHEW. 273 


he might always have need of his Lord. Gtoss. We ask Gloss. 
with faith, we seek with hope, we knock with love. You° 
must first ask that you may have; after that seek that you 
may find; and lastly, observe what you have found that you 

may enterin. AvuG. Asking, is that we may get healthiness of Aug. | 
soul that we may be able to fulfil the things commanded us; we 
seeking, pertains to the discovery of the truth. But when any i. 21. 
has found the true way, he will then come into actual pos- 
session, which however is only opened to him that knocks. 

Ip. How these three differ from one another, I have thought Avg. 
good to unfold with this travail; but it were better to refer; so" 
them all to instant prayer; wherefore He afterwards con- 
cludes, saying, He will give good things to them that ask 

him. Curys. And in that He adds seek, and knock, He 

bids us ask with much importunateness and strength. For 

one who seeks, casts forth all other things from his mind, 

and is turned to that thing singly which he seeks; and 

he that knocks comes with vehemence and warm soul. 
PsEupo-Curyrs. He had said, Ask, and ye shall receive; 
which sinners hearing might perchance say, The Lord herein 
exhorts them that are worthy, but we are unworthy. There- 

fore He repeats it that He may commend the mercy of God 

to the righteous as well as to sinners; and therefore declares 

that every one that asketh receiveth; that is, whether he be 
righteous or a sinner, let him not hesitate to ask; that it may 

be fully seen that none is neglected but he who hesitates to 

ask of God. For it is not credible that God should enjoin 

on men that work of piety which is displayed in doing good 

to our enemies, and should not Himself (being good) act so. 

Auc. Wherefore God hears sinners; for if He do not hear Aug. | 
sinners, the Publican said in vain, Lord, be merciful to }r%t' 


oan. 
me a sinner; and by that confession merited justification. 44. 13 
Ip. He who in faith offers supplication to God for the 43, ak 
necessities of this life is heard mercifully, and not heard oe 
mercifully. For the physician knows better than the sick Sent, 
man what is good for his sickness. But if he asks that?! 
which God both promises and commands, his prayer shall 

be granted, for love shall receive what truth provides. 

Ip. But the Lord is good, who often gives us not what we Avg. 
would, that He may give us what we should rather prefer. hae 
VOL. I. T 


Aug. 


Serm. in 


Mont. 
il. 21. 


274 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


Ip. There is need moreover of perseverance, that we may 


-'™ receive what we ask for. Ip. In that God sometimes delays 


His gifts, He but recommends, and does not deny them. 
For that which is long looked for is sweeter when obtained ; 
but that is held cheap, which comes at once. Ask then and 
seek things righteous. For by asking and seeking grows 
the appetite of taking. God reserves for you those things 
which He is not willing to give you at once, that you may 
learn greatly to desire great things. Therefore we ought 
always to pray and not to fail. 


9. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son 
ask bread, will he give him a stone? 

10. Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? 

11. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good 
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
Father which is in heaven give good things to them 
that ask him ? 


Ave. As above He had cited the birds of the air and the 
lilies of the field, that our hopes may rise from the less to the 
greater; so also does He in this place, when He says, 
Or what man among you? Pstupo-CuHrys. Lest perchance 
any one considering how great is the difference between 
God and man, and weighing his own sins should despair of 
obtaining, and so never take in hand to ask; therefore He 
proposes a comparison of the relation between father and 
son; that should we despair because of our sins, we may 
hope because of God’s fatherly goodness. Curys. There 
arc two things behoveful for one that prays; that he ask 
earnestly ; and that he ask such things as he ought to ask. 
And those are spiritual things; as Solomon, because he 
asked such things as were right, received speedily. Pseupo- 
Curys. And what are the things that we ought to ask, he 
shews under the likeness of a loaf, and a fish. The loaf 
is the word concerning the knowledge of God the Father. 
The stone is all falsehood that has a stumbling-block of 
offence to the soul. Remic. By the fish we may understand 
the word concerning Christ, by the serpent the Devil 


VER. 9—)]1. ST. MATTHEW. 275 


himself. Or by the loaf may be understood spiritual doc- 
trine; by the stone ignorance; by the fish the water of Holy 
Baptism; by the serpent the wiles of the Devil, or unbelief. 
RaBan. Or; bread which is the common food signifies 
charity, without which the other virtues are of no avail. 
The fish signifies faith, which is born of the water of 
baptism, is tossed in the midst of the waves of this life 
and yet lives. Luke adds a third thing, an egg, which ets 
signifies hope; for an egg is the hope of the animal. To!” 
charity, He opposes a stone, that is, the hardness of hatred ; 
to faith, a serpent, that is, the venom of treachery; to hope, 
a scorpion, that is, despair, which stings backward, as the 
scorpion. Remic. The sense therefore is; we need not fear 
that should we ask of God our Father bread, that is doctrine 
or love, He will give us a stone; that is, that He will suffer 
our heart to be contracted either by the frost of hatred or by 
hardness of soul; or that when we ask for faith, He will 
suffer us to die of the poison of unbelief. Thence it follows, 
If then ye being evil. CHrys. This He said not detracting 
from human nature, nor confessing the whole human race to 
be evil; but He calls paternal love ext] when compared with 
His own goodness. Such is the superabundance of His 
love towards men. PsEupo-Curys. Because in comparison 
of God who is preeminently good, all men seem to be evil, as 
all light shews dark when compared with the sun. JEROME; 
Or perhaps he called the Apostles evil, in their person 
condemning the whole human race, whose heart is set to 
evil from his infancy, as we read in Genesis. Nor is it any Gen. 8, 
wonder that He should call this generation evil, as the 
Apostle also speaks, Seeing the days are evil. Auc. Or; Aug. 
He calls evil those who are lovers of this age; whence also Eee 
the good things which they give are to be called good 16. 
according to their sense who esteem them as good; nay, 
even in the nature of things they are goods, that is, temporal 
goods, and such as pertain to this weak life. Ip. For Aug. 
that good thing which makes men good is God. Gold andj, 3. 
silver are good things not as making you good, but as with 
them you may do good. If then we be evil, yet as having a 
Father who is good let us not remain ever evil. AUG. aug: 7 
If then we being evil, know how to give that which is asked Mont: 
T 2 i. 21. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


Luke 
11, 13. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


276 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


of us, how much more is it to be hoped that God will give 
us good things when we ask Him? PsEeupo-Curys. He 
says good things, because God does not give all things 
to them that ask Him, but only good things. Gtoss. For 
from God we receive only such things as are good, of 
what kind soever they may seem to us when we receive 
them; for all things work together for good to His beloved. 
Remic. And be it known that where Matthew says, He shall 
give good things, Luke has, shall give his Holy Spirit. But 
this ought not to seem contrary, because all the good things 
which man receives from God, are given by the grace of the 
Holy Spirit. 


12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for 
this is the Law and the Prophets. 


Aue. Firmness and strength of walking by the way of 
wisdom in good habits is thus set before us, by which men 
are brought to purity and simplicity of heart; concerning 
which having spoken a long time, He thus concludes, All 
things whatsoever ye would, &c. For there is no man who 
would that another should act towards him with a double 
heart. PsEupo-CHrys. Otherwise; He had above com- 
manded us in order to sanctify our prayers that men should 
not judge those who sin against them. Then breaking the 
thread of his discourse He had introduced various other 
inatters, wherefore now when He returns to the command 
with which He had begun, He says, All things whatsoever 
ye would, §c. Thatis; I not only command that ye judge 
not, but All things whutsoever ye would that men should do 
unto you, do ye unto them; and then you will be able to 
pray so as to obtain. Gross. Otherwise; The Holy Spirit 
is the distributor of all spiritual goods, that the deeds of 
charity may be fulfilled; whence He adds, All things there- 
fore &c. Curys. Otherwise; The Lord desires to teach 
that men ought to seek aid from above, but at the same time 
to contribute what lays in their power; wherefore when He 
had said, Ask, seek, and knock, He proceeds to teach openly 


VER. 12. ST. MATTHEW. 277 


that men should be at pains for themselves, adding, Whatso- 
ever ye would §c. AvcG. Otherwise; The Lord had promised aug. 
that He would give good things to them that ask Him. But Prey 
tbat He may own his petitioners, let us also own ours. For 

they that beg are in every thing, save having of substance, 

equal to those of whom they beg. What face can you have 

of making request to your God, when you do not acknowledge 

your equal? This is that is said in Proverbs, Whoso stoppeth ae 
his ear to the cry of the poor, he shall cry and shall not be’? 
heard. What we ought to bestow on our neighbour when 

he asks of us, that we ourselves may be heard of God, we 
may judge by what we would have others bestow upon us; 
therefore He says, All things whatsoever ye would.. CuRrys. 

He says not, All things whatsoever, simply, but All things 
therefore, as though He should say, If ye will be heard, 
besides those things which I have now said to you, do this 
also. And He said not, Whatsoever you would have done 
for you by God, do that for your neighbour; lest you should 
say, Buthow canI? but He says, Whatsoever you would have 
done to you by your fellow-servant, do that also to your 
neighbour. Avuc. Some Latin copies add here, good things”, Aug. 
which I suppose was inserted to make the sense more plain. Mont. - 
For it occurred that one might desire some crime to be i- 22. 
committed for his advantage, and should so construe this 
place, that he ought first to do the like to him by whom he 
would have it done to him. It were absurd to think that 

this man had fulfilled this command. Yet the thought is 
perfect, even though this be not added. For the words, All 
things whatsoever ye would, are not to be taken in their 
ordinary and loose signification, but in their exact and 
proper sense. For there is no will but only in the good; in but vid. 
the wicked it is rather named desire, and not will. Not that ae 
the Scriptures always observe this propriety; but where 

need is, there they retain the proper word so that none other 

need be understood. Cyprian; Since the Word of God, the Cypr. 
Lord Jesus Christ came to all men, He summed up all his! ¥* 
commands in one precept, Whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye also to them; and adds, for this is 

the Law and the Prophels. Pstupo-Cukys. For whatso- 


» So also S. Cyprian de Orat, (Tr. vii. 18. fin.) and the Latin MSS, 


278 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


-ever the Law and the Prophets contain up and down through 
the whole Scriptures, is embraced in this one compendious 
precept, as the innumerable branches of a tree spring from 
Greg. one root. GreG. He that thinks he ought to do to another 
oa as he expects that others will do to him, considers verily 
how he may return good things for bad, and better things 
for good. Curys. Whence what we onght to do is clear, as 
in our own cases we all know what is proper, and so we 
Aug. cannot take refuge in our ignorance. Ava. This precept 
a seems to refer to the love of our neighbour, not of God, as in 
i. 22. another place He says, there are two commandments on 
which hang the Law and the Prophets. But as He says not 
here, The whole Law, as He speaks there, He reserves a 
place for the other commandment respectiug the love of God. 
Aug. Ip. Otherwise; Scripture does not mention the love of God, 
De Trin. , , 
vii.7, Where it says, All things whalsoever ye would; because he 
who loves his neighbour must consequently love Love 
itself above all things; but God is Love; therefore he loves 


God above all things. 


13. Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the 
gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to de- 
struction, and many there be which go in thereat : 

14. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the 
way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that 
find it. 


one: _ Ava. The Lord had warned us above to have a heart single 
Mont. and pure with which to seek God; but as this belongs to but 
i 22. few, He begins to speak of finding out wisdom. For the search- 
ing out and contemplation whereof there has been formed 
through all the foregoing such aneye as may discern the narrow 
way and strait gate; whence He adds, Enter ye in ut the strait 
Gloss. gale. Goss. Though it be hard to do to another what you 
ord. would have done to yourself; yet so must we do, that we 
may enter the strait gate. Pseupo-Curys. Otherwise; This 
third precept again is connected with the right method of 
fasting, and the order of discourse will be this; But thou 


VER. 18, 14. ST. MATTHEW. 279 


when thou fastest anoint thy head; and after comes, Enter 
ye tn at the strait gate. For there are three chief passions 
in our nature, that are most adhering to the flesh; the 
desire of food and drink; the love of the man towards the 
woman; and thirdly, sleep. These it is harder to cut off 
from the fleshly nature than the other passions. And there- 
fore abstinence from no other passion so sanctifies the body 
as that a man should be chaste, abstinent, and continuing in 
watchings. On account therefore of all these righteousnesses, 
but above all on account of the most toilsome fasting, it is that 
He says, Enter ye in at the strait gate. The gate of per- 
dition is the Devil, through whom we enter into hell; the 
gate of life is Christ, through whom we enter into the 
kingdom of Heaven. The Devil is said to be a wide gate, 
not extended by the mightiness of his power, but made 
broad by the license of his unbridled pride. Christ is said 
to be a strait gate not with respect to smallness of power, 
but to His humility ; for He whom the whole world contains 
not, shut Himself within the limits of the Virgin’s womb. The 
way of perdition is sin of any kind. It is said to be broad, 
because it is not contained within the rule of any discipline, 
but they that walk therein follow whatever pleases them. 
The way of life is all righteousness, and is called narrow for 
the contrary reasons. It must be considered that unless one 
walk in the way, he cannot arrive at the gate; so they that 
walk not in the way of righteousness, it is impossible that 
they should truly know Christ. Likewise neither does he 
run into the hands of the Devil, unless he walks in the way of 
sinners. GLoss. Though love be wide, yet it leads men from Gloss. 
the earth through difficult and steep ways. It is sufficiently ord. 
difficult to cast aside all other things, and to love One only, 
not to aim at prosperity, not to fear adversity. Currys. But 
seeing He declares below, My yoke is pleasant, and my 
burden light, how is it that He says here that the way is 
strait and narrow? Even here He teaches that it is light 
and pleasant; for here is a way and a gate as that other, 
which is called the wide and broad, has also a way and a 
gate. Of these nothing is to remain; but all pass away. 
But to pass through toil and sweat, and to arrive at a good 
end, namely life, is sufficient solace to those who undergo 


280 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIE. 


these struggles. For if sailors can make light of storms and 
soldiers of wounds in hope of perishable rewards, much 
more when Heaven lies before, and rewards immortal, will 
none look to the impending dangers. Moreover the very 
circumstance that He calls it strait contributes to make it 
easy ; by this He warned them to be always watching ; this 
the Lord speaks to rouse our desires. He who strives in a 
combat, if he sees the prince admiring the efforts of the 
combatants, gets greater heart. Let us not therefore be sad 
when many sorrows befal us here, for the way is strait, but 
not the city; therefore neither need we look for rest here, 
nor expect any thing of sorrow there. When He says, Few 
there be that jind it, He points to the sluggishness of the 
many, and instructs His hearers not to look to the prosperity 
of the many, but to the toils of the few. JEROME; Attend to 
the words, for they have an especial force, many walk in the 
broad way—few find the narrow way. For the broad way 
needs no search, and is not found, but presents itself readily ; 
it is the way of all who go astray. Whereas the narrow 
way neither do all find, nor when they have found, do they 
straightway walk therein. Many, after they have found the 
way of truth, caught by the pleasures of the world, desert 
midway. 


15. Beware of false prophets, which come to you 
in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening 
wolves. 

16. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men 
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles ? 

17. Even so every good tree bringeth forth good 
fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. 

18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, 
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 

19. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit 
is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 

20. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. 


PsEupo-CHrys. The Lord had before commanded His 
Apostles, that they should not do their alms, prayers, and 


VER. 15—20. 8ST. MATTHEW. 281 


fastings before men, as the hypocrites; and that they might 
know that all these things may be done in hypocrisy, He 
speaks saying, Take heed of false prophets. AuG. When Aug. 
the Lord had said that there were few that find the strait gate rag . 
and narrow way, that heretics, who often commend them- ii. 23. 
selves because of the smallness of their numbers, might not 
here intrude themselves, He straightway subjoins, Jake 
heed of false prophets. Curys. Having taught that the gate 

is strait, because there are many that pervert the way that 
leads to it, He proceeds, Take heed of false prophets. In 
the which that they might be the more careful, He reminds 
them of the things that were done among their fathers, 
calling them false prophets ; for even in that day the like 
things fell out. Psrupo-CHrys. What is written below that 
the Law and the Prophets were until John, is said, because Mat.1], 
there should be no prophecy concerning Christ after He ve 
was come. Prophets indeed there have heen and are, but 
not prophesying of Christ, rather interpreting the things 
which had been prophesied of Christ by the ancients, that 

is by the doctors of the Churches. For no man can unfold 
prophetic meaning, but the Spirit of prophecy. The Lord 
then knowing that there should be false teachers, warns 
them of divers heresies, saying, Zake heed of false prophets. 
And forasmuch as they would not be manifest Gentiles, but 
lurk under the Christian name, He said not ‘ See ye,’ but, 
Take heed. For a thing that is certain is simply seen, or 
looked upon; but when it is uncertain it is watched or 
narrowly considered. Also He says Take heed, because it 

is a sure precaution of security to know him whom you 
avoid. But this form of warning, Jake heed, does not imply 
that the Devil will introduce heresies against God’s will, 
but by His permission only; but because He would not 
choose servants without trial, therefore He sends them 
temptation; and because He would not have them perish 
through ignorance, He therefore warns them beforehand. 
Also that no heretical teacher might maintain that He spoke 
here of Gentile and Jewish teachers and not of them, He 
adds, who come to you in sheep's clothing. Christians are 
called sheep, and the sheep’s clothing is a form of Chris- 
tianity and of feigned religion. And nothing so casts out 


282 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


all good as hypocrisy; for evil that puts on the semblance 
of good, cannot be provided against, because it is unknown. 
Again, that the heretic might not allege that He here speaks 
of the true teachers which were yet sinners, He adds, But 
inecardly they are ravening wolves. But Catholic teachers 
should they indeed have been sinners, are spoken of as 
servants of the flesh, yet not as ravening wolves, because 
it is not their purpose to destroy Christians. Clearly then 
it is of heretical teachers that He speaks; for they put on 
the guise of Christians, to the end they may tear in pieces the 
Christian with the wicked fangs of seduction. Concerning 
Acts 20,such the Apostle speaks, J know that after my departure 
? there will enter among you grievous wolves, not sparing the 
Jiock. Currys. Yet He may seem here to have aimed under 
the title of false prophets, not so much at the heretic, as at 
those who, while their life is corrupt, yet wear an outward 
face of virtuousness; whence it is said, By their fruits ye 
shall know them. For among heretics it is possible many 
times to find a good life, but among those I have named 
Aug. never. AuG. Wherefore it is justly asked, what fruits then 
hea He would have us look to? For many estecm among fruits 
ii. 24. gome things which pertain to the sheep’s clothing, and in 
this manner are deceived concerning wolves. For they 
practise fasting, almsgiving, or praying, which they display 
before men, seeking to please those to whom these things 
seem difficult. These then are not the fruits by which He 
teaches us to discern them. Those deeds which are done with 
good intention, are the proper fleece of the sheep itself, such as 
are done with bad intention, or in error, are nothing else 
than a clothing of wolves; but the sheep ought not to hate 
their own clothing because it is often used to hide wolves. 
What then are the fruits by which we may know an evil tree? 
Gal.5, The Apostle says, The works of the flesh are manifest, which 
are, fornication, uncleanness, §c. And which are they by 
which we may know a good tree? The same Apostle 
teaches, saying, The fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace. 
PsEupo-Curys. The fruits of a man are the confession of his 
faith and the works of his life; for he who utters according to 
God the words of humility and a true confession, is the sheep; 
but he who against the truth howls forth blasphemies against 


VER. 15—20. ST. MATTHEW. 283 


God, is the wolf. JEROME; What is here spoken of false pro- 
phets we may apply to all whose dress and speech promise one 
thing, and their actions exhibit another. But it is specially 

to be understood of heretics, who by observing temperance, 
chastity, and fasting, surround themselves as it were with a 
garment of sanctity, but inasmuch as their hearts within 
them are poisoned, they deceive the souls of the more simple 
brethren. AvucG. But from their actions we may conjecture Aug. 
whether this their outward appearance is put on for display. "°° °° 
For when by any temptations those things are withdrawn or 
denied them which they had either attained or sought to 
attain by this evil, then needs must that it appear whether 
they be the wolf in sheep’s clothing, or the sheep in his 
own. GreG. Also the hypocrite is restrained by peaceful Greg. 
times of Holy Church, and therefore appears clothed with Lhe 
godliness; but let any trial of faith ensue, straight the 
wolf ravenous at heart strips himself of his sheep’s skin, and 
shews by persecuting how great his rage against the good. 
Curys. And a hypocrite is easily discerned; for the way 
they are commanded to walk is a hard way, and the hypocrite 

is loth to toil. And that you may not say that you are 
unable to find out them that are such, He again enforces 
what He had said by example from men, saying, Do men 
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? PsEupo-CHRys. 
The grape has in it a mystery of Christ. As the bunch 
sustains many grapes held together by the woody stem, so 
likewise Christ holds many believers joined to Him by the 
wood of the Cross. The fig again is the Church which 
binds many faithful by a sweet embrace of charity, as the fig 
contains many seeds inclosed in one skin. The fig then has 
these significations, namely, love in its sweetness, unity in 
the close adhesion of its seeds. In the grape is shewn 
patience, in that it is cast into the wine-press—Joy, because 
wine maketh glad the heart of man—purity, because it 1s not 
mixed with water—and sweetness, in that it delighteth. The 
thorns and thistles are the heretics. And as a thorn or a 
thistle has sharp pricks on every part, so the Devil’s servants, 

on whatsoever side you look at them, are full of wickedness. 
Thorns and thistles then of this sort cannot bear the fruits of 
the Church. And having instanced in particular trees, as 


284 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


the fig, the vine, the thorn, and the thistle, He proceeds to 
shew that this is universally true, saying, Thus every good 
tree bringeth forth good fruit, but an evil tree bringeth forth 
Aug. evil fruit. Ava. In this place we must guard against the 
en “error of such as imagine that the two trees refer to two 
ii.25. different natures; the one of God, the other not. But we 
on affirm that they derive no countenance from these two trees ; 
vid.infr.as it will be evident to any who will read the context that 
Aug. De He is speaking here of men. Ip. These men of whom we 
cH ao have spoken are offended with these two natures, not con- 
sidering them according to their true usefulness ; whereas it 
is not by our advantage or disadvantage, but in itself con- 
sidered, that nature gives glory to her Framer. All natures 
then that are, because they are, have their own manner, their 
1 pacem OWN appearance, and as it were their own’ harmony, and are 
altogether good. Crys. But that none should say, An 
evil tree brings forth indeed evil fruit, but it brings forth 
also good, and so it becomes hard to discern, as it has a 
two-fold produce; on this account He adds, A good tree 
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil tree bring 
Aug. forth good fruit. Auc. From this speech the Manichees 
Sn a suppose that neither can a soul that is evil be possibly 
ii. 25. changed for better, nor one that is good into worse. As 
though it had been, A good tree cannot become bad, nor a 
bad tree become good; whereas it is thus said, 4 good tree 
cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor the reverse. The tree is 
the soul, that is, the man himself; the fruit is the man’s 
works. An evil man therefore cannot work good works, nor 
a good man evil works. Therefore if an evil man would 
work good things, let him first become good. But as long 
as he continues evil, he cannot bring forth good fruits. Like 
as it is indeed possible that what was once snow, should 
cease to be so; but it cannot be that snow should be warm; 
so it is possible that he who has been evil should be so 
no longer; but it is impossible that an evil man should 
do good. For though he may sometimes be useful, it is not 
he that does it, but it comes of Divine Providence super- 
intending. RaABAN. And man is denominated a good tree, or 
a bad, after his will, as it is good or bad. His fruit is his 
works, which can neither be good when the will is evil, 


VER. 15—20. ST. MATTHEW. 285 


nor evil when it is good. Ava. But as it is manifest that all vid. Op. 
evil works proceed from an evil will, as its fruits from an daly 
evil tree; so of this evil will itself whence will you say that it 4- &e. 
has sprung, except that the evil will of an angel sprung from 
an angel, of man from man? And what were these two 
before those evils arose in them, but the good work of God, 
a good and praiseworthy nature. See then out of good arises 
evil; nor was there any thing at all out of which it might 
arise but what was good. I mean the evil will itself, since 
there was no evil before it, no evil works, which could not 
come but from evil will as fruit from an evil tree. Nor can 
it be said that it sprung out of good in this way, because it 
was made good by a good God; for it was made of nothing, 
and not of God. JEROME; We would ask thosc heretics 
who affirm that there are two natures directly opposed to 
each other, if they admit that a good tree cannot bring forth 
evil fruit, how it was possible for Moses, a good tree, to sin 
as he did at the water of contradiction? Or for Peter to 
deny his Lord in the Passion, saying, J know not the man? 
Or how, on the other hand, could Moses’ father-in-law, an 
evil tree, masmuch as he believed not in the God of Israel, 
give good counsel? Currys. He had not enjoined them to 
punish the false prophets, and therefore shews them the 
terrors of that punishment that is of God, saying, Every tree 
that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be heen down, and 
cast into the fire. In these words He seems to aim also 
at the Jews, and thus calls to mind the word of John the 
Baptist, denouncing punishment against them in the very 
same words. For he had thus spoken to the Jews, warning 
them of the axe impending, the tree that should be cut down, 
and the fire that could not be extinguished. But if one will 
examine somewhat closely, here are two punishments, to be 
cut down, and to be burned; and he that is burned is also 
altogether cut out of the kingdom; which is the harder 
punishment. Many indeed fear no more than hell; but I 
say that the fall of that glory is a far more bitter punishment, 
than the pains of hell itself. For what evil great or small 
would not a father undergo, that he might see and enjoy 
a most dear son? Let us then think the same of that glory ; 
for there is no son so dear to his father as is the rest of the 


286 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


good, to be deceased and to be with Christ. The pain of hell 
is indeed intolerable, yet are ten thousand hells nothing 
to falling from that blessed glory, and being held in hate by 
Gloss. Christ. GLoss. From the foregoing similitude He draws 
mons" the conclusion to what He had said before, as being now 
manifest, saying, Therefore by their fruits ye shall know 
them. | 


21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, 
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that 
doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. 

22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, 
have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy 
name have cast out devils? and in thy name done 
many wonderful works ? | 

23. And then will I profess unto them, I never 
knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity. 


JEROME; As He had said above that those who have the 
robe of a good life are yet not to be received because of the 
impiety of their doctrines; so now on the other hand, He 
forbids us to participate the faith with those who while they 
are strong in sound doctrine, destroy it with evil works. 
For it behoves the servants of God that both their work 
should be approved by their teaching and their teaching by 
their works. And therefore He says, Not every one that 
saith unto me, Lord, Lord, enters into the kingdom of heaven. 

Chrys. CurRys. Wherein He seems to touch the Jews chiefly who 
xxiv. Placed every thing in dogmas; as Paul accuses them, If 
Hom: 2,thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law. PsEupDo- 
" Currys. Otherwise; Having taught that the false prophets 
and the true are to be discerned by their fruits, He now goes 

on to teach more plainly what are the fruits by which we are 

Aug. to discern the godly from the ungodly teachers. Ave. For 
eee even in the very name of Christ we must be on our guard 
ii. 24. against heretics, and all that understand amiss and love this 
world, that we may not be deceived, and therefore He says, 

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord. But it may 


VER. 2]—23. £T. MATTHEW. 287 


fairly create a difficulty how this is to be reconciled with 

that of the Apostle, No man can say that Jesus is the Lord,\ Cor. 
but by the Holy Ghost. For we cannot say that those who ”’*’ 
are not to enter into the kingdom of heaven have the Holy 
Spint. But the Apostle uses the word ‘ say,’ to express the 

will and understanding of him that says it. He only 
properly says a thing, who by the sound of his voice 
expresses hjs will and purpose. But the Lord uses the 
word in its ordinary sense, for he seems to say who neither 
wishes nor understands what he says. JEROME; For Scrip- 

ture uses to take words for deeds; according to which the 
Apostle declares, They make confession that they know God, Tit 1, 
but in works deny him. Amprosiaster; For all truth, ‘A cabe: 
by whomsoever uttered is from the Holy Spint. Aue. Let us Comm. 
not therefore think that this belongs to those fruits of which oh : 
He had spoken above, when one says to our Lord, Lord, hs See 
Lord; and thence seems to us to be a good tree; the true 
fruit spoken of is to do the will of God; whence it follows, 

But who doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven, he 

shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. MHitary; For 
obeying God’s will and not calling on His name, shall find 

the way to the heavenly kingdom. Psreupo-Cuarys. And 
what the will of God is the Lord Himself teaches, This 2s, John 6, 
He says, the will of him that sent me, that every man that aD. 
seeth the Son and believeth on him should have eternal life. 

The word believe has reference both to confession and con- 

duct. He then who does not confess Christ, or does not walk 
according to His word, shall not enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. CHkys. He said not he that doth My will, but the 

will of my Father, for it was fit so to adapt it in the mean while 

to their weakness. But the one secretly implied the other, seeing 

the will of the Son is no other than the will of the Father. 

Aug. Hereto it also pertains that we be not deceived by the Aug. 
name of Christ not only in such as bear the name and do aaa 
not the deeds, but yet more by certain works and miracles, ii. 25. 
such as the Lord wrought because of the unbelieving, but 

yet warned us that we should not be deceived by such 

to suppose that there was invisible wisdom where was a 
visible miracle ; wherefore He adds, saying, Many shall say 

to me in that day. Curys. See how He thus secretly brings 


1 Cor. 
13, 2. 


288 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Vif. 


in Himself. Here in the end of His Sermon He shews 
Himself as the Judge. The punishment that awaits sinners 
He had shewn before, but now only reveals who He is that 
shall punish, saying, Many shall say to me in that day. 
PsEupo-Curys. When, namely, He shall come in the majesty 
of His Father; when none shall any more dare with strife 
of many words either to defend a lie, or to speak against the 
truth, when each man’s work shall speak, and, his mouth 
be silent, when none shall come forward for another, but 
each shall fear for himself. For in that judgment the 
witnesses shall not be flattering men, but Angels speaking 
the truth, and the Judge is the righteous Lord; whence He 
closely images the cry of men fearful, and in straits, saying, 
Lord, Lord. For to call once is not enongh for him who 
is under the necessity of terror. Hitary. They even assure 
themselves of glory for their prophesying in teaching, for 
their casting out demons, for their mighty works; and 
hence promise themselves the kingdom of heaven, saying, 
Have we not prophesied in thy name? Curys. But there 
are that say that they spoke this falsely, and therefore were 
not saved. But they would not have dared to say this to 
the Judge in His presence. But the very answer and question 
prove that it was in His presence that they spoke thus. For 
having been here wondered at by all for the miracles which 
they wrought, and there seeing themselves punished, they say 
in wonderment, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name ? 
Others again say, that they did sinful deeds not while they 
thus were working miracles, but at a time later. But if this 
be so, that very thing which the Lord desired to prove would 
not be established, namely, that neither faith nor miracles 
avail ought where there is not a good life; as Paul also 
declares, If I have faith that I may remove mountains, but 
hare not charity, I am nothing. PsrEupo-Curys. But note 
that He says, in my name, not in My Spint; for they 
prophesy in the name of Christ, but with the spirit of the 
Devil; such are the diviners. But they may be known 
by this, that the Devil sometimes speaks falsely, the Holy 
Spirit never. Howbeit it is permitted to the Devil some- 
times to speak the truth, that he may commend his lying by 
this his rare truth. Yet they cast out demons in the name 


VER, 21—28. ST. MATTHEW. 289 


of Christ, though they have the spirit of his enemy; or 
rather, they do not cast them out, but seem only to cast them 
out, the demons acting in concert with them. Also they do 
mighty works, that is, miracles, not such as are useful and 
necessary, but useless and fruitless. AuGc. Read also what 
things the Magi did in Egypt in withstanding Moses. 
JEROME; Otherwise; To prophesy, to work wonders, to cast 
out aeons by diving power, is often not of his deserts who 
performs the works, but either the invocation of Christ’s 
name has this force; or it is suffered for the condemnation 
of those that invoke, or for the benefit of those that see and 
hear, that however they despise the men who work the 
wonders, they may give honour to God. So Saul and 
Balaam and Caiaphas prophesied; the sons of Sceva in the 
Acts of the Apostles were seen to cast out demons; and 
Judas with the soul of a traitor is related to have wrought 
Many signs among the other Apostles. Carys. For all are 
not alike fit for all things; these are of pure life, but have 
not so great faith; those again have the reverse. Therefore 
God converted these by the means of those to the shewing 
forth much faith; and those that had faith He called by 
this unspeakable gift of miracles to a better life; and to 
that end gave them this grace in great richness. And they 
say, We have done many mighty works. But because they 
were ungrateful towards those who thus honoured them, it 
follows rightly, Then will I confess unto you, I never knew 
you. JEROME; Emphatically, Then will 1 confess, for for 
long time He had forebore to say it. Pseupo-Curys. For 
great wrath ought to be preceded by great forbearance, 
that the sentence of God may be made more just, and the 
death of the sinners more merited. God does not know 
sinners because they are not worthy that they should be 
known of God; not that He altogether is ignorant concern- 
ing them, but because He knows them not for His own. 
For God knows all men according to nature, but He seems 
not to know them for that [le loves them not, as they seem 
not to know God who do not serve Him worthily. Curys. 
He says to them, J never knew you, as it were, not at the 
day of judgment only, but not even then when ye were 
working miracles. For there are many whom He has now 
VOL. I. U 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 


Cont. 


Adv. 
Leg. 
ii. 4. 


290 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


in abhorrence, and yet turns away His wrath before their 
punishment. JERoME; Note that He says, I never knew 
you, as being against some that say that all men have always 
been among rational creatures*, GREG. By this sentence it 
is given to us to learn, that among men charity and humility, 
and not mighty works, are to be esteemed. Whence also 
now the Holy Church, if there be any miracles of heretics, 
despises them, because she knows that they have not the 
mark of holiness. And the proof of holiness is not to work 
miracles, but to love our neighbour as ourselves, to think 
truly of God, and of our neighbour better than of ourselves. 
Aua. But never let it be said as the Manichees say, that the 
Lord spoke these things concerning the holy Prophets; He 
spoke of those who after the preaching of His Gospel seem 
to themselves to speak in His name not knowing what they 
speak. Hitary; But thus the hypocrites boasted, as though 
they spoke somewhat of themselves, and as though the 
power of God did not work all these things, being invoked ; 
but reading has brought them the knowledge of His doctrine, 
and the name of Christ casts out the demons. Out of our 
own selves then is that blessed eternity to be earned, and out 
of ourselves must be put forth something that we may will 
that which is good, that we may avoid all evil, and may rather 
do what He would have us do, than boast of that to which He 
enables us. These then He disowns and banishes for their 
evil works, saying, Depart from me, ye that work iniquity. 
JEROME; He says not, Who have worked, but, who work 
iniquity, that He should not seem to take away repentance. 
Ye, that is, who up to the present hour when the judgment 
is come, though ye have not the opportunity, yet retain the 
desire of sinning. PsEupo-CuHrys. For death separates 
the soul from the body, but changes not the purpose of the 
heart. 


24. Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of 
mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise 
man, which built his house upon a rock : 


® Origen was accused of saying that partakers of the Divine Word or Rea- 
all men were from their birth inwardly son. vid. Jerome, Ep. ad Avit. 


VER. 24—27. ST. MATTHEW. 291 


25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, 
and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and 
it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. 

26. And every one that heareth these sayings of 
mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a 
foolish man, which built his house upon the sand: 

27. And the rain descended, and the floods came, 
and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and 
it fell: and great was the fall of it. 


Curys. Because there would be some who would admire 
the things that were said by the Lord, but would not add 
that shewing forth of them which is in action, He threatens 
them before, saying, Every man that hears these words of 
mine, and does them, shall be likened to a wise man. 
PsEupo-CuHrys. He said not, I will account him that hears 
and does, as wise; but, He shall be likened to a wise man. 
He then that is likened is a man; but to whom is he 
likened? To Christ; but Christ is the wise man who has 
built His house, that is, the Church, upon a rock, that is, 
upon the strength of the faith. The foolish man is the 
Devil, who has built his house, that is, all the ungodly, 
upon the sand, that is, the insecurity of unbelief, or upon 
the carnal, who are called the sand on account of their 
barrenness ; both because they do not cleave together, but 
are scattered through the diversity of their opinions, and 
because they are innumerable. The rain is the doctrine 
that waters a man, the clouds are those from which the 
rain falls. Some are raised by the Holy Spirit, as the 
Apostles and Prophets, and some by the spirit of the 
Devil, as are the heretics. The good winds are the spirits 
of the different virtues, or the Angels who work invisibly 
in the senses of men, and lead them to good. The bad 
winds are the unclean spirits. The good floods are the 
Evangelists and teachers of the people; the evil floods 
are men full of an unclean spirit, and overflowing with 
many words; such are philosophers and the other pro- 
fessors of worldly wisdom, out of whose belly come rivers 
of dead water. The Church then which Christ has founded, 

U2 


292 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


neither the rain of false doctrine shall sap, nor the blast 
of the Devil overturn, nor the rush of mighty floods remove. 
Nor does it contradict this, that certain of the Church do 
fall; for not all that are called Christians, are Chnist’s, 


2Tim. but, The Lord knows them that are his. But against 


2, 19. 


that house that the Devil has built comes down the rain 
of true doctrine, the winds, that is, the graces of the Spirit, 
or the Angels; the floods, that is, the four Evangelists and 
the rest of the wise; and so the house falls, that is, the 
Gentile world, that Christ may rise; and the ruin of that 
house was great, its errors broken up, its falsehoods laid 
open, its idols throughout the whole world broken down. 
He then is like unto Christ, who hears Christ’s words, and 
does them; for he builds on a rock, that is, upon Christ, who 
is all good, so that on whatsoever kind of good any one shall 
build, he may seem to have built upon Christ. But as the 
Church built by Christ cannot be thrown down, so any 
such Christian who has built himself upon Christ, no ad- 


Rom. 8, versity can overthrow, according to that, Who shall separate 


41. 


us from the love of Christ? Like to the Devil is he 
that hears the words of Christ, and does them not. For 
words that are heard, and are not done, are likened to sand, 
they are dispersed and shed abroad. For the sand signifies 
all evil, or even worldly goods. For as the Devil’s house is 
overthrown, so such as are built upon the sand are destroyed 
and fall. And great is that ruin if he have suffered any 
thing to fail of the foundation of faith; but not if he have 
committed fornication, or homicide, because he has whence 
he may arise through penitence, as David. Rasan. Or the 
great ruin is to be understood that with which the Lord will 


Mat.25,say to them that hear and do not, Go ye into everlasting 


Jire. JEROME ; Or otherwise ; On sand which is loose and 
cannot be bound into one mass, all the doctrine of heretics 
is built so as to fall. Hitary; Otherwise; By the showers 
He signifies the allurements of smooth and gently invading 
pleasures, with which the faith is at first watered as with 
spreading rills, afterwards comes down the rush of torrent 
floods, that is, the motions of fiercer desire, and lastly, the 
whole force of the driving tempests rages against it, 
that is, the universal spirits of the Devil’s reign attack it. 


VER, 28, 29. ST. MATTHEW. 293 


Aug. Otherwise ; Rain, when it is put to denote any evil, is Aug. — 
understood as the darkness of superstition; rumours of men are y¢"", 


compared to winds; the flood signifies the lust of the flesh, in fin. 


as it were flowing over the land, and because what is brought 
on by prosperity is broken off by adversity. None of these 
things does he fear who has his house founded upon a rock, 
that is, who not only hears the command of the Lord, but 
who also does it. And in all these he submits himself to 
danger, who hears and does not. For no man confirms in 
himself what the Lord commands, or himself hears, but by 
doing it. But it should be noted, that when he said, He 
that heareth these words of mine, He shews plainly enough 
that this sermon is made complete by all those precepts by 
which the Christian life is formed, so that with good reason 
they that desire to live according to them, may be compared 
to one that builds on a rock. 


28. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended 
these sayings, the people were astonished at his 


doctrine: 
29. For he taught them as one having authority, 
and not as the Scribes. 


Goss. Having related Christ’s teaching, he shews its 
effects on the multitude, saying, And it came to pass, when 
Jesus had ended these words, the multitude wondered at his 
doctrine. Rasan. This ending pertains both to the finishing 
the words, and the completeness of the doctrines. That it is 
said that the multitude wondered, either signifies the unbe- 
lieving in the crowd, who were astonished because they did 
not believe the Saviour’s words; or is said of them all, in 
that they reverenced in Him the excellence of so great 
wisdom. PsEupo-Curys. The mind of man when satisfied 
reasonably brings forth praise, but when overcome, wonder. 
For whatever we are not able to praise worthily, we admiro. 
Yet their admiration pertained rather to Christ’s glory than 
to their faith, for had they believed on Christ, they would 
not have wondered. For wonder is raised by whatever 
surpasses the appearance of the speaker or actor; and thence 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


294 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIL. 


we do not wonder at what is done or said by God, because 
all things are less than God’s power. But it was the multi- 
tude that wondered, that is the common people, not the 
chief among the people, who are not wont to hear with the 
desire of learning; but the simple folk heard in simplicity ; 
had others been present they would have broken up their 
silence by contradicting, for where the greater knowledge is, 
there is the stronger malice. For he that is in haste to be 


Aug. De first, is not content to be second. Avuc. From that which is 
Cons. : : ee 
Ev.ii.19,.here said, He seems to have left the crowd of disciples— 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
XXV. 


those out of whom He chose twelve, whom He called 
Apostles—but Matthew omits to mention it. For to His 
disciples only, Jesus seems to have held this Sermon, which 
Matthew recounts, Luke omits. That after descending 
into a plain He held another like discourse, which Luke 
records, and Matthew omits. Still it may be supposed, that, 
as was said above, He delivered one and the same Sermon to 
the Apostles, and the rest of the multitude present, which 
has been recorded by Matthew and Luke, in different words, 
but with the same truth of substance; and this explains 
what is here said of the multitude wondering. Currys. He 
adds the cause of their wonderment, saying, He taught them 
as one having authority, and not as the Scribes and Pha- 
risees. But if the Scribes drove Him from them, seeing His 
power shewn in works, how would they not have been 
offended when words only manifested His power? But this 
was not so with the multitude; for being of benevolent 
temper, it is easily persuaded by the word of truth. Such 
however was the power wherewith He taught them, that it 
drew many of them to Him, and caused them to wonder ; 
and for their delight in those things which were spoken they 
did not leave Him even when He had done speaking; but 
followed Him as He came down from the mount. They 
were mostly astonished at His power, in that He spoke not 
referring to any other as the Prophets and Moses had spoken, 
but every where shewing that He Himself had authority ; 
for in delivering each law, He prefaced it with, But I say 
unto you. JEROME; For as the God and Lord of Moses 
himself, He of His own free will either added such things as 
seemed omitted in the Law, or even changed some; as above 


VER. 28, 29. ST. MATTHEW. 295 


we read, It was said by them of old.... But I say unto 

you. But the Scribes only taught the people what was 

written in Moses and the Prophets. Gree. Or, Christ spoke Greg. 

with especial power, because He did no evil from weakness, as 

but we who are weak, in our weakness consider by what 

method in teaching we may best consult for our weak 

brethren. Hiztary; Or; They measure the efficacy of His 

power, by the might of His words. AuG. This is what is Aug. 

signified in the eleventh Psalm, I will deal mightily with oe 19 

him ; the words of the Lord are pure words, silver tried in the 4°-'-\0, 
et seq. 

fire, purified of earth, purged seven times. ‘The mention of Ps. 12, 

this number admonishes me here to refer all these precepts to * 

those seven sentences that He placed in the beginning of 

this Sermon ; those, I mean, concerning the beatitudes. For 

one to be angry with his brother, without cause, or to say to 

him, Racha, or call him fool, is a sin of extreme pride, 

against which is one remedy, that with a suppliant spirit he 

should seek pardon, and not be puffed up with a spirit of 

boasting. Blessed, then, are the poor in spirit, for theirs ts 

the kingdom of heaven. We is consenting to his adversary, 

that is, in shewing reverence to the word of God, who 

goes to the opening His Father’s will, not with conten- 

tiousness of law, but with meekness of religion, therefore, 

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. 

Also whosoever feels carnal delight rebel against his right 

will, will cry out, O wretched man that I am! who shall Row. 7, 

deliver me from the body of this death? And in thus mourning * 

he will implore the aid of the consoler; whence, Blessed are 

they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. What is there 

that can be thought of more toilsome than in overcoming an 

evil practice to cut off those members within us that hinder 

the kingdom of heaven, and not be broken down with the 

pain of so doing? To endure in faithful wedlock all things 

even the most grievous, and yet to avoid all accusation of 

fornication. To speak the truth, and approve it not by 

frequent oaths, but by probity of life. But who would be 

bold to endure such toils, unless he burned with the love 

of righteousness as with a hunger and thirst? Blessed, there- 

fore, are they that hunger and thirst, for they shall be filled. 

Who can be ready to take wrong from the weak, to offer 


296 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. VII. 


himself to any that asks him, to love his enemies, to do good 
to them that hate him, to pray for them that persecute him, 
except he that is perfectly merciful? Therefore, Blessed are 
the merciful, for they shall find mercy. He keeps the eye 
of his heart pure, who places the end of his good actions 
not in pleasing men, nor in getting those things that are 
necessary to this life, and who does not rashly condemn 
any man’s heart, and whatever he gives to another gives 
with that intention with which he would have others give 
to him. Blessed, therefore, are the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God. It must needs be moreover, that by a pure 
heart should be found out the narrow way of wisdom, to— 
which the guile of corrupt men is an obstacle; Blessed are 
the peaceful, for they shall be called the sons of God. But 
whether we take this arrangement, or any other, those things 
which we have heard from the Lord must he done, if we 
would build upon the rock. 


CHAP. VIII. 


1. When he was come down from the mountain, 
great multitudes followed him. 

2. And, behold, there came a leper and wovehipped 
him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me 
clean. 

3. And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, 
saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately his 
leprosy was cleansed. 

4. And Jesus said unto him, See thou tell no man; 
but go thy way, shew thyself to the Priest, and offer 
the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto 
them. 


JEROME; After the preaching and teaching, is offered an 
occasion of working miracles, that by mighty works following, 
the preceding doctrine might be confirmed. PsEupo-Curys. quoad 
Because He taught them as one having authority, that He *"” 
might not thence be supposed to use this method of teaching 
from ostentation, He does the same in works, as one having 
power to cure; and therefore, When Jesus descended from the 
mountain, great multitudes followed him. PSEUDO-ORIGEN ; Pseudo- 
While the Lord taught on the mount, the disciples were }}"e°"" 
with Him, for to them it was given to know the secret things Liv. 5. 
of the heavenly doctrine ; but now as He came down from 
the mount the crowds followed Him, who had been altogether 
unable to ascend into the mount. They that are bowed by 
the burden of sin cannot climb to the sublime mysteries. 
But when the Lord came down from the mount, that is, 
stooped to the infirmity, and helplessness of the rest, in pity to 


298 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CUAP. VIII. 


their imperfections, great multitudes followed Him, some 
for renown, most for His doctrine, some for cures, or having 
their wants administered to. Haymo; Otherwise; By the 
mount on which the Lord sate is figured the Heaven, as it 
Is.66,1.is written, Heaven is my throne. But when the Lord sits 
on the mount, only the disciples come to Him; because 
before He took on Him the frailty of our human nature, 
Ps.76,1.God was known only in Judza; but when He came down 
from the height of his Divinity, and took upon Him the 
frailty of our human nature, a great multitude of the nations 
followed Him. Herein it is shewn to them that teach that 
their speech should be so regulated, that as they see each 
man is able to receive, they should so speak the word of 
God. For the doctors ascend the mountain, when they 
shew the more excellent precepts to the perfect; they come 
down from the mount, in shewing the lesser precepts to the 
weak. Pseupo-CHrys. Among others who were not able 
to ascend into the mount was the leper, as bearing the 
burden of sin; for the sin of our souls is a leprosy. And 
the Lord came down from the height of heaven, as from a 
mountain, that He might purge the leprousness of our sin; 
and so the leper as already prepared meets Him as He came 
Pseudo- down. PsEuDo-ORIGEN; He works the cures below, and does 
oe none in the mount; for there is a time for all. things under 
heaven, a time for teaching, and a time for healing. On the 
mount He taught, He cured souls, He healed hearts; which 
being finished, as He came down from the heavenly heights 
to heal bodies, there came to Him a leper and made 
adoration to Him; before he made his suit, he began to 
adore, shewing his great reverence. Pseupo-Curys. He 
did not ask it of Him as of a human physician, but adored 
Him as God. For faith and confession make a perfect 
prayer; so that the leprous man in adoring fulfilled the work 
of faith, and the work of confession in words, he made 
Pseudo- adoration to him, saying; Psrtupo-OricEN ; Lord, by Thee 
ae all things were made, Thou therefore, if thou wilt, canst 
make me clean. Thy will is the work, and all works are 
subject to Thy will. Thou of old cleansedst Naaman the 
Syrian of his leprosy by the hand of Elisha, and now, if 
thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. Curys. He said not, 


VER. 1—4, ST. MATTHEW. 299 


If Thou wilt ask of God, or, If Thou wilt make adoration to 
God ; but, If thou wilt. Nor did he say, Lord, cleanse me ; 
but left all to Him, thereby making Him Lord, and attributing 
to Him the power over all. Pszupo-CHkys. And thus he 
rewarded a spiritual Physician with a spiritual reward ; for 
as physicians are gained by money, so He with prayer. We 
offer to God nothing more worthy than faithful prayer. In 
that he says, Jf thou wilt, there is no doubt that Christ’s will 
is ready to every good work; but only doubt whether that 
cure would be expedient for him, because soundness of body 
is not good for all. Jf thou wilt then is as much as to say, 
I believe that Thou willest whatever is good, but I know not 
if this that I desire for myself is good. Curys. He was 
able to cleanse by a word, or even by mere will, but He put 
out His hand, He stretched forth his hand and touched him, 
to shew that He was not subject to the Law, and that to the 
pure nothing is impure. Elisha truly kept the Law in all 
strictness, and did not go out and touch Naaman, but sends 
him to wash in Jordan. But the Lord shews that He does 
not heal as a servant, but as Lord heals and touches; His 
hand was not made unclean by the leprosy, but the leprous 
body was made pure by the holy hand. For He came not 
only to heal bodies, but to lead the soul to the true wisdom. 
As then He-did not forbid to eat with unwashen hands, so 
here He teaches us that it is the leprosy of the soul we 
ought only to dread, which is sin, but that the leprosy of the 
body is no impediment to virtue. PsEupo-Curys. But though 
He transgressed the letter of the Law, He did not transgress 
its meaning. For the Law forbade to touch leprosy, because 
it could not hinder that the touch should not defile; there- 
fore it meant not that lepers should not be healed, but that 
they that touched should not be polluted. So He was not 
polluted by touching the leprosy, but purified the leprosy by 
touching it. Damascenus; For He was not only God, but Damas. 
man also, whence He wrought Divine wonders by touch oe ius 
and word; for as by an instrument so by His body theiii. '5. 
Divine acts were done. Currys. But for touching the 
leprous man there is none that accuses Him, because His 
hearers were not yet seized with envy against Him. PsEvpo- 
Currys. Had He healed him without speaking, who would 


300 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VIII. 


know by whose power he had been healed? So the will to 
heal was for the sake of the leprous man ;_ the word was for 
the sake of them that beheld, therefore He said, J «ill, be 
thou clean. JEROME; It is not to be read, as most of the 
Latins think, ‘ I will to cleanse thee ;’ but separately, He 
first answers, J will, and then follows the command, be thou 
clean. The leper has said, Jf thou tilt ; the Lord answers, 
I will; he first said, Thou canst make me clean; the Lord 
: spake, Be thou clean. Curys. No where else do we see 
Him using this word though He be working ever so signal a 
miracle ; but He here adds, J zeill, to confirm the opinion of 
the people and the leprous man concerning His power. 
Nature obeyed the word of the Purifier with proper speed, 
whence it follows, and straight his leprosy was cleansed. 
But even this word sfra‘ghtway is too slow to express the 
Pseudo- speed with which the deed was done. Pseupo-ORIGEN ; 
ae Because he was not slow to believe,.his cure is not delayed ; 
he did not linger in his confession, Christ did not linger in 
ate De His cure. AvG. Luke has mentioned the cleansing of this 
Ev.ii.19. leper, though not in the same order of events, but as his 
manner is to recollect things omitted, and to put first things 
that were done later, as they were divinely suggested ; so that 
what they had known before, they afterwards set down in 
writing when they were recalled to their minds. Curys. 
Jesus when healing his body bids him tell no man; Jeszs 
saith unto him, See thou tell no man. Some say that He 
gave this command that they might not through malice 
distrust his cure. But this is said foolishly, for He did not 
so cure him as that his purity should be called in question ; 
but He bids him ¢ell no man, to teach that He does not love 
ostentation and glory. How is it then that to another }\ whom 
Mark 5, He had healed He gives command to go and tell itt? What 
He taught in that was only that we should have a thankful 
heart; for He does not command that it should be published 
abroad, but that glory should be given to God. He teaches 
us then through this leper not to be desirous of empty 
honour; by the other, not to be ungrateful, but to refer all 
things to the praise of God. JrRomME; And in truth what 
need was there that he should proclaim with his mouth 
what was evidently shewed in his body ?, Hrtary; Or that 


VER. 1—4. ST. MATTHEW. 301 


this healing might be sought rather than offered, therefore 
silence is enjoined. JEROME; He sends him to the Priests, 

first, because of His humility that He may seem to defer to 

the Priests; secondly, that when they saw the leper cleansed 

they might be saved, if they would belicve on the Saviour, 

or if not that they might be without excuse; and, lastly, that 

He might not seem, as He was often charged, to be infringing 

the Law. Curys. He neither every where broke, nor every 
where observed, the Law, but sometimes the one, sometimes 

the other. The one was preparing the way for the wisdom 4 pla- 
that was to come, the other was silencing the irreverent tongue jive. 
of the Jews, and condescending to their weakness. Whence 

the Apostles also are seen sometimes observing, sometimes 
neglecting, the Law. PsEuDo-ORIGEN; Or, He sends him Pseudo- 
to the Priests that they might know that he was not cleansed pia 
according to the manner of the Law, but by the operation of 
grace. JEROME; It was ordained in the Law, that those 

that had been cleansed of a leprosy should offer gifts to the 
Priests; as it follows, And offer thy gift as Moses commanded 
for a testimony to them. Pseupo-Curys. Which is not to 

be understood, Moses commanded it for a testimony to them; 

but, Go thou and offer for a testimony. Curys. For Christ, 
knowing beforehand that they would not profit by this, said 

not, ‘ for their amendment,’ but, for a testemony to them; 

that is, for an accusation of them, and in attestation that all 
things that should have been done by Me, have been done. 

But though He thus knew that they would not profit by it, 

yet He did not omit any thing that behoved to be done; 

but they remained in their former ill-will. Also He said 

not, ‘ The gift that I command,’ but, that Moses communded, 

that in the meantime He might hand them over to the Law, 

and close the mouths of the unjust. That they might not say _ 
that He usurped the honour of the Priests, He fulfilled the work 

of the Law, and made a trial of them. PSEUDO-ORIGEN ; Pseudo- 
Or; offer thy gift, that all who see may believe the miracle. abi cap: 
Psgupo-Carys. Or; He commands the oblation, that should 

they afterwards seek to put him out, he might be able to 

say, You have received gifts on my cleansing, how do ye 

now cast me out as a leper? HrLary; Or we may read, 
Which Moses commanded for a testimony; inasmuch as 


302 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VIII. 


what Moses commanded in the Law is a testimony, not an 
Bede. effect. Brpr&; Should any be perplexed how, when the 
ee 3 Lord seems here to approve Moses’ offering, the Church 
Epiph. does not receive it, let him remember, that Christ had not 
yet offered His body for a holocaust. And it behoved that 
the typical sacrifices should not be taken away, before that 
which they typified was established by the testimony of 
the Apostles’ preaching, and by the faith of the people 
believing. By this man was figured the whole human race, 
for he was not only leprous, but, according to the Gospel of 
ieee 3, Luke, is described as full of leprosy. For all have sinned, 
and need glory of God; to wit, that glory, that the hand of 
the Saviour being stretched out, (that is, the Word being 
made flesh,) and touching human nature, they might be 
cleansed from the vanity of their former ways; and that 
they that had been long abominable, and cast out from the 
camp of God’s people, might be restored to the temple and 
the priest, and be able to offer their badies a living sacrifice 
Fe 110,to Him to whom it is said, Thou art a Priest for ever. 
Remic. Morally; by the leper is signified the sinner; for 
sin makes an unclean and impure soul; he falls down 
before Christ when he is confounded concerning his former 
sins; yet he ought to confess, and to seek the remedy of 
penitence ; so the leper shews his disease, and asks a cure. 
The Lord stretches out His hand when He affords the aid 
of Divine mercy; whereupon follows immediately remission 
of sin; nor ought the Church to be reconciled to the same, 
but on the sentence of the Priest. 


5. And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, 
there came unto him a centurion, beseeching him, 

6. And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home 
sick of the palsy, grievously tormented. 

7. And Jesus saith unto him, I will come and heal 
him. 

8. The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am 
not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof: 
but speak the word only, and my servant shall be 
healed. 


VER. 5—9. - ST. MATTHEW. 303 


~~ 


9. For I am a man under authority, having 
soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go, and 
he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; 
and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. 


PsEupo-Curys. The Lord having taught His disciples 
on the mount, and healed the leper at the foot of the mount, 
came to Capharnaum. This is a mystery, signifying that after 
the purification of the Jews He went to the Gentiles. 
Haymo; For Capharnaum, which is interpreted, The town of 
fatness, or, The field of consolation, signifies the Church, 
which was gathered out of the Gentiles, which is replenished 
with spiritual fatness, according to that, That my soul may be Ps.63,5. 
Jjilled with marrow and fatness, and under the troubles 
of the world is comforted concerning heavenly things, ac- 
cording to that, Thy consolations hare rejoiced my soul. Hence Ps. 94, 
it is said, When he had entered into Caphurnaum the centurion 9- 
came to him. Ava. This centurion was of the Gentiles, Aug. 
for Judza had already soldiers of the Roman empire. oa 
PsEupo-Curys. This centurion was the first-fruits of the 
Gentiles, and in comparison of his faith, all the faith of the 
Jews was unbelief; he neither heard Christ teaching, nor 
saw the leper when he was cleansed, but from hearing only 
that he had been healed, he believed more than he heard; 
and so he mystically typified the Gentiles that should come, — 
who had neither read the Law nor the Prophets concerning 
Christ, nor had seen Christ Himself work His miracles. He 
came to Him and besought Him, saying, Lord, my servant 
lieth at home sick of the palsy, and ts grievously afflicted. 
Mark the goodness of the centurion, who for the health of his 
servant was in so great haste and anxiety, as though by his 
death he should suffer loss, not of money, but of his well being. 
For he reckoned no difference between the servant and the 
master; their place in this world may be different, but their 
nature is one. Mark also his faith, in that he said not, Come 
and heal him, because that Christ who stood there was present 
in every place; and his wisdom, in that he said not, Heal him 
here on this spot, for he knew that He was mighty to do, wise 
to understand, and merciful to hearken, therefore he did but 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
XXxvi. 


Deut. 
32, 8. 


304 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


declare the sickness, leaving it to the Lord, by His merciful 
power to heal. And he ts grievously afflicted; this shews 
how he loved him, for when any that we love is pained or 
tormented, though it be but slightly, yet we think him more 
afflicted than he really is. Rasan. All these things he 
recounts with grief, that he is sick, that it is with palsy; 
that he is grievously afflicted therewith, the more to shew 
the sorrow of his own heart, and to move the Lord to have 
mercy. In like manner ought all to feel for their servants, 
and to take thought for them. Curys. But some say that 
he says these things in excuse of himself, as reasons why he 
did not bring the sick man himself. For it was impossible 
to bring one in a palsy, in great torment, and at the point to 
die. But I rather think it a mark of his great faith; inas- 
much as he knew that a word alone was enough to restore 
the sick man, he deemed it superfluous to bring him. 
Hitary; Spiritually interpreted, the Gentiles are the sick in 
this world, and afflicted with the diseases of sin, all their 
limbs being altogether unnerved, and unfit for their duties of 
standing and walking. The sacrament of their salvation is 
fulfilled in this centurion’s servant, of whom it is sufficiently 
declared that he was the head of the Gentiles that should 
believe. What sort of head this is, the song of Moses in 
Deuteronomy teaches, He set the bounds of the people ac- 
cording to the number of the Angels. Remic. Or, in the 
centurion are figured those of the Gentiles who first believed, 
and were perfect in virtue. For a centurion is one who 
commands a hundred soldiers; and a hundred is a perfect 
number. Rightly, therefore, the centurion prays for his servant, 
because the first-fruits of the Gentiles prayed to God for the 
salvation of the whole Gentile world. JEROME; The Lord 
seeing the centurion’s faith, humbleness, and thoughtfulness, 
straightway promises to go and heal him; Jesus saith unto 
him, I will come and heal him. Curys. Jesus here does 
what He never did; He always follows the wish of the sup- 
plicant, but here He goes before it, and not only promises to 
heal him, but to go to his house. This He does, that we 
may learn the worthiness of the centurion. Psrupo-Curys. 
Had not He said, I will come and heal him, the other would 
never have answered, J am not worthy. It was because it 


i ee 


VER. 5—9J. ST. MATTHEW. 305 


was a servant for whom he made petition, that Christ 
promised to go, in order to teach us not to have respect to 

the great, and overlook the little, but to honour poor and 

ich alike. JEROME; As we commend the centurion’s faith 

in that he believed that the Saviour was able to heal the 
paralytic; so his humility is seen in his professing himself 
unworthy that the Lord should come under his roof; as it 
follows, And the centurion answered and suid unto him, 
Lord, Tam not worthy that thou shouldest come under my 

roof. Ragan. Conscious of his gentile life, he thought he Raban. 
should be more burdened than profited by this act of con-° moe 
descension from Him with whose faith he was indeed endued, 

but with whose sacraments he was not yet initiated. Ava. Aug. 
By declaring himself unworthy, he shewed himself worthy," es 
not indeed into whose house, but into whose heart, Christ 

the Word of God should enter. Nor could he have said this 

with so much faith and humility, had he not borne in his 

heart Him whom he feared to have in his house. And 
indeed it would have been no great blessedness that Jesus 
should enter within his walls, if He had not already entered 

into his heart. CHRysoLocus. Mystically, his house was the Chrysol. 
body which contained his soul, which contains within it the *°5" 
freedom of the mind by a heavenly vision. But God dis- 
dains neither to inhabit flesh, nor to enter the roof of our body. 
Pseupo-OrIGEN; And now also when the heads of Churches, Pseudo- 
holy men and acceptable to God, enter your roof, then in See 
them the Lord also enters, and do you think of yourself as div. 5. 
receiving the Lord. And when you eat and drink the Lord’s 
Body'*, then the Lord enters under your roof, and you then 
should humble yourself, saying, Lord, I am not worthy. 

For where He enters unworthily, there He enters to the 
condemnation of him who receives Him. JEROME; The 
thoughtfulness of the centurion appears herein, that he saw 

the Divinity hidden beneath the covering of body; where- 

fore he adds, But speak the word only, and my servant will 

be healed. Pseupo-Curys. He knew that Angels stood by 


#“¢T am not worthy, Lord, that drews’s Devotions, and our Communion 
Thov shouldest come unto me; but as_ Service. ‘‘ We are not worthy so much 
Thou didst vouchsafe to lodge in aden as to gather up the crumbs under Thy 
or stable of brute beasts, &c.” vid. Table, &c.” 

Liturgy of St. John Chrys. also Bp. An- 


VOL. I. Xx 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


306 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


unseen to minister to Him, who turn every word of his into 
act; yea and should Angels fail, yet diseases are healed by His 
life-giving command. Huxary; Also he therefore says that it 
needed only a word to heal his son, because all the salvation 
of the Gentiles is of faith, and the life of them all is in the 
precepts of the Lord; therefore he continues saying, For 
Tam aman set under authority, having soldiers under me; 
and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; to another, Come, 
andhe cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth tt. 
PsEupo-Curys. He has here developed the mystery of the 
Father and the Son, by the secret suggestion of the Holy 
Spirit; as much as to say, Though I am under the command 
of another, yet have I power to command those who are 
under me; so also Thou, though under the command of the 
Father, in so far as Thou art Man, yet hast Thou power 
over the Angels. But Sabellius perhaps affirms, seeking 
to prove that the Son is the same as the Father, that it is to 
be understood thus; ‘If I who am set under authority have 
yet power to command, how much more Thou who art under 
the authority of none.’ But the words will not bear this 
exposition ; for he said not, ‘ If I being a man under au- 
thority, but, ‘For I also am a man set under authority ;’ 
clearly not drawing a distinction, but pointing to a resem- 
blance in this respect between himself and Christ. Ava. 
If I who am under command have yet power to com- 
mand others, how much more Thou whom all powers 
serve! Gtoss. Thou art able without Thy bodily presence, 
by the ministry of Thy Angels, to say to this disease, 
Go, and it will leave him; and to say to health, Come, 
and it shall come to him. Haymo; Or, we may under- 
stand by those that are set under the centurion, the natural 
virtues in which many of the Gentiles were mighty, or 
even thoughts good and bad. Uet us say to the bad, 
Depart, and they will depart; let us call the good, and 
they shall come; and our servant, that is, our body, let 


Aug. Deus bid that it submit itself to the Divine will. Aug. What 


Cons. 


Evan. ii. 


20. 


is here said seems to disagree with Luke’s account, When 
the centurion heard concerning Jesus, he sent unto him 


a 1 elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and 


heal his servant. And again, When he was come nigh to 


VER. 5—9. ST. MATTHEW. 307 


the house, the centurion sent friends unto him, saying, 
Lord, trouble not thyself, for I am not worthy that thou 
shouldest enter under my roof. CHRys. But some say that 
these are two different occurrences; an opinion which has 
much to support it. Of Him in Luke it is said, He loveth 
our nation, and has built us a synagogue; but of this one 
Jesus says, J have not found so great faith in Israel; 
whence it might seem that the other was a Jew. But in 
my opinion they are both the same person. What Luke 
relates that he sent to Jesus to come to him, betrays the 
friendly services of the Jews. We may suppose that when 
the centurion sought to go to Jesus, he was prevented by the 
Jews, who offered to go themselves for the purpose of 
bringing him. But as soon as he was delivered from their 
importunity, then he sent to say, Do not think that it was 
from want of respect that I did not come, but because I 
thought myself unworthy to receive you into my house. 
When then Matthew relates, that he spoke thus not through 
friends, but in his own person, it does not contradict Luke’s 
account; for both have only represented the centurian’s 
anxiety, and that he had a right opinion of Christ. And 
we may suppose that he first sent this message to Him by 
friends as He approached, and after, when He was come 
thither, repeated it Himself. But if they are relating different 
stories, then they do not contradict each other, but supply 
mutual deficiencies. Auc. Matthew therefore intended to Aug. 
state summarily all that passed between the centurion and “" ™?- 
the Lord, which was indeed done through others, with the 
view of commending his faith; as the Lord spoke, J have 
not found so great faith tn Israel. Luke, on the other hand, 
has narrated the whole as it was done, that so we might be 
obliged to understand in what sense Matthew, who could 
not err, meant that the centurion himself came to Christ, 
namely, in a figurative sense through faith. Curys. For 
indeed there is no necessary contradiction between Luke’s 
statement, that he had built a synagogue, and this, that he 
was not an Israelite ; for it was quite possible, that one who 
was not a Jew should have built a synagogue, and should 


love the nation. 
x 2 


308 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


10. When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said 
to them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have 
not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. 

11. And I say unto you, That many shall come 
from the east and west, and shall sit down with 
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of 
Heaven. 

12. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast 
out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. 

13. And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy 
way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto 
thee. And his servant was healed in the selfsame 
hour. 


Curys. As what the leper had affirmed concerning Christ’s 
power, If thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me, was confirmed by 
the mouth of Christ, saying, I wll, be thou clean; so here 
He did not blame the centurion for bearing testimony to 
Christ’s authority, but even commended him. Nay more; 
it is something greater than commendation that the Evan- 
gelist signifies in the words, But Jesus hearing marvelled. 


Pseudo- PSEUDO-ORIGEN; Observe how great and what that is at which 


Origen. 
Hom. io 


God the Only-begotten marvels! Gold, riches, principalities, 


Div. 5. are in His sight as the shadow or the flower that fadeth ; in 


Aug. 
super 


Gen. c. 


the sight of God none of these things is wonderful, as 
though it were great or precious, but faith only; this He 
wonders at, and pays honour to, this He esteems acceptable 
to Himself. Auc. But who was He that had created this faith 
in him, but only He who now marvelled at it? But even 


Man.i.8.had it come from any other, how should He marvel who 


knew all things future? When the Lord marvels, it is only 
to teach us what we ought to wonder at; for all these 
emotions in Him are not signs of passion, but examples of a 
teacher. Curys. Wherefore He is said to have thus 
wondered in the presence of all the people, giving them an 
example that they also should wonder at Him; for it follows, 
‘And he suid to them that followed, I have not found so great 


VER. 10O—13. ST. MATTHEW. 309 


faith in Israel. Avuc. He praises his faith, but gives no Aug. 
command to quit his profession of a soldier. J EROME 3 Pent, 
This He speaks of the present generation, not of all the *xii. 74. 
Patriarchs and Prophets of past ages. Psrupo-Curys. 
Andrew believed, but it was after John had said, Behold Jobn 1, 
the Lamb of God; Petcr believed, but it was at the a 
preaching of Andrew; Philip believed, but it was by 
reading the Scriptures ; and Nathanael first received a proof 

of His Divinity, and then spoke forth his confession of faith. 
Psgupo-ORIGEN; Jairus a prince in Israel, making request for Pseudo- 
his daughter, said not, ‘ Speak the word,’ but, ‘Come quickly.’ Shier 
Nicodemus, hearing of the sacrament of faith, asks, How can jhe 3, 
these things be? Mary and Martha say, Lord, if thou hadst *: John 11, 
been here, my brother had not died; as though distrusting 21. 
that God’s power could be im all places at the same time. 
Psgupo-Curys. Or, if we would suppose” that his faith was 
greater than even that of the Apostles, Christ’s testimony to 

it must be understood as though every good in a man should 

be commended relatively to his character; as it were a great 

thing in a countryman to speak with wisdom, but in a 
philosopher the same would be nothing wonderful. In this 

way it may be said of the centurion, In none other have I 
found so great faith in Israel. CHrys. For it is a different 
thing for a Jew to believe and for a Gentile. JEROME; Or 
perhaps in the person of the centurion the faith of the 
Gentiles is preferred to that of Israel; whence He proceeds, 

But I say unto you, Many shall come from the east and 
from the west. AuG. He says, not ‘ all,’ but many; yet Aug. 
these from the east and west; for by these two quarters the ae 
whole world is intended. Haymo; Or; From the east shall 

come they, who pass into the kingdom as soon as they are 
enlightened ; from the west they who have suffered persecu- 

tion for the faith even unto death. Or, he comes from the east, 

who has served God from a child; he from the west who 

in decrepit age has turned to God. Pstupo-ORIGEN; [low Pseudo- 
then does He say in another place, that the chosen are few ? cheae 
Because in each generation there are few that are chosen, 

but when all are gathered together in the day of visitation 

they shall be found many. They shall sit down, not the 


b The text of Pseudo-Chrys. has ‘ si non sumus ausi putare,’ 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 
cont. 
aust. 
xvi. 24. 


Job 24, 
19. 


310 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


bodily posture, but the spiritual rest, not with human food, 
but with an eternal feast, swith Abraham, Isuac, and Jacob, 
in the kingdom of heaven, where is light, joy, glory, and 
eternal length of days. JEROME; Because the God of 
Abraham, the Maker of heaven, is the Father of Christ, 
therefore also is Abraham in the kingdom of heaven, and 
with him will sit down the nations who have believed in 
Christ the Son of the Creator. Auc. As we see Christians 
called to the heavenly feast, where is the bread of righteous- 
ness, the drink of wisdom; so we see the Jews in reproba- 
tion. Zhe children of the kingdom shall be cast into outer 
darkness, that is, the Jews, who have received the Law, who 
observe the types of all things that were to be, yet did not 
acknowledge the realities when present. JEROME; Or the 
Jews may be called the children of the kingdom, because 
God reigned among them heretofore. CuHrys. Or, He calls 
them the children of the kingdom, because the kingdom was 
prepared for them, which was the greater grief to them. 
Auc. Moses set before the people of Israel no other God 
than the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Christ sets 
forth the very same God. So that so far was He from seek- - 
ing to turn that people away from their own God, that He 
therefore threatened them with the outer darkness, because 
He saw them turned away from their own God. And in this 
kingdom He tells them the Gentiles shall sit down with 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for no other reason than that 
they held the faith of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. To these 
Fathers Christ gives His testimony, not as though they had 
been converted after death, or had received justification after 
His passion. JEROME; It is called outer darkness, because 
he whom the Lord casts out leaves the light. Haymo; 
What they should suffer there, He shews when He adds, 
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Thus in 
metaphor He describes the sufferings of the tormented | 
limbs; the eyes shed tears when filled with smoke, and the 
teeth chatter together from cold. This shews that the 
wicked in hell shall endure both extreme cold and extreme 
heat: according to that in Job, They shall pass from rivers 
of snow to the scorching heat. JEROME; Weeping and 
gnashing of teeth are a proof of bones and body; truly then 


VER. 14, 15. ST. MATTHEW. 311 


is there a resurrection of the same limbs, that sank into the 
grave. Raban. Or; The gnashing of teeth expresses the 
passion of remorse; repentance coming too late and self- 
accusation that he has sinned with such obstinate wicked- 
ness. Remic. Otherwise; By outer darkness, He means 
foreign nations; for these words of the Lord are a historical 
prediction of the destruction of the Jews, that they were to 
be led into captivity for their unbelief, and to be scattered 
over the earth; for tears are usually caused by heat, gnashing 
of teeth by cold. Weeping then is ascribed to those who 
should be dispersed into the warmer climates of India and 
Ethiopia, gnashing of teeth to those who should dwell in 
the colder regions, as Hyrcania and Scythia. Curys. But 
that none might suppose that these were nothing more 
than fair words, He makes them credible by the miracles 
following, And Jesus said to the centurion, Go, and be it 
done to thee as thou hast believed. Rasan. As though He 
had said, According to the measure of thy faith, so be thy 
grace. For the merit of the Lord may be communicated 
even to servants not only through the merit of their faith, 
but through their obedience to rule. It follows, And his 
servant was healed in the self-same hour. Curys. Wherein 
admire the speediness, shewing Christ’s power, not only 
to heal, but to do it in a moment of time. AuG. As Aug. 
the Lord did not enter the centurion’s house with His ¢. 3, 
body, but healed the servant, present in majesty, but 
absent in body; so He went among the Jews only in the 
body, but among other nations He was neither born of a 
Virgin, nor suffered, nor endured human sufferings, nor did 
divine wonders; and yet was fulfilled that which was spoken, 

A people that I have not known hath served me, and hath i 18, 
obeyed me by the hearing of the ear. ‘The Jews beheld, yet ~ 
crucified Him; the world heard, and believed. 


14. And when Jesus was come into Peter’s house, 
he saw his wife’s mother laid, and sick of a fever. 
15. And he touched her hand, and the fever left 


her: and she arose, and ministered unto them. 


ANSELM. Matthew having in the leper shewn the healing 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
XXVil. 


Gloss. 
non oce. 


Rede. 
in loe. 


312 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


of the whole human race, and in the centurion’s servant that 
of the Gentiles, now figures the healing of the synagogue in 
Peter’s mother-in-law. He relates the case of the servant, 
first, because it was the greater miracle, and the grace was 
greater in the conversion of the Gentile; or because the 
synagogue should not be fully converted till the end of the 
age when the fulness of the Gentiles should have entered 
in. Peter's house was in Bethsaida. Curys. Why did He 
enter into Peter’s house? I think to take food; for it follows, 
And she arose, and ministered to them. For He abode with 
His disciples to do them honour, and to make them more 
zealous. Observe Peter’s reverence towards Christ ; though 
his mother-in-law lay at home sick of a fever, yet he did not 
force Him thither at once, but waited till His teaching should 
be completed, and others healed. For from the beginning 
he was instructed to prefer others to himself. Wherefore 
he did not even bring Him thither, but Christ went in of 
Himself; purposing, because the centurion had said, J um 
not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof, to shew 
what He granted to a disciple. And He did not scorn to 
enter the humble hut of a fisherman, instructing us in every 
thing to trample upon human pride. Sometimes He heals 
by a word, sometimes He reaches forth His hand; as here, 
He touched her hand, and the fever left her. For He would 
not always work miracles with display of surpassing power, 
but would sometimes be hid. By touching her body He 
not only banished the fever, but restored her to perfect 
health. Because her sickness was such as art could cure, 
He shewed his power to heal, in doing what medicine could 
not do, giving her back perfect health and strength at once ; 
which is intimated in what the Evangelist adds, And she 
arose, and ministered to them. JEROME; For naturally the 
greatest weakness follows fever, and the evils of sickness 
begin to be felt as the patient begins to recover; but that 
health which is given by the Lord’s power is complete at 
once. Gtoss. And it is not enough that she is cured, but 
strength is given her besides, for she arose and ministered 
unto them. Curys. This, she arose and ministered unto 
them, shews at once the Lord’s power, and the woman’s 
feeling towards Christ. Berpr; Figuratively; Peter’s house 


VER. 14, 15. ST. MATTHEW. 313 


is the Law, or the circumcision, his mother-in-law the syna- 
gogue, which is as it were the mother of the Church com- 
mitted to Peter. She is in a fever, that is, she is sick of 
zealous hate, and persecutes the Church. The Lord touches 

her hand, when He turns her carnal works to spiritual uses. 
Remic. Or by Peter’s mother-in-law may be understood the 
Law, which according to the Apostle was made weak 
through the flesh, i. e. the carnal understanding. But when 

the Lord through the mystery of the Incarnation appeared 
visibly in the synagogue, and fulfilled the Law in action, and 
taught that it was to be understood spiritually; straightway it 

thus allied with the grace of the Gospel received such strength, 

that what had been the minister of death and punishment, 
became the minister of life and glory. Rasan. Or, every Raban. 
soul that struggles with fleshly lusts is sick of a fever, but‘ oe 
touched with the hand of Divine mercy, it recovers health, 
and restrains the concupiscence of the flesh by the bridle of 
continence, and with those limbs with which it had served 
uncleanness, it now ministers to righteousness. HILARY; 
Or; In Peter’s wife’s mother is shewn the sickly condition 
of infidelity, to which freedom of will is near akin, being 
united by the bonds as it were of wedlock. By the Lord’s 
entrance into Peter’s house, that is into the body, unbelief is 
cured, which was before sick of the fever of sin, and ministers 
in duties of righteousness to the Saviour. Auc. When this Aug. De 
miracle was done, that is, after what, or before what, Matthew fy. 9). 
has not said. For we need not understand that it took place 

just after that which it follows in the relation; he may be 
returning here to what he had omitted above. For Mark 
relates this after the cleansing of the leper, which should Mark}, 

. 1 30. 

seem to follow the sermon on the mount, concerning which 

Mark is silent. Luke also follows the same order in relating 

this concerning Peter’s mother-in-law as Mark; also inserting 

it before that long sermon which seems to be the same with 
Matthew’s sermon on the mount. Dut what matters itin what 

order the events are told, whether something omitted before 

is brought in after, or what was done after is told earlier, so 

long as in the same story he does not contradict either 
another or himself? For as it is in no man’s power to choose 

in what order he shall recollect the things he has once 


314 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


known, it is likely enough that each of the Evangelists 
thought himself obliged to relate all in that order in which 
it pleased God to bring to his memory the various events. 
Therefore when the order of time is not clear, it cannot 
import to us what order of relation any one of them may have 
followed. 


16. When the even was come, they brought unto 
him many that were possessed with devils: and he 
cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all 
that were sick: 

17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken 
by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our 
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. 


Curys. Because the multitude of believers was now very 
great, they would not depart from Chnist, though time 
pressed; but in the evening they bring unto Him the sick. 
When tt was evening, they brought unto him many 

Aug.Dethat had demons. Avuc. The words, Now when it was 
ee evening, shew that the evening of the same day is meant. 
is would not have been implied, had it been only when it 

ecas evening. Remic. Christ the Son of God, the Author of 
human salvation, the fount and source of all goodness, 
furnished heavenly medicine, He cast out the spirits 

with a word, and healed all that were sick. Deemons and 
diseases He sent away with a word, that by these signs, and 
mighty works, He might shew that He was come for the 
salvation of the human race. CuHurys. Observe how great a 
multitude of cured the Evangelist here runs through, not 
relating the case of each, but in one word introducing an 
innumerable flood of miracles. That the greatness of the 
miracle should not raise unbelief that so much people and so 
various diseases could be healed in so short a space, he 
brings forward the Prophet to bear witness to the things 

that were done, That it might be fulfilled which was spoken 

by Esaias the Prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities. 
RaBpan. Took them not that He should have them Himself, 

but that He should take them away from us; and bare our 


VER. 18—22. ST. MATTHEW. 315 


sicknesses, in that what we were too weak to bear, He should 
bear for us. ReEmic. He took the infirmity of human nature 
so as to make us strong who had before been weak. 
Hitary; And by the passion of His body, according to the 
words of the Prophet, He absorbed all the infirmities of 
human weakness. CuHrys. The Prophet seems to have 
meant this of sins; how then does the Evangelist explain it 
of bodily diseases? It should be understood, that either he 
cites the text literally, or he intends to inculcate that most 
of our bodily diseases have their origin in sins of the 
soul; for death itself has its root in sin. JEROME; It 
should be noted, that all the sick were healed not in 
the morning nor at noon, but rather about sunset; as a 
corm of wheat dies in the ground that it may bring forth 
much fruit. RaBan. Sunset shadows forth the passion 
and death of Him Who said, While I am in the world, John 9, 
I am the light of the world. Who while He lived tem-* 
porally in the flesh, taught only a few of the Jews; but 
having trodden under foot the kingdom of death, promised 
the gifts of faith to all the Gentiles throughout the world. 


18. Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about 
him, he gave commandment to depart unto the 
other side. 

19. And a certain Scribe came, and said unto 
him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou 
goest. 

20. And Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have 
holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the 
Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 

21. And another of his disciples said unto him, 
Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father. 

22. But Jesus said unto him, Follow me; and let 
the dead bury their dead. 


Curys. Because Christ not only healed the body, but 
purified the soul also, He desired to shew forth true 
wisdom, not only by curing diseases, but by doing nothing 


316 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


with ostentation; and-therefore it is said, Now when Jesus 
saw yreat multitudes about him, he commanded his disciples 
to cross over to the other side. This He did at once 
teaching us to be lowly, softening the ill-will of the 
Jews, and teaching us to do nothing with ostentation. 
Remic. Or; He did this as one desiring to shun the 
thronging of the multitude. But they hung upon Him 
in admiration, crowding to see Him.. For who would 
depart from one who did such miracles? Who would 
not wish to look upon His open face, to see His mouth 
that spoke such things? For if Moses’ countenance was 
made glorious, and Stephen’s as that of an Angel, gather 
from this how it was to have been supposed that their 
common Lord must have then appeared; of whom the 
Ps.45, Prophet speaks, Thy form is fair above the sons of men. 
e Hirary; The name disciples is not to be supposed to be 
confined to the twelve Apostles; for we read of many 
Aug. disciples besides the twelve. AucG. It is clear that this 
ubi “uP: day on which they went over the lake was another day, 
and not that which followed the one on which Peter's 
mother-in-law was healed, on which day Mark and Luke relate 
that He went out into the desert. CHrys. Observe that 
He does not dismiss the multitudes, that He may not 
offend them. He did,say to them, Depart ye, but bade 
His disciples go away from thence, thus the crowds might 
hope to be able to follow. Remic. What happened 
between the command of the Lord given, and their crossing 
over, the Evangelist purposes to relate in what follows ; 
And one of the Scribes came to him and said, Master, I 
will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. JEROME; This 
Scribe of the Law who knew but the perishing letter, 
would not have been turned away had his address been, 
‘ Lord, I will follow Thee.’ But because he esteemed the 
‘iterator Saviour only as one of many masters, and was a 'man of 
the letter (which is better expressed in Greek, yeappuateds) 
not a spintual hearer, therefore he had no place where 
Jesus might lay His head. It is suggested to us that 
he sought to follow the Lord, because of His great miracles, 
for the sake of the gain to be derived from them; and was 
therefore rejected; seeking the same thing as did Simon 


VER. 18—22, ST. MATTHEW. 317 


Magus when he would have given Peter money. Curys. 
Observe also how great his pride; approaching and 
speaking as though he disdained to be considered as one 

of the multitude; desiring to shew that he was above 
the rest. HrLtary; Otherwise; This Scribe being one 

of the doctors of the Law, asks if he shall follow Him, 

as though it were not contained in the Law that this is 

He whom it were gain to follow. Therefore He discovers 

the feeling of unbelief under the diffidence of his enquiry. 
For the taking up of the faith is not by question but 

by following. Curys. So Christ answers him not so 
much to what he had said, but to the obvious purpose 

of his mind. Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have holes, 
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man 
hath not where to lay his head; as though He had said; 
JEROME; Why do you seek to follow Me for the sake of 
the riches and gain of this world, when My poverty is 
such that I have neither lodging nor home of My own? 
Curys. This was not to send him away, but rather to 
convict him of evil intentions; at the same time permitting 
him if he would to follow Christ with the expectation of 
poverty. AucG. Otherwise; The Son ofman hath not where Aug. 
to lay his head; that is, in your faith. The foxes have holes, \oo"}. 
in your heart, because you are deceitful. The birds of the air 
have nests, in your heart, because you are proud. Deceitful and 
proud follow Me not; for how should guile follow sincerity ? 
Gree. Otherwise; The fox is a crafty animal, lying hid in Greg. 
ditches and dens, and when it comes abroad never going in mane 
a straight path, but in crooked windings; birds raise them- 
selves in the air. By the foxes then are meant the subtle 
and deceitful demons, by the birds the proud demons; as 
though He had said; Deceitful and proud demons have 
their abode in your heart; but my lowliness finds no rest in 

a proud spirit. Auc. He was moved to follow Christ be- Aug. 
cause of the miracles; this vain desire of glory is signified by mare 
the birds; but he assumed the submissiveness of a disciple, q. 5. 
which deceit is signified by the foxes. Rasan. Heretics 
confiding in their art are signified by the foxes, the evil 
spirits by the birds of the air, who have their holes and their 
nests, that is, their abodes in the heart of the Jewish people. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


318 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VIII. 


Another of his disciples saith unto him, Lord, suffer me first 
to go and bury my father. JEROME; In what one thing is 
this disciple like the Scribe? The one called Him Master, 
the other confesses Him as his Lord. The one from filial 
piety asks permission to go and bury his father; the other 
offers to follow, not seeking a master, but by means of his 
master seeking gain for himself. H1tary; The disciple does 
not ask whether he shall follow Him; for he already believed 
that he ought to follow, but prays to be suffered first to bury 
his father. Ava. The Lord when He prepares men for the 
Gospel will not have any excuse of this fleshly and temporal 
attachment to interfere, therefore it follows ; Jesus said unto 
him, Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their dead. 
Currys. This saying does not condemn natural affection to 
our parents, but shews that nothing ought to be more binding 
on us than the business of heaven; that to this we ought to 
apply ourselves with all our endeavours, and not to be slack, 
however necessary or urgent are the things that draw us 
aside. For what could be more necessary than to bury a 
father? What more easy? For it could not need much time. 
But in this the Lord rescued him from much evil, weeping, 
and mourning, and from the pains of expectation. For after 
the funeral there must come examination of the will, division 
of the inheritance, and other things of the same sort; and 
thus trouble following trouble, like the waves, would have 
borne him far from the port of truth. But if you are not yet 
satisfied, reflect further that oftentimes the weak are not 
permitted to know the time, or to follow to the grave; even 
though the dead be father, mother, or son; yet are they not 
charged with cruelty that hinder them; it is rather the 
reverse of cruelty. And it is a much greater evil to draw 
one away from spiritual discourse; especially when there 
were who should perform the rites; as here, Leave the dead 
to bury their dead. Ava. As much as to say; Thy father is 
dead; but there are also other dead who shall bury their 
dead, because they are in unbelief. Cuarys. This moreover 
shews that this dead man was not his; for, I suppose, he 
that was dead was of the unbelieving. If you wonder at the 
young man, that in a matter so necessary he should have 
asked Jesus, and not have gone away of his own accord, 


VER. 23-—27,. BT. MATTHEW. 319 


wonder much more that he abode with Jesus after he was 
forbidden to depart; which was not from lack of affection, 

but that he might not interrupt a business yet more neces- 

sary. HirLary; Also, because we are taught in the begin- 

ning of the Lord’s prayer, first to say, Our Father, which art 

tn heaven; and since this disciple represents the believing 
people; he is here reminded that he has one only Father in Mat. 23, 
heaven, and that between a believing son and an unbelieving ~* 
Father the filial relation does not hold good. We are also 
admonished that the unbelieving dead are not to be mingled 

with the memories of the saints, and that they are also dead 

who live out of God; and the dead are buried by the dead, 
because by the faith of God it behoves the living to cleave 

to the living (God.) JEROME; But if the dead shall bury the 

dead, we ought not to be careful for the dead but for the 
living, lest while we are anxious for the dead, we ourselves 
should be counted dead. Grec. The dead also bury the Greg. 
dead, when sinners protect sinners. They who exalt sinners set 
with their praises, hide the dead under a pile of words. 
RaBan. From this we may also take occasion to observe, 

that lesser goods are to be sometimes forfeited for the sake of 
securing greater. AuG. Matthew relates that this was done Aug. De 
when He gave them commandment that they should go over gy i 93, 
the lake, Luke, that it happened as they walked by the way; 
which is no contradiction, for they must have walked by the 

way that they might come to the lake. 


23. And when he was entered into a ship, his 
disciples followed him. 

24. And, behold, there arose a great tempest in 
the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the 
waves: but he was asleep. 

25. And his disciples came to him, and awoke 
him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish. 

26. And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, 
O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the 
winds and the sea; and there was a great calm. 

27. But the men marvelled, saying, What manner 


Pseudo- 
Origen. 
Hom. in 


320 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey 
him! 


Psrupo-Oricen; Christ having performed many great and 
wonderful things on the land, passes to the sea, that there also 


div. vii. He might shew forth His excellent power, presenting Himself 


Chrys. 


Hom. 


XXVill. 


Pseudo- 
Origen. 
ubi sup. 


Jer. 10, 
18. 


before all men as the Lord of both earth and sea. And when 
he was entered into a boat, his disciples followed him, not being 
weak but strong and established in the faith. Thus they followed 
Him not so much treading in His footsteps, as accompanying 
Him in holiness of spirit. Curys. He took His disciples 
with Him, and in a boat, that they might learn two lessons; 
first, not to be confounded in dangers, secondly, to think 
lowly of themselves in honour. That they should not think 
great things of themselves because He kept them while He 
sent the rest away, He suffers them to be tossed by the 
waves. Where miracles were to be shewn, He suffers the 
people to be present; where temptations and fears were to 
be stilled, there He takes with Him only the victors of the 
world, whom He would prepare for strife. Psrupo-ORIGEN; 
Therefore, having entered into the boat He caused the sea to 
rise; And, lo, there arose a great tempest in the sea, so that the 
boat was covered by the waves. ‘This tempest did not arise 
of itself, but in obedience to the power of Him Who gave 
commandment, who brings the winds out of his treasures. 
There arose a great tempest, that a great work might be 
wrought; because by how much the more the waves rushed 
into the boat, so much the more were the disciples troubled, 
and sought to be delivered by the wonderful power of the 
Saviour. Curys. They had seen others made partakers of 
Christ’s mercies, but forasmuch as no man has so strong a 
sense of those things that are done in the person of another as 
of what is done to himself, it behoved that in their own bodies 
they should feel Christ’s mercies. Therefore He willed that 
this tempest should arise, that in their deliverance they might 
have a more lively sense of His goodness. This tossing of 
the sea was a type of their future trials of which Paul speaks, 
LI would not have you ignorant, brethren, how that we were 
troubled beyond our strength. But that there might be time 
for their fear to arise, it follows, But he was asleep. For if 


VER, 23—27. ST. MATTHEW. $21. 


the storm had arisen while He was awake, they would either 
not have feared, or not have prayed Him, or would not have 
believed that He had the power to still it. Psrvpo-ORIGEN ; Pseudo- 
Wonderful, stupendous event! He that never slumbereth nor ee 
sleepeth, is said to be asleep. He slept with His body, but 
was awake in His Deity, shewing that He bare a truly human 
body which He had taken on Him, corruptible. He slept 
with the body that He might cause the Apostles to watch, 
and that we all should never sleep with our mind. With so 
great fear were the disciples seized, and almost beside them- 
selves, that they rushed to Him, and did not modestly or 
gently rouse Him, but violently awakened Him, His disciples 
came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us, we 
perish. JeRome; Of this miracle we have a type in Jonah, 
who while all are in danger is himself unconcerned, sleeps, 
and is awakened. PsEupo-OriGEN; O ye true disciples! ye pseudo- 
have the Saviour with you, and do ye fear danger? Life itself ce 
is among you, and are ye afraid of death? They would 
answer, We are yet children, and weak, and are therefore 
afraid; whence it follows, Jesus saith unto them, Why are ye 
afraid, O ye of little faith? As though He had said, If 
ye have known me mighty upon earth, why believe ye 
not that I am also mighty upon the sea? And even 
though death were threatening you, ought ye not to sup- 
port it with constancy? He who believes a little will be 
reasoned with ; he who believes not at all will be neglected. 
Curys. If any should say, that this was a sign of no small 
faith to go and rouse Jesus; it is rather a sign that they had 
not a right opinion concerning Him. They knew that when 
wakened He could rebuke the waves, but they did not yet 
know that He could do it while sleeping. For this cause 
He did not do this wonder in the presence of the multitudes, 
that they should not be charged with their little faith; but 
He takes His disciples apart to correct them, and first stills 
the raging of the waters. Zhen he arose, and rebuked the 
winds and the sea, and there was a great calm. JEROME; 
From this passage we understand, that all creation is con- 
scious of its Creator; for what may be rebuked and com- 
manded is couscious of the mind commanding. I do not 
mean as some heretics hold, that the whole creation is 
YOL. I. y 


322 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


animate°—but by the power of the Maker things which to us 
Pseudo- have no consciousness have to Him. PsEupo-Or1GEN; There- 
acs fore He gave commandment to the winds and the sea, and 
from a great storm it became a great calm. For it behoves 
Him that is great to do great things; therefore He who first 
greatly stirred the depths of the sea, now again commands a 
great calm, that the disciples who had been too much 
troubled might have great rejoicing. CuHRys. Observe also 
that the storm is stilled at once entirely, and no trace of 
disturbance appears; which is beyond nature; for when a 
storm ceases in the course of nature, yet the water is wont 
to be agitated for some time longer, but here all is tran- 
Ps. 107, quillity at once. Thus what is said of the Father, He spuke, 
and the storm of wind ceused, this Christ fulfilled in deed ; 
for by His word and bidding only He stayed and checked the 
waters. For from His appearance, from His sleeping, and 
His using a boat, they that were present supposed Him a 
man only, and on this account they fell into admiration 
of Him; And the men marvelled, saying, What manner of 
Gloss. man ts this, for thé winds and the sea obey him? GLtoss. 
non o¢e- Chrysostom explains thus, What manner of man is this? His 
sleeping and His appearance shewed the man; the sea and 
Pseudo- the calm pointed out the God. Pseupo-Oricey; But who 
ee were the men that marvelled? You must not think that the 
Apostles are here meant, for we never find the Lord’s disciples 
mentioned with disrespect; they are always called either the 
Disciples or the Apostles. They marvelled then who sailed 
with Him, whose was the boat. Jerome; But if any shall 
contend that it was the disciples who wondered, we shall 
answer they are rightly spoken of as ‘ the men,’ seeing they had 
Pseudo- not yet learnt the power of the Saviour. Pseupo-OriceEn ; 
oe This is not a question, What manner of man is this? but 
an affirmation that He is one whom the winds and the sea 
obey. What manner of man then is this? that is, how 
powerful, how mighty, how great! He commands every 


© Origen is accused of maintaining thcy knew, praised, and prayed to God 
that the sun, moon, and stars had souls, through Christ, that they were liable to 
(which had been originally created in- sin, and that they, and the elements 
corporeal, and for sinning had been also, would undergo the future judg- 
united with the heavenly bodies,) that ment. vid. Jerom. ad Avit. 4. 
they were in consequence rational, that 


i» 


VER, 23—27. ST. MATTHEW. 323 


creature, and they transgress not His law; men alone 
disobey, and are therefore condemned by His judgment. 
Figuratively; We are all embarked in the vessel of the 
Holy Church, and voyaging through this stormy world with 
the Lord. The Lord Himself sleeps a merciful sleep while 
we suffer, and awaits the repentance of the wicked. Huinary; 
Or; He sleeps, because by our sloth He is cast asleep in us. 
This is done that we may hope aid from God in fear of 
danger; and that hope though late may be confident that it 
shall escape danger by the might of Christ watching within. 
Pszupo-Oricen; Let ustherefore come to Him with joy,saying 
with the Prophet, Arise, O Lord, why sleepest thou? And Ps. 44, 
He will command the winds, that is, the daemons, who raise an 
the waves, that is, the rulers of the world, to persecute the 
saints, and He shall make a great calm around both body 
and spirit, peace for the Church, stillness for the world. 
Rasan. Otherwise; The sea is the turmoil of the world; the 
boat in which Christ is embarked is to be understood the 
tree of the cross, by the aid of which the faithful having 
passed the waves of the world, arrive in their heavenly 
country, as on a safe shore, whither Christ goes with His 
own; whence He says below, He that will come after me, Mat. 16, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. “ 
When then Christ was fixed on the cross, a great commotion 
was raised, the minds of His disciples being troubled at His 
passion, and the boat was covered by the waves. For the 
whole strength of persecution was around the cross of Christ, 
on which He died; as it is here, But he was asleep. His 
sleep is death. The disciples awaken the Lord, when 
troubled at His death; they seek His resurrection with 
earmmest prayers, saying, Save us, by rising again ; we perish, 
by our trouble at Thy death. He rises again, and rebukes 
the hardness of their hearts, as we read in other places. He 
commands the winds, in that He overthrew the power of the 
Devil; He commanded the sea, in that He disappointed the 
malice of the Jews; and there was «a great calm, because the 
minds of the disciples were calmed when they beheld His 
resurrection. BEpgE. Or; The boat is the present Church, Bede. 
in which Christ passes over the sea of this world with His moe 
y¥2 


324 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


own, and stills the waves of persecution. Wherefore we 
may wonder, and give thanks. 


283. And when he was come to the other side into 
the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two 
possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, 
exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that 
way. 

29. And, behold, they cried out, saying, What 
have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? 
art thou come hither to torment us before the time? 

30. And there was a good way off from them an 
herd of many swine feeding. 

31. So the devils besought him, saying, If thou 
cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of 
swine. 

32. And he said unto them, Go. And when they 
were come out, they went into the herd of swine: 
and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently 
down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the 
waters. 

33. And they that kept them fled, and went their 
ways into the city, and told every thing, and what 
was befallen to the possessed of the devils. 

34. And, behold, the whole city came out to meet 
Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought him 
that he would depart out of their coasts. 


Currs. Because there were who thought Christ to be 
a man, therefore the demons came to proclaim His divinity, 
that they who had not seen the sea raging and again still, might 
hear the demons crying; And when he was come to the other 
side in the country of the Gergesenes, there met him teeo men 
having demons. Rasan. Gerasa is a town of Arabia beyond 
Jordan, close to Mount Gilead, which was in the possession 


VER. 28—34, ST. MATTHEW. $25 


of the tribe of Manassch, not far from the lake of Tiberias, 
into which the swine were precipitated. Auc. Whereas Aue: De 
Matthew relates that there were two who were afflicted with ¢) 12 . 
dzmons, but Mark and Luke mention only one, you must 
understand that one of them was a person of note, for whom 
all that country was in grief, and about whose recovery there 
was much care, whence the fame of this miracle was the 
more noised abroad. Currys. Or; Luke and Mark chose 
to speak of one who was more grievously afflicted ; whence 
also they add a further description of his calamity; Luke 
saying that he brake his bonds and was driven into the 
desert; Mark telling that he ofttimes cut himself with 
stones. But they neither of them say that there was only 
one, Which would be to contradict Matthew. What is added 
respecting them that they came /rom among the tombs, 
alludes to a mischievous opinion, that the souls of the 
dead become demons. Thus many soothsayers use to kill 
children, that they may have their souls to cooperate with 
them; and dzmoniacs also often cry out, I am the spirit of 
such an one. But it is not the soul of the dead man that 
then crics out, the damon assumes his voice to deceive the 
hearers. For if the soul of a dead man has power to enter 
the body of another, much more might it enter its own. 
And it is more unreasonable to suppose that a soul that has 
suffered cruelty should cooperate with him that injured it, 
or that a man should have power to change an incorporeal 
being into a different kind of substance, such as a human 
soul into the substance of a demon. For even in material 
body, this is beyond human power; as, for example, no man 
can change the body of a man into that of an ass. And it 
is not reasonable to think that a disembodied spirit should 
wander to and fro on the earth. The souls of the righteous Wisd. 3, 
are in the hand of God, therefore those of young children !- 
must be so, seeing they are not evil. And the souls of 
sinners are at once conveyed away from hence, as is clear 
from Lazarus, and the rich man. Because none dared to 
bring them to Christ because of their fierceness, therefore 
Christ goes to them. This their fierceness is intimated when 
it is added, Exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass that 
way. So they who hindered all others from passing that 


326 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


way, found one now standing in their way. For they were 
tortured in an unseen manner, suffering intolerable things 
from the mere presence of Christ. Avd, lo, they cried out, 
saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of 
David? JreRomE; This is no voluntary confession followed 
up by a reward to the utterer, but one extorted by the com- 
pulsion of necessity. A runaway slave, when after long 
time he first beholds his master, straight thinks only of 
deprecating the scourge; so the demons, seeing the Lord 
suddenly moving upon the earth, thought He was come to 
judge them. Some absurdly suppose, that these demons 
knew the Son of God, while the Devil knew Him not, 
because their wickedncss was less than his. But all the 
knowledge of the disciple must be supposed in the Master. 


Aug. De AUG. God was so far known to them as it was His pleasure 


Civ. Dei, 


ix. 21. 


to be known; and He pleased to be known so far as it was 
needful. He was known to them therefore not as He is Life 
eternal, and the Light which enlightens the good, but by 
certain temporal effects of His excellence, and signs of His 
hidden presence, which are visible to angelic spirits though 
evil, rather than to the infirmity of human nature. JEROME; 
But both the Devil and the demons may be said to have 
rather suspected, than known, Jesus to be the Son of God. 
Psgeupo-AuG. When the demons cry out, What have we to 


’ do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? we must suppose them 


to have spoken from suspicion rather than knowledge. For 
had. they known him, they never would have suffered the 
Lord of glory to be crucified. Remic. But as often as they 
were tortured by His excellent power, and saw Him working 
signs and miracles, they supposed Him to be the Son of 
God ; when they saw Him hungry and thirsty, and suffering 
such things, they doubted, and thought Him mere man. 
It should be considered that even the unbelieving Jews when 
they said that Christ cast out demons in Beelzebub, and 
the Arians who said that He was a creature, deserve con- 
demnation not only on God’s sentence, but on the confession 
of the demons, who declare Christ to be the Son of God. 
Rightly do they say, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, 
thou Son of God? that is, our malice and Thy grace have 
nothing in common, according to that the Apostle speaks, 


VER. 28—34. ST. MATTHEW. 827 


There is no fellowship of light with darkness. Curys. That2 Cor.6, 
this should not be thought to be flattery, they cry out what os 
they were experiencing, Art thou come to torment us before 

the time? Aue. Either because that came upon them un- Aug. De 
expectedly, which they looked for indeed, but supposed more me tig 
distant; or because they thought their perdition consisted 

in this, that when known they would be despised; or 
because this was before the day of judgment, when they 
should be punished with eternal damnation. JEROME; For 

the presence of the Saviour is the torment of demons. 
Curyrs. They could not say they had not sinned, because 
Christ had found them doing evil, and marring the work- 
manship of God; whence they supposed that for their more 
abundant wickedness the time of the last punishment which 

shall be at the day of judgment should not be tarried for to 
punish them. Avc. Though the words of the demons are Aug. De 
variously reported by the three Evangelists, yet this is no py ,,94. 
difficulty; for they either all convey the same sense, or 

may be supposed to have been all spoken. Nor again 
because in Matthew they speak in the plural, in the 
others in the singular number; because even the other 

two Evangelists relate that when asked his name, he an- 
swered, Legion, shewing that the demons were many. Now 

there was not far from thence a herd of many swine 
feeding; and the demons prayed him, saying, If thou 

cast us out hence, send us into the swine. GREG. For Greg. 
the Devil knows that of himself he has no power ton 16. 
do any thing, because it is not of himself that he exists 

as a spirit. Remic. They did not ask to be sent into 

men, because they saw Him by whose excellence they 

were tortured existing in human shape. Nor did they 

ask to be sent into sheep, because sheep are by God’s 
institution clean animals, and were then offered in the 
temple of God. But they requested to be sent into the 
swine rather than into any of the other unclean animals, 
because this is of all animals the most unclean; whence 

also it has its name ‘ porcus,’ as being ‘ spurcus,’ filthy, 

and delighting in filthiness; and demons also delight in 

the filthiness of sin. They did not pray that they might 

be sent into the air, because of their eager desire of hurting 


1,? 
Oieve- 
~ 


| aad ‘ 
WerAAag 


328 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ’ CHAP, VIIE. 


men. And he saith unto them, Go. Curys. Jesus did 
not say this, as though persuaded by the demons, but 
with many designs’ therein. One, that He might shew 
the mighty power to hurt of these daemons, who were 
in possession of the two men; another, that al] might see 
that they had no power against the swine unless by His 
sufferance ; thirdly, to shew that they would have done 
more grievous hurt to the men, had they not even in their 
calamities been aided by Divine Providence, for they hate 
men more than rational animals. By this it is manifest 
that there is no man who is not supported by Divine 
Providence ; and if all are not equally supported by it, 
neither after one manner, this 1s the highest character- 
istic of Providence, that it is extended to each man 
according to his need. Besides the above-mentioned 
things, we iearn also that He cares not only for the whole 
together, but for each one in particular; which one may 
see clearly in these dwemoniacs, who would have been long 
before choked in the decp, had not Divine care preserved 
them. He also permitted them to go into the herd of 
swine, that they that dwelt in those parts might know 
His power. For where He was known to none, there 
He makes His miracles to shine forth, that He may bring 
them to a confession of His divinity. JERoME; The 
Saviour bade them go, not as yielding to their request, 
but that by the death of the swine, an occasion of man’s 
salvation might be offered. But they went out, (to wit, 
out of the men,) and went into the swine; and, lo, the whole 
herd rushed violently headlong into the sea, and perished in 
the waters. Let Manicheus blush; if the souls of men 
and of beasts be of one substance, and one origin, how 
should two thousand swine have perished for the sake 
of the salvation of two men? Currys. The demons 
destroyed the swine because they are ever striving to 
bring men into distress, and rejoice in destruction. The 
greatness of the loss also added to the fame of that which 
was done; for it was published by many persons; namely, 
by the men that were healed, by the owners of the swine, 
and by those that fed them; as it follows, But they that 
fed them fled, and went into the town, and told all, and 


VER. 28—834. ST. MATTHEW. 329 


concerning them that had the demons; and, behold, the 
whole town went out to meet Jesus. But when they should 
have adored Him, and wondered at His excellent power, 
they cast Him from them, as it follows, And when they saw 
him, they besought him that he weuld depart out of their 
coasts. Observe the clemency of Christ next to His ex- 
cellent power; when those who had received favours from 
Him would drive Him away, He resisted not, but departed, 
and left those who thus pronounced themselves unworthy of 
His teaching, giving them as teachers those who had been 
delivered from the dzmons, and the feeders of the swine. 
JEROME; Otherwise; This request may have proceeded 
from humility as well as pride; like Peter, they may have 
held themselves unworthy of the Lord’s presence, Depart Lute 5, 
from me, for Tama sinful man, O Lord.  Rasan. Gerasa®- 
is interpreted ‘ casting out the dweller,’ or, ‘a stranger 
approaching; this is the Gentile world which cast out the 
Devil from it; and which was first far off, but now 
made near, after the resurrection being visited by Christ 
through His preachers. AMBROSE; The two demoniacs are Amp, in 
also a type of the Gentile world; for Noah having he 8. 
three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, Shem’s posterity’ 
alone was taken into the inheritance of God, while from the 
other two sprang the nations of the Gentiles. HuLary; 
Thus the demous held the two men among the tombs with- 
out the town, that is, without the synagogue of the Law and 
the Prophets; that is, they infested the original seats of the 
two nations, the abodes of the dead, making the way of this 
present life dangerous to the passers by. Rasan. It is not 
without cause that he speaks of them as dwelling among the 
tombs; for what else are the bodies of the faithless but 
sepulchres of the dead, in which the word of God dwells 
not, but there is enclosed the soul dead in sins. He 
says, So that no man might pass through that way, because 
before the coming of the Saviour the Gentile world was 
inaccessible. Or, by the two, understand both Jews and 
Gentiles, who did not abide in the house, that is, did not rest 
in their conscience. But they abode in tombs, that is, 
delighted themselves in dead works, and suffered no man to 
pass by the way of faith, which way the Jews obstructed. 


330 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. VIII. 


Hitary; By their coming forth to meet Him is signified the 
willingness of men flocking to the faith. The demons 
seeing that there is no longer any place left for them among 
the Gentiles, pray that they may be suffered to dwell among 
the heretics; these, seized by them, are drowned in the sea, 
that is, in worldly desires, by the instigations of the dzmons, 
Bede. in and perish in the unbelief of the rest of the Gentiles. BEDE; 
eee ’ Or; The swine are they that delight in filthy manners; for 
unless one live as a swine, the devils do not receive power 
over him; or at most, only to try him, not to destroy him. 
That the swine were sent headlong into the lake, signifies, 
that when the people of the Gentiles are delivered from the 
condemnation of the demons, yet still they who would not 
believe in Christ, perform their profane mtes in _ secret, 
drowned in a blind and deep curiosity. That they that fed 
the swine, fled and told what was done, signifies that even 
the leaders of the wicked though they shun the law of 
Christianity, yet cease not to proclaim the wonderful power 
of Christ. When struck with terror, they entreat Him to 
depart from them, they signify a great number who, well 
satisfied with their ancient life, shew themselves willing to 
honour the Christian law, while they declare themselves 
unable to perform it. H1tary; Or; The town is a type of 
the Jewish nation, which having heard of Christ’s works goes 
forth to meet its Lord, to forbid Him to approach their 
country and town; for they have not received the Gospel. 


CHAP. IX. 


I. And he entered into a ship, and passed over, 
and came into his own city. 

2. And, behold, they brought to him a man sick 
of the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their 
faith said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good 
cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee. 

3. And, behold, certain of the Scribes said within 
themselves, This man blasphemeth. 

4. And Jesus knowing their thoughts said, Where- 
fore think ye evil in your hearts ? 

5. For whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be for- 
given thee; or to say, Arise, and walk ? 

6. But that ye may know that the Son of man 
hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he 
to the sick of the palsy,) Arise; take up thy bed, and 
go unto thine house. 

7. And he arose, and departed to his house. 

8, But when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, 
and glorified God, which had given such power unto 
men. 


Curys. Christ had above shewn His excellent power by Chrys. 
teaching, when he taught them as one having authority ; yx. 
in the leper, when He said, J will, be thou clean; by the 
centurion, who said to Him, Speak the word, and my servant 
shall be healed; by the sea which He calmed by a word; 
by the demons who confessed Him; now again, in another 
and greater way, He compels His enemies to confess the 


Chryso'. 
Serm., 
50. 


332 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


equality of His honour with the Father; to this end it 
proceeds, And Jesus entered into a ship, and passed over, and 
came into his own city. He entered a boat to cross over, 
who could have crossed the sea on foot; for He would not 
be always working miracles, that He might not take away 
the reality of His incarnation. CHRrysotocus. The Creator of 
all things, the Lord of the world, when He had for our sakes 
straitened Himself in the bonds of our flesh, began to have 
His own cuuntry as a man, began tv be a citizen of Judxa, 
and to have parents, though Himself the parent of all, that 
affection might attach those whom fear had separated. 
Curys. By his on city is here meant Capharnaum. For one 
town, to wit, Bethlehem, had received Hlim to be born there; 
another had brought Him up, to wit, Nazareth; and a third 
received Him to dwell there continually, namely, Capharnaum. 


Aug-De AuG. That Matthew here speaks of his own cily, and Mark 


on 


Ss. 
Ey. ii.25. 


1 civitas 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


calls it Capharnaum, would be more difficult to be reconciled 
if Matthew had @xpressed it Nazareth. But as it is, all 
Galilee might be called Christ’s city, because Nazareth was 
in Galilee; just as all the Roman empire, divided into many 
states, was still called the Roman city'. Who can doubt then 
that the Lord in coming to Galilee is rightly said to come 
into his own city, whatever was the town in which He 
abode, especially since Capharnaum was exalted into the 
metropolis of Galilee? JERoME; Or; This city may be no 
other than Nazareth, whence He was called a Nazarene. 
Aue. And if we adopt this supposition, we must say that 
Matthew has omitted all that was done from the time that 
Jesus entered into His own city till He came to Capharnaum, 
and has proceeded on at once to the healing of the paralytic ; 
as in many other places they pass over things that inter- 
vened, and carry on the thread of the narrative, without 
noticing any interval of time, to something else; so here, 
And, lo, they bring unto him a paralytic laying on a bed. 
Curys. This paralytic is not the same as he in John. 
For he lay by the pool, this in Capharnaum; he had 
none to assist him, this was borne on a bed. JEROME; 
On a bed, because he could not walk. CHrys. He does 
not universally demand faith of the sick, as, for example, 
when they are mad, or from any other sore sickness are 


VER, 1—8. ST. MATTHEW. 333 


not in possession of their minds; as it is here, seeing 
their faith; JEROME; not the sick man’s, but theirs that 
bare him. Curys. Seeing then that they shewed so great 
faith, He also shews His excellent power; with full power 
forgiving sin, as it follows, He said to the paralytic, Be of 
good courage, son, thy sins are forgiven thee. CHRysoLoGus. Chrysol. 
Of how great power with God must a man’s own faith be, when us 4 
that of others here availed to heal a man both within and 
without. The paralytic hears his pardon pronounced, in 
silence uttering no thanks, for he was more anxious for the 
cure of his body than his soul. Christ therefore with good 
reason accepts the faith of those that bare him, rather than 
his own hardness of heart. Curys. Or, we may suppose 
even the sick man to have had faith; otherwise he would 
not have suffered himself to be let down through the roof as 
the other Evangelist relates. JEROME; O wonderful hu- 
mility! This man feeble and despised, crippled in every limb, - 
He addresses as son. The Jewish Priests did not deign to 
touch him. Even therefore His son, because his sins were 
forgiven him. Hence we may learn that diseases are often 
the punishment of sin; and therefore perhaps his sins are 
forgiven him, that when the cause of his disease has been 
first removed, health may be restored. Curys. The Scribes 
in their desire to spread an ill report of Him, against their 
will made that which was done be more widely known; 
Christ using their envy to make known the miracle. For 
this is of His surpassing wisdom to manifest His deeds through 

. His enemies; whence it follows, Behold, some of the Scribes 
suid among themselves, This man blasphemeth. JEROME; 
We read in prophecy, J am he that blotteth out thy trans- 1s. 43, 
gressions; so the Scribes regarding Him as a man, and not ~ 
understanding the words of God, charged Him with blas- 
phemy. But He seeing their thoughts thus shewed Himself 
to be God, Who alone knoweth the heart; and thus, as 
it were, said, By the same power and prerogative by which I 
see your thoughts, [ can forgive men their sins. Learn 
from your own experience what the paralytic has obtained. 
When Jesus perceived their thoughts, he said, Why think ye 
evil in your hearts? Curys.. He did not indeed contradict 
their suspicions so far as they had supposed Him to have 


= see 


$34 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


spoken as God. For had He not been equal to God the 
Father, it would have behoved Him to say, I am far from 
this power, that of forgiving sin. But He confirms the 
contrary of this, by His words and His miracle; Whether 1s 
tt easier to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, 
and talk? By how much the soul is better than the body, 


- by so much is it a greater thing to forgive sin than to heal 


the body. But forasmuch as the one may be seen with the 


eyes, but the other is not sensibly perceived, He does the 


es 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


Chrysol. 
ubi sup. 


lesser miracle which is the more evident, to be a proof of the 
greater miracle which is imperceptible. JEROME; Whether 
or no his sins were forgiven He alone could know who 
forgave; but whether he could rise and walk, not only 
himself but they that looked on could judge of; but the 
power that heals, whether soul or body, is the same. And as 
there is a great difference between saying and doing, the 
outward sign is given that the spiritual effect may be proved ; 
But .that ye may know that the Son of Man hath povcer 
on earth to forgive sins. Curys. Above, He said to the 
paralytic, Thy sins are forgiven thee, not, I forgive thee thy 
sins; but now when the Scribes made resistance, He shews 
the greatness of His power by saying, The Son of Man hath 
power on earth to forgive sins. And to shew that He was 
equal to the Father, He said not that the Son of Man needed 
any to forgive sins, but that He hath power. Guoss. These 
words That ye may know, may be either Christ’s words, or 
the Evangelist’s words. As though the Evangelist had said, 
They doubted whether He could remit sins, But that ye 
may know that the Son of Man hath the power to remit 
sins, he saith to the paralytic. If they are the words of 
Christ, the connexion will be as followe; You doubt that I 
have power to remit sins, But that ye may know that the 
Son of Man hath power to remit sins—the sentence is 
mmperfect, but the action supplies the place of the consequent 
clause, he saith to the paralytic, Rise, take up thy bed. 
Curyso.oous. That that which had been proof of his sickness, 
should now become proof of his recovered health. And 
go to thy house, that having been healed by Christian faith, 
you may not die im the faithlessness of the Jews. Curys. 


This command He added, that it might be seen there was no 


VER. 1—8., ST. MATTHEW. 335 


delusion in the miracle; so it follows to establish the reality 

of the cure, And he arose, and went away to his own 
house. But they that stood by yet grovel on the earth, 
whence it follows, But the multitude seeing it were afraid, 

and glorified God, who had bestowed such power among 

men. For had they rightly considered among themselves, 

they would have acknowledged Him to be the Son of God. 
Meanwhile it was no little matter to esteem Him as one 
greater than men, and to have come from God. Hu ary; 
Mystically ; When driven out of Judea, He returns into His 

own city; the city of God is the people of the faithful; into 

this He entered by a boat, that is, the Church. CHRysoLoous. Chrysol. 
Christ has no need of the vessel, but the vessel of Christ ; °°!" 
for without heavenly pilotage the bark of the Church cannot 

pass over the sea of the world to the heavenly harbour. 
Hivary ; In this paralytic the whole Gentile world is offered 

for healing, he is therefore brought by the ministration 

of Angels; he is called Son, because he is God’s work; 

the sins of his soul which the Law could not remit 

are remitted him; for faith only justifies. Lastly, he 
shews the power of the resurrection, by taking up his 

bed, teaching that all sickness shall then be no more 
found in the body. Jerome; Figuratively; the soul 

sick in the body, its powers palsied, is brought by the 
perfect doctor to the Lord to be healed. For every one 
when sick, ought to engage some to pray for his recovery, 
through whom the halting footsteps of our acts may be 
reformed by the healing power of the heavenly word. 
These are mental monitors, who raise the soul of the hearer 

to higher things, although sick and weak in the outward 
body. CHrysoLocus. The Lord requires not in this world Chrysol. 
the will of those who are without understanding, but looks "! *P- 
to the faith of others; as the physician does not consult the 
wishes of the patient, when his malady requires other things. 
RaBaN. His rising up is the drawing off the soul from carnal 
lusts; his taking up his bed is the raising the flesh from 
earthly desires to spiritual pleasures ; his going to his house 

is his returning to Paradise, or to internal watchfulness of 
himself against sin. Grec. Or by the bed is denoted the Greg. 


pleasure of the body. He is commanded now he is made or ay 


$36 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Ix. 


whole to bear that on which he had lain when sick, because 
every man who still takes pleasure in vice is laid as sick in 
carnal delights; but when made whole he bears this because 
he now endures the wantonness of that flesh in whose 
desires he had before reposed. Hyivary; It is a very fearful 
thing to be seized by death while the sins are yet unforgiven 
by Christ; for there is no way to the heavenly house for him 
whose sins have not been forgiven. But when this fear is 
removed, honour is rendered to God, who by His word has 
in this way given powcr to men, of forgiveness of sins, of 
resurrection of the body, and of return to Heaven. 


9. And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw 
a man, named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of 
custom: and he saith unto him, Follow me. And 
he arose, and followed him. 

10. And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in 
the house, behold, many Publicans and sinners came 
and sat down with him and his disciples. 

11. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto 
his disciples, Why eateth your Master with Publicans 
and sinners ? 

12. But when Jesus heard that, he said unto 
them, They that be whole need not a physician, but 
they that are sick. 

13. But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will 
have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to 
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. 


Chrys. | CuHrRys. Having wrought this miracle, Christ would not 
an abide in the same place, lest He should rouse the envy of 
the Jews. Let us also do thus, not obstinately opposing 
those who lay in wait for us. And as Jesus departed thence, 
(namely from the place in which He had done this miracle,) 
he saw aman sitting at the receipt of custom, Matthew by 
name. JEROME; The other Evangelists! from respect ’to 
Matthew have not called him by his’common name, but say 
here, Levi, for he had both names. Matthew himself, 


VER. 9—13. ST. MATTHEW. 337 


according to that Solomon says, The righteous man accuses Prov. 
himself, calls himself both Matthew and Publican, to shew re 
the readers that none need despair of salvation who turn to 
better things, seeing he from a Publican became an Apostle. 
Goss. He says, sitting at the receipt of custom, that is, in Gloss. 
the place where the tolls were collected. He was named nt 
Telonarius, from a Greek word. signifying taxes. Curys. 
Herein he shews the excellent power of Him that called 
him; while engaged in this dangerous office He rescued him 
from the midst of evil, as also Paul while he was yet mad 
against the Church. He satth unto him, Follow me. As 
you have seen the power of Him that calleth, so learn the 
obedience of him that is called; he neither refuses, nor 
requests to go home and inform his friends. Remic. He 
esteems lightly human dangers which might accrue to him 
from his masters for leaving his accounts in disorder, but, 
he arose, and followed him. And because he relinquished 
earthly gain, therefore of right was he made the dispenser of 
the Lord’s talents. JzRomE; Porphyry and the Emperor 
Julian insist from this account, that either the historian is to 
be charged with falsehood, or those who so readily followed 
the Saviour with haste and temerity; as if He called any 
without reason. They forget also the signs and wonders 
which had preceded, and which no doubt the Apostles had 
seen before they believed. Yea the brightness of effulgence 
of the hidden Godhead which beamed from His human 
countenance might attract them at first view. For if the 
loadstone can, as it is said, attract iron, how much more can 
the Lord of all creation draw to Himself whom He will! 
Currys. But why did He not call him at the same time with 
Peter and John and the others? Because he was then still 
in a hardened state, but after many miracles, and great 
fame of Christ, when He who knows the inmost secrets of 
the heart, perceived him more disposed to obedience, then 
He called him. Avge. Or, perhaps it is more probable Aug. De 
that Matthew here turns back to relate something that he Fv.ii26. 
had omitted; and we may suppose Matthew to have been 
called before the sermon on the mount; for on the mount, as 
Luke relates, the twelve, whom He also named Apostles, 
were chosen. Gross. Matthew places his calling among ais 
VOL. I. Zz 


Cc. 


338 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


the miracles; for a great miracle it was, a Publican becoming 

an Apostle. Carys. Why is it then that nothing is said of the 

rest of the Apostles how or when they were called, but only of 

Peter, Andrew, James, John, and Matthew? Because these 

were in the most alien and lowly stations, for nothing can be 

more disreputable than the office of Publican, nothing more 

Gless. abject than that of fisherman. GLoss. As a meet return 
on for the heavenly mercy, Matthew prepared a great feast for 
Christ in his house, bestowing his temporal goods on Him 

of whom he looked to receive everlasting goods. It follows, 

Aug. De And it came to pass as he sat at meat in the house. AvG. 
ce Matthew has not said in whose house Jesus sat at meat (on 
this occasion), from which we might suppose, that this was 

not told in its proper order, but that what took place at some 

other time is inserted here as it happened to come into his 
mind; did not Mark and Luke who relate the same shew 

that it was in Levi's, that is, in Matthew’s house. Curys. 
Matthew being honoured by the entrance of Jesus into his 
house, called together all that followed the same calling with 
himself; Behold many Publicans and sinners came and sat 

Gloss. down with Jesus, and with his disciples. Guoss. The 
eee Publicans were they who were engaged in public business, 
which seldom or never can be carried on without sin. And 

a beautiful omen of the future, that he that was to be an 
Apostle and doctor of the Gentiles, at his first conversion 
draws after him a great multitude of sinners to salvation, 
already performing by his example what he was shortly to 

Gloss. perform by word. Gtoss. Tertullian says that these must 
or). have been Gentiles, because Scripture says, There shall be 
no payer of tribute in Israel, as if Matthew were not a Jew. 

But the Lord did not sit down to meat with Gentiles, being 

more especially careful not to break the Law, as also He gave 
commandment to His disciples below, Go not into the way of 

the Gentiles. JEtoME; But they had seen the Publican turning 

- from sins to better things, and finding place of repentance, and 

on this account they do not despair of salvation. Curys. 

Thus they came near to our Redeemer, and that not only to 
converse with Him, but to sit at meat with Him; for so not 

only by disputing, or healing, or convincing His enemies, 

but by eating with them, He oftentimes healed such as were 


VER. 9—138. ST. MATTHEW. 339 


ill-disposed, by this teaching us, that all times, and all 
actions, may be made means to our advantage. When the 
Pharisees saw this they were indignant; And the Pharisees 
beholding suid to his disciples, Why eateth your Master with 
Publicans and sinners? It should be observed, that when the 
disciples seemed to be doing what was sinful, these same 
addressed Christ, Behold, thy disciples are doing what it is Mat.12, 
not allowed to do on, the Sabbath. Here they speak against ”’ 
Christ to His disciples, both being the part of malicious 
persons, seeking to detach the hearts of the disciple from 
the Master. Rasan. They are here in a twofold error; Raban. 
first, they esteemed themselves righteous, though in® Be. 
their pride they had departed far from righteousness ; 
secondly, they charged with unrighteousness those who 
by recovering themselves from sin were drawing near to 
righteousness. AuG. Luke seems to have related this a Aug. 
little differently; according to him the Pharisees say to the *”! *"?- 
disciples, Why do ye eat and drink with Publicans and Luke 5, 
sinners? not unwilling that their Master should be under- aM 
stood to be involved in the same charge; insinuating it at 
once against Himself and His disciples. Therefore Matthew 
and Mark have related it as said to the disciples, because 
so it was as much an objection against their Master 
whom they followed and imitated. The sense therefore 
is one in all, and so much the better conveyed, as the 
words are changed while the substance continues the same. 
JEROME; For they do not come to Jesus while they remain 
in their original condition of sin, as the Pharisees and 
Scribes complain, but in penitence, as what follows proves ; 
But Jesus hearing said, They that be whole need not a 
physician, but they that are sick. Ranan. He calls Himself 
a physician, because by a wonderful kind of medicine He 
was wounded for our iniquities that He might heal the 
wound of our sin. By the whole, He means those who 
seeking to establish their own righteousness have not sub- Rom.10, 
mitted to the true righteousness of God. By the sick, He a: 
means those who, tied by the consciousness of their frailty, 
and seeing that they are not justified by the Law, submit 
themselves in penitence to the grace of God. Curys. 
Having first spoken in accordance with common opinion, 

Z 2 


Hosea 
6, 6. 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Gen. 3, 
2 


Rom. 3, 


23. 


340 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


He now addresses them out of Scripture, saying, Go ye, and 
learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. 
JEROME; This text from Osee is directed against the Scribes 
and Pharisees, who, deeming themselves righteous, refused to 
keep company with Publicans and sinners. Currys. As much 
as to say; How do you accuse me for reforming sinners? 
Therefore in this you accuse God the Father also. For as He 
wills the amendment of sinners, even so.also do I. And He 
shews that this that they blamed was not only not forbidden, 
but was even by the Law set above sacrifice; for He said 
not, I will have mercy as well as sacrifice, but chooses the 
one and rejects the other. Gross. Yet does not God con- 
temn sacrifice, but sacrifice without mercy. But the Phari- 
sees often offered sacrifices in the temple that they might 
seem to men to be righteous, but did not practise the deeds 
of mercy by which true righteousness is proved. RaBAN. 
He therefore warns them, that by deeds of mercy they should 
seek for themselves the rewards of the mercy that is above, 
and, not overlooking the necessities of the poor, trust to 
please God by offering sacrifice. Wherefore, He says, Go; 
that is, from the rashness of foolish fault-finding to a more 
careful meditation of Holy Scripture, which highly com- 
mends mercy, and proposes to them as a guide His own 
example of mercy, saying, [ came not to call the righteous 
but sinners. Auc. Luke adds to repentance, which explains 
the sense ; that none should suppose that sinners are loved 
by Christ because they are sinners; and this comparison of 
the sick shews what God means by calling sinners, as a 
physician does the sick to be saved from their iniquity as 
from a sickness: which is done by penitence. Huitanry; 
Christ came for all; how is it then that He says He came 
not for the righteous? Were there those for whom it needed 
not that He should come? But no man is righteous by the 
law. He shews how empty their boast of justification, 
sacrifices being inadequate to salvation, mercy was necessary 
for all who were set under the Law. Currys. Whence we 
may suppose that He is speaking ironically, as when it is said, 
Behold now Adam is become as one of us. For that there 
is none righteous on earth Paul shews, All have sinned, 
and need glory of God. By this saying He also consoled 


VER. 14—17. ST. MATTHEW. 341 


those who were called; as though He had said, So far am 

I from abhorring sinners, that for their sakes only did I come. 
Goss. Or; Those who were righteous, as Nathanael and Gloss. 
John the Baptist, were not to be invited to repentance. Or, ne 
I came not to call the righteous, that is, the feiguedly righteous, 
those who boasted of their righteousness as the Pharisees, 

but those that owned themselves sinners. Rasan. In the 

call of Matthew and the Publicans is figured the faith of the 
Gentiles who first gaped after the gain of the world, and are 
now spiritually refreshed by the Lord; in the pride of the 
Pharisees, the jealousy of the Jews at the salvation of the 
Gentiles. Or, Matthew signifies the man intent on temporal 
gain; Jesus sees him, when He looks on him with the eyes 

of mercy. For Matthew is interpreted ‘ given,’ Levi ‘ taken,’ 

the penitent is taken out of the mass of the perishing, and 

by God's grace given to the Church. And Jesus saith unto 
him, Follow me, either by preaching, or by the admonition 

of Scripture, or by internal illumination. 


14. Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, 
Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy dis- 
ciples fast not ? 

15. And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of 
the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom 
is with them? but the days will come, when the 
bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall 
they fast. 

16. No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto 
an old garment, for that which is put in to fill 
it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made 
worse. 

17. Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: 
else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, 
and the bottles perish: but they put new wine into 
new bottles, and both are preserved. 


Goss. When He had replied to them respecting eating Gloss. 
and converse with sinners, they next assault Him on the,” 


342 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, IX. 


matter of food; Then came to him the disciples of John, 
saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fust often, but thy 
disciples fast not? JEROME; O boastful enquiry and osten- 
tation of fasting much to be blamed, nor can John’s disciples 
be excused for their taking part with the Pharisees who 
they knew had been condemned by John, and for bringing 
a false accusation against Him whom they knew their master 
had preached. CHrys. What they say comes to this, Be 
it that you do this as Physician of souls, but why do your 
disciples neglect fasting and approach such tables? And to 
augment the weight of their charge by comparison, they put 
themselves first, and then the Pharisees. They fasted as 


Pele, »they learnt out of the Law, as the Pharisee spoke, { fast 


Aug. 


ubi sup. 


Luke 5, 


33. 


twice in the week; the others learnt it of John. RaBan. 
For John drank neither wine, nor strong drink, increasing 
his merit by abstinence, because he had no power over 
nature. But the Lord who has power to forgive sins, why 
should He shun sinners that eat, since He has power to 
make them more righteous than those that eat not? Yet 
doth Christ fast, that you should not avoid the command ; 
but He eats with sinners that you may know His grace and 
power. Avuc. Though Matthew mentions only the disciples 
of John as having made this enquiry, the words of Mark 
rather seem to imply that some other persons spoke of others, 
that is, the guests spoke concerning the disciples of John 
and the Pharisees—this is still more evident from Luke; why 
then does Matthew here say, Then came unto him the dis- 
ciples of John, unless that they were there among other 
guests, all of whom with one consent put this objection to 
Him? Curys. Or; Luke relates that the Pharisees, but 
Matthew that the disciples of John, said thus, because the 
Pharisees had taken them with them to ask the question, as 
they afterwards did the Herodians. Observe how when 
strangers, as before the Publicans, were to be defended, He 
accuses heavily those that blamed them; but when they 
brought a charge against His disciples, He makes answer 
with mildness. And Jesus suith unto them, Can the children 
of the bridegroom mourn as long as the brideyroom is with 
them ? Before He had styled Himself Physician, now Bride- 
groom, calling to mind the words of John which he had said, 


VER. 14—17. ST. MATTHEW. 343 


He that hath the bride is the bridegroom. JEROME; Christ Joba 3, 
is the Bridegroom and the Church the Bride. Of this spi- si 
ritual union the Apostles were born; they cannot mourn so 
long as they see the Bridegroom in the chamber with the 
Bride. But when the nuptials are past, and the time of 
passion and resurrection is come, then shall the children of 
the Bridegroom fast. The days shall come when the bride- 
groom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. 
Curys. He means this; The present is a time of joy and 
rejoicing ; sorrow is therefore not to be now brought forward ; 
and fasting is naturally grievous, and to all those that are yet 
weak ; for to those that seek to contemplate wisdom, it is 
pleasant ; He therefore speaks here according to the former 
opinion. He also shews that this they did was not of 
gluttony, but of a certain dispensation. JEROME; Hence 
some think that a fast ought to follow the forty days of 
Passion, although the day of Pentecost and the coming of 
the Holy Spirit immediately bring back our joy and festival. 
From this text accordingly, Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla 
enjoin a forty days’ abstinence after Pentecost, but it is the usc 
of the Church to come to the Lord’s passion and resurrection 
through humiliation of the flesh, that by carnal abstinence we 
may better be prepared for spiritual fulness. CHrys. Here 
again He confirms what He has said by examples of common 
things; No man putteth a patch of undressed cloth into an 
old garment; for tt taketh away its wholeness from the 
garment, and the rent 1s made worse ; which is to say, My 
disciples are not yet become strong, but have need of much 
consideration; they are not yet renewed by the Spirit. On 
men in such a state it is not behoveful to lay a burden 
of precepts. Herein He establishes a rule for His disciples, 
that they should receive with leniency disciples from out of 
the whole world. Remic. By the old garment He means 
His disciples, who had not yet been renewed in all things. 
The patch of undressed, that is, of new cloth, means the new 
grace, that is, the Gospel doctrine, of which fasting is a 
portion; and it was not meet that the stricter ordinances of 
fasting should be entrusted to them, lest they should be 
broken down by their severity, and forfeit that faith which 
they had; as He adds, Jt taketh its wholeness from the 


344 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


Gloss. garment, and the rent is made worse. GLoss. As much as 
ee to say, An undressed patch, that is, a new one, ought not to 
be put into an old garment, because it often takes away from 
the garment its wholeness, that is, its perfection, and then 
the rent is made worse. For a heavy burden laid on one 
that is untrained often destroys that good which was in him 
before. Remic. After two comparisons made, that of the 
wedding, and that of the undressed cloth, He adds a third 
concerning wine skins; Neither do men put new wine tnto 
old skins. By the old skins He means His disciples, who 
were not yet perfectly renewed. The new wine is the 
fulness of the Holy Spirit, and the depths of the heavenly 
mysteries, which His disciples could not then bear; but 
after the resurrection they became as new skins, and were 
filled with new wine when they received the Holy Spirit 
Acts2, into their hearts. Whence also some said, Ziese men are 
oe full of new wine. Curys. Herein He also shews us the 
cause of those condescending words which He often ad- 
dressed to them because of their weakness. JEROME; 
Otherwise; By the old garment, and old skins, we must 
understand the Scribes and Pharisees; and by the piece of 
new cloth, and new wine, the Gospel precepts, which the 
Jews were not able to bear; so the rent was made worse. 
Something such the Galatians sought to do, to mix the 
precepts of the Law with the Gospel, and to put new wine 
into old skins. The word of the Gospel is therefore to 
be poured into the Apostles, rather than into the Scribes 
and Pharisees, who, corrupted by the traditions of the elders, 
were unable to preserve the punty of Christ’s precepts. 
Gloss. Gross. This shews that the Apostles being hereafter to be 
non occ replenished with newness of grace, ought not now to be 
Aug. bound to the old observances. Auc. Otherwise; Every 
ae: one who rightly fasts, either humbles his soul in the 
groaning of prayer, and bodily chastisement, or suspends 
the motion of carnal desire by the joys of spiritual medi- 
tation. And the Lord here makes answer respecting both 
kinds of fasting; concerning the first, which is in humilia- 
tion of soul, He says, The children of the bridegroom cannot 
mourn. Of the other which has a feast of the Spirit, He 
next speaks, where He says, No man putteth a patch of 


VER. 14—18. ST. MATTHEW. 343 


undressed cloth. Then we must mourn because the Bride- 
groom is taken away from us. And we rightly mourn if we 
burn with desire of Him. Blessed they to whom it was 
granted before His passion to have Him present with them, 
to enquire of Him what they would, to hear what they ought 
to hear. Those days the fathers before His coming sought to 
see, and saw them not, because they were placed in another 
dispensation, one in which He was proclaimed as coming, 
not one in which He was heard as present. For in us was 
fulfilled that He speaks of, The days shall come when 
ye shall desire to see one of these days, and shall not be able. 
Who then will not mourn this? Who will not say, My tears 
have been my meat day and night, while they daily say unto 
me, Where is now thy God? With reason then did the 
Apostle seek to die and to be with Christ. Avuc. That 
Matthew writes here mourn, where Mark and Luke write 
Jast, shews that the Lord spake of that kind of fasting which 
pertains to humbling one’s self in chastisement; as in the 
following comparisons He may be supposed to have spoken 
of the other kind which pertains to the joy of a mind wrapt 
in spiritual thoughts, and therefore averted from the food of 
the body; shewing that those who are occupied about the 
body, and owing to this retain their former desires, are not 
fit for this kind of fasting. HuiLary; Figuratively; This His 
answer, that while the Bridegroom was present with them, 
His disciples needed not to fast, teaches us the joy of His 
presence, and the sacrament of the holy food, which none 
shall lack, while He is present, that is, while one keeps 
Christ in the eye of the mind. He says, they shall fast when 
He is taken away from them, because all who do not believe 
that Christ is risen, shall not have the food of life. For in 
the faith of the resurrection the sacrament of the heavenly 
bread is received. JEROME; Or; When He has departed 
from us for our sins, then is a fast to be proclaimed, then is 
mourning to be put on. HuLary; By these examples He 
shews that neither our souls nor bodies, being so weakened 
by inveteracy of sin, are capable of the sacraments of the new 
grace. RaBan. The different comparisons all refer to the 
same thing, and yet are they different; the garment by 
which we are covered abroad signifies our good works, 


Lukel7, 
22. 


Ps.42,3. 


Aug. De 
Cons. 
Eyv.ii.27, 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
XXxi. 


346 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


which we perform when we are abroad; the wine with 
which we are refreshed within is the fervor of faith and 
charity, which creates us anew within. 


18. While he spake these things unto them, be- 
hold, there came a certain ruler, and worshipped him, 
saying, My daughter is even now dead: but come 
and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live. 

19. And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so did 
his disciples. 

20. And, behold, a woman, which was diseased 
with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind 
him, and touched the hem of his garment : 

21. For she said within herself, If I may but touch 
his garment, I shall be whole. 

22. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw 
her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith 
hath made thee whole. And the woman was made 
whole from that hour. 


Curys. After His instructions He adds a miracle, which 
should mightily discomfit the Pharisees, because he who 
came to beg this miracle, was a ruler of the synagogue, and 
the mourning was great, for she was his only child, and of 
the age of twelve years, that is, when the flower of youth 
begins; While he spake these things unto them, behold, 


Aug. Dethere came one of their chief men unto him. Ave. This 


Cons. 


Ev ii29,2arrative is given both by Mark and Luke, but in a quite 


different order ; namely, ‘when after the casting out of the 
demons and their entrance into the swine, he had returned 
across the lake from the country of the Gerasenes. Now 
Mark does indeed tell us that this happened after He had 
recrossed the lake, but how long after he docs not determine. 
Unless there had been some interval of time, that could not 
have taken place that Matthew relates concerning the feast 
in his house. After this, immediately follows that concern- 
ing the ruler of the synagogue’s daughter. If the ruler came 
to Him while He was yet speaking that of the new patch, 


ee — ee 
—— eee ee 


VER. 18—22. ST. MATTHEW. 347 


and the new wine, then no other act of speech of his inter- 
vened. And in Mark’s account, the place where these things 
might come in, is evident. In like manner, Luke does not 
contradict Matthew; for what he adds, And behold a man, Mat. 8, 
whose name was Jairus, is not to be taken as though it ~ 
followed instantly what had been related before, but after 
that feast with the Publicans, as Matthew relates. While 
he spake these things unto them, behold, one of their chief 
men, namely, Jairus, the ruler of the synagogue, came to 
him, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, my daughter is 
even now dead. It should be observed, lest there should 
seem to be some discrepancy, that the other two Evan- 
gelists represent her as at the point of death, but yet 
not dead, but so as afterwards to say that there came 
afterwards some saying, She is dead, trouble not the Master, 
for Matthew for the sake of shortness represents the Lord as 
having been asked at first to do that which it is manifest He 
did do, namely, raise the dead. He looks not at the words 
of the father respecting his daughter, but rather his mind. 
For he had so far despaired of her life, that he made his 
request rather for her to be called to life again, thinking 
it impossible that she, whom he had left dying, should be 
found yet alive. The other two then have given Jairus’ 
words; Matthew has put what he wished and thought. 
Indeed had either of them related that it was the father 
himself that said that Jesus should not be troubled for she 
was now dead, in that case the words that Matthew has 
given would not have corresponded with the thoughts of 
the ruler. But we do not read that he agreed with the 
messengers. Hence we learn a thing of the highest 
necessity, that we should look at nothing in any man’s 
words, but his meaning to which his words ought to be 
subservient; and no man gives a false account when he 
repeats a man’s meaning in words other than those actually 
used. Carys. Or; The ruler says, she is dead, exaggerating 
his calamity. As it 1s the manner of those that prefer a 
petition to magnify their distresses, and to represent them as 
something more than they really are, in order to gain the 
compassion of those to whom they make supplication; 
whence he adds, But come and lay thy hand upon her, and 


348 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


she shall live. See his dullness. He begs two things of 
Christ, to come, and to lay His hand upon her. This was 
what Naaman the Syrian required of the Prophet. For 
they who are constituted thus hard of heart have need of 
sight and things sensible. Remic. We ought to admire and 
at the same time to imitate the humility and mercifulness of 
the Lord; as soon as ever He was asked, He rose to follow 
him that asked; And Jesus rose, and followed htm. Here 
is instruction both for such as are in command, and 
such as are in subjection. To these He has left an ex- 
ample of obedience; to those who are set over others 
He shews how earnest and watchful they should be im 
teaching; whenever they hear of any being dead in 
spirit, they should hasten to Him; And his disciples went 
with him. Curys. Mark and Luke say that He took with 
Him three disciples only, namely, Peter, James, and John ; 
He took not Matthew, to quicken his desires, and because 
1 gesat- he was yet not perfectly minded'; and for this reason He 
vasejus- LOOUTS these three, that others may become like-minded. 
xs. | It was enough meanwhile for Matthew to see the things that 
were done respecting her that had the issue of blood, 
concerning whom it follows; And, behold, a woman who 
had suffered an issue of blood twelve years, came behind 
and touched the hem of his garment. JEROME; This 
woman that had the flux came to the Lord not in the house, 
nor in the town, for she was excluded from them by the 
Law, but by the way as He walked; thus as He goes to 
heal one woman, another is cured. CuHrys. She came not 
to Christ with an open address through shame concerning 
this her disease, believing herself unclean; for in the Law 
this disease was esteemed highly unclean. For this reason she 
hides herself. Remig. In which her humility must be 
praised, that she came not before His face, but behind, and 
judged herself unworthy to touch the Lord’s feet, yea, she 
touched not His whole garment, but the hem only; for the 
Lord wore a hem according to the command of the -Law. 
So the Pharisees also wore hems which they made large, 
and in some they inserted thorns. But the Lord’s hem was 
not made to wound, but to heal, and therefore it follows, 
For she said within herself, If I can but touch his garment, 


VER. 18—22. ST. MATTHEW. 349 


I shall be made whole. How wonderful her faith, that 
though she despaired of health from the physicians, on 
whom notwithstanding she had exhausted her living, she 
perceived that a heavenly Physician was at hand, and 
therefore bent her whole soul on Him; whence she deserved 
to be healed; But Jesus turning and seeing her, said, Be of 
good cheer, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. 
RaBan. What is this that He bids her, Be of good cheer, 
seeing if she had not had faith, she would not have sought 
healing of Him? He requires of her strength and per- 
severance, that she may come to a sure and certain salvation. 
Currys. Or because the woman was fearful, therefore He 
said, Be of good cheer. He calls her daughter, for her 
faith had made her such. JEROME; He said not, Thy faith 
shall make thee whole, but, hath made thee whole; for 
in that thou hast believed, thou art already made whole. 
Currys. She had not yet a perfect mind respecting Christ, 
or she would not have supposed that she could be hid from 
Him; but Christ would not suffer her to go away un- 
observed, not that He sought fame, but for many reasons. 
First, He relieves the woman’s fear, that she should not be 
pricked in her conscience as though she had stolen this 
boon; secondly, He corrects her error in supposing she 
could be hid from Him; thirdly, He displays her faith to all 
for their imitation; and fourthly, He did a miracle, in that 
He shewed He knew all things, no less than in drying the 
fountain of her blood. It follows, And the woman was 
made whole from that hour. Gtoss. This must be under- Gloss. 
stood as the time in which she touched the hem of His°h4™ 
garment, not in which Jesus turned to her; for she was 
already healed, as the other Evangelists testify, and as may 
be inferred from the Lord’s words. HiLary; Herein is to 
be observed the marvellous virtue of the Lord, that the 
power that dwelt in His body should give healing to things 
perishable, and the heavenly energy extended even through 
the hems of His garments; for God is not comprehensible 
that He should be shut in by a body. For His taking a 
body unto Him did not confine His power, but His power 
took upon it a frail body for our redemption. Figuratively, 
this ruler is to be understood as the Law, which prays the 


Raban. 


art. € 
eda. 


350 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


Lord that He would restore life to the dead multitude which 
it had brought up for Christ, preaching that His coming 
was to be looked for. Rasan. Or; The ruler of the 
synagogue signifies Moses; he is named Jairus, ‘ illu- 
minating,’ or, ‘ that shall illuminate,’ because he received 
the words of life to give to us, and by them enlightens all, 
being himself enlightened by the Holy Spirit. The daughter 
of the ruler, that is, the synagogue itself, being as it were in 
the twelfth year of its age, that is, in the season of puberty, 
when it should have borne spiritual progeny to God, fell 
into the sickness of error. While then the Word of God is 
hastening to this ruler’s daughter to make whole the sons of 
Israel, a holy Church is gathered from among the Gentiles, 
which while it was perishing by inward corruption, received 
by faith that healing that was prepared for others. It should 
be noted, that the ruler’s daughter was twelve years old, and 
this woman had been twelve years afflicted; thus she had 
begun to be diseased at the very time the other was born; 
so in one and the same age the synagogue had its birth 
among the Patriarchs, and the nations without began to be 
polluted with the pest of idolatry. For the issue of blood 
may be taken in two ways, either for the pollution of 
idolatry, or for obedience to the pleasures of flesh and blood. 
Thus as long as the synagogue flourished, the Church 
languished; the falling away of the first was made the 
salvation of the Gentiles. Also the Church draws nigh 
and touches the Lord, when it approaches Him in 
faith. She believed, spake her belief, and touched, for by 
these three things, faith, word, and deed, all salvation is 


Jota 12, gained. She came behind Him, as He spake, Jf any one 


serve me, lel him follow me; or because, not having seen the 
Lord present in the flesh, when the sacraments of His incar- 
nation were fulfilled, she came at length to the grace of the 
knowledge of Him. Thus also she touched the hem of His 
garment, because the Gentiles, though they had not seen 
Christ in the flesh, received the tidings of His incarfation. 
The garment of Christ is put for the mystery of His incar- 
nation, wherewith His Deity is clothed; the hem of His 
garment are the words that hang upon His incarnation. She 
touches not the garment, but the hem thereof; because she 


VER. 23—26. ST. MATTHEW. 35] 


saw not the Lord in the flesh, but received the word of the 
incarnation through the Apostles. Blessed is he that touches 

but the uttermost part of the word by faith. She is healed 

while the Lord is not in the city, but while He is yet on the 

way; as the Apostles cried, Because ye judge yourselves Acts 13, 
unicorthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. And o 
from the time of the Lord’s coming the Gentiles began to be 
healed. ; 


23. And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house, 
and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, 

24. He said unto them, Give place: for the maid 
is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to 
scorn. 

25. But when the people were put forth, he went 
in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose. 

26. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that 
land. | 


Gross. After the healing of the woman with the issue of Gloss. 
blood, follows the raising of the dead ; And when Jesus was" 
come into the ruler’s house. Curys. We may suppose that 
He proceeded slowly, and spake longer to the woman whom 
He had healed, that He might suffer the maid to die, and 
thus an evident miracle of restoring to life might be wrought. 

In the case of Lazarus also He waited till the third day. 

And when he saw the minstrels and the people making a 
noise; this was a proof of her death. AMBROSE; For by Ambros. 
the ancient custom minstrels were engaged to make lament- 0 roe 
-ation for the dead. Currys. But Christ put forth all the 
pipers, but took in the parents, that it might not be said that 

He had healed her by any other means; and before the 
restoring to life He excites their expectations by His words, 

And he said, Give place: for the maid is not dead, but 
sleepeth. BrEpe; As though He had said, To you she is Bede. 
dead, but to God who has power to give life, she sleeps only in Luc. 
both in soul and body. Curys. By this saying, He soothes 

the minds of those that were present, and shews that it is 

easy to Him to raise the dead; the like He did in the case 


352 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


John 11,0f Lazarus, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth. This was also a 
lesson to them not to be afraid of death; forasmuch as He 
Himself also should die, He made His misciples learn in the 
persons of others confidence and patient endurance of death. 
For when He was near, death was but as sleep. When He 
had said this, They mocked him. And He did not rebuke 
their mocking; that this mocking, and the pipes and all 
other things, might be a proof of her death. For ofttimes at 
His miracles when men would not believe, He convicted 
them by their own answers; as in the case of Lazarus, when 
He said, Where have ye laid him? so that they that answered, 
Come and see, and, He stinketh, for he hath now been dead 
Jour days, could no longer disbelieve that He had raised a 
dead man. JEROME; They that had mocked the Reviver 
were not worthy to behold the mystery of the revival; and 
therefore it follows, And when the multitude was put forth, 
he entered, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose. 
Carys. He restored her to life not by bringing in another 
soul, but by recalling that which had departed, and as it 
were raising it from sleep, and through this sight preparing the 
way for belief of the resurrection, And He not only restores 
her to life, but commands food to be given her, as the other 
Evangelists relate, that that which was done might be seen 
to be no delusion. And the fame of him went abroad into 

Gloss. all that country. Guoss. The fame, namely, of the greatness 

non °°" and novelty of the miracle, and its established truth; so that 
it could not be supposed to be a forgery. | 

Hirary; Mystically ; The Lord enters the ruler’s house, 
that is, the synagogue, throughout which there resounded in 
the songs of the Law a strain of wailing. JERoME; To this 
day the damsel lays dead in the ruler’s house; and they that 
seem to be teachers are but minstrels singing funeral dirges. 
The Jews also are not the crowd of believers, but of people 
making a noise. But when the fulness of the Gentiles shall 
come in, then all Israel shall be saved. Hitary; But that 
the number of the elect might be known to be but few out 
of the whole body of believers, the multitude is put forth; 
the Lord indeed would that they should be saved, but they 
mocked at His sayings and actions, and so were not worthy 
to be made partakers of His resurrection. JEROME; He took 


VER. 27—3]. ST. MATTHEW. 353 


her by the hand, and the maid arose; because if the hands 

of the Jews which are defiled with blood be not first 
cleansed, their synagogue which is dead shall not revive. 
Hirary; His fame went about into all that country; that 

is, the salvation of the elect, the gift and works of Christ 
are preached. RasBan. Morally; The damsel dead in the 
house is the soul dead in thought. He says that she is 
asleep, because they that are now asleep in sin may yet be 
roused by penitence. The minstrels are flatterers who 
cherish the dead. Gree. The multitude are put forth that Greg. 
the damsel may be raised; for unless the multitude of ror 43. 
worldly cares is first banished from the secrets of the heart, 

the soul which is laid dead within, cannot rise again. 
RaBAN. The maiden is raised in the house with few to 
witness, the young man without the gate, and Lazarus in 
the presence of many ; for a public scandal requires a public 
expiation ; a less notorious, a lesser remedy; and sccret sins 
may be done away by penitence. 


27. And when Jesus departed thence, two blind 
men followed him, crying, and saying, Thou Son of 
David, have mercy on us. 

28. And when he was come into the house, the 
blind men came to him: and Jesus saith unto them, 
Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said 
unto him, Yea, Lord. 

29. Then touched he their eyes, saying, According 
to your faith be it unto you. 

30. And their eyes were opened: and Jesus straitly 
charged them, saying, See that no man know it. 

31. But they, when they were departed, spread 
abroad his fame in all that country. 


JeROME; The miracles that had gone before of the ruler’s 
daughter, and the woman with the issue of blood, are now 
followed by that of two blind men, that what death and 
disease had there witnessed, that blindness might now witness. 
And as Jesus passed thence, that is, from the ruler’s house, 

VOL, I. 2A 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
XXXil. 


354 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, IX. 


there followed him tico blind men, crying, and saying, Have 
mercy on us, thow Son of David. Curys, Here is no small 
charge against the Jews, that these men, having lost their 
sight, yet believe by means of their hearing only; while they 
who had sight, would not believe the miracles that were 
done. Observe their eagerness; they do not simply come 
to Him, but with crying, and asking for nothing but mercy ; 
they call Him Son of David, because that seemed to be 


a name of honour. Remic. Rightly they call Him Son of 


Rom. 
10, 10. 


David, because the Virgin Mary was of the line of David. 
JEROME; Let Marcion and Manicheus, and the other 
heretics who mangle the Old Testament, hear this, and learn 
that the Saviour is called the Son of David; for if He was 
not born in the flesh, how is He the Son of David? Curys. 
Observe that the Lord oftentimes desired to be asked to 
heal, that none should think that He was eager to seize an 
occasion of display. JEROME; Yet were they not healed by 
the way-side and in passing as they had thought to be; but 
when He was entered into the house, they come unto Him ; 
and first their faith is made proof of, that su they may receive 
the light of the true faith. And when he was come into 
the house, the blind men came unto him; and Jesus said 
unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? Curys. 
Here again He teaches us to exclude the desire of fame ; 
because there was a house hard by, He takes them there 
to heal them apart. Rremic. He who was able to give 
sight to the blind, was not ignorant whether they be- 
lieved; but He asked them, in order that the faith which 
they bare in their hearts, being confessed by their mouth 
might be made deserving of a higher reward, according to 
that of the Apostle, By the mouth confession is made unto 
salvation. Curys. And not for this reason only, but that He 
might make manifest that they were worthy of healing, and 
that none might object, that if mercy alone saved, then ought 
all to be saved. Therefore also He requires faith of them, 
that He may thereby raise their thoughts higher; they had 
called Him the Son of David, therefore He instructs them 
that they should think higher things of Him. Thus He 
does not say to them, Believe ye that I can ask the Father? 
But, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say unto 


Cd 


VER. 27—31., 8ST. MATTHEW. 355 


him, Yea, Lord. They call Him no more Son of David, 
but exalt Him higher, and confess His dominion. Then He 
lays His hand upon them; as it follows, Then he touched 
their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you. 
This He says confirming their faith, and testifying that what 
they had said were not words of flattery. Then follows the 
cure, And their eyes were opened. And after this, His 
injunction that they should tell it to no man; and this not a 
simple command, but with much earnestness, And Jesus . 
straitly charged them, saying, See that no man know it; but 
they went forth, and spread abroad the fame of him through 
the whole country. Jerome; The Lord from humility 
shunning the fame of His glorious works, gave them this 
charge, and they from gratitude cannot be silent respecting 
so great benefit. Curys. That He said to another man, 
Go, and proclaim the glory of God, is not contrary to this ; Luke 8, 
for what He would teach is, that we should hinder those that Me 
would commend us for ourselves. But when it is the 
Lord’s glory that is to be praised, we ought not to forbid, 
but to promote it ourselves. Hritary; Or He enjoins 
silence on the blind men, because to preach was the 
Apostles’ office. Grea. We must enquire how this is Greg. 
that the Almighty, whose will and power are coextensive, Sao 
should have here willed that His excellent works should 
be hid in silence, and is yet preached against His will, as it 
were, by these men who have received their sight. It is 
only that He herein has left an example to His servants 
who follow Him, that they should desire their own good 
deeds to be hid, and that notwithstanding they should be 
made known against their will, that others may profit by 
their example. They should then be hid by design, and 
published of compulsion; their concealment is by our own 
watchfulness, their betrayal is for others’ profit. 

Remic. Allegorically ; By these two blind men are denoted 
the two nations of Jews and Gentiles, or the two nations of 
the Jewish race; for in the time af Roboam his kingdom was 
split into two parts. Out of both nations such as believed 
on Him Christ gave sight to in the house, by which is 
understood the Church ; for without the unity of the Church 
no man can be saved. And they of the Jews who had 

2a2 


356 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


believed the Lord’s coming spread the knowledge thereof 
throughout the whole earth. Rasan. The house of the 
ruler is the Synagogue which was ruled by Moses; the 
house of Jesus is the heavenly Jerusalem. As the Lord 
passed through this world and was returning to His own 
house, two blind men followed Him; that is, when the 
Gospel was preached by the Apostles, many of the Jews 
and Gentiles began to follow Him. But when He ascended 
into Heaven, then He entered Lis house, that is, into the 
confession of one faith which is in the Catholic Church, and 
in that they were enlightened. 


32. As they went out, behold, they brought to 
him a dumb man possessed with a devil. 

33. And when the devil was cast out, the dumb 
spake: and the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was 
never so seen in Israel. 

34. But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils 
through the prince of the devils. 

35. And Jesus went about all the cities and 
villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching 
the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sick- 
ness and every disease among the people. 


ReEmIGc. Observe the beautiful order of His miracles; how 
after He had given sight to the blind, He restored speech to 
the dumb, and healed the possessed of the demon; by 
which He shews Himself the Lord of power, and the author 


Is.35,6.0f the heavenly medicine. For it was said by Isaiah, Then 


shall the eyes of the blind be opened, the ears of the deaf 
shall be unstopped, and the tongue of the dumb loosed. 
Whence it is said, When they were gone forth, they brought 
unto him a man dumb, and possessed with a daemon. 
JEROME; The Greek word here is more frequent in 
common speech in the sense of ‘ deaf, but it is the manner 
of Scripture to use it indifferently as either. Currys. This 
was not a mere natural defect; but was from the malignity 
of the demon; and therefore he needed to be brought of others, 


VER. 32—35. ST. MATTHEW. 357 


for he could not ask any thing of others as living without 
voice, and the demon chaining his spirit together with his 
tongue. Therefore Christ does not require faith of him, but 
immediately healed his disorder; as it follows, And when 
the demon was cast out, the dumb spake. Hiutary; The 
natural order of things is here preserved ; the dzemon is first 
cast out, and there the functions of the members proceed. 
And the multitude marvelled, saying, lt was never so seen 
in Israel. Curys. They set Him thus above others, because 
He not only healed, but with such ease, and quickness ; and 
cured diseases both infinite in number, and in quality 
incurable. This most grieved the Pharisees, that they set 
Him before all others, not only those that then lived, but all 
who had lived before, on which account it follows, But the 
Pharisees said, He casteth out demons through the Prince of 
demons. Remic. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees denied 
such of the Lord’s miracles as they could deny; and such as 
they could not they explained by an evil interpretation, 
according to that, In the multitude of thy excellency thy Ps.66,3. 
enemies shall lie unto thee. CHRys. What can be more 
foolish than this speech of theirs? For it cannot be pre- 
tended that one demon would cast out another; for they are 
wont to consent to one another’s deeds, and not to be at 
variance among themselves. But Christ not only cast out 
dzmons, but healed the lepers, raised the dead, forgave sins, 
preached the kingdom of God, and brought men to the 
Father, which a demon neither could nor would do. 
Rasan. Figuratively; As in the two blind men were denoted 
both nations, Jews and Gentiles, so in the man dumb and 
afflicted with the demon is denoted the whole human race. 
Hitary; Or; By the dumb and deaf, and demoniac, is 
signified the Gentile world, needing health in every 
part; for sunk in evil of every kind, they are afflicted with 
disease of every part of the body. Remie. For the Gentiles 
were dumb; not being able to open their mouth in the con- 
fession of the true faith, and the praises of the Creator, or 
because in paying worship to dumb idols they were made 
like unto them. They were afflicted with a demon, because 
by dying in unbelief they were made subject to the power of 
the Devil. Hitary; But by the knowledge of God the 


Aug. De 
Cons. 
Ev.ii.29. 


358 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


frenzy of superstition being chased away, the sight, the 
hearing, and the word of salvation is brought in to them. 
JEROME; As the blind receive light, so the tongue of the 
dumb is loosed, that he may confess Him whom before he 
denied. ‘The wonder of the multitude is the confession of 
the nations. The scoff of the Pharisees is the unbelief of the 
Jews, which is to this day. Hitary; The wonder of the 
multitude is followed up by the confession, Jt eas never 
so seen in Israel; because he, for whom there was no help 
under the Law, is saved by the power of the Word. Remic. 
They who brought the dumb to be healed by the Lord, 
signify the Apostles and preachers, who brought the Gentile 
people to be saved before the face of divine mercy. AuG. 
This account of the two blind men and the dumb demon is 
read in Matthew only. The two blind men of whom the 
others speak are not the same as these, though something 
similar was done with them. So that even if Matthew had 
not also recorded their cure, we might have seen that this 
present narrative was of a different transaction. And this 
we ought diligently to remember, that many actions of our 
Lord are very much like one another, but are proved not 
to be the same action, by being both related at different times 
by the same Evangelist. So that when we find cases in 
which one is recorded by one Evangelist, and another by 
another, and some difference which we cannot reconcile 
between their accounts, we should suppose that they are like, 
but not the same, events. 


36. But when he saw the multitudes, he was 
moved with compassion on them, because they fainted, 
and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no 
shepherd. 

37. Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest 
truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few; 

38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that 
he will send forth labourers into his harvest. 


Curys. The Lord would refute by actions the charge of 
the Pharisees, who said, He casteth out demons by the 


VER. 36—38. ST. MATTHEW. 359 


Prince of the demons; tor a demon having suffered rebuke, 
dves not return good but evil to those who have not shewn 
him honour. But the Lord on the other hand, when He has 
suffered blasphemy and contumely, not only does not punish, 
but does not utter a hard speech, yea He shews kindness to 
thein that did it, as it here follows, dnd Jesus went about 
all their towns and villages. Herein He teaches us not to 
return accusations to them that accuse us, but kindness. 
For he that ceases to do good because of accusation, shews 
that his good has been done because of men. But if for 
God’s sake you do good to your fellow-servants, you will 
not cease from doing good whatever they do, that your 
reward may be greater. JEROME; Observe how equally in 
villages, cities, and towns, that is to great as well as small, 
He preaches the Gospel, not respecting the might of the 
noble, but the salvation of those that believe. It follows, 
Teaching in their synagogues; this was His meat, going about 
to do the will of His Father, and saving by His teaching such 
as yet believed not. Guoss. He taught in their synagogues 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, as it follows, Preaching the 
Gospel of the Kingdom. Remic. Understand, ‘ of God;’ 
for though temporal blessings are also proclaimed, yet they 
are not called The Gospel. Hence the Law was not called 
a Gospel, because to such as kept it, it held out not heavenly, 
but earthly, goods. JERoME; He first preached and taught, 
and then proceeded to heal sicknesses, that the works might 
convince those who would not believe the words. Hence 
it follows, Healing every sickness and every disease, for to 
Him alone nothing is impossible. GtLoss. By disease we 
may understand complaints of long standing, by sickness 
any lesser infirmity. Remic. It should be known that those 
whom He healed outwardly in their bodies, He also healed 
inwardly in their souls. Others cannot do this of their own 
power, but can by God’s grace. Currys. Nor does Christ’s 
goodness regt here, but He manifests His care for them, 
opening the bowels of His mercy towards them; whence it 
follows, And seeing the multitudes, he had compassion upon 
them. Remic. Herein Christ shews in Himself the dis- 
position of the good shepherd and not that of the hireling. 
Why He pitied them is added, Because they were troubled’, 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


' vexali 


360 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


Yacentesand sick' as sheep that have no shepherd—troubled 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


vid. Ps, 
102, 19. 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


either by demons, or by divers sicknesses and infirmities. 
Goss. Or, troubled by demons, and sick, that is, benumbed 
and unable to rise; and though they had shepherds, yet they 
were as though they had them not. Curys. This is an 
accusation against the rulers of the Jews, that being shepherds 
they appeared like wolves; not only not improving the 
multitude, but hindering their progress. For when the 
multitude marvelled and said, Jt was never so seen in Israel, 
these opposed themselves, saying, He casteth out demons by 
the prince of the demons. Remia. But when the Son of God 
looked down from heaven upon the earth, to hear the groans 
of the captives, straight a great harvest began to ripen; 
for the multitude of the human race would never have come 
near to the faith, had not the Author of human salvation 
looked down from heaven; and it follows, Then said he 
unto his disciples, The harvest truly ts great, but the labourers 
are few. Gtoss. The harvest are those men who can be 
reaped by the preachers, and separated from the number of 
the damned, as grain is beaten out from the chaff that it 
may be laid up in granaries. JEROME; The great harvest 
denotes the multitude of the people; the few labourers, the 
want of instructors. Remic. For the number of the Apostles 
was small in comparison of so great crops to be reaped. 
The Lord exhorts His preachers, that is, the Apostles and 
their followers, that they should daily desire an increase of 
their number; Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, 
that he would send forth labourers into his harvest. CHRys. 
He privately insinuates Himself to be the Lord; for it is He 
Himself who is Lord of the harvest. For if He sent the 
Apostles to reap what they had not sown, it is manifest that 
He sent them not to reap the things of others, but what He 
had sown by the Prophets. But since the twelve Apostles 
are the labourers, He said, Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, 
that he would send labourers into his harvest ; and notwith- 
standing H{[e added none to their number, but rather He 
multiplied those twelve many times, not by increasing their 
numbers, but by giving them more abundant grace. REMIG. 
Or, He then increased their number when He chose the 
seventy and two, and then when many preachers were made 


VER. 36—38. ST. MATTHEW. 361 


what time the Holy Spirit descended upon the believers. 
Curys. He shews us that it is a great gift that one should 
have the power of rightly preaching, in that He tells them 
that they ought to pray for it. Also we are here reminded 
of the words of John concerning the threshing-floor, and the 
fan, the chaff, and the wheat. 

Hitary; Figuratively; When salvation was given to 
the Gentiles, then all cities and towns were enlightened 
by the power and entrance of Christ, and escaped every 
former sickness and infirmity. The Lord pities the people 
troubled with the violence of the unclean Spirit, and sick 
under the burden of the Law, and having no shepherd 
at hand to bestow on them the guardianship of the Holy 
Spirit. But of that gift there was a most abundant fruit, 
whose plenty far exceeded the multitude of those that 
drank thereof; how many soever take of it, yet an inex- 
haustible supply remains; and because it is profitable that 
there should be many to minister it, He bids us ask the Lord 
of the harvest, that God would provide a supply of reapers 
for the ministration of that gift of the Holy Spirit which was 
made ready; for by prayer this gift is poured out upon us 
from God. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


CHAP. X. 


1. And when he had called unto him his twelve 
disciples, he gave them power against unclean spirits, 
to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness 
and all manner of disease. 

2. Now the names of the twelve apostles are 
these; The first, Simon, who is called Peter, and 
Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and 
John his brother ; 

3. Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew 
the Publican; James the son of Alphaus, and Leb- 
beeus, whose surname was Thaddeus; 

4. Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who 
also betrayed him. | 


GLoss. From the healing of Peter’s wife’s mother to this 
place there has been a continued succession of miracles; 
and they were done before the Sermon upon the Mount, as we 
know for certain from Matthew’s call, which is placed among 
them; for he was one of the twelve chosen to the Apostle- 
ship upon the mount. He here returns to the order of 
events, taking it up again at the healing of the centurion’s 
servant; saying, And calling to him his twelve disciples. 
Remia. The Evangelist had related above that the Lord 
exhorted His disciples to pray the Lord of the harvest to 
send labourers into His vineyard; and He now seems to be 
fulfilling what He had exhorted them to. For the number 
twelve is a perfect number, being made up of the number 
six, which has perfection because it is formed of its own 
parts, one, two, three, multiplied into one another; and the 


VER. ]—4. GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. 3863 


number six when doubled amounts to twelye. GLoss. And vid. 
this doubling seems to have some reference to the two pre- ee 
cepts of charity, or to the two Testaments. Bebe; For the Fv. xvii. 
number twelve, which is made up of three into four, denotes — 
that through the four quarters of the world they were to 
preach the faith of the holy Trinity. RaBan. This number cf. 

is typified by many things in the Old Testament; by the ae 
twelve sons of Jacob, by the twelve princes of the children Marc.iv. 
of Israel, by the twelve running springs in Helim, by the 
twelve stones in Aaron’s breastplate, by the twelve loaves of 

the shew-bread, by the twelve spies sent by Moses, by the 
twelve stones of which the altar was made, by the twelve 
stones taken out of Jordan, by the twelve oxen which bare 

the brazen sea. Also in the New Testament, by the twelve 

stars in the bride’s crown, by the twelve foundations of 
Jerusalem which John saw, and her twelve gates. CHRys. 

He makes them confident not only by calling their ministry 

a sending forth to the harvest, but by giving them strength 

for the ministry ; whence it follows, He gave them power over 

all unclean spirits to cast them out, and to heal every 
sickness and every disease. Rremic. Wherein is openly 
shewed that the multitude were troubled not with one 
single kind of affliction, but with many, and this was His 

pity for the multitude, to give His disciples power to heal 

and cleanse them. JEROME; A kind and merciful Lord and 
Master does not envy His servants and disciples a share in 

His powers. As Himself had cured every sickness and 
disease, He imparted the same power to His Apostles. 

But there is a wide difference between having and im- 
parting, between giving and receiving. Whatever He does 

He does with the power of a master, whatever they do 

it is with confession of their own weakness, as they speak, 

In the name of Jesus rise and walk. A catalogue of the Acts 3, 
names of the Apostles is given, that all false Apostles ® 
might be excluded. The names of the twelve Apostles are 
these; First, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his 
brother. To arrange them in order according to their ment 

is His alone who searches the secrets of al] hearts. But 
Simon is placed first, having the surname of Peter given to 
distinguish him from the other Simon surnamed Chananeus, 


Raban. 


John I, 


42. 


364 : GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


from the village of Chana in Galilee where the Lord turned 
the water into wine. Rasan. The Greek or Latin ‘ Petrus’ 
is the same as the Syriac Cephas, in both tongues the word 
is derived from a rock; undoubtedly that of which Paul 
speaks, And that rock was Christ. Remia. There have 


- been some who in this name Peter, which is Greek and 


Latin, have sought a Hebrew interpretation, and would have 
it to signify, ‘ Taking off the shoe,’ ‘ or unloosing,’ or 
‘acknowledging.’ But those that say this are contradicted 
by two facts. First, that the Hebrew has no letter P, but 
uses PH instead. Thus Pilate they call Philate. Secondly, 
that one of the Evangelists has used the word as an in- 


‘terpretation of Cephas; The Lord said, Thou shalt be 


called Cephas, on which the Evangelist adds, which being 
interpreted is Petrus. Simon is interpreted ‘ obedient,’ for he 
obeyed the words of Andrew, and with him came to Christ, 
or because he obeyed the divine commands, and at one word 
of bidding followed the Lord. Or as some will have it, it is 
to be interpreted, ‘ Laying aside grief,’ and, ‘ hearing painful 
things;’ for that on the Lord’s resurrection he laid aside the 
grief he had for His death; and he heard sorrowful things 


John21,wWhen the Lord said to him, Another shall gird thee, and 


18. 


shall carry thee whither thou wouldest not. 

And Andrew his brother. CuHrys. This is no small 
honour (done to Peter), He places Peter from his merit, 
Andrew from the nobility he had in being the brother of 
Peter. Mark names Andrew next after the two heads, 
namely, Peter and John; but this one not so; for Mark has 
arranged them in order of dignity. ReEmie. Andrew is 
interpreted ‘ manly;’ for as in Latin ‘ virilis’ is derived from 
‘vir,’ so in Greek Andrew is derived from avjg. Rightly 
is he called manly, who left all and followed Christ, and 
manfully persevered in His commands. JERoME; The 
Iivangelist couples the names throughout in pairs. So he 
puts together Peter and Andrew, brothers not so much 
according to the flesh as in spirit; James and John who left 
their father after the flesh to follow their true Father; James 
the son of Zebedee and John his brother. He calls him the 
son of Zebedec, to distinguish him from the other James the 
son of Alpheus. CHRys. Observe that he does not place 


VER. 1—4., ST. MATTHEW. 365 


’ them according to their dignity ; for to me John would seem 
to be greater not than others only, but even than his brother. 
Remia. James is interpreted ‘The supplanter,’ or ‘ that 
supplanteth ;’ for he not only supplanted the vices of the 
flesh, but even contemned the same flesh when Herod put 
him to death. John is interpreted ‘The grace of God,’ 
because he deserved before all to be loved by the Lord; 
whence also in the favour of [lis especial love, he leaned at 
supper in th: Lord’s bosom. 

Philip and Bartholomew. Philip is interpreted, ‘ Thee Beda. 
mouth of a lamp,’ or ‘ of lamps,’ because when he had been 
enlightened by the Lord, he straightway sought to communi- 
cate that light to his brother by the means of his mouth. 
Bartholomew is a Syriac, not a Hebrew, name, and is inter- 
preted ‘ The son of him that raiseth water’, that is, of Christ, 
who raises the hearts of His preachers from earthly to heavenly 
things, and hangs them there, that the more they penetrate 
heavenly things, the more they should steep and inebriate 
the hearts of their hearers with the droppings of holy 
preaching. 

Thomas, and Matihee the Publican. JEROME; The other 
Evangelists in this pair of names put Matthew before 
Thomas; and do not add, the Publican, that they should 
not seem to throw scorn upon the Evangelist by bringing to 
mind his former life. But writing of himself he both puts 
Thomas first in the pair, and styles himself the Publican ; 
because, where sin hath abounded, there grace shall much Bown. 5, 
more abound. ReEmic. Thomas is interpreted ‘ an abyss,’ ; Romig. 
or ‘ a twin,’ which in Greek is Didymus. Rightly is Didy-e Beda. 
mus interpreted an abyss, for the longer he doubted the 
more deeply did he believe the effect of the Lord’s passion, 
and the mystery of His Divinity, which forced him to cry, 

My Lord and my God. Matthew is interpreted ‘ given,’ John20, 
because by the Lord’s bounty he was made an Evangelist of 28. 
a Publican. 

James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus. RaBan. This Raban. 
James is he who in the Gospels, and also in the Epistle to * °°“ 
the Galatians, is called the Lord’s brother. For Mary the 
wife of Alphzus was the sister of Mary the mother of the 


a Or some say the son of Tolmai or Ptolemy. 


366 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, X. 


Lord; John the Evangelist calls her Mary the wife of 
Cleophas, probably because Cleophas and Alpheus were the 
same person. Or Mary herself on the death of Alpheus 
after the birth of James married Cleophas. Remic. It is 
well said, the son of Alpheus, that 1s, ‘ of the just,’ or ‘ the 
learned ;’ for he not only overthrew the vices of the flesh, 
but also despised all care of the same. And of what he was 
worthy the Apostles are witness, who ordained him Bishop 
of the Church of Jerusalem’. And ecclesiastical history 
‘ among other things tells of him, that he never ate flesh, 
- drunk neither wine nor strong drink, abstained from the 
bath and linen garments, and night and day prayed on his 
bended knees. And so great was his merit, that he was 
called by all men, ‘ The just.’ Thaddeus is the same whom 
Luke calls Jude of James, (that is, the brother of James,) 
whose Epistle is read in the Church, in which he calls him- 
Aug. De self the brother of James. AuG. Some copies have Lebbeus; 
pou ap: Dut whoever prevented the same man from having two, or 
even three different names? ReEmic. Jude is interpreted 
‘having confessed,’ because he confessed the Son of God. 
Rasan. Thaddeus or Lebbeus is interpreted ‘ a little heart,’ 

that is, a heart-worshipper. 

Simon Chananeus, and Judas Scarioth, who also betrayed 
him. JEROME; Simon Chananeus is the same who in 
the other Evangelist is called Zelotes. Chana signifies 
‘Zeal. Judas is named Scarioth, either from the town in 
which he was born, or from the tribe of Issachar, a prophetic 
omen of his sin; for Issachar means ‘a booty,’ thus signifying 
the reward of the betrayer. Remic. Scarioth is interpreted 
‘The memory of the Lord,’ because he followed the Lord; 
or ‘ The memorial of death,’ because he plotted in his heart 
how he might betray the Lord to death; or ‘ strangling,’ 
because he went and hanged himself. It should be known 
that there are two disciples of this name, who are types of all 
Christians ; Jude the brother of James, of such as persevere 


b Whether St. James the son of 
Alpheus is the same as the Bishop of 
Jerusalem is doubtful. Eusebius is 
cited on both sides the question; S. 
Epiphanius, S. Gregory Nyssen, Theo- 


doret, and the Author of the Consti- 
tutions take the negative; so does S. 
Chrysostom, but qualifies his evidence 
elsewhere; S. Jerome varies. Other 
Fathers are in favour of their identity. 


VER. 5—8, ST. MATTHEW. 367 


in the confession of the faith ; Jude Scarioth of such as leave 

the faith; and turn back again. Gtoss. They are named Gloss. 
two and two to express their union as yoke-fellows. AUG. \uy De 
These therefore He chose for His disciples, whom also He Civ.Dei, 
named Apostles, humbly born without honour, without eee 
learning, that whatever they should do that was great, 

it was He that should be in them and should do it. He 

had among them one that was evil, whom He should use 

in the accomplishment of His Passion, and who should be 

an example to His Church of suffering evil men. AMBROSE; Ambros. 
He was not chosen among the Apostles unwittingly ; for'™&<® 
that truth is great, which cannot be harmed even by having 

an adversary in one of its own ministers. Rasan. Also He 
willed to be betrayed by a disciple, that you when betrayed 

by your intimate might bear patiently that your judgment 

has erred, that your favours have been thrown away. 


5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded 
them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, 
and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: 

6. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel. 

7. And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. 

8. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the 
dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely 
give. 


Goss. Because the manifestation of the Spirit, as the Gloss. 
Apostle speaks, is given for the profit of the Church, after "°" 
bestowing His power on the Apostles, He sends them that 
they may exercise this power for the good of others; These 
twelve Jesus sent forth. Crys. Observe the propriety of 
the time in which they are sent. After they had seen the 
dead raised, the sea rebuked, and other like wonders, and 
had had both in word and deed sufficient proof of His 
excellent power, then He sends them. GtLoss. When He Gloss. 
sends them, He teaches them whither they should go, what" °° 


368 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


they should preach, and what they should do. And first, 
whither they should go; Giving them commandment, and 
saying, Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any 
city of the Samaritans enter ye not ; but go ye rather to the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel. JEROME; This passage 
does not contradict the command which He gave afterwards, 
Go and teach all nations; for this was before His resur- 
rection, that was after. And it behoved the coming of 
Christ to be preached to the Jews first, that they might not 
have any just plea, or say that they were rejected of the 
Lord, who sent the Apostles to the Gentiles and Samaritans. 
Curys. Also they were sent to the Jews first, in order that 
being trained in Judza, as in a palestra, they might enter 
| on the arena of the world to contend; thus He taught them 
Greg. like weak nestlings to fly. Grec. Or He would be first 
en preached to Judea and afterwards to the Gentiles, in order 
that the preaching of the Redeemer should seem to seek out 
foreign lands only because it had been rejected in His own. 
There were also at that time some among the Jews who 
should be called, and among the Gentiles some who were 
not to be called, as being unworthy of being renewed to life, 
and yet not deserving of the aggravated punishment which 
would ensue upon their rejection of the Apostles’ preaching. 
Hitary; The promulgation of the Law deserved also the first 
preaching of the Gospel ; and Israel was to have less excuse 
for its crime, as it had experienged more care in being 
warned. Currys. Also that they should not suppose that 
they were hated of Christ because they had reviled Him, and 
branded Him as demoniac, He sought first their cure, and 
withholding His disciples from all other nations, He sent this 
people physicians and teachers; and not only forbid them 
to preach to any others before the Jews, but would not that 
they should so much as approach the way that led to the 
Gentiles; Go nol into the way of the Gentiles. And because 
the Samaritans, though more readily disposed to be con- 
verted to the faith, were yet at enmity with the Jews, He 
would not suffer the Samaritans to be preached to before 
Gloss. the Jews. GLoss. The Samaritans were Gentiles who had 
aa been settled in the land of Israel by the king of Assyria after 
the captivity which he made. They had been driven by 


VER. 5—8. ST. MATTHEW. 369 


many terrors to turn to Judaism, and had received circum- 
cision and the five books of Moses, but renouncing every 
thing else; hence there was no communication between the 
Jews and the Samaritans. CHrys. From these then He 
diverts his disciples, and sends them to the children of 
Israel, whom He calls perishing sheep, not straying; in every 
way contriving an apology for them, and drawing them to 
Himself. H1rLtary; Though they are here called sheep, yet 
they raged against Christ with the tongues and throats of 
wolves and vipers. JEROME; Figuratively; Herein we who 
pear the name of Christ are commanded not to walk in the 
way of the Gentiles, or the error of the heretics, but as we 
are separate in religion, that we be also separate in our life. 
Goss. Having told them to whom they should go, He Gloss. 
now introduces what they should preach; Go und preach," 
saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Raran; 
The kingdom of heaven is here said to draw nigh by the 
faith in the unseen Creator which is bestowed upon us, not 
by any movement of the visible elements. The saints are 
rightly denoted by the heavens, because they contain God 
by faith, and love Him with affection. Cukys. Behold the 
greatness of their ministry, behold the dignity of the Apo- 
stles. ‘They are not to preach of any thing that can be an 
object of sense, as Moses and the Prophets did; but things 
new and unlooked for; those preached earthly goods, but 
these the kingdom of heaven and all the goods that are there. 
GREG. Miracles also were granted to the holy preachers, Greg. 
that the power they should shew might be a pledge of the aaah 
truth of their words, and they who preached new things 
should also do new things; wherefore it follows, Heal the 
sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out daemons. 
JEROME ; Lest peasants untaught and illiterate, without the 
graces of speech, should obtain credit with none when they 
announced the kingdom of heaven, He gives them power to 
do the things above mentioned, that the greatness of the 
miracles might approve the greatness of their promises. 
Hitary; The exercise of the Lord’s power is wholly 
entrusted to the Apostles, that they who were formed in the 
image of Adam, and the likeness of God, should now obtain 
the perfect image of Christ; and whatever evil Satan had 
VOL. I. 2B 


Greg. 
Hom. in 
Ev.xxix. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


Gloss. 


non occ. 


Greg. 
om. in 
Ev. iv. 4. 


370 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. xX. 


introduced into the body of Adam, this they should now 
repair by communion with the Lord’s power. GREc. 
These signs were necessary in the beginning of the Church ; 
the faith of the believers must be fed with miracles, that it 
might grow. Curys. But afterwards they ceased when a 
reverence for the faith was universally established. Or, if 
they were continued at all, they were few and seldom; for 
it is usual with God to do such things when evil is increased, 
then He shews forth His power. Greco. The Holy Church 
daily doth spiritually, what it then did materially by the 
Apostles ; yea, things far greater, inasmuch as she raises and 
cures souls and not bodies. Remic. The sick are the slothful 
who have not strength to live well; the lepers are the unclean 
in sin and carnal delights; the demoniacs are they that are 
given up under the power of the Devil. JERomE; And 
because spiritual gifts are more lightly esteemed when 
money is made the means of obtaining them, He adds a 
condemnation of avarice; Freely ye have received, freely 
give; I your Master and Lord have imparted these to you 
without price, do you therefore give them to others in like 
manner, that the free grace of the Gospel be not corrupted. 
Gross. This He says, that Judas who had the bag might 
not use the above power for getting money; a plain con- 
demnation of the abomination of the simoniacal heresy. 
GREG. For He knew before that there would be some that 
would turn the gift of the Spint which they had received 
into merchandize, and pervert the power of miracles into an 
instrument of their covetousness. CHRys. Observe how 
He is as careful that they should be upright in moral virtue, 
as that they should have the miraculous powers, shewing 
that miracles without these are nought. Freely ye have 
received, seems a check upon their pride; /reely give, a 
command to keep themselves pure from filthy lucre. Or, 
that what they should do might not be thought to be their 
own benevolence, He says, Freely ye have received; as 
much as to say; Ye bestow nothing of your own on those 
ye relieve; for ye have not received these things for money, 
nor for wages of labour; as ye have received them, so give 
to others; for indeed it is not possible to receive a price 
equal to their value. 


VER. 9, 10. ST. MATTHEW. 371 


9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in 
your purses, 

10. Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, 
neither shoes, nor yet staves: for the workman is 
worthy of his meat. 


Curys. The Lord having forbidden to make merchandize 
of spiritual things, proceeds to pull up the root of all evil, 
saying, Possess neither gold, nor silver. JEROME; For if 
they preach without receiving reward for it, the possession 
of gold and silver and wealth was unnecessary. For had 
they had such, they would have been thought to be preach- 
ing, not for the sake of men’s salvation, but their own gain. 
Curys. This precept then first frees the Apostles from all 
suspicions; secondly, from all care, so that they may give 
up their whole time to preaching the word ; thirdly, teaches 
them their excellence. This is what He said to them after- 
wards, Was any thing lacking to you, when I sent you 
without bag or scrip? JEROME; As He had cut off riches, 
which are meant by gold and silver, He now almost cuts 
off necessaries of life; that the Apostles, teachers of the true 
religion, who taught men that all things are directed by 
God’s providence, might shew themselves to be without 
thought for the morrow. Gtoss. Whence He adds, Neither Gloss. 
money in your purses. For there are two kinds of things” ° 
necessary ; one is the means of buying necessaries, which 
is signified by the money in their purses; the other the 
necessaries themselves, which are signified by the scrip. 
JERoME; In forbidding the scrip, neither scrip for your 
journey, He aimed at those philosophers commonly called vid. ; 
Bactroperate, who being despisers of this world, and ee 
esteeming all things as nothing, yet carry a bag about with Herm. 

ast. 1. 
them. Nor twocoats. By the two coats He seems to mean}. 
a change of raiment; not to bid us be content with a 
single tunic in the snow and frosts of Scythia, but that 
they should not carry about a change with them, wearing 
one, and carrying about the other as provision for the 
future. Nor shoes. It is a precept of Plato, that the two 
extremities of the body should be left unprotected, and 
2B2 


372 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


that we should not accustom ourselves to tender care of the 
head and feet; for if these parts be hardy, it will follow that 
the rest of the body will be vigorous and healthy. Nor 
staff; for having the protection of the Lord, why need we 
seek the aid of a staff? Remic. The Lord shews by these 
words that the holy preachers were reinstated in the dignity 
of the first man, who as long as he possessed the heavenly 
treasures, did not desire other; but having lost those by 
sinning, he straightway began to desire the other. CuHRYS. 
A happy exchange! In place of gold and silver, and the 
like, they received power to heal the sick, to raise the dead. 
For He had not commanded them from the beginning, 
Possess neither gold nor silver; but only then when He 
said at the same time, Cleanse the lepers, cast out demons. 
Whence it is clear that He made them Angels more than 
inen, freeing them from all anxiety of this life, that they 
might have but one care, that of teaching; and even of that 
He in a manner takes away the burden, saying, Be noé 
careful what ye shall speak. 'Thus what seemed hard and 
burdensome, He shews them to be light and easy. For 
nothing is so pleasant as to be delivered from all care and 
anxiety, more especially when it is possible, being delivered 
from this, to lack nothing, God being present, and 
being to us instead of all things. JEROME; As He had 
sent the Apostles forth unprovided and unencumbered on 
their mission, and the condition of the teachers seemed 
a hard one, He tempered the severity of the rules by 
this maxim, The labourer is worthy of his hire, i. e. Receive 
what you need for your food and clothing. Whence the 


. Apostle says, Having food and raiment, let us thererith 
be content. And again, Let him that ts catechized com- 


municate unto him that catechizeth in all good things; 
that they whose disciples reap spiritual things, should make 
them partakers of their carnal things, not for the gratification 
of covetousness, but for the supply of wants. Curys. It 
behoved the Apostles to be supported by their disciples, that 
neither they should be haughty towards those whom they 
taught, as though they gave all, and received nothing; and 
that the others, on their part, should not fall away, as over- 
looked by them. Also that the Apostles might not cry, He 


VER. 9, 10. ST. MATTHEW. 373 


bids us lead the life of beggars, and should be ashamed 
thereat, He shews that this is their due, calling them 
labourers, and that which is given their fire. For they 
were not to suppose that because what they gave was onlv 
words, therefore they were to esteem it but a small benefit 
that they conferred; therefore He says, The labourer is 
worthy of his meat. This He said not to signify that the 
labours of the Apostles were only worth so much, but laying 
down a rule for the Apostles, and persuading those that gave, 
that what they gave was only what was due. Ava. The Auy. 
Gospel therefore is not for sale, that it should be preached i 
for reward. For if they so sell it, they sell a great thing for 

a small price. Let preachers then receive their necessary 
support from the people, and from God the reward of their 
employment. For the people do not give pay to those that 
minister to them in the love of the Gospel, but as it were 

a stipend that may support them to enable them to work. 
Auc. Otherwise; When the Lord said to the Apostles, Aug. 1c 
Possess not gold, He added immediately, The labourer is 5°"*4o, 
worthy of his hire, to shew why He would not have them 
possess and carry about these things; not that these things 
were not needed for the support of this life, but that He 
sent them in such a way as to shew that these things were 
due to them from those to whom they preached the Gospel, 

as pay to soldiers. It is clear that this precept of the Lord 
does not at all imply that they ought not according to the 
Gospel to live by any other means, than by the contributions 

of those to whom they preached ; otherwise Paul transgressed 
this precept when he lived by the labour of his own hands. 
But He gave the Apostles authority that these things were 
due to them from the house in which they abode. But 
when the Lord has issued a command, if it be not performed, 

it is the sin of disobedience; when He bestows a privilege, 

it 1s in any one’s power not to use it, and as it were to 
refrain from claiming his right. The Lord then having 
sanctioned this maxim, that they who preach the Gospel 
should live of the Gospel, He spoke these things to the 
Apostles, that being confident they should not possess nor 
carry about with them the necessaries of life, neither things 
great nor things small. Therefore He adds, Nor «a staff, 


374 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


to shew that from His people all things are due to His 
ministers, and they require no superfluities. This authority 
Mark 6, He signifies by the staff, saying in Mark, Take nothing 
: but a staff only. And when He forbids them (in Matthew) 
to take with them shoes, He forbids that carefulness and 
thought which would be anxious to carry them lest they 
should be wanting. Thus also we must understand con- 
cerning the two coats, that none should think it necessary 
to carry another besides that which he wore, supposing 
that he should have need of it; for it would be in his power 
to obtain one by this authority which the Lord gave. Further 
that we read in Mark that they should be shod with 
sandals, seems to imply that this kind of shoe has a mystic 
meaning in it, that the foot should neither be covered above, | 
nor yet bare beneath, that is, that the Gospel should‘ not be 
hid, nor yet rest itself on earthly advantage. Also when He 
forbids them to carry two coats, He warned them not to 
walk deceitfully, but in simplicity. So we cannot doubt 
that all these things were said by the Lord, partly in a 
direct, partly in a figurative sense; and that of the two 
Evangelists one inserted some things, the other other things, 
in his narrative. If any one should think that the Lord 
could not in one speech speak some things in a direct, and. 
some things in a mystic sense, let him look at any other 
of His sayings, and he will see how hasty and unlearned 
his opinion is. When the Lord commands that the left 
hand should not know what the right hand doeth, does he 
think that almsgiving, and the rest of His precepts in that 
place are to be taken figuratively ? 

JEROME; Thus far we have expounded by the letter ; 
but metaphorically, as we often find gold put for the 
sense, silver for the words, brass for the voice—all these 
we may say we are not to receive from others, but to 
have them given by the Lord. We are not to take up 
the teaching of heretics, of philosophers, and of corrupt 
doctrine. HiLary; The girdle is the making ready for the 
ministry, the girding up that we may be active in duty; 
we may suppose that the forbidding money in the girdle 
is to warn us from suffering any thing in the ministry to be 
bought and sold. We are not to have a scrip by the way, 


VER. LI—15. ST. MATTHEW. $75 


that is, we are to leave all care of our worldly substance; 
for all treasure on earth is hurtful to the heart, which will 
be there where the treasure is. Not two coats, for it is 
enough to have once put on Christ, nor after true knowledge 
of Him ought we to be clothed with any other garment 
of heresy or law. Not shoes, because standing on holy 
ground as was said to Moses not covered with the thorns 
and prickles of sin, we are admonished to have no other 
preparation of our walk than that we have received from 
Christ. JEROME; Or; The Lord herein teaches us that our 
feet are not to be bound with the chains of death, but to 
be bare as we tread on the holy ground. We are not to 
carry a staff which may be turned into a serpent, nor to 
trust in any arm of flesh; for all such is a reed on which 
if a man lean ever so lightly, it will break and go into his 
hand and pierce him. Hutary; Neither a staff; that is, 
We are not to seek rights of extraneous power, having a rod 
from the root of Jesse. 


11. And into whatsoever city or town ye shall 
enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide 
till ye go thence. 

12. And when ye come into an house, salute it. 

13. And if the house be worthy, let your peace 
come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace 
return to you. 

14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor 
hear your words, when ye depart out of that house 
or city, shake off the dust of your feet. 

15. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tole- 
rable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the 
day of judgment, than for that city. 


Curys. The Lord had said above, The workman is worthy 
of his meat; that they should not hence suppose that He 
would open all doors to them, He here commands them to 
use much circumspection in the choice of a host, saying, 
Into what city or town ye enter, enquire who in it is worthy. 


Ambros. 
in Luc. 
9, 5. 


Gloss. 
interlin. 


376 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


JEROME; The Apostles, on entering a strange town, could 
not know of each inhabitant what sort of man he was; they 
were to choose their host therefore by the report of the 
people, and upinion of the neighbours, that the worthiness 
of the preacher might not be disgraced by the ill character 
of his entertainer. Curys. How then did Christ Himself 
abide with the publican? Because he was made worthy by 
his conversion ; for this command that he should be worthy, 
had respect not to their rank, but to their furnishing food. For 
if he be worthy he will provide them with food, especially 
when they need no more than bare necessaries. Observe 
how though He stripped them of all property, He supplied 
all their wants, suffering them to abide in the houses of 
those whom they taught. For so they were both themselves 
set free from care, and convinced men that it was for their 
salvation only that they had come, seeing they carried nothing 
about with them, and desired nothing beyond necessaries. 
And they did not lodge at all places indiscriminately, for 
He would not have them known only by their miracles, but 
much more by thcir virtues. But nothing is a greater mark 
of virtue, than to discard superfluities. JEROME; One host 
is chosen who does not so much confer a favour upon him 
who is to abide with him, as receive one. For it is said, 
Who in it is worthy, that he may know that he rather re- 
ceives than does a favour. CHrys. Also observe that He 
has not yet endowed them with all gifts; for He has not 
given them power to discern who is worthy, but bids them 
seek out; and not only to find out who is worthy, but also 
not to pass from house to house, saying, And there remain 
until ye depart out of that city; so they would neither make 
their entertainer sorrowful, nor themselves incur suspicion 
of lightness or gluttony. AmBroseE; The Apostles are not 
to choose carelessly the house into which they enter, that 
they may have no cause for changing their lodging; the 
same caution is not enforced upon the entertainer, lest in 
choosing his guests, his hospitality should be diminished. 
When ye enter a house, salute it, saying, Peace be to this 
house. Gtoss. As much as to say, Pray ye for peace upon 
the master of the house, that all resistance to the truth may 
‘be pacified. Jrrome; Here is a latent allusion to the form 


VER. 11—15. ST. MATTHEW. 377 


of salutation in Hebrew and Syriac; they say Salemalach 
or Salamalach, for the Greek yeaige, or Latin Ave; that is, 
‘ Peace be with you.’ The command then is, that on entering 
any house they should pray for peace for their host ; and, as 
far as they may be able, to still all discords, so that if any 
quarrel should arise, they, who had prayed for peace should 
have it—others should have the discord; as it follows, 
And if that house be ‘worthy, your peace shall rest upon it; 
but if it be not worthy, your peace shall return to you again. 
Remic. Thus either the hearer, being predestined to eternal Remig. 
life, will follow the heavenly word when he hears it; or if jf... 
there be none who will hear it, the preacher himself shall 
not be without fruit; for his peace returns to him when he 
receives of the Lord recompense for all his labour. Curys. 
The Lord instructs them, that though they were teachers, 
yet they should not look to be first saluted by others ; 
but that they should honour others by first saluting then. 
And then He shews them that they should give not a 
salutation only, but a benediction, when He says, I/ 
that house be worthy, your peace shall rest upon it. REMI. 
The Lord therefore: taught his disciples to offer peace 
on their entering into a house, that by means of their 
salutation their choice might be directed to a worthy house 
and host. As though He had said, Offer peace to all, they 
will shew themselves either worthy by accepting, or unworthy 
by not accepting it; for though you have chosen a host that 
is worthy by the character he bears among his neighbours, 
yet ought you to salute him, that the preacher may seem 
rather to enter by invitation, than to intrude himself. This 
salutation of peace in few words may indeed be referred 
to the trial of the worthiness of the house or master. HILARY; 
The Apostles salute the house with the prayer of peace ; 
yet so as that peace seems rather spoken than given. For 
their own peace which was the bowels of their pity ought 
not to rest upon the house if it were not worthy; then the 
sacrament of heavenly peace could be kept within the 
Apostles own bosom. Upon such as rejected the precepts 
of the heavenly kingdom an eternal curse is left by the 
departure of the Apostles, and the dust shaken from their ,- 
feet; And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your 


378 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


words, when ye go out of that house, or that town, cast the 
dust off your feet. For he that lives in any place seems to 
have a kind of fellowship with that place. By the casting 
the dust off the feet therefore all that belonged to that 
house is left behind, and nothing of healing or soundness is 
borrowed from the footsteps of the Apostles having trod 
their soil. JERomeE; Also they shake off the dust as a testi- 
mony of the Apostles’ toil, that in preaching the Gospel they 
had come even so far, or as a token that from those that 
rejected the Gospel they would accept nothing, not even the 
necessaries of life. RasBan. Otherwise; The feet of the 
disciples signify the labour and progress of preaching. The 
dust which covers them is the lightness of earthly thoughts, 
from which even the greatest doctors cannot be free; 
their anxiety for their hearers involves them in cares for 
their prosperity, and in passing through the ways of this 
world, they gather the dust of the earth they tread upon. 
They then who have despised the teaching of these doc- 
tors, turn upon themselves all the toils and dangers and 
anxieties of the Apostles as a witness to their damnation. 
And lest it should seem a slight thing not to receive the 
Apostles, He adds, Verily I say unto you, it shall be more 
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, 
than for that city. JEROME; Because to the men of Sodom 
and Gomorrah no man had ever preached; but this city had 


. been preached to and had rejected the Gospel. Remia. 
_ Or because the men of Sodom and Gomorrah were hospitable 


among their sensuality, but they had never entertained 
such strangers as the Apostles. JEROME; But if it shall be 
more tolerable for the land of Sodom than for that city, 
hence we may learn that there is difference of degree in the 
punishment of sinners. Remic. Sodom and Gomorrah are. 
especially mentioned, to shew that those sins which are against 
nature are particularly hateful to God, for which the world 
was drowned with the waters of the deluge, four towns were 
overthrown, and the world is daily afflicted with manifold evils. 

Hivary; Figuratively, The Lord teaches us not to enter 
the houses or to mix in the acquaintance of those who 
persecute Christ, or who are ignorant of Him; and in 
each town to enquire who among them is worthy, i. e. 


VER. 16—18. ST. MATTHEW. 379 


where there is a Church wherein Christ dwells; and not to 
pass to another, because this house is worthy, this host is 
our right host. But there would be many of the Jews who 
would be so well disposed to the Law, that though they 
believed in Christ because they admired His works, yet they 
would abide in the works of the Law; and others again who, 
desiring to make trial of that liberty which is in Christ, 
would feign themselves ready to forsake the Law for the 
Gospel; many also would be drawn aside into heresy by 
perverse understanding. And since all these would falsely 
maintain that with them only was Catholic verity, therefore 
we must with great caution seek out the house, i. e. the 
Church. 


16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst 
of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and 
harmless as doves. 

17. But beware of men: for they will deliver you 
up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their 
synagogues ; 

18. And ye shall be brought before governors and 
kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and 
the Gentiles. 


Curys. Having removed all care and anxiety from the Chrys. 
Apostles, and armed them with the miraculous powers, cheat 
He proceeds to foretell the evils which should befal them. 
First, that they might know his knowledge of the future ; 
secondly, that they should not think that these things befel 
them because of the want of power in their Master ; thirdly, 
that they might not be amazed if these things had come upon 
them unexpectedly; fourthly, that after hearing these things, 
they might not be dismayed in the season of His cross; and 
lastly, that they might learn a new method of warfare. He 
sends them unprovided, bidding them look to those who 
should receive them for support; but rests not in that, but 
shews his power still further, Zo, J send you as sheep in the 
midst of wolves. Where observe that He does not say 
merely ‘ to wolves,’ but in the midst of wolves, to shew His 


380 _ GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


excellent might therein, that the sheep would overcome the 
wolves though they were in the midst of them; and though 
they received many bites from them, yet were they not 
destroyed, but rather convert them. And it is a much 
greater and a more wonderful power that can change their 
hearts than that can kill them. Among wolves He teaches 
Greg. them to shew the meekness of sheep. GreEG. For he who 
aed undertakes the office of preacher ought not to do evil, but to 
4. suffer it, and by his meekness to mollify the wrath of the 
angry, and by his wounds to heal the wounds of sinners in 
their affliction. And even should the zeal of right-doing 
ever require that He should be severe to those that are placed 
under Him, His very severity will be of love and not of 
cruelty, outwardly maintaining the rights of discipline, and 
inwardly loving those whom [le corrects. Too many, when 
they are entrusted with the reins of government, bum to 
make the subjects fecl them, display the terrors of authority, 
and forgetting that they are fathers, rather desire to be 
thonght lords, changing a station of lowliness into that of 
lofty dominion, if they ever seem outwardly to fawn on 
any one, they inwardly hate him; of such He _ spoke 
Mat.7, above; They come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly 
19. they are ravening wolves. For prevention whereof we ought 
to consider that we are sent as sheep among wolves, whose 
innocence we ought to preserve, not having the tooth of 
malice. JEROME; He calls the Scribes and Pharisees who 
are the clergy of the Jews, wolves. H1Lary; The wolves 
indeed are all such as should pursue the Apostles with mad 
fury. Curys. Their consolation under their hardships was 
the excellent power of Him who sent them ; wherefore He 
puts that before all, Lo, I send you. Be not dismayed, 
though you be sent into the midst of wolves; for I am able 
to bring it to pass that you suffer no hurt, and that ye should 
not only prevail over the wolves, but be made more terrible 
than lions. But it is good that it should be thus; hereby 
your virtue is made brighter, and My power is more 
manifested. Also that somewhat should proceed from them- 
selves, that they should not think themselves to be crowned 
without reason, He adds, Be ye therefore wise as serpents, 
simple as doves. JEROME; Wise, that they might escape 


VER. 16—18. ST. MATTHEW. 381 


snares; simple, that they might not do evil to others. The 
craft of the serpent is set before them as an example, for he 
hides his head with all the rest of his body, that he may 
protect the part in which life is. So ought we to expose 
our whole body, that we may guard our head which 1s 
Christ; that is, that we study to keep the faith whole and 
uncorrupt. RasBan. The serpent moreover seeks out narrow 
chinks through which it crawls to draw off its old skin; 
so the preacher passing through the narrow way lays 
aside the old man. MRemic. Beautifully the Lord bids 
the preacher have the wisdom of the serpent; because 
the first man was beguiled by a serpent; as though He 
had said, The foe is subtle to deceive, be ye therefore wise 
to rescue; he commended the tree, do ye also commend the 
tree of the Cross. HuiLary; He first attempted the softer 
sex, allured her by hope, and promised a share of immor- 
tality. Do you in hike manner seize every opportunity, 
look well into each man’s nature and inclination, use wisdom 
of speech, reveal hope of good things to come; that what he 
promised falsely we may preach truly according to God's 
promise, that they that believe shall be like to the Angels. 
Currys. But as we ought to have the wisdom of the serpent, 
that we should not be hurt in any deadly part, so also we 
should have the simplicity of the dove, not to retaliate when 
we are hurt, nor to avenge ourselves on those who have 
designed aught against us. ReEmic. The Lord unites these 
two things; because simplicity without wisdom might 
be easily deceived, and wisdom is dangerous unless it be 
tempered with simplicity that does no man hurt. JEROME; 
The harmlessness of doves is shewn by the assumption 
of that form by the Holy Spirit; as the Apostle speaks, 
In malice be ye children. Curys. What is harder than 
these commands? It is not enough that we suffer ill, but we 
must not be angry thereat, as is the dove’s nature, for anger 
is extinguished not by anger, but by meekness. RaBan. 
That by the wolves above He intended men, He shews 
when He adds, Take heed of men. Gtoss. Ye have indeed Gloss. 
need to be wise as serpents, for, as they are wont to do, they ee 
will deliver you to councils, forbidding you to preach in My 
name; then if ye be not corrected, they will scourge you, 


382 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


and at length ye shall be brought before kings and governors. 
Hitary; Who will endeavour to extort from you either to 
be silent or to temporize. CHrys. How wonderful that 
men who had never been beyond the lake in which they 
fished, did not straightway depart from Him on hearing 
these things. It was not only of their goodness, but of the 
wisdom of their Teacher. For to each evil He attaches 
somewhat of alleviation; as here He adds, for my sake; 
for it is no light consolation to suffer for Christ’s sake, for 
they did not suffer as evil or wrong doers. Again He adds, 
Greg. for a testimony against them. GREG. Either that they had 
oe persecuted to the death, or that they had seen and were not 
xxxv. 2.changed. For the death of the saints is to the good an aid, 
to the bad a testimony ; that thus the wicked may perish without 
excuse in that from which the elect take example and live. 
Curys. This was matter of consolation to them, not that 
they sought the punishment of others, but that they were 
confident that in all things they had One present with them, 
and all-knowing. Huivary; And by this their testimony not 
only was all excuse of ignorance of His divinity taken away 
from their persecutors, but also to the Gentiles was opened 
the way of believing on Christ, who was thus devotedly 
preached by the voices of the confessors among the flames 
of persecution ; and this is that He adds, and the Gentiles. 


19. But when they deliver you up, take no thought 
how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you 
in that same hour what ye shall speak. 

20. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of 
your Father which speaketh in you. 


Curys. To the foregoing topics of consolation, He adds 
another not a little one; that they should not say, How shall 
we be able to persuade such men as these, when they shall 
persecute us? He bids them be of good courage respecting 
their answer, saying, When they shall deliver you up, take 
no thought how or what ye shall speak. Remic. Hovw or what, 
one refers to the substance, the other to the expression in 
words. And because both of these would be supplied by Him, 


VER. 21, 22. ST. MATTHEW. 383 


there was no need for the holy preachers to be anxious about 
either. JEROME; When then we are brought before judges 
for Christ’s sake, we ought to offer only our will for Christ. 
But Christ who dwelleth in us speaks for Himself, and the 
grace of the Holy Spirit will minister in our answer. 
Hirary; For our faith, observing all the precepts of the 
Divine will, will be instructed with an answer according to 
knowledge, after the example of Abraham, to whom when 
he had given up Isaac, there was not wanting a ram for a 
victim. For zt is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your 
Father that speakethin you. Remic. Meaning, Ye indeed Remig. 
go out to the battle, but it is I who fight; you utter the words, },,,, 
but it is I who speak. Hence Paul speaks, Seek ye a proof? cor. 
of Christ who speaketh in me? Cunrys. Thus He raises !* * 
them to the dignity of the Prophets, who have spoken by 
the Spirit of God. He who says here, Take no thought Pet. 
what ye shall speak, has said in another place, Be ye” = 
always ready to give an answer to him that demandeth a 
reason of the hope that is in you. When it is a dispute 
among friends, we are commanded to be ready; but before 
the awful judgment, and the raging people, aid is ministered 
by Christ, that they may speak boldly and not be dismayed. 


21. And the brother shall deliver up the brother 
to death, and the father the child; and the children 
shall rise up against their parents, and cause them 
to be put to death. 

22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my 
name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall 
be saved. 


Goss. Having placed the comfort first, He adds the Gloss. 
more alarming perils; Brother shall deliver up brother tooh A™ 
death, and the father the son; children shall rise against 
parents, to put them to death. Grec. Wrongs which we Greg. 
suffer from strangers, pain us less than those we suffer oe 
from men on whose affections we had counted; for besides ««2v. 3. 
the bodily affliction, there is then the pain of lost affection. 
JEROME; This we see often happen in persecutions, nor is there 


Rom. 
10, 4. 


38.4 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


any true affection between those whose faith is different. 
Currys. What follows is yet more dreadful, Ye shall be hated 
of all men; they sought to exterminate them as common 
enemies of all the world. To this again is added the con- 
solation, For my name's sake ; and yet further to cheer them, 
Whosoever shall endure to the end, he shall be saved. For 
many are hot and zealous in the beginning, but afterwards 
grow cool, for these, He says, I look at the end. For where 
is the profit of seeds that only sprout at firstf wherefore 
He requires a sufficient endurance from them. JEROME; . 

For virtue is not to begin but to complete. Remic. And — 
the reward is not for those that begin, but for those that 
bring to an end. CuHrys. But that no man should say, 
that Christ wrought all things in His Apostles, and therefore 
it is nothing wonderful that they were made such as they 
were, since they did not bear the burden of these things, 
therefore He says, that perseverance was their work. For 
though they were rescued from their first perils, they are 
preserved for still harder trials, which again shall be followed 
by others, and they shall be in danger of snares as long as 
they live. This He covertly intimates when he says, Who- 
soever shall endure to the end, he shall be saved. Remic. 
That is, He who shall not let go the commands of the faith, 
nor fall away in persecution, shall be saved; he shall receive 
the reward of the heavenly kingdom for his earthly -per- 
secutions. And note that ‘ the end’ does not always mean 
destruction, but sometimes perfection, as in that, Christ ts 
the end of the Law. So the sense here may be, Whosoever 


Aug. De shall endure to the end, that 1s, in Christ. Auc. To endure 


Civ. Dei, 
xxi, 25, 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
RXxXiv. 


in Christ, is to abide in His faith which worketh by love. 


23. But when they persecute you in this city, flee 
ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall 
not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of 
man be come. 


Curys. Having foretold the fearful things which should 


come upon them after His Cross, resurrection, and ascension, - . 


He leads them to gentler prospects; He does not bid them | 
presumptuously to offer themselves for persecution, but tor 


VER. 23. ST. MATTHEW. 385 


fly from it; When they persecute you in this city, flee ye 
to another. For because this was the first beginning of 
their conversion, He adapts His words to their state. 
JEROME; This must be referred to the time when the 
Apostles were sent to preach, when it was said to them, 
Go not into the way of the Gentiles; they should not fear, 
but may shun persecution. This we see the believers did 
in the beginning, when on a persecution arising in Jerusalem 
they were scattered throughout all Judea, and thus the 
_season of tribulation was made the seedtime of the Gospel. 


Ava. Not that the Saviour was unable to protect His disciples, Aug. 


does He here bid them fly, and Himself give them an 


cont. 
Faust. 


example of it, but He instructed man’s weakness, that he xxii. 36. 


should not presume to tempt God, when he has any thing 


that he can do for himself, but should shun all evils. Ip. Aug. De 


themselves, that they might not fall into the hands of their 
persecutors. Therefore if He neither commanded nor allowed 
this mode of departure from this world to His own, for 
whom He Himself had promised that He would prepare 
an eternal mansion; whatever instances may be brought 
by the Gentiles who know not God, it is clear that this 
is not lawful for those who believe one true God. CuHrys. 
But that they should not say, What then if we fly from 
persecution, and again they cast us out thence whither we 
have fled? To remove this fear, He says, Verily I say unto 
you, ye shall not have completed, &c. that is, ye shall not have 
made the circuit of Palestine and return to Me, before I 
shall take youto Me. Rasan. Or; He foretels that they 
shall not have brought all the cities of Israel to the faith 
by their preaching, before the Lord’s resurrection be accom- 
plished, and a commission given them to preach the Gospel 
throughout the world. Hitary; Otherwise; He exhorts 
to fly from place to place; for His preaching driven from 
Judea, first passed into Greece; then, wearied with divers 
sufferings of the Apostles up and down the cities of Greece, 
it takes an abiding refuge in the rest of the Gentile world. 
.. But to shew that the Gentiles would believe the preaching 
of the Apostles, but that the remnant of Israel should only 
" kelieve at His second coming, He adds, Ye shall'not have 
VOL, I. Qc 


He might have suffered them to lay violent hands upon? 


iv. Dei, 
22. 


Aug. 
Ep. 228. 


386 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


completed the cities of Israel; i. e. After the fulness of the 
Gentiles is brought in, that which remains of Israel to fill 
up the number of the Saints shall be called into the Church 
in Christ’s future coming to glory. Auge. Let the servants of 
Christ then do as He commanded, or permitted them ; 
as He fled into Egypt, let them fly from city to city, when- 
ever any one of them is marked out for persecution ; that 
the Church be not deserted, it will be filled by those who 
are not so sought after; and let these give sustenance to 
their fellow-servants whom they know cannot live by any 
other means. But when the threatening danger is common 
to all, Bishops, clergy, and laity, let not those who have 
need of aid be deserted by those whose aid they require. 
Either therefore let them all pass to some stronghold, or 
let those who are obliged to remain, not be deserted by 
those whose province it is to supply their ecclesiastical 
needs; that they may either all live, or all suffer whatever 
their Master will have them to suffer. Remic. Be it known 
moreover, that as this precept respecting endurance under 
persecution specially belongs to the Apostles and _ their 
successors, men of fortitude, so the permission to fly is 
sufficiently proper for the weak in the faith, to whom the 
tender Master condescends, lest if they should offer them- 
selves for martyrdom, under the pain they should deny the 
faith ; and the sin of flight is lighter than that of denial. 
But though by their flight they shewed that they had not 
the constancy of perfect faith, yet their desert was great, 
seeing they were ready to leave all for Christ. So that if 
He had not given them permission to fly, some would have 
said that they were alicns from the glory of the heavenly 
kingdom. JEROME; Spiritually we may say; When they 
shall persecute you in one book or one passage of Scripture, 
let us flee to other volumes, for however contentious the 
adversary may be, protection will come from the Saviour 
before the victory is yielded to the enemy. 


24. The disciple is not above his master, nor the 
servant above his lord. 


25. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his 


VER. 24, 25. ST. MATTHEW. 387 


master, and the servant as his lord. If they have 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much 
more shall they call them of his household ? 


Curys. Because it should come to pass that His disciples. 
among their other persecutions should suffer loss of character, 
which to many is the most grievous of all calamities, He con- 
soles them from His own example, and those things that were 
spoken of Him; a comfort to which no other can be com- 
pared. Hu1ary; For the Lord, the Light eternal, the Captain 
of the faithful, the Parent of immortality, set before His 
disciples this solace of the sufferings that should come upon 
them, that we should embrace it as our glory when we are 
made like to our Lord in suffering; whence He says, The 
disciple is not above his master, nor the slave above his lord. 
Curys. Understand, so long as he is a disciple or servant, 
he is not above his master or lord by the nature of honour. 
And do not here object to me such cases as rarely happen, 
but receive this according to the common course of things. 
Remic. He calls Himself master and lord; by disciple and 
servant He denotes His Apostles. Gtoss. As much as to Glace 
say, Be not indignant that ye suffer things, which I also“ 
suffer, because I am your lord, who do what I will, and 
your master, who teach you what I know to be profitable for 
you. Remic. And because this sentence seemed not to 
agree with the foregoing words, He shews what they mean 
by adding, If they have called the master of the house 
Beelzebub, how much more they o his household? Curys. 
He said not here ‘ slaves,’ but those of his household, to 
shew how dear they were to Him; as elsewhere He said, 

I will not call you slaves, but my friends. ReEemic. As much Joba l5, 
as to say, Ye therefore will not seek worldly honours and) 
human glory, while you see me pursuing the redemption of 
mankind through mocking and contumely. CuHrys. And 
He says not only, If they have reviled the master of the 
house, but expresses the very words of railing, for they had 
called Him Beelzebub. JEROME; Beelzebub is the idol of 
Accaron who is called in the book of Kings, the God of2 Kings 
flies; ‘ Bel,’ signifying idol; ‘ zebub,’ a fly. The Prince oe 
of the demons He calls by the name of the foulest of idols, 

2c 2 


388 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


which is so called because of the uncleanness of the fly, 
which destroys the sweetness of ointment. 


26. Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing 
covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that 
shal] not be known. 

27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye 
in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach 
ye upon the housetops. 

28. And fear not them which kill the body, but 
are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him 
which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. 


Remic. To the foregoing consolation He adds another 
no less, saying, Fear ye not them, namely, the persecutors. 
And why they were not to fear, He adds, For there ts 
nothing hid which shall not be revealed, nothing secret which 
shall not be known. JEROME; How is it then that in the 
present world, the sins of so many are unknown? It is of 
the time to come that this is said; the time when God shall 
judge the hidden things of men, shall enlighten the hidden 
places of darkness, and shall make manifest the secrets of 
hearts. The sense is, Fear not the cruelty of the persecutor, 
or the rage of the blasphemer, for there shall come a day 
of judgment in which your virtue and their wickedness will 
be made known. Hi Lary; -Therefore neither threatening, 
nor evil speaking, nor power of their enemies should move 
them, seeing the judgment-day will disclose how empty, 
how nought all these were. Curys. Otherwise; It might 
seem that what is here said should be applied generally ; 
but it is by no means intended as a general maxim, but is 
spoken solely with reference to what had gone before with 
this meaning; If you are grieved when men revile you, 
think that in a little time you will be delivered from this 
evil, They call you indeed impostors, sorcerers, seducers, 
but have a little patience, and all men shall call you the 
saviours of the world, when in the course of things you shall 
be found to have been their benefactors, for men will not 
judge by their words but by the truth of things. Remie. 


VER. 26—28. ST. MATTHEW. 389 


Some indeed think that these words convey a promise from 

our Lord to His disciples, that through them all hidden 
mysteries should be revealed, which lay beneath the veil 

of the letter of the Law ; whence the Apostle speaks, When? Cor. 
they have turned to Christ, then the veil shall be taken away. BHA 
So the sense would be, Ought you to fear your persecutors, 
when you are thought worthy that by you the hidden mys- 
teries of the Law and the Prophets should be made manifest? 
Curys. Then having delivered them from all fear, and set 
them above all calumny, He follows this up appropmiately 
with commanding that their preaching should be free and 
unreserved ; What I say to you in darkness, that speak ye 

in the light; what ye hearin the ear, that preach ye upon 

the housetops. JEROME; We do not read that the Lord 
was wont to discourse to them by night, or to deliver his 
doctrine in the dark; but He said this because all His 
discourse is dark to the carnal, and His word night to the 
unbelieving. What had been spoken by Him they were 

to deliver again with the confidence of faith and confession. 
Remica. The meaning therefore 1s, What I say to you in 
darkness, that is, among the unbelieving Jews, that speak 

ye in the light, that is, preach it to the believing ; what ye 
hear in the ear, that is, what I say unto you secretly, that 
preach ye upon the housetops, that is, openly before all men. 

It is a common phrase, To speak 1n one’s ear, that is, to. speak 

to him privately. Rapan. And what He says, Preach ye 
upon the housetops, is spoken after the manner of the pro- 
vince of Palestine, where they use to sit upon the roofs of 
the houses, which are not pointed but flat. That then may 

be said to be preached upon the housetops which is spoken 

in the hearing of all men. Gtoss. Otherwise; What I say Gloss. 
unto you while you are yet held under carnal fear, that ae: 
speak ye in the confidence of truth, after ye shall be en- 
lightened by the Holy Spirit; what you have only heard, 
that preach by doing the same, being raised above your 
bodies, which are the dwellings of your souls. JEROME; 
Otherwise ; What you hear in mystery, that teach in plain- 
ness of speech; what I have taught youin a corner of Judza, 
that proclaim boldly in all quarters of the world. CuHrys. As 

He said, He that believeth on me, the works that I do he shall sonal 


390 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


do also, and greater things than these shall he do; so here He 
shews that He works all things through them more than 
through Himself; as though He had said, I have made a be- 
ginning, but what is bevond, that I will to complete through 
your means. So that this is not a command but a prediction, 
shewing them that they shall overcome all things. HIvLary; 
Therefore they ought to inculcate constantly the knowledge 
of God, and the profound secret of evangelic doctrine, to be re- 
vealed by the light of preaching ; having no fear of those who 
have power only over the body, but cannot reach the soul; Fear 
not those that kill the body, but cannot kill the soul. CHRys. 
Observe how He sets them above all others, encouraging them 
to set at nought cares, reproaches, perils, yea even the most 
terrible ofall things, death itself, in comparison of the fear of 
God. But rather fear him, who can destroy both soul and 
body in hell. JEROME; This word is not found in the Old 
Scriptures, but it is first used by the Saviour. Let us enquire 
then into its origin. We read in more than one place that 
the idol Baal was near Jerusalem, at the foot of Mount 
Moriah, by which the brook Siloe flows. This valley and 
a small level plain was watered and woody, a delightful spot, 
and a grove in it was consecrated to the idol. To so great 
folly and madness had the people of Israel come, that, for- 
saking the neighbourhood of the Temple, they offered their 
sacrifices there, and concealing an austere ritual under a 
voluptuous life, they burned their sons in honour of a demon. 
This place was called Gehennom, that is, The valley of the 
children of Hinnom. These things are fully described in 
2 Kings Kings and Chronicles, and the Prophet Jeremiah. God 
onan threatens that He will fillthe place with the carcases of the dead, 
a 3. that it be no more called Tophet and Baal, but Polyandrion, 
32; 32, i. e. The tomb of the dead. Hence the torments and eternal 
35. pains with which sinners shall be punished are signified by 
Aug.Dethis word. AvucG. This cannot be before the soul is so joined 
co te the body, that nothing may sever them. Yet it is rightly 
called the death of the soul, because it does not live of God; 
and the death of the body, because though man does not 
cease to feel, yet because this his feeling has neither pleasure, 
nor health, but is a pain and a punishment, it is better 
named death than life. CHrys. Note also, that He does 


VER. 29—831. ST. MATTHEW. 391 


not hold out to them deliverance from death, but encourages 
them to despise it; which is a much greater thing than to 
be rescued from death; also this discourse aids in fixing 
in their minds the doctrine of immortality. 


29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? 
and one of them shall not fall on the ground without 
your Father. 

30. But the very hairs of your head are all num- 
bered. 

31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value 
than many sparrows. 


Curys. Having set aside fear of death, that the Apostles 
should not think that if they were put to death they were 
deserted by God, He passes to discourse of God’s providence, 
saying, Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, and one 
of them does not fall to the ground without your Father ? 
JEROME; If these little creations fall not without God’s 
superintendence and providence, and if things made to 
perish, perish not without God’s will, you who are immortal 
ought not to fear that you live without His providence. 
Hitary; Figuratively; That which is sold is our soul and 
body, and that to which it is sold, is sm. They then who 
sell two sparrows for a farthing, are they who sell themselves 
for the smallest sin, born for flight, and for reaching heaven vid. Ps. 
with spiritual wings. Caught by the bait of present pleasures, panes 
and sold to the enjoyment of the world, they barter away 
their whole selves in such a market. It is of the will of God 
that one of them rather soar aloft; but the law proceeding ac- 
cording to God’s appointment decrees that one of them should 
fall. In like manner as, if they soared aloft they would become 
one spiritual body ; so, when sold under sin, the soul gathers 
earthly matter from the pollution of vice, and there is made 
of them one body which is committed to earth. JEROME; That 
He says, The hairs of your head are all numbered, shews 
the boundless providence of God towards man, and a care 
unspeakable that nothing of ours is hid from God. H Lary; 
For when any thing is numbered it is carefully watched 


392 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


over. CuHrys. Not that God reckons our hairs, but to 
shew His diligent knowledge, and great carefulness over us. 
JEROME. Those who deny the resurrection of the flesh 
ridicule the sense of the Church on this place, as if we 
affirmed that every hair that has ever been cut off by the 
razor rises again, when the Saviour says, Every hatr of 
ycur head—not is saved, but—is numbered. Where there 
is number, knowledge of that number is implied, but not 


Aug. De preservation of the same hairs. Avé6. Though we may fairly 


Civ. Dei, 
xxii. 19. 


a 21, 


enquire concerning our hair, whether all that has ever been 
shorn from us will return; for who would not dread such 
disfigurement. When it is once understood that uothing 
of our body shall be lost, so as that the form and perfectness 
of all the parts should be preserved, we at the same time 
understand that all that would have disfigured our body 
is to be united or taken up by the whole mass, not affixed 
to particular parts so as to destroy the frame of the limbs; 
just as a vessel made of clay, and again reduced to clay, 
is once more reformed into a vessel, it needs not that that 
portion of clay which had formed the handle should again 
form it, or that which had composed the bottom, should 
again go to the bottom, so long as the whole was remoulded 
into the whole, the whole clay into the whole vessel, no part 
being lost. Wherefore if the hair so often shorn away 
would be a deformity if restored to the place it had been 
taken from, it will not be restored to that place, but all 
the materials of the old body will be revived in the new, 
whatever place they may occupy so as to preserve the 
mutual fitness of parts. Though what is said in Luke, 
Not a hair of your head shall fall to the ground, may be 
taken of the number, not the length of the hairs, as here also it 
is said, The hairs of your head are all numbered. TA1LaRy ; 
For it is an unworthy task to number things that are to 
perish. Therefore that we should know that nothing of us 
should perish, we are told that our very hairs are numbered. 
No accident then that can befal our bodies is to be feared ; 
thus He adds, Fear not, ye are better than many sparrovws. 
JEROME; This expresses still more clearly the sense as it 
was above explained, that they should not fear those who 
can kill the body, for if the least animal falls not without 


VER. 32, 33. ST. MATTHEW. 393 


God’s' knowledge, how much less a man who is dignified 
with the Apostolic rank? Hutary; Or this, ye are better 
than many sparrows, teaches that the elect faithful are 
better than the multitude of the unbelieving, for the one 
fall to earth, the other fly to heaven. Remic. Figuratively ; 
Christ is the head, the Apostles the hairs, who are well 
said to be numbered, because the names of the saints are 
written in heaven. 


32: Whosoever therefore shall confess me before 
men, him will I confess also before my Father which 
is in heaven. 

33. But whosoever shall deny me before men, 
him will I also deny before my Father which is in 
heaven. 


Curys. The Lord having banished that fear which haunted 
the minds of His disciples, adds further comfort in what 
follows, not only casting out fear, but by hope of greater 
rewards encouraging them to a free proclamation of the 
truth, saying, Every man who shall confess me before men, 
I also will confess him before my Father which is in heaven. 
And it is not properly shall confess me, but as it is in the 
Greek, shall confess in me, shewing that it 1s not by your own 
strength but by grace from above, that you confess Him 
whom you do confess. HiLary; This He says in con- 
clusion, because it behoves them after being confirmed by 
such teaching, to have a confident freedom in confessing 
God. Remic. Here is to be understood that confession 
of which the Apostle speaks, With the heart men believe ai 
unto justification, with the mouth confession is made unto ne 
salvation. That none therefore might suppose that he could 
be saved without confession of the mouth, He says not only, 
He that shall confess me, but adds, before men ; and again, 
He that shall deny me before men, him will I also deny 
before my Father which is in heaven. Hitary; This 
teaches us, that in what measure we have borne witness to 
Him upon earth, in the same shall we have Him to bear 
witness to us in heaven before the face of God the Father. 


394 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


Curys. Here observe that the punishment is manifold more 
than the evil done, and the reward more than the good done. 
As much as to say, your deed was more abundant in con- 
fessing or denying Me here; so shall My deed to you-ward 
be more abundant in confessing or denying you there. 
Wherefore if you have done any good thing, and have 
not received retribution, be not troubled, for a manifold 
reward awaits you in the time to come. And if you have 
done any evil, and have not paid the punishment thereof, 
do not think that you have escaped, for punishment 
will overtake you, unless you are changed and become 
better. Rasan. It should be known that not even Pagans 
can deny the existence of God, but the infidels may 
deny that the Son as well as the Father is.God. The 
Son confesses men before the Father, because by the 
Son we have access to the Father, and because the Son 

Mat. 25,saith, Come, ye blessed of my Father. Remic. And thus 

34 He will deny the man that hath denied Him, in that he 
shall not have access to the Father through Him, and shall 
be banished from seeing either the Son or the Father in 
their divine nature. Currys. He not only requires faith 
which is of the mind, but confession which is by the mouth, 
that He may exalt us higher, and raise us to a more open 
utterance, and a larger measure of love. For this is spoken 
not to the Apostles only, but to all; He gives strength not 
to them only, but to their disciples. And he that observes 
this precept will not only teach with free utterance, but 
will easily convince all; for the observance of this command 
drew many to the Apostles. Rasan. Or, He confesses Jesus 
who by that faith that worketh by love, obediently fulfils 
His commands; he denies Him who is disobedient. 


34. Think not that I am come to send peace on 
earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. 

35. For I am come to set a man at variance 
against his father, and the daughter against her 
mother, and the daughter in law against her mother 
in law. 


VER. 34—36. | ST. MATTHEW. 395 


36. And a man’s foes shall be they of his own 
household. 


JEROME; He had before said, What J say to you in 
darkness, that speak ye in the light ; He now tells them what 
will follow upon that preaching, saying, Think not that 
I am come to send peace npon earth; I am not come to 
send peace, but a sword. Gtoss. Or connect it with what Gloss. 
has gone before, As the fear of death ought not to draw you i 
away, so neither ought carnal affection. CHrys. How then Chrys. 
did He enjoin them, that when they should enter any house a 
they should say, Peace be to this house, as also the Angels 
sung, Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace to men. Luke 2, 
That is the most perfect peace when that which is diseased is . 
lopped off, when that which introduces strife is taken away, 
for so only is it possible that heaven should be joined to 
earth. For so does the physician save the rest of the body, 
namely by cutting off that which cannot be healed. So it 
came to pass at the tower of Babel; a happy discord broke 
up their bad union. So also Paul divided those who were 
conspired together against him. For concord is not in all 
cases good; for there is honour among thieves. And this 
combat is not of His setting before them, but of the plots 
of the world. JERoME; For in the matter of belief in 
Christ, the whole world was divided against itself; each 
house had its believers and its unbelievers; and therefore 
was this holy war sent, that an unholy peace might be 
broken through. CuHrys. This He said as it were com- 
forting His disciples, as much as to say, Be not troubled as 
though these things fell upon you unexpectedly; for, for 
this cause I came that I might send war upon the earth—nay 
He says not ‘ war,’ but what is yet harder, a sword. For 
He sought by sharpness of speech so to rouse their attention, 
that they should not fall off in time of trial and difficulty, 
or say that He had told them smooth things, and had hid 
the difficulties. For it is better to meet with softness in 
deeds than in words; and therefore He stayed not in words, 
but shewing them the nature of their warfare, He taught 
them that it was more perilous than a civil war; saying, 
I am come to set a man against his father, and daughter 


Is. 6, 10. 


Mic.7,6. 


Eph. 6 
17. Heb. 
4, 12. 


wa 


396 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


against her mother, and daughter-in-law against her mother- 
in-law. So this warfare will be between not acquaintances 
merely, but the nearest and dearest kindred; and this shews 
Christ’s very great power; that His disciples after having 
heard this, yet undertook the mission, and brought over 
others. Yet was it not Christ who made this division, but 
the evil nature of the parties; when He says that it is He 
that does it, He speaks according to the manner of Scripture. 
As it is written, God hath given them eyes that they should 
not see. . Here is also a great proof that the Old Testament 
is like the New. For among the Jews a man was to put 
his neighbour to death if he found him making a calf, or 
sacrificing to Baalphegor; so here to shew that it was the 
same God who ordained both that and these precepts, He 
reminds them of the prophecy, A man’s foes are they of his 
household. For this same thing happened among the Jews ; 
there were Prophets, and false Prophets; there the multitude 
was divided, and houses were set against themselves ; there 
some believed one part, and some another. JEROME; These 
are almost the words of the Prophet Micah. We should 
always take note when a passage is cited out of the Old 
Testament, whether the sense only, or the very words are 
given. Huitary; Mystically; A sword is the sharpest of all 
weapons, and thence it is the emblem of the right of au- 
thority, the impartiality of justice, the correction of offenders. 
The word of God, we may remember, is likened to a sword ; 
so here the sword that is sent upon the earth is His preaching 
poured into the heart of man. The five inhabiting one 
house, whom He divides three against two, and two against 
three, we may explain thus; The three are the three parts 
of man, the body, the soul, and the will; for as the soul is 
bestowed in the body, so the will has power of using both 
in any way it chooses; and thence when a law is given it 
is given to the will. But this is only found in those who 
were first formed by God. By the sin and unbelief of the 
first parent, all the generations of men since have had sin for 
the father of their body, and unbelief for the mother of their 
soul. And as each man has his will within him, there are 
thus five in one house. When then we are renewcd in the 
laver of baptism, by virtue of the word we are set apart from 


VER. 87—39. 8ST. MATTHEW. 397 


our original guilt, and severed, as it were, by the sword of 
God, from the lusts of this our father and mother, and thus 
there is great discord made in one house; the new man 
finding his foes within, he seeks with joy to live in newness 

of “spirit ; they which are derived from the old stock, lust to 
remain in their old pleasures. AucG. Otherwise; f am come ae 
to set a man against his father; for he renounces the Devil; grins 
who was his son; the daughter against her mother, that is, 1: °- 
the people of God against the city of the world, that is, the 
wicked society of mankind, which is spoken of in’ Scripture 
under the names of Babylon, Egypt, Sodom, and other names. 

The daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, that is, the 
Church against the Synagogue, which according to the flesh, 
brought forth Christ the spouse of the Church. They are 
severed by the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. 
And u man’s foes are they of his household, those, that is, with 
whom he before lived as intimates. RasBan. For no other 
mutual rights can be preserved between those who are at 
war in their creeds. GtLoss, Otherwise; He means, I am Gloss. 
not come among men to strengthen their carnal affections, ™*"!"- 
but to cut them off with the sword of the Spirit; whence it 

is rightly added, And a man’s foes are they of his household. 
Grec. For the subtle enemy when he sees himself driven Greg. 
out of the hearts of the good, seeks out those who most ji 8. 
love them, and speaking by the mouth of those who are 
dearest, endeavours while the heart is penetrated by love, 
that the sword of conviction may pierce to the inmost 
bulwarks of virtue. 


37. He that loveth father or mother more than 
me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or 
daughter more than me is not worthy of me. 

38. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth 
after me, is not worthy of me. 

39. He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he 
that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. 


JEROME; Because of what He had said, J am not come to 
send peace but a sword, &c. that none might suppose that 


c. 2, 4. 


Deut. 
33, 9. 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


398 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


family affection was banished from His religion, He now 
adds, He that loves father or mother more than me is 
not worthy of me. So in the Song of Songs we read, 
Order love in me. For this order is needed in every 
affection; after God love thy father, thy mother, and thy 
children; but if a necessity should occur that the love of 
parents and children comes into competition with the love 
of God, and where both cannot be preserved, remember that 
hatred of our kindred becomes then love to God. He forbids 
not to love parent or child, but adds emphatically, more 
than me. Huitary; For they who have esteemed domestic 
affection of relations higher than God, are unworthy to inherit 
good things tocome. Curys. Yet when Paul bids us obey our 
parents in all things, we are not to marvel; for we are only 
to obey in such things as are not hurtful to our piety to God. 
It is holy to render them every other honour, but when they 
demand more than is due, we ought not to yield. This is 
likewise agreeable to the Old Testament; in it the Lord 
commands that all who worshipped idols, should not only 
be held in abhorrence, but should be stoned. And in 
Deuteronomy it is said, He who saith to his father and his 
mother, I know you not; and to his brethren, Ye are 
strangers; he hath kept thy saying. Gtoss. It seems to 
happen in many cases that the parents love the children 
more than the children love the parents; therefore having 
taught that His love is to be preferred to the love of parents, 
as in an ascending scale, He next teaches that it is to be 
preferred to the love of children, saying, And whoso loveth 
son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. RaBan. 
He is unworthy of the divine communion who prefers the 
carnal affection of kindred to the spiritual love of God. 
Curys. Then that those to whom the love of God is pre- 
ferred should not be offended thereat, He leads them to 
a higher doctrine. Nothing is nearer to a man than his 
soul, and yet He enjoins that this should not only be hated, 
but that a man should be ready to deliver it up to death, 
and blood; not to death only, but to a violent and most 
disgraceful death, namely, the death of the cross; therefore 
it follows, And whoso taketh not up his cross and followeth 
me, 1s not worthy of me. He had as yet said nothing to 


VER. 37—89. ST. MATTHEW. 399 


them respecting his own sufferings, but instructs them in the 
meanwhile in these things, that they may the more readily 
receive His words concerning His passion. Hu1Lary; Or; 

They that are Christ’s hare crucified the body with its vices Gal. 5, 
and lusts. And he is unworthy of Christ who does not take a 

up His cross, in which we suffer with Him, die with Him, 

are buried and rise again with Him, and follow his Lord, 
purposing to live in newness of spirit in this sacrament of 

the faithe Grrc. The cross is so called from 'torment; Greg. 
and there are two ways in which we bear the Lord’sp, 


Vv. 
cross; either when we afflict the flesh by abstinence ; xxii. 3. 


or when in compassion for our neighbour we make his la 
afflictions our own. [But it should be known that there are 
some who make a shew of abstinence not for God, but for 
ostentation; and some there are who shew compassion to 
their neighbour, not spiritually but carnally, not that they 
may encourage him in virtue, but rather countenancing him 
in faults. These indced seem to bear their cross, but do not 
follow the Lord; therefore He adds, And followeth me 
Curys. Because these commands seemed burdensome, He 
proceeds to shew their great use and benefit, saying, He 
that findeth his life shall lose it. As much as to say, Not 
only do these things that I have inculcated do no harm, but 
they are of great advantage to a man; and the contrary 
thereof shall do him great hurt—and this is His manner 
every where. He uses those things which men’s affections 
are set upon as a means of bringing them to their duty. 
Thus: Why are you loath to contemn your life? Because 
you love it? For that very reason contemn it, and you will 
do it the highest service. ReEMiG. The life in this place is 
not to be understood as the substance, (the soul,) but as this 
present state of being; and the sense is, He who findeth 
his life, i. e. this present life, he who so loves this light, 
its joys and pleasures, as to desire that he may always find 
them ; he shall lose that which he wishes always to keep, and 
prepare his soul for eternal damnation. RaBan. Otherwise ; 
He who seeks an immortal life, does not hesitate to lose his 
life, that 1s, to offer it to death. But either sense suits equally 
well with that which follows, And whoso shall lose hts life 
for my sake shall find it. Remic. That is, he who in con- 


400 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


fession of My name in time of persecution despises this 
temporal world, its joys, and pleasures, shall find eternal 
salvation for his soul. H1tary; Thus the gain of life brings 
death, the loss of life brings salvation; for by the sacrifice 
of this short life we gain the reward of immortality. 


40. He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he 
that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. 

41. He that receiveth a prophet in the name ofa 
prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward ; and he that 
receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous 
man shall receive a righteous man’s reward. 

42. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one 
of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the 
name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in 
no wise lose his reward. 3 


JEROME; The Lord when He sends forth His disciples to 
preach, teaches them that dangers are not to be feared, that 
natural affection is to be postponed to religion—gold He had 
above taken from them, brass He had shaken out of their 
purses—hard then surely the condition of the preachers! 
Whence their living? Whence their food and necessaries? 
Therefore He tempers the rigour of His precepts by the 
following promises, that in entertaining the Apostles each 
believer may consider that he entertains the Lord. Curys. 
Enough had been said above to persuade those who should 
have to entertain the Apostles. For who would not with 
all willingness take in to his house men who were so 
courageous, that they despised all dangers that others might 
be saved? Above He had threatened punishment to those 
who should not receive them, He now promises reward to 
such as should receive them. And first He holds out to 
those who should entertain them the honour, that in so doing 
they were entertaining Christ, and even the Father; He who 
receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me. What honour to 
be compared to this of receiving the Father and the Son? 
Hitary; These words shew that He has a Mediator’s office, 
and since He came from God, when He is received by us, 


VER. 40—42. ST. MATTHEW. 401 — 


through Him God is transfused into us; and by this dispo- 
sition of grace to. have received the Apostles is no other 
than to have received God; for Christ dwells in them, and 
God in Christ. CuHrys. A further reward also He promises, 
saying, He who receiveth a prophet in the name of a 
prophet, shall receive a prophets reward. He said not 
merely, Whoso recetveth a prophet, or a righteous man, 
but tu the name of a prophet, and in the name of a 
righteous man; that is, not for any greatness in this life, 
or other temporal account, but because he is a prophet, 
or a righteous man. JEROME; Otherwise; To this His 
exhortation to the disciple to entertain his teacher, there 
might a secret objection arise among the faithful; then 
shall we have to support the false prophets, or Judas the 
traitor. To this end it is that the Lord instructs them 
in these words, that it 1s not the person but the office that 
they should look to; and that the entertainer loses not his 
reward, though he whom he entertains be unworthy. CuHrys. 
A prophel’s reward, and a righteous man’s reweard, are such 
rewards as it is fitting he should have who entertains a 
prophet, or a righteous man: or, such a reward as a prophet 
or righteous man should have. GREG. He says not, a reward Greg. 
from a prophet, or rightcous man, but the reward of a prophet Se 
or righteous man. For the prophet is perhaps a righteous man, !?- 
and the less he possesses in this world, the greater confidence 
has he in speaking in behalf of righteousness. He who hath of 
this world’s goods, in supporting such a man, makes himself 
a free partaker in his righteousness, and shall receive the 
reward of righteousness togethcr with him whom he has 
aided by supporting him. He is full of the spirit of pro- 
phecy, but he lacks bodily sustenance, and if the body be 
siot supported, it is certain that the voice will fail. Whoso 
then gives a prophet food, gives him strength for speaking, 
therefore together with the prophet he shall receive the pro- 
yhet’s reward, when he shews before the face of God what 
bounty he shewed him. Jerome; Mystically; He who 
receives a prophet as a prophet, and understands him speak- 
421g of things to come, he shall receive reward of that prophet. 
Vhe Jews therefore, who understand the prophets carnally, 
dio not receive the prophet’s reward. Rrmic. Some under- 
VOL. 1. 2D 


| Gloss. 
non occ. 


Gloss. 
ord. 


402 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. X. 


stand by the prophet here, the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom 
Moses says, 4 Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up 
tunto you; and the same also by the nghteous man, because 
he is beyond comparison righteous. He then who shall 
receive a prophet or righteous man in the name of the 
prophet or righteous man, i. e. of Christ, shall receive 
reward from Him for love of whom he received Him. 
JEROME; That none should say, I am poor and therefore 
cannot be hospitable, He takes away even this plea by the 
instance of a cup of cold water, given with good will. He 
says cold water, because in hot, poverty and lack of fuel 
might be pleaded. And whosoever shall give to drink to 
one of the least of these a cup of cold water only in the 
name of a disciple, verily 1 say unto you, he shall not lose 
his reward. Remic. The least of these, that is, not a prophet, 
or a righteous man, but one of these least. Gtoss. Note, that 
God looks more to the pious mind of the giver, than to the 
abundance of the thing given. Goss. Or, the least are they 
who have nothing at all in this world, and shall be judges 
with Christ. HiLtary; Or; Seeing beforehand that there 
would be many who would only glory in the name of 
Apostleship, but in their whole life and walk would be 
unworthy of it, Ife does not therefore deprive of its reward 
that service which might be rendered to them in belief 
of their religious life. For though they were the very least, 
that is, the greatest of sinners, yet even small offices of 
mercy shewn them, such as are denoted by the cup of cold 
water, should not be shewn in vain. For the honour is not 
done to a man that is a sinner, but to his title of disciple. 


| 


* an i 


Catena Aurea. 


COMMENTARY 


ON THERE 


FOUR GOSPELS, 


COLLECTED OUT OF THE 


WORKS OF THE FATHERS 


BY 


S. THOMAS AQUINAS. 


VOL. I. 


ST. MATTHEW. PART Il. 


e OXFORD, 
JOHN HENRY PARKER} 
J. G. F. AND J. RIVINGTON, LONDON. 
MDCCCKXLI. | 


BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


TuHE following Compilation not being admissible into the 
Library of the Fathers ‘from the date of some few of the 
authors introduced imto it, the Editors of the latter work 
have been led to publish it in a separate form, being assured 
that those who have subscribed to their Translations of the 
entire Treatises of the ancient Catholic divines, will not feel 
less interest, or find less benefit, in the use of so very 
judicious and beautiful a selection from them. The Editors 
refer to the Preface for some account of the natural and 
characteristic excellences of the work, which will be found 
as useful in the private study of the Gospels, as it is well 
adapted for family reading, and full of thought for those who 
are engaged in religious instruction. 


Oxford, May 6, 1841. 


—— ee ee eee 


~ 


COMMENTARY 


ON THE 


GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. 


VOL. I. PART II. 


VOL. I. 2 D 


CHAP. XI. 


1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an 
end of commanding his twelve disciples, he departed 
thence to teach and to preach in their cities. 


RaBaN. The Lord having sent out His disciples to preach 
with the foregoing instructions, Himself now fulfils in action 
what He had taught in words, offering His preaching first to the 
Jews; And it came to pass when Jesus had ended all these 
sayings, he pussed thence. Curys. Having sent them forth, He Chrys. 
withdrew Himself, giving them opportunity and time to do,;;y, 
the things that He had enjoined ; for while He was present 
and ready to heal, no man would come to His disciples. 
Remia. He well passes from the special teaching which He 
had delivered to His disciples, to the general which He 
preached in the cities ; passing therein as it were from 
heaven to earth, that He might give light to all. By this 
deed of the Lord, all holy preachers are admonished that 
they should study to benefit all. 


2. Now when John had heard in the prison the 
works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples, 

3. And said unto him, Art thou he that should 
come, or do we look for another ? 

4. Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and 
shew John again those things which ye do hear 
and see : 

5. The blind receive their sight, and the lame’ 
walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the 
dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel 


preached to them. 
2Dd2 


404 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


6. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended 


in me. 


Gloss. Gtoss. The Evangelist had shewn above how by Christ's 
non °* miracles and teaching, both His disciples and the multitudes 
had been instructed; he now shews how this instruction 
had reached even to John’s disciples, so that they seemed 
to have some jealousy towards Christ; John, when he had 
heard in his bonds the works of Christ, sent two of his 
disciples to say unto him, Art thou he that should come, 
Greg. or look we for another? Gxrec. We must enquire how 
o™-"" John, who is a prophet and more than a prophet, who made 
known the Lord when He came to be baptized, saying, 
Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the 
world '—why, when he was afterwards cast into prison, he 
should send his disciples to ask, Art thou he that should 
come, or look we for another 2 Did he not know Him whom 
he had pointed out to others; or was he uncertain whether 
this was He, whom by foretelling, by baptizing, and by 
Ambros. Making known, he had proclaimed to be He? AMBROSE; 
ea Some understand it thus; That it was a great thing that 
John should be so far a prophet, as to acknowledge Christ, 
and to preach remission of sin; but that like a pious 
prophet, he could not think that He whom he had believed 
to be He that should come, was to suffer death ; he doubted 
therefore though not in faith, yet in love. So Peter also 
Mat, 16, doubted, saying, This be far from thee, Lord; this shall not 
be unto thee. CHrys. But this seems hardly reasonable. 
For John was not in ignorance of His death, but was the 
first to preach it, saying, Behold the Lamb of God, that 
taketh away the sins of the world. For thus calling Him 
the Lamb, he plainly shews forth the Cross; and no 
otherwise than by the Cross did He take away the sins 
of the world. Also how is he a greater prophet than these, 
if he knew not those things which all the prophets knew ; 
1s.53,7.for Isaiah says, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter. 
Aug. GREG. But this question may be answered in a better way 
abi sup.if we attend to the order of time. At the waters of Jordan 
he had affirmed that this was the Redeemer of the world: 
‘after he was thrown into prison, he enquires if this was He 


VER. 2—6. ST. MATTHEW. 405 


that should come—not that he doubted that this was the 
Redeemer of the world, but he asks that he may know 
whether He who in His own person had come into the world, 
would in His own person descend also to the world below. 
JEROME; Hence he frames his question thus, Art thou he 
that ts to come? Not, Art Thou He that hast come? And 

the sense is, Direct me, since I am about to go down into 

the lower parts of the earth, whether I shall announce Thee 

to the spints beneath also; or whether Thou as the Son of 
God may not taste death, but will send another to this sacra- 
ment? CuHrys. But is this a more reasonable explanation 
than the other? for why then did he not say, Art Thou 

He that is coming to the world beneath? and not simply, 

Art thou he that is to come? And the reason of his 
seeking to know, namely, that he might preach Him there, is 
even ridiculous. For the present life is the time of grace, 
and after death the judgment and punishment; therefore 
there was no need of a forerunner thither. Again, if the 
unbelievers who should believe after death should be saved, 
then none would perish; all would then repent and worship; 

for every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven, and things Phil-2, 
on earth, and things under the earth. Gtoss. But it ought hee 
to be observed, that Jerome and Gregory did not say that on occ. 
John was to proclaim Christ’s coming to the world beneath, 

to the end that the unbelievers there might be converted to 

the faith, but that the mghteous who abode in expectation 

of Christ, should be comforted by His near approach. 
Hicary; It is indeed certain, that he who as forerunner 
proclaimed Christ’s coming, as prophet knew Him when 

He stood before him, and worshipped Him as Confessor 
when He came to him, could not fall into error from such 
abundant knowledge. Nor can it be believed that the grace 

of the Holy Spirit failed him when thrown into prison, seeing 

He should hereafter minister the light of His power to the 
Apostles when they were in prison. JEROME; Therefore he 
does not ask as being himself ignorant. But as the Saviour 
asks where Lazarus is buried, in order that they who shewed Joho 1), 
Him the sepulchre might be so far prepared for faith, and 5*- 
believe that the dead was verily raiscd again— so John, about 

to be put to death by Herod, sends his disciples to Christ, 


John 8, 
13. 


406 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, XI. 


that by this opportunity of seeing His signs and wonders 
they might believe on Him, and so might learn through their 
master’s enquiry. But John’s disciples had somewhat of 


bitterness and jealousy towards the Lord, as their former 


enquiry shewed, Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but 
thy disciples fast not? Curys. Yet whilst John was with 
them he held them rightly convinced concerning Christ. 
But when he was going to die, he was more concerned on 
their behalf. For he feared that he might leave his disciples 
a prey to some pernicious doctrine, and that they should 
remain separate from Christ, to whom it had been his care 
to bring all his followers from the beginning. Had he said 
to them, Depart from me, for He is better than me, he would 
not have prevailed with them, as they would have supposed 
that he spoke this in humility, which opinion would have 
drawn them more closely to him. What then does he? He 
waits to hear through them that Christ works miracles. 
Nor did he send all, but two only, (whom perhaps he chose 
as more ready to believe than the rest,) that the reason of his 
enquiry might be unsuspected, and that from the things 
themselves which they should see they might understand the 
difference between him and Jesus. HuiLary; John then 
is providing not for his own, but his disciples’ ignorance ; 
that they might know that it was no other whom he had 
proclaimed, he sent them to see His works, that the works 
might establish what John had spoken; and that they should 
not look for any other Christ, than Ilim to whom His works 
had borne testimony. Carrs. So also Christ as knowing 
the mind of John, said not, I am He; for thus He would 
have put an obstacle in the way of those that heard Him, 
who would have at least thought within themselves, if they 
did not say, what the Jews did say to Christ, Thou bearest 
wilness of thyself. Therefore He would have them learn 
from His miracles, and so presented His doctrine to them 
more clear, and without suspicion. For the testimony of 
deeds is stronger than the testimony of words. Therefore 
He straightway healed a number of blind, and lame, and 
many other, for the sake not of John who had knowledge, 


but of others who doubted ; as it follows, And Jesus answered 


and said unto them, Go and tell John what ye have heard 


VER. 2—6. ST. MATTHEW. 407 


and seen; The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are 
cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have 
the Gospel preached to them. JEROME; This last is no less 
than the first. And understand it as if it had been said,’ 
Even the poor; that so between noble and mean, rich and 
poor, there may be no difference in preaching. This ap- 
proves the strictness of the master, this the truth of the 
teacher, that in His sight every one who can be saved is 
equal. Curys. And blessed is he who shall not be offended 
tn me, is directed against the messengers; they were offended 
in Him. But He not publishing their doubts, and leaving 

it to their conscience alone, thus privately introduced a re- 
futation of them. Hrtary; This saying, that they were 
blessed from whom there should be no offence in Him, 
shewed them what it was that John had provided against in 
sending them. For John, through fear of this very thing, 
had sent his disciples that they might hear Christ. GREG. Greg. 
Otherwise; The mind -.of unbelievers was greatly offended poe 1. 
concerning Christ, because after many miracles done, they 
saw Him at length put to death; whence Paul speaks, We 1 Cor.1, 
preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block. ?*- 
What then does that mean, Blessed is he who shall not be 
offended in me, but a direct allusion to the humiliation of 
His death; as much as to say, I do indeed wonderful works, 
but do not disdain to suffer humble things. Because then I 
follow you in death, men must be careful not to despise in 
Me My death, while they reverence My wonderful works. 
Hiary ; In these things which were done concerning John, 
there is a deep store of mystic meaning. The very condition 
and circumstances of a prophet are themselves a prophecy. 
John signifies the Law; for the Law proclaimed Christ, 
preaching remission of sins, and giving promise of the king- 
dom of heaven. Also when the Law was on the point of 
expiring, (having been, through the sins of the people, which 
hindered them from understanding what it spake of Christ, 
as it were shut up in bonds and in prison,) it sends men to 
the contemplation of the Gospel, that unbelief might see the 
truth of its words established by deeds. AmBrosz; And 
perhaps the two disciples sent are the two people; those of 
the Jews, and those of the Gentiles who believed. 


408 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. xI. 


7. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto 
the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out 
into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with 
the wind ? 

8. But what went ye out for to see? A man 
clothed in soft raiment ? behold, they that wear soft 

- clothing are in kings’ houses. 

9. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet ? 
yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet. 

10. For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, 
I send my messenger before thy face, which shall 
prepare thy way before thee. 


Chrys.  CuHrys. Sufficient had been now done for John’s disciples ; 
Hom. they returned certified concerning Christ by the wonderful 
works which they had seen. But it behoved that the 
multitude also should be corrected, which had conceived 
many things amiss from the question of John’s disciples, not 
knowing the purpose of John in sending them. They might 
say, He who bare such witness to Christ, is now of another 
mind, and doubts whether this be He. Doth he this because 
he hath jealousy against Jesus? Has the prison taken away 
his courage? Or spake he before but empty and untrue 
words? Huvary; Therefore that this might not lead them 
to think of John as though he were offended concerning 
Christ, it continues, When they had gone away, Jesus began 
to speak to the multitudes concerning John. CHRYS. 
As they departed, that He should not seem to speak 
flattery of the man; and in correcting the error of the 
multitude, He does not openly expose their secret suspi- 
clons, but by framing his words against what was in their 
hearts, He shews that He knows hidden things. But He 
said not as to the Jews, Why think ye evil in your hearts? 
though indeed it was evil that they had thought; yet it 
proceeded not from wickedness, but from ignorance ; there- 
fore He spake not to them harshly, but answered for John, 
shewing that he had not fallen from his former opinion. 
This He teaches them, not by His word only, but by their 


VER. 7—10. ST. MATTHEW. 409 


own witness, the witness of their own actions, as well as 
their own words. What went ye out into the wilderness to 

see? As much as to say, Why did ye leave the towns and 

go out into the wilderness? So great multitudes would not 
have gone with such haste into the desert, if they had not 
thought that they should see one great, and wonderful, one more 
stable than the rock. Pseupo-Curys. They had not gone out Pseudo- 
at this time into the desert to see John, for he was not now es 
in the desert, but in prison ; but He speaks of the past time 
while John was yet in the desert, and the people flocked to 

him. Curys. And note that making no mention of any 
other fault, He clears John of fickleness, which the multitude 

had suspected him of, saying, A reed shaken by the wind ? 
Grec. This He proposes, not to assert, but to deny. ForGreg. 
if but a breath of air touch a reed, it bends it one way or po": 9 
other ; a type of the carnal mind, which leans to either side, 
according as the breath of praise or detraction reaches it. 

A reed shaken by the wind John was not, for no variety of 
circumstance bent him from his uprightness. The Lord’s 
meaning then is, JEROME; Was it for this ye went out into 

the desert to see a man like unto a reed, and carried about 

by every wind, so that in lightness of mind he doubts con- 
cerning Him whom once he preached? Or it may be he is 
roused against Me by the sting of envy, and he seeks empty 
honour by his preaching, that he may thereof make gain. 
Why should he covet wealth? that he may have dainty fare? 

But his foud is locusts and wild honey. That he may wear 

soft raiment? But his clothing is camel’s hair. This is that 

He adds, But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed 

in soft raiment? Curys. Otherwise; That John is not as a 
waving reed, yourselves have shewn by going out unto 

the desert to him. Nor can any say that John was once 
firm, but has since become wilful and wavering ; for as some 

are prone to anger by natural disposition, others become so 

by long weakness and indulgence, so in inconstancy, some 
are. by nature inconstant, some become so by yielding to 
their own humour and self-indulgence. But John was 
neither inconstant by natural disposition; this he means 

by saying, What went ye out for to see, a reed shaken by the 
wind? Neither had he corrupted an excellent nature by 


410 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


self-indulgence, for that he had not served the flesh is shewn 
by his raiment, his abode in the desert, his prison. Had he 
sought soft raiment, he would not have dwelt in the desert, 
but in kings’ houses; Lo they that are clothed in soft 
raiment, are in kings’ houses. JEROME; This teaches that 
an austere life and strict preaching ought to shun kings’ 
Greg. courts and the palaces of therich and luxurious. Gree. Let 
ho eNO one suppose that there is nothing sinful in luxury and 
rich dress; if pursuit of such things had been blameless, the 
Lord would not have thus commended John for the coarse- 
ness of his raiment, nor would Peter have checked the 
1 Pet. desire of fine clothes in women as he does, Not in costly 
Aug. raiment. Auge. In all such things we blame not the use 
Doctr. of the things, but the lust of those that use them. For 
ii, 12, Whoever uses the good things in his reach more sparingly 
than are the habits of those with whom he lives, is either 
temperate or superstitious. Whoever again uses them in a 
measure exceeding the practice of the good among whom he 
' aliquid lives, either has some’ meaning therein, or else is dissolute. 
feat  CHRYS. Having described his habits of life from his 
dwelling-place, his dress, and the concourse of men to hear 
him, He now brings in that he is also a prophet, But what 
went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, 
Greg. and more than a prophet. Grea. The office of a prophet 
z v5.18 to foretel things to come, not to shew them present. 
John therefore is more than a prophet, because Him whom 
he had foretold by going before Him, the same he shewed 
as present by pointing Him out. JEROME; In this he is 
also greater than the other prophets, that to his prophetic 
privilege is added the reward of the Baptist that he should 
baptize his Lord. Curys. Then he shews in what respect 
He is greater, saying, This is he of whom it is written, 
Behold, I send my angel before thy face. JEROME; To add 
to this great worthiness of John, He brings a passage from 
Mal. 3, Malachias, in which he is spoken of as an Angel. We must 
ss suppose that John is here called an Angel, not as partaking 
the Angelic nature, but from the dignity of his office as a 
Greg. forerunner of the Lord. Grea. For the Greek word Angel, 
ubisuP- 5. in Latin N untius, ‘a messenger.’ He therefore who came 
to bear a heavenly message is rightly called an Angel, that 


VER. ll. ST. MATTHEW. 4l1l 


he may preserve in his title the dignity which he performs 

in his office. CHRys. He shews wherein it is that John is 
greater than the Prophets, namely, in that he is nigh unto 
Christ, as he says, I send before thy face, that is, near Thee, 

as those that walk next to the king’s chariot are more illus- 
trious than others, so likewise is John because of his nearness 

to Christ. Pseupo-Curys. Also the other Prophets were 

sent to announce Christ’s coming, but John to prepare His 

way, as it follows, who shall muke ready thy way before thee; 
Gtoss. That is, shall open the hearts of Thy hearers by preach- Gloss. 
ing repentance and baptizing. JEROME; Mystically ; The '"e'™ 
desert is that which is deserted of the Holy Spirit, where 
there is no habitation of God; in the reed is signified a man 

who in outward show lives a pious life, but lacks all real 

fruit within himself, fair outside, within hollow, moved with 

every breath of wind, that is, with every impulse of unclean 
spirits, having no firmness to remain still, devoid of the 
marrow of the soul; by the garment wherewith his body is 
clothed is his mind shewn, that it is lost in luxury and self- 
indulgence. The kings are the fallen angels; they are they 

who are powerful in this life, and the lords of this world. 
Thus, They that are clothed in soft raiment are in kings’ 
houses; that is, those whose bodies are enervated and 
destroyed by luxury, it is clear are possessed by daemons. 
Gree. Also John was not clothed in soft raiment, that is, he Greg. 
did not encourage sinners in their sinful life by speaking” 
smooth things, but rebuked them with sharpness and rigour, 
saying, Generation of vipers, &c. Mat.3,7. 


11. Verily I say unto you, Among them that are 
born of women there hath not risen a greater than 
John the Baptist : notwithstanding he that is least in 
the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 


- Curys. Having first delivered the Prophet's testimony in 
praise of John, He rested not there, but added His own 
decision respecting him, saying, Among them that are born 
of women there has not arisen a greater than John the 
Baptist. Rasan. As much as to say; What need to 


412 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


recount one by one the praises of John the Baptist; J say 
verily unto you, Among them that are born of women, &c. He 
says women, not virgins. If the same word mulier, which 
denotes a married person, is any where in the Gospels 
applied to Mary, it should be known that the translator has 
John 19, there used ‘ mulier’ for ‘ femina;’ as in that, Woman, behold 
26. thy son! JeERoME; He is then set before all those that are 
born in wedlock, and not before Him who was born of the 
Virgin and the Holy Spirit; yet these words, there has not 
arisen a greater than John the Baplist, do not imply that 
John is to be set above the Prophets and Patriarchs and all 
others, but only makes him equal to the rest; for it does not 
follow that because others are not greater than him, 
that therefore he is greater than others. PsEupo-CHRYS. 
But seeing that righteousness has so great deepness 
that none can be perfect therein but God only, I suppose 
that all the saints tried by the keenness of the divine 
judgment, rank in a fixed order, some lower, some before 
other. Whence we understand that He that hath none 
greater than Himself, is greater than all. Curys. That the 
abundance of this praise might not beget a wrong inclination 
in the Jews to set John above Christ, he corrects this, saying, 
He that ts least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 
Auge AvG. The heretic' argues from this verse to prove, that since 
ri John did not belong to the kingdom of heaven, therefore 
Ee. . much less did the other Prophets of that people, than whom 
i. 8 Johnisgreater. But these words of the Lord may be under- 
' Mani- stood in two ways. Either the kingdom of heaven is 


chee or 
Mar- something which we have not yet received, that, namely, of 


Mat.25,Which He speaks, Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the 
34. kingdom, because they in it are Angels, therefore the least 
among them is greater than a righteous man who has a 
corruptible body. Or if we must understand the kingdom of 
heaven of the Church, whose children are all the righteous 
men from the beginning of the world until now, then the 
Lord speaks this of Himself, who was after John in the time 
of His birth, but greater in respect of His divine nature and 
supreme power. According then to the first interpretation 
it will be pointed, He who is least in the kingdom of heaven, 
is greater than he; according to the second, He who ts less 


VER. 12—15. ST. MATTHEW. 413 


than he, is in the kingdom of heaven greater than he. 
Curys. The kingdom of heaven, that is, in the spiritual 
world, and all relating thereto. But some say that Christ 
spoke this of the Apostles. JERoME; We understand it 
simply, that every saint who is already with the Lord is 
greater than he who yet stands in the battle; for it is one 
thing to have gained the crown of victory, another to be yet 
fighting in the field. 


12. And from the days of John the Baptist until 
now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and 
the violent take it by force. 

13. For all the prophets and the law prophesied 


until John. 
14. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which 


was for to come. 
15. He that hath ears to ear, let him hear. 


Gross. That what He had last said should not lead any Gloss. 
to suppose that John was an alien from the kingdom of” °™ 
heaven, He corrects this by adding, From the days of John 
the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence, and the violent take it by force. Gree. By the Greg. 
kingdom of heaven is meant the heavenly throne, whither Fy. +3. 
when sinners defiled with any evil deed return in penitence, !* 
and amend themselves, they enter as sinners into the place 
of another, and take by violence the kingdom of heaven. 
JEROME; Because John the Baptist was the first who 
preached repentance to the people, saying, Repent ye, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand: rightly therefore from that day 
forth it may be said, that the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence, and the violent take it by force. For great indeed 
is the violence, when we who are born of earth, seek an 
abode in heaven, and obtain by excellence what we have 
not by nature. HuLary; Otherwise; The Lord bade His 
Apostles go to the lost sheep of Israel, but all their preaching 
conveyed profit to the publicans and sinners. Therefore 
the kingdom suffers violence, and the violent take it by 
force, for the glory of Israel, due to the Fathers, foretold by 


Mal. 4, 
5. 


414 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. xl. 


the Prophets, offered by Christ, is entered and held by force 
by the might of the Gentiles. Curys. Or; All who come 
thereto with haste take by force the kingdom of God through 
the faith of Christ; whence He says, from the days of John 
until now, and thus He brings them in haste to His faith, and 
at the same time adds support to those things which had 
been spoken by John. For if all. things were fulfilled until 
John, then is Jesus He that should come; wherefore He adds, 
All the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John. 
JEROME; Not that He cuts off all Prophets after John; for 
we read in the Acts of the Apostles that Agabus prophesied, 
and also four virgins daughters of Philip; but He means that 
the Law and the Prophets whom we have written, whatever 
they have prophesied, they have prophesied of the Lord. 
That He says, Prophesied until John, shews that this was 
now the time of Christ’s coming; and that whom they had 
foretold should come, Him John shewed to be already come. 
Curys. Then He adds another token of him, saying, 
And if ye will receive it, this is Elias who was to come. 
The Lord speaks in Malachias, I will send you Elias the 
Tishbite; and of the same again, Behold, I send my messenger 
before thy face. JEROME; John then is said to be Elias, 
not according to the foolish philosophers, and certain heretics 
who bring forward their metempsychosis, or passing of the 
soul from one body to another; but because (as it is in 
another passage of the Gospel) he came in the spirit and 
power of Elias, and had the same grace and measure of 
the Holy Spirit. But in austerity of life, and fortitude of 
spirit, Elias and John were alike; they both dwelt in the 
desert, both were girded with a girdle of skins; because 
he reproved Ahab and Jezebel for their wickedness, Elias was 
compelled to fly; because he condemned the unlawful union 
of Herod and Herodias, John is beheaded. Curys. If ye 
will receive it, shewing their freedom, and requiring of them a 
willing mind. John the Baptist is Elias, and Elias is John, 
because both were forerunners of Christ. JEROME; That 
He says, This is Elias, is figurative, and needs to be explained, 
as what follows, shews; He that hath ears to hear, let him 
hear. Remic. As much as to say, Whoso has ears of the 
heart to hear, that is, to understand, let him understand ; for 


VER. 16—19. ST. MATTHEW. | 415 


He did not say that John was Elias in person, but in the 
Spirit. 


{6. But whereunto shall I liken this generation? 
It is like unto children sitting in the markets, and 
calling unto their fellows, 

17. And saying, We4rave piped unto you, and ye 
have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and 
ye have not lamented. 

18. For John came neither eating nor drinking, 
and they say, He hath a devil. 

19. The Son of man came eating and drinking, 
and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine- 
bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners. But wisdom 
is justified of her children. 


Hitary; The whole of this speech is a reproach of un- 
belief, and arises out of the foregoing complaint; that the 
stiff-necked people had not learned by two different modes 
of teaching. Curys. Whence He puts this question, 
shewing that nothing had been omitted that ought to be done 
for their salvation, saying, To whom shall [liken this genera- 
tion? Goss. By this generation He means the Jews together Gloss. 
with Himself and John. As though He had said; John is re = 
thus great; but ye would believe neither him nor Me, and 
therefore to whom shall I liken you? Remia. And straight- 
way He answers Himself, saying, Jt is like unto children 
sitling in the market-place, crying unto their fellows, and 
saying, We have played music to you, and ye have not danced ; 
we have mourned, and ye have not lamented. H1tary; By the 
children are meant the Prophets, who preached as children 
in singleness of meaning, and in the midst of the synagogue, 
that is in the market-place, reprove them, that when they 
played to those to whom they had devoted the service 
of their body, they had not obeyed their words, as the 
movement of the dancers are regulated by the measures of 
the music. For the Prophets invited them to make con- 
fession by song to God, as it is contained in the song of 


Ta. 8, 18. 


Aug. 
Cont. 
Faust. 
xvi. 31. 


416 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


Moses, of Isaiah, or of David. JEROME; They say therefore, 
We have played music to you, and ye have not danced ; 1. e. 
We have called on you to work good works to our songs, 
and ye would not. We have lamented and called you to 
repentance, and this ye would not, rejecting both preaching, 
as well of exhortation to virtue, as of repentance for sin. 
Remic. What is that He says, Jo their fellows ? Were the 
unbelieving Jews then fellows of the Prophets? He speaks 
thus only because they were sprung of one stock. JEROME ; 
The children are they of whom Isaiah speaks, Behold I, and 
the children whom the Lord has given me. These children 
then sit in the market-place, where are many things for sale, 
and say, Curys. We have played music to you, and ye 
have nol danced; that is, I have shewed you an unrestricted 
life, and ye are not convinced; We have mourned unto you, 
and ye have not lamented ; that is, John lived a hard life, and 
ye heeded him not. Yet does not he speak one thing, and 
I another, but both speak the same thing, because both have 
one and the same object. or John came neither eating nor 
drinking, and they say, He hath a demon. The Son of man 
came &c. AvuG. I would that the Manicheans would tell me 
what Christ ate and drank, who here speaks of. Himself as 
eating and drinking in comparison of John, who did neither. 
Not indeed that John drank nothing at all, but that he drank 
neither wine nor strong drink—but water only. Not that 
he dispensed altogether with food, but that he ate only 
locusts and wild honey. Whence then is it said of him that 
he came neither eating nor drinking, except that he used not 
that food which the Jews used? Unless therefore the Lord 
had used this food, He would not have been said to have 
been, in comparison of John, eating and drinking. It would 
be strange that he who ate locusts and honey, should be 
said to come netther eating nor drinking, and that he who 
ate only bread and herbs, should be said to come eating and 
drinking. Curys. He says therefore, Jesus cume, as much 
as to say, I and John came opposite ways, to do the same 
thing; as two hunters chasing the same animal from opposite 
sides, so that it might fall into the hands of one of them. 
But all mankind admire fasting and severity of life; and for 
this reason it was ordained from his infancy that John should 


VER. 16—19. ST. MATTHEW. 417 


be so brought up, that the things that he should say should 
receive credit. The Lord also walked in this way when He 
fasted forty days; but He had other means of teaching men 
to have confidence in Him ; for it was a much greater thing 
that John who had walked in this way should bear witness 
to Him, than that He Himself should walk in that way. Again, 
John had nothing to shew besides his life, and his righteous- 
ness; whcreas Christ had also the witness of His miracles. 
Leaving therefore to John the representation of fasting, He 
Himself walked in a contrary way, entering to the table of the 
publicans, and eating and drinking with them. JrRoME; If 
fasting then pleascs you, why were you not satisfied with John? 
If fulness, why not with the Son of man? Yet one of these ye 
said had a demon, the other ye called a gluttonous man, 
and drunkard. Currys. What excuse then shall be given for 
them? Therefore He adds, And wisdom is justified of her 
children ; that is, though ye were not convinced, yet have 
ye nothing whereof to accuse me, as also of the Father the 
Prophet speaks, That thou mightest be justified in thy sayings. Ps.51,4. 
For though nought be effected in you by that goodness 
which is extended to you, yet He fulfils all His part that 
you may not have the shadow of excuse for your ungrateful 
doubt. JEROME; Wisdom is justified of her children, i. e. 
The dispensation or doctrine of God, or Christ Himself who 
is the power and wisdom of God, is proved by the Apostles, 
who are His children, to have done righteously. HiInary; 
He is wisdom itself not by His acts, but by His nature. 
Many indeed evade that saying of the Apostle’ s, Christ 1 Cor. 1, 
ts the wisdom and power of God, by saying, that truly ? 24. 

e.g. Paul 
in creating Him of a Virgin the Wisdom and Power of ofsamo- 
God were shewn mightily. Therefore that this might not %* &- 
be so explained, He calls Himself the Wisdom of God, 
shewing that it was verily He, and not the deeds relating to 
Him, of whom this was meant. For the power itself, and 
the effect of that power, are not the same thing; the efficient 
is known from the act. Aue. Or, Wisdom its justified of Aug. 
her children, because the holy Apostles understood that the Ru=* 
kingdom of God was not in meat and drink, but in patient 
enduring ; such persons neither does abundance lift up, nor 
want cast down, but as Paul spoke, J know how to abound, Phil 4, 

VOL. I. 25 


418 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


and to suffer want. JEROME; Some copies read, Wisdom is 
justified of her works, for wisdom does not seek the witness 
of words, but of works. Curys. You should not be sur- 
prised at His using trite instances, such as that respecting 
the children; for He spoke to the weakness of His hearers ; 
as Ezekiel spoke many things adapted to the Jews, but 
unworthy of the greatness of God. Hunary; Mystically; 
Neither did the preaching of John bend the Jews, to whom 
the law seemed burdensome in prescribing meats and drinks, 
difficult and grievous, having in it sin which He calls having 
a demon—for from the difficulty of keeping it they must sin 
under the Law. Nor again did the preaching of the Gospel 
with freedom of life in Christ please them—by which the 
hardships and burdens of the Law were remitted, and 
publicans and sinners only believed in it. Thus, then, so 
many and so great warnings of all kinds having been offered 
them in vain, they are neither justified by the Law, and 
they are cast off from grace; Wisdom, therefore, 7s justified 
of her children, by those, that is, who seize the kingdom 
of heaven by the justification of faith, confessing the work 
of wisdom to be just, that it has transferred its gift from 
the rebellious to the faithful. 


20. Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein 
most of his mighty works were done, because they 
repented not : 

21. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, 
Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done 
in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would 
have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 

22. But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable 
for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for 
you. 

23. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto 
heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the 
mighty works, which have been done in thee, had 
been done in Sodom, it would have remained until 
this day. 


VER. 20—24. ST. MATTHEW. 419 


24. But I say unto you, That it shall be more 
tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judg- 
ment, than for thee. 


Gtoss. Thus far He had brought His accusation against Gloss. 
the Jews in common; now against certain towns by name, aie 
in which He had specially preached, and yet they would 
not be converted; whence it is said, Then began he to 
upbraid the cities in which most of his mighty works were 
done, because they had not repented. JEROME; His up- 
braiding of the towns of Corozaim, Bethsaida, and Caphar- 
naum, is set forth in this chapter, because He therefore 
upbraided them, because after He had such mighty works 
and wonders in them they had not done penitence. Whence 
He adds, Wo for thee, Corozaim! wo for thee, Bethsaida ! 
Currys. That you should not say that they were by nature 
evil, He names Bethsaida, a town from which the Apostles 
had come; namely, Philip, and two pair of the chief of the 
Apostles, Peter and Andrew, James and John. JEROME; 

In this word Wo, these towns of Galilce are mourned for 
by the Saviour, that after so many signs and mighty works, 
they had not done penitence. Rasan. Corozaim, which 
is interpreted ‘my mystery,’ and Bethsaida, ‘ the house 
of fruits,’ or, ‘the house of hunters,’ are towns of Galilee 
situated on the shore of the sea of Galilee. The Lord there- 
fore mourns for towns which once had the mystery of God, 
and which ought to have brought forth the fruit of virtues, 
and into which spiritual hunters had been sent. JEROME; 
And to these are preferred Tyre and Sidon, cities given up 
to idolatry and vices; For if the mighty works which have 
been done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they 
would have long ago done penitence in sackcloth and ashes. 
Gree. In sackcloth is the roughness which denotes the Greg. 
pricking of the conscience for sin, ashes denote the dust 4°" 6. 
of the dead; and both are wont to be employed in peni- 
tence, that the pricking of the sackcloth may remind us 
of our sins, and the dust of the ash may cause us to reflect 
what we have become hy judgment. RaBAN. Tyre and 
Sidon are cities of Phoenicia. Tyre is interpreted ‘ 
rowness, and Sidon ‘ hunting;’ and denote the Gentiles 
2E2 


420 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


whom the Devil as a hunter drives into the straits of sin; 

but Jesus the Saviour sets them free by the Gospel. 
JEROME; We ask where it is written that the Lord did 
wonders in Corozaim and Bethsaida? We read above, 
ch.9,35. And he went about the towns and willages, healing all 
sicknesses, &c. among the rest, therefore, we may suppose 
Aug. that He wrought signs in Corozaim and Bethsaida. Avge. 
sa 9, It is not then true that His Gospel was not preached in 
those times and places, in which He foreknew that all 
would be such, as were many in His actual presence, 
who would not even believe on Him when He raised men 
from the dead. For the Lord Himself bears witness that 
they of Tyre and Sidon would have done penitence in great 
humility, had the wonders of the Divine power been done 

in them. Moreover, if the dead are judged according to 
those deeds which they would have done had they lived, 
then because these would have believed had the Gospel 
been preached to them with so great miracles, surely they 
should not be punished at all, and yet in the day of judg- 
ment they shall be punished; for it follows, But I say unto 

you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre und Sidon in the day 

of judgment, than for you. Those then shall be punished with 
more, these with less severity. JEROME; This is because Tyre 

and Sidon had trodden under foot the law of nature only, 

but these towns after they had transgressed the natural 

and the written Law, also made light of those wonders 
which had been wrought among them. Rasan. We at this 

day see the words of the Saviour fulfilled; Corozaim and Beth- 
saida would not believe when the Lord came to them in 
person ; but Tyre and Sidon have afterwards believed on the 
preaching of the Apostles. Remic. Capharnaum was the 
metropolis of Galilee, and a noted town of that province, 

and therefore the Lord mentions it particularly, saying, 
And thou, Capharnaum, shalt thou indeed be exalted to 
heaven? (Thou shalt go down even to hell. JEROME; In 
other copies we find, And thou, Capharnaum, that art 
exalted to heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; and it may 

be understood in two different ways. Either, thou shalt go 
down to hell because thou hast proudly resisted my 
preaching ; or, thou that hast been exalted to heaven by en- 


VER, 20—24. ST. MATTHEW. 421 


tertaining me, and having my mighty wonders done in thee, 
shalt be visited with the heavier punishment, because thou 
wouldest not believe even these. Remic. And they have 
made the sins not vf Sodom only and Gomorrah, but of 
Tyre and Sidon light in comparison, and therefore it follows, 
For tf the mighty works which have been done in thee had 
been done in Sodom, it would perhaps have remained unto 
this day. Curys. This makes the accusation heavier, for it 
is a proof of extreme wickedness, that they are worse, not 
only than any then living, but than the wickedest of all past 
time. JEROME; In Capharnaun, which is interpreted ‘ the 
most fair town,’ Jerusalem is condemned, to which it is 
said by Ezekiel, Sudom is justified by thee. Remic. The Ezek. 
Lord, who knows all things, here uses a word expressing '® 52- 
uncertainty—perhaps, to shew that freedom of choice is left 
tomen. But I say unto you, it shall be easier for the land 
of Sodom in the day of judgment than for you. And be it 
known, that in speaking of the city or country, the Lord 
does not chide with the buildings and walls, but with 
the men that inhabit there, by the figure metonymy, putting 
the thing containing for the thing contained. The words, 
It shall be easier in the day of judgment, clearly prove that 
there are divers punishments in hell, as there are divers man- 
sions in the kingdom of heaven. JEROME; The careful reader 
will hesitate here; If Tyre and Sidon could have done peni- 
tence at the preaching of the Saviour, and His miracles, they 
are not in fault that they believed not; the sin is his who 
would not preach to bring them to penitence. To this there 
is a ready answer, that we know not God’s judgments, and 
are ignorant of the sacraments of His peculiar dispensations. 
It was determined by the Lord not to pass the borders 
of Judza, that He might not give the Pharisees and Priests 
a just occasion of persecuting Him, as also He gave com- 
mandment to the Apostles, Go not into the way of the Gen- 
tiles. Corozaim and Bethsaida are condemned because they 
would not believe, though Christ Himself was among them— 
Tyre and Sidon are justified, because they believed His 
Apostles. You should not enquire into times when you see 
the salvation of those that believe. Remic. We may also 
answer in another way. There were many in Corozaim and 


4223 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


Bethsaida who would believe, and many in Tyre and Sidon 
who would not believe, and therefore were not worthy of the 
Gospel. The Lord therefore preached to the dwellers in 
Corozaim and Bethsaida, that they who were to believe, 
might be able; and preached not in Tyre and Sidon, lest 
perhaps they who were not to believe, being made worse 
by contempt of the Gospel, should be punished more 
Aare - heavily. Auc. A certain Catholic disputant of some note 
Pers, 10, expounded this place of the Gospel in the following way ; 
That the Lord foreknew that they of Tyre and Sidon would 
fall from the faith after they had believed the miracles done 
among them; and that therefore in mercy He did not His 
miracles there, because they would have incurred the 
heavier penalty had they lapsed from the faith after having 
held it, than if they had never held it at all. Or otherwise ; 
The Lord surely foreknew His mercies with which He 
deigns to deliver us. And this is the predestination of the 
saints, namely, the foreknowledge and making ready the 
mercies of God, by which they are most certainly saved, 
whosoever are saved. The rest are left to the just judgment 
of God in the general body of the condemned, where they of 
Tyre and Sidon are left, who might have believed had they 
seen Christ’s many miracles; but since it was not given 
them that they should believe, therefore that through which 
they might have belicved was also withheld. From which 
it appears, that there are certain who have in their dis- 
positions by nature a divine gift of understanding by. which 
they would be moved to faith, if they should either hear 
words or see signs adapted to their minds. But if they 
be not by the high sentence of God set apart from the mass 
of perdition through the predestination of grace, then neither 
words nor works are set before them by God, which yet, 
could they have scen or heard them, would have stirred them 
to believe. In this general mass of perdition are the Jews 
also left, who could not believe so great and manifest 
wonders wrought before their eyes. And the cause where- 
fore they could not believe, the Gospel hath not hidden, 
Hes 12,speaking thus; Though he did so great miracles before 
them, yet could they not believe, us Esaias said, I have 
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart. Not in this 


VER. 25, 26. ST. MATTHEW. 423 


way then were the eyes of they of Tyre and Sidon blinded, 
or their heart hardened, for they would have believed had 
they seen such wonders as these saw. But it profited those 
not that they could have believed, for that they were not 
predestinated ; neither would it have been any hindrance to 
these that they had not power to believe, had they been 
so predestined that God should have enlightened their 
blindness, and taken away the heart of stone from within 
them. Ip. Luke also gives this as spoken in continuation Aug. De 
of some other of the Lord’s discourses; from which it a. 
appears that he has rather followed the actual order of 
events; Matthew to have followed his recollection. Or the 
words of Matthew, Then beyan he to upbraid the towns, 
must be taken, as some think, as expressing some particular 
time by the word ¢hen, but not referring generally to that 
time in which the many other things here told were done 
and said. Whoever, therefore, thinks thus must suppose 
that this was spoken twice. And when we find in the 
same Evangelist some things spoken by the Lord at two 
different times—like that in Luke concerning the not taking 
a scrip for their journey,—what wonder is it if any thing 
else, which was twice spoken, is found once severally in two 
several Gospels in the actual connexion in which it 
was spoken, which connexion is different, because they 
are two different occasions on which it is related to have 
been spoken ? 


25. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes. 

26. Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in 


thy sight. 


Gtoss. Because the Lord knew that many would doubt Gloss. 
respecting the foregoing matter, namely, that the Jews"™" °" 
would not receive Christ whom the Gentile world has so 
willingly received, He here makes answer to their thoughts ; 

And Jesus answered and said, I confess unto thee, Father, 


Gloss. 
ord. 


Aug. 


Serm. 
67. l. 


XXXVili. 


424 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO. CHAP. XI. 


Lord of heaven and earth. Gtoss. That is, Who makest of 
heaven, or leavest in earthliness, whom Thou wilt. Or lite- 
rally, AuG. If Christ, from whom all sin is far, said, J confess, 
confession is not proper for the sinner only, but sometimes 
also for him that gives thanks. We may confess either by 
praising God, or by accusing ourselves. When He said, J 
confess unto thee, it is, 1 praise Thee, not I accuse Myself. 
JeEROME; Let those hear who falsely argue, that the Saviour 
was not bom but created, how He calls His Father Lord of 
heaven and earth. Yor if He be a creature, and the creature 
can call its Maker Father, it was surely foolish here to 
address Him as Lord of heaven and earth, and not of Him 
(Christ) likewise. He gives thanks that His coming has 
opened to the Apostles sacraments, which the Scribes and 
Pharisees knew not, who seemed to themselves wise, and 
understanding in their own eyes; That thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and understanding, and hast revealed 
them unto babes. Auac. That the wise and understanding 
are to be taken as the proud, Himself opens to us when He 
says, and hast revealed them unto babes; for who are babes 
but the humble? Grea. He says not ‘ to the foolish,’ but 
to babes, shewing that He condemns pride, not understand- 
ing. CuHrys. Or when He says, The wise, He does not 
speak of true wisdom, but of that which the Scribes and 
Pharisees seemed to have by their speech. Wherefore He 
said not, ‘ And hast revealed them to the foolish,’ but, to 
babes, that is, uneducated, or simple; teaching us in all 
things to keep ourselves from pride, and to seek humility. 
Hitary; The hidden things of heavenly words and their 
power are hid from the wise, and revealed to the babes; 
babes, that is, in malice, not in understanding; hid from the 
wise because of their presumption of their own wisdom, not 
because of their wisdom. Currys. That it is revealed to the 
one is matter of joy, that it is hid from the other not of joy, 
but of sorrow; He does not therefore joy on this account, 
but He joys that these have known what the wise have not 
known. rary; The justice of this the Lord confirms by 
the sentence of the Father’s will, that they who disdain to 
be made babes in God, should become fools in their own 
wisdom; and therefore He adds, Even so, Father: for so it 


VER. 27, ST. MATTHEW. 425 


seemed good before thee. GRrG. In which words we have a Greg. 
lesson of humility, that we should not rashly presume to ;5y. 14, 
discuss the counsels of heaven conceming the calling of 
some, and the rejection of others; shewing that that cannot 

be unrighteous which is willed by Him that is righteous. 
JEROME; In these words moreover He speaks to the Father 
with the desire of one petitioning, that- His mercy begun in 

the Apostles might be completed in them. Curys. These 
things which the Lord spoke to His disciples, made them 
more zealous. As afterwards they thought great things of 
themselves, because they cast out dzmons, therefore He 
here reproves them; for what they had, was by revelation, 

not by their own efforts. ‘The Scribes who esteemed them- 
selves wise and understanding were excluded because of their 
pride, and therefore He says, Since on this account the 
mysteries of God were hid from them, fear ye, and abide as 
babes, for this it is that has made you partakers in the 
revelation. But as when Paul says, God gave them over to Rom. 
a reprobate mind, he does not mean that God did this, but !» 2° 
they who gave Him cause, so here, Thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and understanding. And wherefore 
were they hid from them? Hear Paul speaking, Seeking to Rom. 
set up their own righteousness, they were not subject to the’ = 
righteousness of God. | 


27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father: 
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither 
knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to 
whomsoever the Son will reveal him. 


Curys. Because He had said, J confess unto thee, Father, 
because thou hast hid these things from the wise, that you 
should not suppose that He thus thanks the Father as though 
He Himself was excluded from this power, He adds, All 
things are committed to me by my Father. Hearing the 
words are committed, do not admit suspicion of any thing 
human, for He uses this word that you may not think there 
be two gods unbegotten. For at the time that He was begotten 
He was Lord of all. JEROME; For if we conceive of this 


Aug. 
cont. 
Maxi- 
min, ii. 
12, 


426 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


thing according to our weakness, when he who receives 
begins to have, he who gives begins to be without. Or when 
He says, All things are committed to him, He may mean, 
not the heaven and earth and the elements, and the rest 
of the things which He created and made, but those who 
through the Son have access to the Father. HuLary; Or 
that we may not think that there is any thing less in Him 
than in God, therefore He says this. Auc. For if He has 
aught less in His power than the Father has, then all that 
the Father has, are not His; for by begetting Him the 
Father gave power to the Son, as by begetting Him He gave 
all things which He has in His substance to Him whom He 
begot of His substance. Hitary; And also in the mutual 
knowledge between the Father and the Son, He teaches us 
that there is nothing in the Son beyond what was in the 
Father; for it follows, And none knoweth the Son but the 
Father, nor does any man know the Father but the Son. 
Curys. By this that He only knows the Father, He shews 
covertly that He is of one substance with the Father. As 
though He had said, What wonder if I be Lord of all, when 
I have somewhat yet greater, namely to know the Father and 
to be of the same substance with Him? MHutary; For this 
mutual knowledge proclaims that they are of one substance, 
since He that should know the Son, should know the Father 
also in the Son, since all things were delivered to Him by 
the Father. Curys. When He says, Netther does any 
know the Father but the Son, He does not mean that all 
men are altogether ignorant of Him; but that none knows 
Him with that knowledge wherewith He knows Him; which 


i.e. whomay also be said of the Son. For it is not said of some 


was not 


the 


Creator. 
Aug. D 


unknown God as Marcion declares. Auc. And because 


; their substance is inseparable, it is enough sometimes to 


Trin.i.8.name the Father, sometimes the Son; nor is it possible to 


separate from either His Spirit, who is especially called the 
Spirit of truth. JEROME; Let the heretic Eunomius there- 
fore blush hereat who claims to himself such a knowledge of 
the Father and the Son, as they have one of another*. But 


4 Eunomius, the chiefofthe Auomean He is opposed by St. Basil, and by St. 
branch of the Arians, taught that there Chrysostom in bis Homilies on ‘ the 
was no mystery about the Divinenature. incomprehensible nature of God.’ 


VER. 28—830. ST. MATTHEW. 427 


if he argues from what follows, and props up his madness by 
that, And he to «hom the Son will reveal him, it is one thing 

to know what you know by equality with God, another to 
know it by His vouchsafing to reveal it. Auc. The Father Avg. De 
is revealed by the Son, that is, by His Word. For if the!” Vi 3. 
temporal and transitory word which we utter both shews 
itself, and what we wish to convey, how much more the Word 

of God by which all things were made, which so shews the 
Father as He is Father, because itself is the same and in the 
same manner as the Father. Ip. When He said, None knoweth Aug. 
the Son but the Father, He did not add, And he to whom the ee 
Father will reveal the Son. But when He said, None knoweth 

the Father but the Son, He added, And he to whom the Son 
will rereal him. But this must not be so understood as though 

the Son could be known by none but by the Father only ; 
while the Father may be known not only by the Son, but 
also by those to whom the Son shall reveal Him. But it is 
rather expressed thus, that we may understand that both the 
Father and the Son Himself are revealed by the Son, inas- 
much as He is the light of our mind; and what is afterwards | 
added, And he to whom the Son will reveal, is to be under- 
stood as spoken of the Son as well as the Father, and to 
refer to the whole of what had been said. For the Father 
declares Himself by His Word, but the Word declares not 
only that which is intended to be declared by it, but in 
declaring this declares itself. Curys. If then He reveals 
the Father, He reveals Himself also. . But the one he 
omits as a thing manifest, but mentions the other because 
there might be a doubt concerning it. Herein also He 
instructs us that He is so one with the Father, that it is not 
possible for any to come to the Father, but through the Son. 
For this had above all things given offence, that He seemed 

to be against God, and therefore He strove by all means 

to overthrow this notion. 


28. Come unto me, all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. 

29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for 
I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest 
unto your souls. 


Aug. 
Serm. 
69. 1. 


Raban. 
non occ, 


428 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XI. 


30. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 


Curys. By what He had said, He brought His disciples 
to have a desire towards Him, shewing them His unspeakable 
excellence; and now He invites them to Him, saying, Come 
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden. Ava. 
Whence do we all thus labour, but that we are mortal men, 
bearing vessels of clay which cause us much difficulty. But 
if the vessels of flesh are straitened, the regions of love will 
be enlarged. To what end then does He say, Come unto me, 
all ye that labour, but that ye should not labour? HIvarRy; 
He calls to Him those that were labouring under the hard- 
ships of the Law, and those who are burdened with the 
sins of this world. JEROME; That the burden of sin is heavy 


, the Prophet Zachariah bears witness, saying, that wicked- 


ness sitteth upon a talent of lead. And the Psalmist fills it up, 


.Thy iniquities are grown heary upon me. GREG. For a 


cruel yoke and hard weight of servitude it is to be subject to 


.the things of time, to be ambitious of the things of earth, to 


cling to falling things, to seek to stand in things that stand 
not, to desire things that pass away, but to be unwilling to 
pass away with them. For while all things fly away against 
our wish, those things which had first harassed the mind 
in desire of gaining them, now oppress it with fear of losing 
them. Curys. He said not, Come ye, this man and that 
man, but All whosoever are in trouble, in sorrow, or in sin, 
not that I may exact punishment of you, but that I may 
remit your sins. Come ye, not that I have need of your 
glory, but that I seek your salvation. And I will refresh you; 
not, I will save you, only ; but that is much greater, J «ill 
refresh you, that is, I will set you in all quietness. Rasay. 
I will not only take from you your burden, but will satisfy 
you with inward refreshment. Remic. Come, He says, 
not with the feet, but with the life, not in the body, but in 
faith. For that is a spiritual approach by which any man 
approaches God; and therefore it follows, Take my yoke 
upon you. RasBan. The yoke of Christ is Christ’s Gospel, 
which joins and yokes together Jews and Gentiles in the 
unity of the faith. This we are commanded to take upon us, 
that is, to have in honour; lest perchance setting it beneath 


VER. 28-—30. ST. MATTHEW. A29 


us, that is wrongly despising it, we should trample upon it 
with the miry feet of unholiness ; wherefore He adds, Learn 

of me. Aue. Not to create a world, or to do miracles in Aug. 
that world; but that I am meek and lowly in heart. a i 
Wouldest thou be great? Begin with the least. Wouldest 
thou build up a mighty fabric of greatness? First think of 

the foundation of humility; for the mightier building any 
seeks to raise, the deeper let him dig for his foundation. 
Whither is the summit of our building to rise? To the sight 

of God. Rasan. We must learn then from our Saviour to 

be meek in temper, and lowly in mind; let us hurt none, 

let us despise none, and the virtues which we have shewn in 
deed let us retain in our heart. CuHrys. And therefore in 
beginning the Divine Law He begins with humility, and 
sets before us a great reward, saying, And ye shall find rest 

Jor your souls. This is the highest reward, you shall not 
only be made useful to others, but shall make yourself to 
have peace; and He gives you the promise of it before it 
comes, but when it is come, you shall rejoice in perpetual 
rest. And that they might not be afraid because He had 
spoken of a burden, therefore He adds, For my yoke ts 
pleasant, and my burden light. WHitary; He holds forth 

the inducements of a pleasant yoke, and a light burden, that 

to them that believe He may afford the knowledge of that 
good which He alone knoweth in the Father. Grec. What Greg. 
burden is it to put upon the neck of our mind that He bids a ave 
us shun all desire that disturbs, and turn from the toilsome 
paths of this world? H1Lary; And what is more pleasant 
than that yoke, what lighter than that burden? To be made 
better, to abstain from wickedness, to choose the good, and 
refuse the evil, to love all men, to hate none, to gain eternal 
things, not to be taken with things present, to be unwilling 

to do that to another which yourself would be pained to suffer. 
Rasan. But how is Christ’s yoke pleasant, seeing it was said 
above, Narrow is the way which leadeth unto life? That which _ a 
is entered upon by a narrow entrance is in process of time made *“ 
broad by the unspeakable sweetness of love. AuG. So then Avg. 
they who with unfearing neck have submitted to the yoke of 5° 70. 1. 
the Lord endure such hardships and dangers, that they seem 

to be called not from labour to rest, but from rest to labour. 


430 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. XI. 


But the Holy Spirit was there who, as the outward man 
decayed, renewed the inward man day by day, and giving 
a foretaste of spiritual rest in the rich pleasures of God in 
the hope of blessedness to come, smoothed all that seemed 
rough, lightened all that was heavy. Men suffer amputations 
and burnings, that at the price of sharper pain they may 
be delivered from torments less but more lasting, as boils or 
swellings. What storms and dangers will not merchants 
undergo that they may acquire perishing riches? Even those 
who love not riches endure the same hardships; but those 
that love them endure the same, but to them they are not 
hardships. For love makes right easy, and almost nought 
all things however dreadful and monstrous. How much 
more easily then does love do that for true happiness, which 
avarice does for misery as far as it can? JEROME; And 
how is the Gospel lighter than the Law, seeing in the Law 
murder and adultery, but under the Gespel anger and con- 
cupiscence also, are punished? Because by the Law many 
things are commanded which the Apostle fully teaches us 
cannot be fulfilled; by the Law works are required, by the 
Gospel the will is sought for, which even if it goes not into 
act, yet does not lose its reward. The Gospel commands 
what we can do, as that we lust not; this is in our own 
power; the Law punishes not the will but the act, as adultery. 
Suppose a virgin to have been violated in time of persecution; 
as here was not the will she is held as a virgin under the 
Gospel; under the Law she is cast out as defiled. 


CHAP. XII. 


}. At that time Jesus went on the sabbath day ~ 
through the corn; and his disciples were an hungred, 
and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat. 

2. But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto 
him, Behold, thy disciples do that which is not lawful 
to do upon the sabbath day. 

3. But he said unto them, Have ye not read what 
David did, when he was an hungred, and they that 
were with him; 

4. How he entered into the house of God, and did 
eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to 
eat, neither for them which were with him, but only 
for the Priests? 

5. Or have ye not read in the law, how that on 
the sabbath days the Priests in the temple profane 
the sabbath, and are blameless ? 

6. But I say unto you, That in this place is one 
greater than the temple. 

7. But if ye had known what this meaneth, I will 
have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have 
condemned the guiltless. 

8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath 
day. 


Goss. Having related the preaching together with the Gloss. 
miracles of one year before John’s enquiry, He passes to = 
those of another year, namely after the death of John, when 
Jesus is already in all things spoken against ; and hence it 


432 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


is said, Ad that time Jesus pussed through the corn Jields 


es Deon the sabbath day. Ava. This which here follows is 


a i. 34, 


Clirys. 
Hon. 
XXXIX, 


Aug. 


De Op. 


Monach. 


23. 


related both by Mark and Luke, without any question of 
discrepancy; indeed they do not say, At that time, so that 
Matthew has here perhaps preserved the order of time, they 
that of their recollection; unless we take the words in a 
wider sense, At that time, that is, the time in which these 
many and divers things were done, whence we may conceive 
that all these things happened after the death of John. For 
he is believed to have been beheaded a little after he sent 
his disciples to Christ. So that when he says at that time, 
he may mean only an indefinite time. Curys. Why then 
did He lead them through the corn fields on the sabbath, 
seeing He knew all things, unless He desired to break the 
sabbath? This he desired indeed, but not absolutely ; there- 
fore He broke it not without cause, but furnished a sufficient 
reason ; so that He both caused the Law to cease, and yet 
offended not against it. Thus in order to soften the Jews, 
He here introduces a natural necessity ; this is what is said, 
And his disciples being an hungred, began to pluck the ears 
of corn,and to eat. Although in things which are manifestly 
sinful, there can be no excuse; he who kills another cannot 
plead rage, nor he who commits adultery, lust, or any other 
cause; yet here saying that the disciples were hungry, He 
delivers them from all accusation. JEROME; As we read 
in another Evangelist, they had no opportunity of taking 
food because of the thronging of the multitude, and therefore 
they hungredasmen. That they rub the ears of corn in their 
hands, and with them satisfy themselves, is a proof of an 
austere life, and of men who needed not prepared meats, but 
sought only simple food. CHrys. Here admire the disciples, 
who are so limited in their desires, that they have no care of the 
things of the body, but despise the support of the flesh ; they 
are assailed by hunger, and yet they go not away from Chnist ; 
for had not they been hard pressed by hunger, they would 
not have done thus. What the Pharisees said to this is 
added, The Pharisees seeing it said unto Him, Behold, thy 
disciples do what is not lawful to do on the sabbath.  AUvG. 
The Jews rather charged the Lord’s disciples with the 
breach of the sabbath than with theft; because it was 


VER. 1—8S8. ST. MATTHEW. 433 


commanded the people of Israel in the Law, that they Deut. 
should not lay hold of any as a thief in their fields, unless 7* 2° 
he sought to carry ought away with him; but if any touched 
only what he needed to eat, him they suffered to depart with 
impunity free. JERoME; Observe, that the first Apostles 
of the Saviour broke the letter of the sabbath, contrary to the 
opinion of the Ebionites*, who receive the other Apostles, but 
reject Paul as a transgressor of the Law. Then it proceeds 
to their excuse; But he said unto them, Have ye not read 
what David did, when he was an hungred? To refute the 
false accusation of the Pharisees, He calls to mind the 
ancient history, that David flying from Saul came to Nobba, 
and being entertained by Achimelech the Priest, asked for | Sam. 
food; he having no common bread, gave him the conse- 
crated loaves, which it was not lawful for any to eat, but the 
Priests only and Levites; esteeming it a better action 
to deliver men from the danger of famine than to offer sa- 
crifice to God; for the preservation of man is a sacrifice 
acceptable to God. Thus then the Lord meets their ob- 
jection, saying, If David be a holy man, and if you blame not 
the high-priest Achimelech, but consider their excuse for 
their transgression of the Law to be valid, and that was 
hunger; how do ye not approve in the Apostles the same 
plea which you approve in‘others? Though even here 
there is much difference. These rub ears of corn in their 
hands on the sabbath; those ate the Levitical bread, and 
over and above the solemn sabbath it was the season of new 
moon, during which when sought for at the banquet he fled 
from the royal palace. Cnrys. To clear His disciples, 
He brings forward the instance of David, whose glory as 
a Prophet was great among the Jews. Yet they could 
not here answer that this was lawful for him, because he was 
a Prophet; for it was not Prophets, but Priests only who 
might eat. And the greater was he who did this, the greater 
is the defence of the disciples; yet though David was a 
Prophet, they that were with him were not. JEROME; 
Observe that neither David nor his servants received the 


« The Ebionites received only the apostate, vid. Iren. Har. 1. 26. n. 2. 
Hebrew Gospel of St. Matthew muti- Orig. in Cels. v. 65. Euseb. iii. 27, 
lated. They rejected St. Paul as an 


VOL. I. 2F 


John 7, 
23. 


434 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


loaves of shew-bread, before they had made answer that they 
were pure from women. Curys. But some one will say, 
How is this instance applicable to the question in hand? 
For David did not transgress the sabbath. Herein is shewn 
the wisdom of Christ, that He brings forward an instance 
stronger than the sabbath. For it is by no means the same 
thing to violate the sabbath, and to touch that sacred table, 
which is lawful for none. And again, He adds yet another 
answer, saying, Or have ye not read in the Law, that on the 
sabbath days the Priests in the temple profane the sabbath, 
and are blameless? JERoME; As though He had said, Ye 
bring complaints against my disciples, that on the sabbath 
they rub ears of corn in their hands, under stress of hunger, 
and ye yourselves profane the sabbath, slaying victims in the 
temple, killing bulls, burning holocausts on piles of wood ; 
also, on the testimony of another Gospel, ye circumcise 
infants on the sabbath ; so that in keeping one law, ye break 
that concerning the sabbath. But the laws of God are 
never contrary ove to another; wisely therefore, wherein 
His disciples might be accused of having transgressed them, 
He shews that therein they followed the examples of Achi- 
melech and David; and this their pretended charge of 
breaking the sabbath He retorts truly, and not having the 
plea of necessity, upon those who had brought the ac- 
cusation. Curys. But that you should not say to me, that to 
find an instance of another’s sin is not to excuse our own— 
indeed where the thing done and not the doer of it is 
accused, we excuse the thing done. But this is not enough, 
He said what is yet more, that they are blameless. But see 
how great things He brings in; first, the place, in the 
Temple; secondly, the time, on the sabbath; the setting 
aside the Law, in the word profane, not merely break; and 
that they are not only free from punishment but from blame ; 
and are blameless. And this second instance is not like the 
first which He gave respecting David; for that was done 
but once, by David who was not a Priest, and was a case 
of necessity ; but this second is done every sabbath, and 
by the Priests, and according to the Law. So that not only 
by indulgence, as the first case would establish, but by the 
strict law the disciples are to be held blameless. But are 


VER. 1—8. ST. MATTHEW. 435 


the disciples Priests? yea, they are yet greater than Priests, 
forasmuch as He was there who is the Lord of the Temple, 
who is the reality and not the type; and therefore it is 
added, But I say unto you, one greater than the Temple ts 
here. JEROME; The word Hic is not a pronoun, but an 
adverb of place here, for that place is greater than the 
Temple which contains the Lord of the Temple. Ava. Aug. 
It should be observed, that one example is taken from royal nary 
persons, as David, the other from priestly, as those who: !9 
profane the sabbath for the service of the Temple, so that 
much less can the charge concerning the rubbing the ears 

of corn attach to Him who is indeed King and Priest. 
Currys. And because what He had said seemed hard to 
those that heard it, He again exhorts to mercy, introducing 

His discourse with emphasis, saying, But had ye known what 
that meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would 
never have condemned the innocent. JEROME; What J will 
have mercy, and not sacrifice, signifies, we have explained 
above. The words, Ye would never have condemned the 
tnnocent, are to be referred to the Apostles, and the mean- 

ing is, If ye allow the mercy of Achimelech, in that he re- 
freshed David when in danger of famishing, why do ye 
condemn My disciples? Curys. Observe again how in 
leading the discourse towards an apology for them, He 
shews His disciples to be above the need of any apology, 
and to be indeed blameless, as He had said above of the 
Priests. And He adds yet another plea which clears them 

of blame, For the Son of Man is Lord also of the sabbath. 
Remia. He calls Himself the Son of Man, and the meaning 

is, He whom ye suppose a mere man is God, the Lord of all 
creatures, and also of the sabbath, and He has therefore 
power to change the law after His pleasure, because He 
made it. Avuc. He did not, forbid His disciples to pluck Aug. 
the ears of corn on the sabbath, that so He might convict Fons. 
both the Jews who then were, and the Manichezans who *vi. 28. 
were to come, who will not pluck up a herb lest they should 

be committing a murder. 

Hitary; Figuratively; First consider that this discourse was 
held at that time, namely, when He had given thanks to the 
Father for giving salvation to the Gentiles. The field is the 

2F2 


436 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


world, the sabbath is rest, the corn the nipening of them that 
believe for the harvest; thus His passing through the corn field 
on the sabbath, is the coming of the Lord into the world in the 
rest of the Law; the hunger of the disciples is their desire for 
the salvation of men. Rasan. They pluck the ears of corn 
when they withdraw men from devotion to the world; they 
rub them in their hands when they tear away their hearts 
from the lusts of the flesh; they eat the grain when they 
transfer such as are amended into the body of the Church. 
Aug. AuG. But no man passes into the body of Christ, until he 
= ane has been stripped of his fleshly raiment; according to that 
Eph. 4, of the Apostle, Put ye off the old man. Rasan. This 
22. they do on the sabbath, that is in the hope of eternal 
rest, to which they invite others. Also they walk through 
the corn fields with the Lord, who have delight in medi- 
tating on the Scriptures ; they are hungry while they desire 
to find the bread of life, that is the love of God, in them; 
they pluck the ears of corn and rub them in their hands, 
while they examine the testimonies to discover what lies 
hid under the letter, and this on the sabbath, that is, while 
they are free from disquieting thoughts. Hitary; The 
Pharisees, who thought that the key of the kingdom of 
heaven was in their hands, accused the disciples of doing 
what was not lawful to do; whereon the Lord reminded 
them of deeds in which, under the guise of facts, a prophecy 
was concealed; and that He might shew the power of all 
things, He further added, that it contained the form of that 
work which was to be, Had ye known what that meaneth, 
I will have mercy; for the work of our salvation is not in the 
sacrifice of the Law, but in mercy; and the Law having 
ceased, we are saved by the mercy of God. Which gift if 
they had understood they would not have condemned the 
innocent, that is His Apostles, whom in their jealousy they 
were to accuse of having transgressed the Law, where the 
old sacrifices having ceased, the new dispensation of mercy 
came through them to the aid of all. 


9. And when he was departed thence, he went into 
their synagogue : 


10. And, behold, there was a man which had his 


VER. 9—13. ST. MATTHEW. 437 


hand withered. And they asked him, saying, Is it 
lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might 
accuse him. 

11. And he said unto them, What man shall there 
be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it 
fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay 
hold on it, and lift it out ? 

12. How much then is a man better than a sheep? 
Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath 
days. 

13. Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine 
hand. Andhe stretched it forth; and it was restored 
whole, like as the other. 


JEROME; Because by fair instances He had vindicated 
His disciples from the charge of breaking the sabbath, the 
Pharisees seek to bring false accusation against Himself; 
whence it is said, And passing thence, he came into their 
synagogue. Hitary; For the things that had gone before 
were said and done in the open air, and after this He entered 
the synagogue. <Auc. It might have been supposed that the Aug. De 
matter of the ears of corn, and this cure following, had been Ee 
done on the same day, for it is mentioned to have been the 
sabbath day in both cases, had not Luke shewn us that 
they were on different days. So that what Matthew says, 
And when he had passed thence, he came into their syna- 
gogue, is to be taken as that He did not enter into the 
synagogue till He had passed thence; but whether several 
days intervened or He went thither straight is not expressed in 
this Gospel, so that place is given to the relation of Luke, who 
tells of the healing of this kind of palsy on another sabbath. 
Hitary; When He was entered into the synagogue, they 
bring a man of a withered hand, asking Him whether it was 
lawful to heal on the sabbath day, seeking an occasion of 
convicting Him out of His answer; as it follows, And they 
brought him a man having a withered hand, and asked him, 
saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day? CuHRYS. Chrys. 
They do not ask that they may learn, but that they may 4o™-*!. 


438 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


accuse Him; as it follows, that they might accuse him. 
Though the action itself would have been enough, yet they 
sought occasion against Him in His words also, thus pro- 
viding for themselves greater matter of complaint. JEROME; 
And they ask Him whether it is lawful to heal on the 
sabbath day, that if He should refuse, they might charge 
Him with cruelty, or want of power; if He should heal 
him, they might charge Him with transgressing the Law. 
Avg. DeAuG. But it may raise enquiry how Matthew can say that 
one they asked the Lord, Whether it were lawful to heal on the 
35. sabbath, seeing Mark and Luke relate that it was the Lord 
Luke 6, who asked them, Whether it is larful on the sabbath day 
es to do good or to do evil? It is to be understood then 
that they first asked the Lord, Js it luwful to heal on the 
sabbath day? Then understanding their thoughts that they 
sought an occasion to accuse Him, He placed in the midst 
him whom He was about to heal, and put to them the 
question which Mark and Luke say that He did ask; and 
when they remained silent, He made the comparison respect- 
ing the sheep, and concluded that they might do good on 
the sabbath day; as it follows, But he said unto them, 
What man shall there be among you, that shall have one 
sheep, and tf tt fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he 
not lay hold on it, and lift it out? JEROME; Thus He 
answers their question in such a way as to convict the 
questioners of covetousness. If ye on the sabbath, saith 
He, would hasten to lift out a sheep or any other animal 
that might have fallen into a pit, not for the sake of the 
animal, but to preserve your own property, how much more 
ought I to deliver a man who is so much better than a 
Gloss. sheep? GLoss. Thus He answers their question with a 
ord. suitable example, so as to shew that they profane the 
sabbath by works of covetousness who were charging 
Him with profaning it by works of charity ; evil interpreters 
of the Law, who say that on the sabbath we ought to rest 
from good deeds, when it is only evil deeds from which we 
Lev. 23,ought to rest. As it is said, Ye shall do no servile work 
therein, that is, no sin. Thus in the everlasting rest, we 
Aug. De shall rest only from evil, and not from good. Aug. After 


bout';,,this comparison concerning the sheep, He concludes that 


VER. 9—13. ST. MATTHEW. 439 


it is lawful to do good on the sabbath day, saying, Therefore 

st ts lawful to do good on the sabbath. Curys. Observe 
how He shews many reasons for this breaking of the 
sabbath. But forasmuch as the man was incurably sick, 

He proceeds straightway to the work, as it follows, Zhen 
saith he to the man, Reach forth thy hand: and he reached 

it forth, and it was restored whole as the other. JEROME; 

in the Gospel which the Nazarenes and Ebionites use, and vid.note, 
which we have lately translated into Greek out of the?’ bs 
Hebrew, and which many regard as the genuine Matthew, 

this man who has the withered hand is described as a 
builder, and he makes his prayer in these words, ‘I was 

a builder, and gained my living by the labour of my hands; 

I pray thee, Jesus, to restore me to health, that I may not 
disgracefully beg my bread.’ Rasan. Jesus teaches and 
works chiefly on the sabbath, not only on account of the 
spiritual sabbath, but on account of the gathering together 

of the people, seeking that all should be saved. 

Hriiary; Figuratively; After their departure from the corn 
field, from which the Apostles had received the fruits of their 
sowing, He came to the Synagogue, there also to make ready 
the work of His harvest; for there were afterwards many with 
the Apostles who were healed. JERoME; Until the coming of 
the Lord the Saviour, there was the withered hand in the Syna- 
gogue of the Jews, and the works of the Lord were not done 
in it; but when He came upon earth, the nght hand was 
restored in the Apostles who believed, and given back to its 
former occupation. HiLary; All healing is done by the 
word; and the hand is restored as the other; that is, made 
like to the ministry of the Apostles in the business of be- 
stowing salvation ; and it teaches the Pharisees that they 
should not be displeased that the work of human salvation is 
done by the Apostles, seeing that if they would believe, their 
own hand would be made able to the ministry of the same 
duty. Rasan. Otherwise; The man who had the withered 
hand denotes the human race in its barrenness of good 
works dried up by the hand which was stretched out to Gen.3,6. 
the fruit; this was healed by the stretching out of the 
innocent hand on the Cross. And well is this withered 
hand said to have been in the Synagogue, for where tlie gift 


440 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO. CHAP. XII. 


of knowledge is greater, there is the greater danger of an 
irrecoverable infliction. The withered hand when it is 
to be healed is first bid to be stretched out, because the 
weakness of a barren mind is healed by no means better than 
by liberality of almsgiving. A man’s right hand is affected 
when he is remiss in giving alms, his left whole when 
he is attentive to his own imterests. But when the Lord 
comes, the right hand is restored whole as the left, because 


what he had got together greedily, that he distributes 
freely. 


14. Then the Pharisees went out, and held a 
council against him, how they might destroy him. 

15. But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself 
from thence: and great multitudes followed him, and 
he healed them all; 

16. And charged them that they should not make 
him known: | 

17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by 
Esaias the prophet, saying, 

18. Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; 
my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: - 
I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew 
judgment to the Gentiles. 

19. He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall 
any man hear his voice in the streets. 

20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking 
flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment 
unto victory. 

21. And in his name shall the Gentiles trust. 


Hirary; The Pharisees are moved with jealousy at what 
had been done; because beholding the outward body of 
a man, they did not recognize the God in His works; The 
Pharisees went out and sought counsel against him, how 
they might destroy him. Rasan. He says, went out 
because their mind was alien from the Lord. They 


VER. 14—21. ST. MATTHEW. 44] 


took counsel how they might destroy life, not how them- 
selves might find life. HtLary; And He knowing their 
plots withdrew, that He might be far from the counsels 
of the evil hearted, as it follows, Jesus knowing it departed 
thence. JEROME; Knowing, that is, their designs against 
Him withdrew Himself, that He might remove from the 
Pharisees all opportunity of sin. Remic. Or; He withdrew 
from thence as avoiding the designs of His own when they 
persecuted Him; or because that was not the time or place 
for Him to suffer, for It cunnot be that a Prophet should Luke13, 
perish out of Jerusalem, as He Himself spake. The Lord** 
also shunned those who persecuted Him through hatred, and 
went thither where He found many who were attached to 
Him from affection, whence it follows, And there followed 
him many. Him whom the Pharisees with one consent 
plotted against to destroy, the untaught multitude with one 
consent love and follow; whence they soon received the 
fulfilment of their desires, for it follows, And he healed them 
all. Hitary; On those whom He healed He enjoined 
silence, whence it follows, And he charged them that they 
should not make him known. For his restored health was a 
witness to each man. And by commanding them to hold 
their peace, He avoids all ostentation of Himself, and at the 
same time notwithstanding affords a knowledge of Himself 
in that very admonition to hold their peace; for the 
observance of silence proceeds from that very thing which 
is to be kept silent. Rasan. In this also He instructs us, 
that when we have done any thing great we are not to seek 
praise abroad. Remic. And He also gives them command 
that they should not make Him known, that they might not 
by persecuting Him be put into a worse state. CHrys. And 
that you may not be troubled at those things which are done, 
and at the incredible madness of the Pharisees, He introduces 
the Prophet’s words. For such was the carefulness of the 
Prophets, that they had not omitted even this, but had noted 
all His ways and movements, and the meaning with which 
He did this; that you might learn that He spoke all things 
by the Holy Spirit; for if it be impossible to know the 
thoughts of men, much more to know the meaning of Christ, 
unless the Holy Spirit revealed it. Therefore it follows, 


442 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


That tt might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the 
Prophet, saying, Behold my servant whom I have chosen. 
Remic. The Lord Jesus Christ is called the servant of the 
Almighty God", not in respect of His divinity, but in respect 
of the dispensation of the flesh which He took upon Him, 
because by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit He took flesh 
of the Virgin without stain of sin. Some books have, Elect, 
whom I have chosen, for He was chosen by God the Father, 
that is, predestinated that He should be the Son of God, 
proper, not adopted. Rasan. Whom I have chosen, he 
says, for a work which none else has done, that He should 
redeem the human race, and make peace between God and 
the world. It follows, My beloved, in whom my soul is well 
pleased, for He alone is the Lamb without spot of sin, of 
i 17,whom the Father speaks, This ts my beloved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased. ReEmic. That he says, My soul, is not to 
be understood as though God the Father had a soul, but by 
way of adaptation, shewing how God is disposed towards 
Him. And it is no wonder that a soul is ascribed to God in 
this manner, seeing that all other members of the body are 
likewise. Currys. This the Prophet puts in the beginning, 
that you might learn that that which is here said was 
according to the counsel of the Father. For he that is beloved 
does according to his will who loveth him. And again, he 
that is chosen, does not as an enemy break the law, nor as 
one being an adversary of the legislator, but as one in 
agreement with Him. Because therefore He is beloved, / 
will put my Spirit upon him. Remic. Then also God the 
Father put His Spint upon Him, when by the working of 
the Holy Spint He took flesh of the Virgin; and as soon as He 
became man, He took the fulness of the Holy Spirit. JEROME; 
But the Holy Spirit is put, not on the Word of God, but on 
the Only-Begotten, who came forth from the bosom of the 


b Our Lord is said to be properly a 
“ibe as regards His human nature, 


the course of the Adoptionist contro- 
versy, the same heretics who denied 


S. Athan. Orat. in Arian. i. 43. 8. 

ilar. de Trin. xi. 13. S. Greg. Naz. 
Orat. xxxvi. p. 578. S. Greg. Nyss. de 
Fide ad Simp). p.471.S. Ambros. de Fid. 
v.8.Psendo-August. Alterc.cum Pasc.15. 
S.Cyrill. Alex. ad Theodor.in Anathem. 
10. p. 223, But it came to be denied in 


that our Lord was the true Son of God 
in His human nature, asserting that He 
was a servant. Theodoret attributes 
the opinion to Apollinaris, ‘ which 
none of us ever dared to utter.” 
Eranist. ii. fin. 


VER. 14—2]. 8T. MATTHEW. 443 


Father; on Him, that is, of whom it is said, Behold my 
servant. And what He will do by Him He adds, And he 

shall declare judgment to the Gentiles. Avuc. Seeing He Aug. De 
preached the judgment to come which was hidden from the ("2 
Gentiles. Curys. Further, to shew His lowliness, He says, 

He shall not strive ; and so He was offered up as the Father 

had willed, and gave Himself willingly into the hands of 

His persecutors. Neither shall he cry; so He was dumb as 

a lamb before his shearer. Nor shall any hear his voice in 

the streets. JEROME; For the way is broad and wide which 

leads to destruction, and many walk in it; and being many, 

they will not hear the voice of the Saviour, because they are 

not in the narrow but in the broad way. Remic. The 
Greek wAarteia, is in Latin called ‘ latitudo.’ No one therefore 
hasheard His voice in the streets, because He has not promised 
pleasant things in this world to those that love Him, but 
hardships. Curys. The Lord sought to heal the Jews by 

this mildness. But though they rejected Him, yet He did 

not resist them by destroying them; whence the Prophet, 
displaying His power and their weakness, says, A bruised 

reed he shall not break, and a smoking flax he shali not 
quench. JEROME; He that holds not out his hand to a 
sinner, nor bears his brother’s burden, he breaks a bruised 
reed; and he who despises a weak spark of faith in a little 

one, he quenches a smoking flax. Aue. So He neither Ay. 
bruised nor quenched the Jewish persecutors, who are here "” "*? 
likened to a bruised reed which has lost its wholeness, and 

to a smoking flax which has lost its flame; but He spared. 
them because He was not come to judge them, but to be 
judged by them. Ip. In the smoking flax it is observed, Aug. 
that when the flame is out it causes a stink. CHrys. Or agreed 
this, He shall not break a bruised reed, shews that it was 

as easy for Him to break them all, as to break a reed, 

and that a bruised reed. And, He shall not quench a 
smoking flax, shews that their rage was fired, and that the 
power of Christ was strong to quench such rage with all 
readiness; hence in this is shewn the great mercy of Christ. 
Hirary; Or, he means this bruised reed that is not broken, 

to shew that the perishing and bruised bodies of the 
Gentiles, are not to be broken, but are rather reserved for 


444 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


salvation. He shall not quench a smoking flax, shews the 
feebleness of that spark which though not quenched, only 
moulders in the flax, and that among the remnants of that 
ancient grace, the Spirit is yet not quite taken away from 
Israel, but power still remains to them of resuming the 
aaa whole flame thereof in a day of penitence. JEROME; Or, 
oP” ‘the reverse ; He calls the Jews a bruised reed, whom tossed 
by the wind and shaken from one another, the Lord did 
not immediately condemn, but patiently endured; and the 
smoking flax He calls the people gathered out of the 
Gentiles, who, having extinguished the light of the natural 
law, were involved in the wandering mazes of thick darkness 
of smoke, bitter and hurtful to the eyes; this He not only 
did not extinguish, by reducing them to ashes, but on the 
contrary from a small] spark and one almost dead He raised 
a mighty flame. Cnyrys. But one might say, What then, 
shall these things be always thus? Will He endure for ever 
those who thus lay snares, and are mad against Him? Far 
from it; when His own work shall be all complete, then 
shall He work these things also. And this He signifies, 
saying, Until he shall send forth judgment to victory; 
as much as to say, When He shall have accomplished all 
things which are of Himself, then shall He bring in perfect 
vengeance; then shall they receive punishment when He has 
made his victory illustrious, that there be not left to them 
any irreverent opportunity of contradiction. HmILary; Or, 
Until he shall send forth gudgment to victory, that is, Until 

. He shall take away the power of death, and bring in judg- 
ment and the return of His splendour. Ranan. Or, Until 
that judgment which was being done in Him should come 
forth to victory. For after that by His resurrection He had 
overcome death, and driven forth the prince of this world, 
He returned as conqueror to His kingdom to sit on the right 
hand of the Father, until He shall] put all His enemies under 
His feet. Currys. But the things of this dispensation will 
not rest in this only, that they who have not believed should 
be punished, but He will also draw the world to Him; 
whence it follows, And in his name shall the Gentiles hope. 
Aug.De Auc. This last we now see fulfilled; and thus this which 


Coe cannot be denied establishes the truth of that which some 


VER. 22—24. ST. MATTHEW. 445 


have denied through ignorance, the last judgment namely, 
which He will hold upon earth, when He Himself shall 
come from heaven. Fur who could have expected that the 
Gentiles would have hope in Christ’s name, when He was 
in the hands of His enemies, when He was bound, scourged, 
set at nought, and crucified; when even His disciples had 
lost that hope which they had begun to have in Him? That 
which one thicf hardly hoped on the cross, the nations 
scattered far and wide now hope. And that they may not 
die for ever, they are marked with that very cross on which 
He died. Let none then doubt that the last judgment will 
be by Christ Himself. Remic. And it should be known, that 
the meaning not only of this passage, but of many others also, 
is supported by this testimony from the Prophet. The words, 
Behold my serrant, may be referred to the place in which 
the Father had said above, This is my Son. The words, Mat. 3, 
Twill put my Spirit upon him, is referred to the descent 7 
of the Holy Spirit upon the Lord at His baptism ; He shall 
declure judgment to the Gentiles, to that which THe says 
below, When the Son of Man shall sit in the seat of his Mat 25, 
Majesty. What He adds, He shall not strive nor cry, refers”: 
to the Lord how He answered but little to the Chief Priests, 
-and to Pilate, but to Herod nothing at all. He shall not 
break the bruised reed, refers to His shunning His persecutors 
that they might not be made worse; and that Jn his name 
shall the Gentiles hope, refers to what Himself says below, 
Go ye, and teach all natvons. zee 28, 


22. Then was brought unto him one possessed with 
a devil, blind and dumb: and he healed him, inso- 
much that the blind and dumb both spake and saw. 

23. And all the people were amazed, and said, Is 
not this the Son of David? 

24. But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, 
This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub 
the prince of the devils. 


Goss. The Lord had refuted the Pharisees above, when Gioss. 
they brought false charges against the miracles of Christ, as"°° °°* 


Aug. 
Quest. 
Ey. 1. 


446 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


if He had broken the sabbath in doing them. But inas- 
much as with a yet greater wickedness they perversely attri- 


‘buted the miracles of Christ done by divine power to an 


unclean spirit, therefore the Evangelist places first the 
miracle from which they had taken occasion to blaspheme, 
saying, Then was brought to him one that had a demon, 
blind and dumb. Remic. The word Then refers to that 
above, where having healed the man who had the withered 
hand, He went out of the synagogue. Or it may be taken of 
a more extended time; Then, namely, when these things 
were being done or said. CHrys. We may wonder at the 
wickedness -of the dzmon; he had obstructed both inlets 
by which he could believe, namely, hearing and sight. But 
Christ opened both, whence it follows, And he healed him, 
insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw. 
JEROME; Three miracles were wrought in one and the same 
person at the same time; the blind sees, the dumb speaks, 
the possessed is delivered from the demon. This was at 
that time done in the flesh, but is now daily being fulfilled 
in the conversion of them that believe; the demon is cast 
out when they first behold the light of the faith, and then 
their mouths which had before been stopped are opened to 
utter the praises of God. Hitary; Not without reason, 
after having mentioned that all the multitude was healed 
together, does he bring in the cure of this man separately 
who was dzmoniac, blind and dumb. For after the man of 
the withered hand had been brought before Him, and been 
healed in the Synagogue, it behoved that the salvation of 
the Gentiles should be represented in the person of some 
other afflicted man; he who had been the habitation of a 
dzmon, and blind and dumb, should be made meet to receive 
God, should contain God in Christ, and by confession of God 
should give praise to the works of Christ. Ava. For he that 


,, believes not, is truly demoniac, blind, and dumb; and he 


that has not understanding of the faith, nor confesses, nor 


Aug. De gives praise to God, is subject to the devil. Ip. This 
Cons. oe . . 
Ey ij.37, Barrative is given by Luke, not in this place, but after many 


other things intervening, and speaks of him as dumb only, 
and not blind. But he is not to be thought to be speaking 
of another man, because he is silent respecting this one 


VER. 25, 26. ST. MATTHEW. 447 


particular; for in what follows he agrees exactly with 
Matthew. Hurary; All the multitude were astonished at 

this which was done, but the jealousy of the Pharisees grew 
thereupon, And all the multitude were astonished and said, 

Is not this the Son of David? Gtoss. Because of His Gloss. 
mercy and His goodness to them they proclaim Him the Son ¥#.,.,, 
of David. Rasan. The multitude who seemed less learned, Raban. 
always wondered at the works of the Lord; they, on the f Bede 
other hand, either denied these things, or what they could 

not deny laboured to pervert by an ill interpretation, as though 

they were wrought not by a Deity, but by an unclean spirit, 
namely, Beelzebub, who was the God of Acharon: The 
Pharisees when they heard it said, This man does not cast 

out demons but by Beelzebub, the prince of the demons. 
Remte. Beelzebub is the same as Beel or Baal, or Beel- 
phegor. Beel was father of Ninus king of Assyria; Baal 

was 80 called because he was worshipped on high; he was 
called Beelphegor from the mountain Phegor; Zebub was 

the servant of Abimelech the son of Gedeon, who, having 
slain his seventy brothers, built a temple to Baal, and set 

him up as Priest therein, to drive away the flies which were 
collected there by the abundant blood of the victims; for 
Zebub means, a fly. Beelzebub therefore is interpreted, The 

man of flies; wherefore from this most unclean worship they 
called him the Prince of the demons. Having therefore 
nothing more mean to cast upon the Lord, they said that 

He cast out demons by Beelzebub. And it should be 
known that this word is not to be read with d or t at the end, 

as some corrupt copies have, but with b. 


25. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said upto 
them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought 
to desolation; and every city or house divided against 
itself shall not stand; 

26. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided 
against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand? 


JzromsE; The Pharisees ascribed the works of God to the 
Prince of the demons; and the Lord makes answer not to 


Chrys. 


Hom. 
xhi. 


448 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


what they said, but to what they thought, that even thus 
they might be compelled to believe His power, Who saw the 
secrets of the heart; Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said unto 
them. Curys. Above they had accused Christ of having 
cast out demons by Beelzebub; but then He did not reprove 
them, suffering them, if they would, to acknowledge Him 
from further miracles, and to learn His greatness from His 
doctrine. But because they continued to maintain the same 
things, He now rebukes them, although their accusation had 
been very unreasonable. But jealousy recks not what it 
says, so that only it say somewhat. Yet does not Christ 
contemn them, but answers with a gracious mildness, teach- 
ing us to be gentle to our enemies, and not to be troubled, 
even though they should speak such things against us, as we 
neither acknowledge in us, nor have any reasonableness in 
themselves. Therein also He proves that the things which 
they had said against Him were false, for it is not of one 
having a demon to shew such mercy, and to know the 
thoughts. Moreover, because this their accusation was very 
unreasonable, and they feared the multitude, they did not 
dare to proclaim it openly, but kept it in their thoughts ; 
wherefore he says, Knowing their thoughts. He does not 
repeat their thoughts in His answer, not to divulge their 
wickedness; but He brings forward an answer; it was His 
object to do good to the sinners, not to proclaim their sin. 
He does not answer them out of the Scriptures, because 
they would not hearken to Him as they explained them 
differently, but He refutes them from common opinions. 
For assaults from without are not so destructive as quarrels 
within ; and this is so in bodies and in all other things. 
But in the mean while He draws instances from matters 
more known, saying, Every kingdom divided against itself 
shall be brought to desolation; for there is nothing on 
earth more powerful than a kingdom, and yet that is de- 
stroyed by contention. What then must we say concerning 
a city or a family; that whether it be great or small, it is 
destroyed when it is at discord within itself. Ht1Lary; 
For a city or family is analogous to a kingdom; as it fol- 
lows, And every city or house divided against itself shall 
not stand. JEROME; For as small things grow by concord, 


VER. 25, 26. ST. MATTHEW. 449 


so the greatest fall to pieces through dissensions. H1ary ; 
But the word of God is rich, and whether taken simply, 
or examined inwardly, it is needful for our advancement. 
Leaving therefore what belongs to the plain understanding 
thereof, let us dwell on some of the more secret reasons. 
The Lord is about to make answer to that which they 
had said concerning Beelzebub, and He casts upon those 
to whom He made answer a condition of their answering. 
Thus; The Law was from God and the promise of the 
kingdom to Israel was by the Law; but if the kingdom 
of the Law be divided in itself, it must needs be de- 
stroyed; and thus Israel lost the Law, when the nation 
whose was the Law, rejected the fulfilment of the Law 
in Christ. The city here spoken of is Jerusalem, which 
when it raged with the madness of its people against the 
Lord, and drove out His Apostles with the multitude of 
them that believed, after this division shall not stand; and 
thus (which soon happened in consequence of this division) 
the destruction of that city is declared. Again He puts 
another case, And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided 
against himself; how then shall his kingdom stand? JEROME; 
As much as to say, If Satan fight against himself, and demon 
be an enemy to dsemon, then must the end of the world be 
at hand, that these hostile powers should have no place there, 
whose mutual.war is peace for men. Goss. He holds them Gloss. 
therefore in this dilemma. For Christ casts out demons” 
either by the power of God, or by the Prince of the demons. 
If by the power of God, their accusations are malicious ; if 
by the Prince of the demons, his kingdom is divided, and will 
not stand, and therefore let them depart out of his kingdom. 
And this alternative He intimates that they had chosen for 
themselves, when they refused to believe in Him. CuHrys. 
Or thus; If he is divided, he is made weak, and perishes ; 
but if he perishes, how can he cast out another? HILary; 
Otherwise; If the demon was driven to this division to the 
end that he should thus afflict the demons, even thus must 
we attribute higher power to Him who made the division 
than to those who are thus divided; thus the kingdom of 
the Devil, after this division made, is destroyed by Christ. 
JEROME; But if ye think, ye Scribes and Pharisees, that the 
VOL. I. 2G 


450 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


demons depart out of the possessed in obedience to their 
Prince, that men may be imposed upon by a concerted 
fraud, what can ye say to the healing of diseases which the 
Lord also wrought? It is something more if ye assign to the 
demons even bodily infirmities, and the signs of spiritual 
virtues. 


27. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by 
whom do your children cast them out? therefore 
they shall be your judges. 

28. But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, 
then the kingdom of God is come unto you. 


Curys. After the first answer, He comes to a second more 
plain than the first, saying, And if I by Beelzebub cast out 
demons, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore 
shall they be your judges. JEROME; He alludes, as is His 
manner, under the name children of the Jews, either to the 
exorcists of that race, or to the Apostles who are by race of 
that nation. If He means the exorcists who by the invo- 
cation of God cast out demons, He thus constrains the 
Pharisees by a wise enquiry to confess that their work was 
of the Holy Spirit. If, We would say, the casting out of 
the demons by your children is imputed to God, and not 
to demons, why should the same work wrought by Me not 
have the same cause? Therefore shall they be your judges, 
not by authority but by comparison; they ascribe the casting 
out of the dsemons to God, you to the Prince of the demons. 
But if it is of the Apostles also that this is said, (and so we 
should rather take it,) then they shall be their judges, for they 
shall sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of 
Israel. Hitary; And they are worthily appointed judges 
over them, to whom Christ is found to have given that power 
over the demons, which it was denied that He had. Rasan. 
Or, because the Apostles well knew within their own con- 
science that they had learnt uo evil art from Him. CuHrys. 
Yet He said not, My disciples, or Apostles, but your 
children; that if they chose to return again to their own 
privileges, they might take occasion hence; butif they should 


VER. 27, 28. ST. MATTHEW. 45] 


be ungrateful, they might not have even an impudent excuse. 
And the Apostles cast out demons by virtue of power which 
they had from Him, and yet the Pharisees made no such 
charge against them; for it was not the actions themselves, 
but the person of Christ to which they were opposed. 
Desiring then to sbew that the things which were said 
against Him were only jealous suspicions, He brings forward 
the Apostles. And also He leads them to a knowledge of 
Himself, shewing how they stood in the way of their own 
good, and resisted their own salvation; whereas they ought 
to be joyful because He had come to bestow great goods 
upon them; Jf I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, 
then is the kingdom of God come upon you. This also 
shews that it is a matter of great power to cast out demons, 
and not an ordinary grace. And thus it is He reasons, 
Therefore is the kingdom of God come upon you, as much as 
to say, If this indeed be so, then is the Son of God come 
upon you. But this He hints darkly, that it may not seem 
hard to them. Also to draw their attention, He said not 
merely, The kingdom hath come, but, upon you; that is 
to say, These good things are coming for you; why do you 
oppose your own salvation; for this is the very sign given 
by the Prophets of the presence of the Son of God, that 
such works as _ these should be wrought by Divine power. 
JEROME; For the kingdom of God denotes Himself, of whom 
it is written in another place, The kingdom of God is among Luke17, 
you; and, There standeth one in the midst of you whom Ye Join 1, 
know not. Or surely that kingdom which both John and26. 
the Lord Himself had preached above, Repent ye, for the Mat. 3, 
kingdom of heaven is at hand. There is also a third™ *!” 
kingdom of the Holy Scripture which shall be taken from 
the Jews, and be given to a nation that brings forth the fruit 
thereof. Hitary; If then the disciples work by Christ, 
and Christ by the Spirit of God, already is the kingdom of 
God transferred to the Apostles through the office of the 
Mediator. Gtoss. For the weakening of the kingdom of Gloss. 
the Devil is the increase of the kingdom of God. Ava. oe 
Whence the sense might be this, /f ] by Beelzebub cast out Avg. 
daemons, then, according to your own opinion, the kingdom ee 
of God is come upon you, for the kingdom of the Devil, being 

262 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


452 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


thus divided against itself, cannot stand. Thus calling that 
the kingdom of God, in which the wicked are condemned, 
and are separated from the faithful, who are now doing 
penitence for their sins. 


29. Or else how can one enter into a strong man’s 
house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the 
strong man? and then he will spoil his house. 


Currys. Having concluded the second answer, He brings 
forward yet a third, saying, Or how can any enter into a 
strong man’s house? For that Satan cannot cast out Satan 
is clear from what has been said; and that no other can cast 
him out, till he have first overcome him, is plain to all. 
Thus the same as before is established yet more abundantly ; 
for He says, So far am I from having the Devil for my ally, 
that I rather am at war with him, and bind him; and in that 
I cast out after this sort, I therein spoil his goods. Thus 
He proves the very contrary of that they strove to establish. 
They would shew that He did not cast out demons of His 
own power; He proves that not only demons, yea but the 
prince also of the demons He hath bound, as is shewn by 
that which He hath wrought. For if their Prince were not 
overcome, how were the demons who are His subjects thus 
spoiled. This speech seems also to me to be a prophecy ; 
inasmuch as He not only casts out demons, but will take 
away all error out of the world, and dissolve the craft of the 
Devil; and He says not rob, but spoil, shewing that He will 
do it with power. JEROME; His house is this world, which 
is set in evil, not by the majesty of the Creator, but by the 
greatness of the sinner. The strong man is bound and 
chained in tartarus, bruised by the Lord’s foot. Yet ought 
we not therefore to be careless ; for here the conqueror Him- 
self pronounces our adversary to be strong. Curys. He 
calls him strong, shewing therein his old reign, which arose 
out of our sloth. Aue. For he held us, that we should not 
by our own strength be able to free ourselves from him, but 
by the grace of God. By his goods, he means all the un- 
believers. He has bound the strong man, in that He has 


To —_— — Se 


VER. 30. ST. MATTHEW. 453 


taken away from him all power of hindering the faithful from 
following Christ, and gaining the kingdom of heaven. 
RaBaN. Therefore He has spoiled his house, in that them 
whom He foresaw should be His own, He set free from the 
snares of the Devil, and has joined to the Church. Or in that 
He has divided the whole world among His Apostles and their 
successors to be converted. By this plain parable therefore 
He shews that He does not join in a deceitful working with 
the demons as they falsely accused Him, but by the might 
of His divinity He frees men from the demons. 


30. He that is not with me is against me; and he 
that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad. 


Curys. After that third reply, here follows a fourth, He 
that is not with me is against me. WiiLary; Wherein He 
shews how far He is from having borrowed any power from 
the Devil; teaching us how great the danger to think amiss 
of Him, not to be with Whom, is the same as to be against 
Him. JeEROME; But let none think that this is said of 
heretics and schismatics; though we may apply it besides 
to such; but it is shewn by the context to refer to the Devil; 
in that the works of the Saviour cannot be compared with 
the works of Beelzebub. He seeks to hold men’s souls 
im captivity, the Lord to set them free; he preaches idols, 
the Lord the knowledge of the true God; he draws men to 
sin, the Lord calls them back to virtues. How then can 
these have agreement together, whose works are so opposite ? 
Curys. Therefore whoso gathereth not with me, nor is with 
me, may not be compared together with me, that with me he 
should cast out deemons, but rather seeks to scatter what is 
mine. But tell me; If you were to have fought together 
with some one, and he should not be willing to come to 
your aid, is he not therefore against you? The Lord also 
Himeelf said in another place, He that is not against you 2s Luke 9, 
for you. To which that which is here said is not contrary. °% 
For here He is speaking of the Devil who is our adversary— 
there of some man who was on their side, of whom it is 
said, We saw one casting out demons tn thy name. Here 
He seems to allude to the Jews, classing them with the 


Aug. 
Serm. 
7. 13. 


454 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


Devil; for they were against Him, and scattered what He 
would gather. But it is fair to allow that He spoke this of 
Himself; for He was against the Devil, and scattered abroad 
the things of the Devil. 


31. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin 
and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the 
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be for- 
given unto men. 

32. And whosoever speaketh a word against the 
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever 
speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be 
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the 
world to come. 


Curys. The Lord had refuted the Pharisees by explaining 
His own actions, and He now proceeds to terrify them. 
For this is no small part of correction, to threaten punish- 
ment, as well as to set right false accusation. HILARY; 
He condemns by a most rigorous sentence this opinion of 
the Pharisees, and of such as thought with them, promising 
pardon for all sins, but refusing it to blasphemy against the 
Spirit; Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and 
blasphemy shalt be forgiven unto men. Remic. But it 
should be known that they are not forgiven to all men 
universally, but to such only as have performed due peni- 
tence for their guiltinesses. So by these words is over- 
thrown the error of Novatian, who said that the faithful 
could not rise by penitence after a fall, nor merit pardon of 
their sins, especially they who in persecution denied”. Ave. 
For what difference does it make to the purpose, whether it 
be said, The spirit of blasphemy shall not be forgiven, or, 


Luke12, Whoso shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit it shall not 


10. 


be forgiven him,as Luke speaks; except that the same sense 


b Novatian, a presbyter of Rome, considered the Church in a state of 
separated from the Church in the corruption, and they were led to main- 
middle of the third century, and formed tain that none were in God’s favour 
a sect, on the ground of the Church's who had sinned grievously after Bap- 
restoring the lapsed in persecution upon = tism. 
their repentance. In consequence they 


VER. 31, 32. ST. MATTHEW. 455 


ig expressed more clearly in the one place than in the other, 
the one Evangelist not overthrowing but explaining the 
other? The spirit of blasphemy it is said shortly, not ex- 
pressing what spirit; to make which clear it is added, 
And whoso shall speak a word against the Son of man, 
tt shall be forgiven him. After having said the same of all 
manner of blasphemy, He would in a more particular way 
speak of that blasphemy which is against the Son of Man, 
and which in the Gospel according to John He shews to 
be very heavy, where He says concerning the Holy Ghost, 
He shall convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of 
judgment ; of sin, because they believe not on me. That then 
which here follows, He tho shall speak a word against the 
Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this 
world, nor tn that which is to come, is not said because 
the Holy Spirit is in the Trinity greater than the Son, 
which no heretic ever affirmed. HiLary; And what is 
so beyond all pardon as to deny that in Christ which is 
of God, and to take away the substance of the Father’s 
Spirit which is in Him, seeing that He performs every work 
in the Spint of God, and in Him God is reconciling the 
world unto Himself. Jerome; Or the passage may be 
thus understood; Whoso speaks a word against the Son of 
Man, as stumbling at My flesh, and thinking of Me as no 
more than man, such opinion and blasphemy though it is not 
free from the sin of heresy, yet finds pardon because of the 
little worth of the body. But whoso plainly perceiving the 
works of God, and being unable to deny the power of 
God, speaks falsely against them prompted by jealousy, 
and calls Christ who is the Word of God, and the works of the 
Holy Ghost, Beelzebub, to him it shall not be forgiven, 
neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Aue. But Aug. 
if this were said in such manner, then every other kind of °™ %P- 
blasphemy is omitted, and that only which is spoken against 
the Son of Man, as when He is pronounced to be mere man, 
is to be forgiven. That then that is said, All manner of sin 
and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, without doubt 
blasphemy spoken against the Father is included in its 
largeness ; though here again that alone is declared irre- 
missible which is spoken against the Holy Ghost. What 


456 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII, 


then, hath the Father also taken upon Him the form of a 
servant, that the Holy Ghost is thus as it were spoken of 
as greater? For who could not be convicted of having 
spoken a word against the Holy Spirit, before He become 
a Christian or a Catholic? First, the Pagans themselves 
when they say that Christ wrought miracles by magic arts, 
are they not like those who said that He cast out demons 
by the Prince of the demons? Likewise the Jews and all 
such heretics as confess the Holy Spirit, but deny that He is 
in the body of Christ, which is the Church Catholic, are like 
the Pharisees, who denied that the Holy Spirit was in Christ. 
Some heretics even contend that the Holy Spirit Himself is 
either a creature, as the Arians, Eunomians, and Macedo- 
nians, or deny Him at least in such sort that they may deny 
the Trinity in the Godhead; others assert that the Father 
alone is God, and the same is sometimes spoken of as the 
Son, sometimes as the Holy Spirit, as the Sabellians. . The 
Photinians also say, that the Father only is God, and that 
the Son is nothing more than a man, and deny altogether 
that there is any third Person, the Holy Spirit. It is clear 
then that the Holy Spirit is blasphemed, both by Pagans, 
Jews, and heretics. Are all such then to be left out, and 
looked upon as having no hope? For if the word they have 
spoken against the Holy Spirit is not forgiven them, then in 
vain is the promise made to them, that in Baptism or in the 
Church they should receive the forgiveness of their sins. 
For it is not said, ‘ It shall not be forgiven him in Baptism ;’ 
but, Neither in this world, nor in the world to come; and so 
they alone are to be supposed clear of the guilt of this most 
heavy sin who have been Catholics from their infancy. Some 
again think that they only sin against the Holy Ghost, who 
having been washed in the laver of regeneration in the 
Church, do afterwards, as though ungrateful for such a gift of 
the Saviour, plunge themselves into some deadly sin, such 
as adultery, murder, or quitting the Christian name, or the 
Church Catholic. But whence this meaning can be proved, 
I know not; since place for penitence of sins however great 
was never denied in the Church, and even heretics are. 


2 Tim. exhorted to embrace it by the Apostle. Jf God peradventure 


2, 25. 


worill give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. 


VER. 31, 32. ST. MATTHEW. 457 


Lastly, the Lord says not, ‘ If any Catholic believer,’ but, 
Whoso shall speak a word, that is, whosoever, it shall not be 
Sorgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to come. 

Ip. Otherwise ; The Apostle John says, There is a sin unto Ane: 
death ; I do not say that he shall pray for it. This sin of ° ze Mont 
the brother unto death I judge to be, when any one having! 2 ae rs 
come to the knowledge of God, through the grace of our §, 16. 
Lord Jesus Christ, opposes Himself against the brotherhood, 

or is roused by the fury of jealousy against that grave by 
which he was reconciled to God. The stain of this sin is so 
great, that it may not submit to the humility of prayer, even 
when the sinful conscience is driven to acknowledge and 
proclaim its own sin. Which state of mind because of the 
greatness of their sin we must suppose some may be brought 
to; and this perhaps may be to sin against the Holy Ghost, 
that is through malice and jealousy to assail brotherly charity 
after having received the grace of the Holy Spirit; and this 
sin the Lord declares shall be forgiven neither in this world, 
nor in that to come. Whence it may be enquired whether 
the Jews sinned this sin against the Holy Ghost when they 
said that the Lord cast out demons by Beelzebub the Prince 
of the demons. Are we to suppose this spoken of our Lord 
Himself, because He said in another place, If they have Mat.1o, 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more 
they of his household? Seeing they thus spoke out of 
jealousy, ungrateful for so great present benefits, are they, 
though not Christians, to be supposed by the very greatness 

of that jealousy to have sinned the sin against the Holy 
Spirit? This cannot be gathered from the Lord’s words. 

Yet He may seem to have warned them that they should 
come to grace, and that after that grace received they should 

not sin as they now sinned. For now their evil word had 
been spoken against the Son of Man, but it might be forgiven 
them, if they should be converted, and believe on Him. But 

if after they had received the Holy Spint, they should be 
jealous against the brotherhood, and should fight against 
that grace which they had received, it should not be forgiven 
them neither in this world, nor in the world to come. For 

if He had there condemned them in such sort that no hope 
remained for them, He would not have added an admonition, 


Aug. 
Retract. 
i. 19. 


Aug. 
Serm. 
71.8. 


458 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


Either make the tree good, §c. Tv. But I do not affirm this 
for certain, by saying that [I think thus; yet thus much 
might have been added; If he should close this life in this 
impious hardness of heart, yet since we may not utterly 
despair of any however evil, so long as he is in this life, so 
neither is it unreasonable to pray for him of whom we do 
not despair. Ip. Yet is this enquiry very mysterious. Let 
us then seek the light of exposition from the Lord. I say 
unto you, beloved, that in all Holy Scripture there is not 
perhaps so great or so difficult a question as this. First 
then I request you to note that the Lord said not, Every 


- blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven, nor, 


John 15, 
22. 


Rom. 5, 


1 Pet. 4, 


Jobn 20, 


22. 


Whoso shall speak any word against—but, Whoso shall speak 
the word. Wherefore it is not necessary to think that every 
blasphemy and every word spoken against the Holy Spirit 
shall be without pardon; it is only necessary that there be 
some word which if spoken against the Holy Spirit shall be 
without pardon. For such is the manner of Scripture, that 
when any thing is so declared in it as that it is not declared 
whether it is said of the whole, or a part, it is not necessary 
that because it can apply to the whole, it therefore is not to 
be understood of the part. As when the Lord said to the 
Jews, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not 
had sin, this does not mean that the Jews would have been 
altogether without sin, but that there was a sin they would 
not have had, if Christ had not come. What then is this 
manner of speaking against the Holy Ghost, comes now to 
be explained. Now in the Father is represented to us the 
Author of all things, in the Son birth, in the Holy Spirit 
community of the Father and the Son. What then is com- 
mon to the Father and the Son, through that they would have 
us have communion among ourselves and with them; The love 
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which 
he hath given us, and because by our sins we were alienated 
from the possession of true goods, Charity shall cover the 
multitude of sins. And for that Christ forgives sins through 
the Holy Spirit, hence may be understood how, when He 
said to his disciples, Receive ye the Holy Spirit, He sub- 
joined straight, Whosesoever sins ye forgive, they shall be for- 
given them. The first benefit therefore of them that believe 


VER. 31, 32. ST. MATTHEW. A359 


is forgiveness of sins in the Holy Spirit.. Against this gift of 

free grace the impenitent heart speaks; impenitence itself 
therefore is the blasphemy against the Spirit which shall not 

be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in that to come. For 
indeed he speaks the evil word against the Holy Spirit either 

in his thought, or with his tongue, who by his hard and 
Impenitent heart treasures up for himself wrath against the 

day of wrath. Such impenitence truly has no forgiveness, 
neither in this world nor in the world to come, for penitence 
obtains forgiveness in this world which shall hold in the world 

to come. But that impenitence as long as any lives in the 
flesh may not be judged, for we must despair of none so long 

as the patience of God leads to repentance. For what if those 
whom you discover in any manner of sin, and condemn as 
most desperate, should before they close this life betake 
themselves to penitence, and find true life in the world to 
come? But this kind of blasphemy though it be long, and 
comprised in many words, yet -the Scripture is wont to 
speak of many words as one word. It was more than a 
single word which the Lord spoke with the prophet, and 

yet we read, The word which came unto this or that 
prophet. Here perhaps some may enquire whether the 
Holy Spirit only forgives sins, or the Father and the Son like- 
wise, We answer the Father and the Son hkewise; for the 

Son Himself saith of the Father, Your Father shall forgive Mat. 6, 
you your sins, and He saith of Himself, The Son of Man'# Mat. 9, 
hath power on earth to forgive sins. Why then is that6é. 
impenitence which is never forgiven, spoken of as blasphemy 
against the Holy Spirit only? Forasmuch as he who falls 
under this sin of impenitence seems to resist the gift of the 
Holy Spirit, because in that gift is conveyed remission of 

sin. But sins, because they are not remitted out of the 
Church, must be remitted in that Spirit by which the 
Church is gathered into one. Thus this remission of sins 
which is given by the whole Trinity is said to be the 
proper office of the Holy Spirit alone, for it is He, The Rom. 8, 
Spirit of adoption, in which we cry, Abba Father, so that >: 
to Him we may pray, Forgive us our sins; And hereby 

we know, speaks John, that Christ abideth in us, by) Jobn 
the Holy Spirit which He hath given unto us. For to’ 


460 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


Him belongs that bond by which we are made one body 
of the only-begotten Son of God; for the Holy Spirit 
Himself is in a manner the bond of the Father and the Son. 
Whosoever then shall be found guilty of impenitence against 
the Holy Spirit, in whom the Church is gathered together 
in unity and one bond of communion, it is never remitted 
to him. Curys. Otherwise according to the first exposition. 
The Jews were indeed ignorant of Christ, but of the Holy 
Ghost they had had a sufficient communication, for the 
Prophets spake by Him. What He here saith then is this; 
Be it that ye have stumbled at Me because of the flesh which 
is around Me; but can ye in the same manner say of the 
Holy Spirit, We know Him not? Wherefore this blasphemy 
cannot be forgiven you, and ye shall be punished both here 
and hereafter, for since to cast out demons and to heal 
diseases are of the Holy Spirit, you do not speak evil against 
Me only, but also against Him; and so your condemnation 
is inevitable both here and hereafter. For there are who 
are punished in this life only; as they who among the 
Corinthians were unworthy partakers of the mysteries; 
others who are punished only in the life to come, as the rich 
man in hell; but those here spoken of are to be punished 
both in this world, and in the world to come, as were the 
Jews, who suffered horrible things in the taking of Jerusalem, 
and shall there undergo most heavy punishment. GLoss. 


- This passage destroys that heresy of Origen, who asserted 


that after many ages all sinners should obtain pardon ; for 
it is here said, this shall not be forgiven either in this world, 


‘or in the world to come. Grec. Hence we may gather 
&-. that there are some sins that are remitted in this world, and 


some in the world to come; for what is denied of one sin, 
must be supposed to be admitted of others. And this may 
be believed in the case of trifling faults; such as much idle 
discourse, immoderate laughter, or the sin of carefulness in 
our worldly affairs, which indeed can hardly be managed 
without sin even by one who knows how he ought to avoid 
sin; or sins through ignorance (if they be lesser sins) which 
burden us even after death, if they have not been remitted 
to us while yet in this life. But it should be known that 
none will there obtain any purgation even of the least 


VER. 33—35. ST. MATTHEW. 461 


sin, but he who by good actions has merited the same in 
this life. 


33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good ; 
or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt : 
for the tree is known by his fruit. 

34. O generation of vipers, how can ye, being 
evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speaketh. 

35. A good man out of the good treasure of the 
heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man 
out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. 


Curys. After his former answers He here again refutes cy,,,. 
them in another manner. This He does not in order to do Hom. 
away their charges against Himself, but desiring to amend~ 
them, saying, Either make the tree good and his fruit good, 
or make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt. As much 
as to say, None of you has said that it is an evil thing for 
a man to be delivered from demons. But because they did 
not speak evil of the works, but said that it was the Devil 
that wrought them, He shews that this charge is contrary to 
the common sense of things, and human conceptions. And 
to mvent such charges can only proceed from unbounded 
impudence. JEROME; Thus He holds them in a syllogism 
which the Greeks call ‘ Aphycton,’ the unavoidable ; which 
shuts in the person questioned on both sides, and presses 
him with either hom. If, He saith, the Devil be evil, he 
cannot do good works; so that if the works you see be good, 
it follows that the Devil was not the agent thereof. For it 
cannot be that good should come of evil, or evil of good. 
Crys. For the discerning of a tree is done by its fruits, 
not the fruits by the tree. A tree ts known by its fruits. 
For though the tree is the cause of the fruit, yet the fruit is 
the evidence of the tree. But ye do the very contrary, 
having no fault to allege against the works, ye pass a 
sentence of evil against the tree, saying that I have a 
demon. HuLary; Thus did He at that present refute the 


162 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


Jews, who seeing Christ’s works to be of power more than 
human, would notwithstanding not allow the hand of God. 
And at the same time He convicts all future errors of the 
faith, such as that of those who taking away from the Lord 
His divinity, and communion of the Father's substance, have 
fallen into divers heresies ; having their habitation neither 
under the plea of ignorance as the Gentiles, nor yet within 
the knowledge of the truth. He figures Himself as a tree set 
in the body, seeing that through the inward fruitfulness of 
His power sprung forth abundant richness of fruit. There- 
fore either must be made a good tree with good fruits, or an 
evil tree with evil fruits; not that a good tree is to be made 
a bad tree, or the reverse; but that in this metaphor we may 
understand that Christ is cither to be left in fruitlessness, or 
to be retained in the fruitfulness of good works. But to 
hold one’s self neuter, to attribute some things to Christ, but 
to deny Him those things that are highest, to worship Him 
as God, and yet to deny Him a common substance with the 
Father, is blasphemy against the Spirit. In admiration of 
His so great works you dare not take away the name of God, 
yet through malevolence of soul you debase His high nature 
by denying His participation of the Father’s substance. Avc. 
Or this is an admonition to ourselves that we should be good 
trees that we may be able to bring forth good fruit; Afake 
the tree good, and its fruit good, is a precept of health to which 
obedience is necessary. But what He says, Make the tree 
corrupt, and its fruit corrupt, is not a command to do, but 
a warning to take heed, spoken against those who being evil 
thought that they could speak good things, or have good 
works; this the Lord declares is impossible. The man must 
be changed first, that his works may be changed ; for if the 
man remains in that wherein he is evil, he cannot have good 
works ; if he remains in that wherein he is good, he cannot 
have evil works. Christ found us all corrupt trees, but gave 
power to become sons of God to them that believe on His 
name. CHRys. But as speaking not for Himself but for the 
Holy Spirit, He accordingly rebukes them, saying, Genera- 
tion of vipers, how can ye being evil speak good things? 
This is both a rebuke of them, and a proof in their own 
characters of those things which had been said. As though 


VER, 33—S85. ST. MATTHEW. 163 


He had said, So ye being corrupt trees cannot bring forth 
good fruit. I do not wonder then that you thus speak, for 
you are ill nourished of ill parentage, and have an evil mind. 
And observe He said not, How can ye speak good things, 
seeing ye are a generation of vipers? for these two are not 
connected together; but He said, How can ye being evil 
speak good things? He calls them generation of vipers, 
because they made boast of their forefathers; in order 
therefore to cut off this their pride, He shuts them out of 
the race of Abraham, assigning them a parentage corre- 
sponding to their characters. Ranan. Or the words, Gene- 
ration of vipers, may be taken as signifying children, or 
imitators of the Devil, because they had wilfully spoken 
against good works, which is of the Devil, and thence 
follows, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh. That man speaks out of the abundance of the 
heart who is not ignorant with what intention his words 
are uttered; and to declare his meaning more openly He 
adds, A good man out of the good treasure of his heart 
bringeth forth good things. The treasure of the heart is the 
intention of the thoughts, by which the Judge jndges that 
work which is produced, so that sometimes though the 
outward work that is shewn seem great, yet because of the 
carelessness of a cold heart, they receive a little reward from 
the Lord. Curys. Herein also He shews His Godhead as 
knowing the hidden things of the heart; for not for words 
only, yea but for evil thoughts also they shall receive 
punishment. For it is the order of nature that the store 
of the wickedness which abounds within should be poured 
forth in words through the mouth. Thus when you shall 
hear any speaking evil, you must infer that his wickedness 
is more than what his words express; for what is uttered 
without is but the overflowing of that within; which was 
a sharp rebuke to them. For if that which was spoken by 
them were so evil, consider how evil must be the root from 
whence it sprung. And this happens naturally; for often- 
times the hesitating tongue does not suddenly pour forth all 
its evil, while the heart, to which none other is privy, begets 
whatsoever evil it will, without fear; for it has little fear of 
God. But when the multitude of the evils which are within 


464 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


is increased, the things which had been hidden then burst 
forth through the mouth. This is that He says, Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. JEROME; 
What He says, The good man out of the good treasure of 
his heart, &c. is either pointed against the Jews, that seeing 
they blasphemed God, what treasure in their heart must that 
be out of which such blasphemy proceeded; or it is con- 
nected with what had gone before, that like as a good man 
cannot bring forth evil things, nor an evil man good things, 
so Christ cannot do evil works, nor the Devil good works. 


36. But I say unto you, That every idle word that 
men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in 
the day of judgment. 

37. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and 
by thy words thou shalt be condemned. 


Carys. The Lord follows up what He had said before by 
moving their fears, shewing that they that have thus sinned 
shall receive the most extreme punishment, J say unto you, 
that everg idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an 
account thereof in the day of judgment. JEROME; And the 
meaning is; If every idle word which does not edify the 
hearers is not without danger to him that speaks it, and if 
each man shall render an account of his words in the day of 
judgment, how much more shall you, who have spoken 
falsely against the works of the Holy Spirit, saying that I 
cast out demons through Beelzebub, render an account of 
your false charge? Curys. He said not ‘ which ye have 
spoken, but makes His teaching of universal application 
to the whole race of mankind, and at the same time His 
words less grievous to them that heard them. By an idle 
word is meant one that is false, that accuses any falsely. 
Some indeed say that it includes all light talk, all such as 
stirs immoderate laughter, or shameful and immodest words. 

a e GrReEa@. Or such as lacks either rightness in itself, or reasons 
Ey. vj. Of just necessity; JEROME; being spoken without the profit 
of either the speaker or hearer; as if laying aside weighty 
matters we should speak of frivolous trifles, or relate old 


VER. 38—40. ST. MATTHEW. 465 


fables. For he that deals in buffoon jests to create laughter, 
or brings forth any thing shameful, he will be held guilty 
not of an idle, but of a sinful word. Remic. The words 
which here follow depend on those that went before; By thy 
words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt 
be condemned. There is no doubt but that every man shall 
be condemned for his evil words which he speaks; but none 
shall be justified for his good words, unless they proceed 
from his inmost heart, and from a entire purpose. CHRYS. 
See that this sentence is not a burdensome one. The Judge 
will pass sentence not according to what any other has said 
concerning you, but according to what you have yourself 
spoken. ‘They that are accused then have no need to fear, 
but they that accuse; for those are not charged of those evil 
things that have been spoken of them, but these of those evil 
things that they have spoken. 


38. Then certain of the Scribes and of the Phari- 
sees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign 
from thee. 

39. But he answered and said unto them, An evil 
and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and 
there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the 
prophet Jonas: 

40. For as Jonas was three days and three nights 
in the whale’s belly: so shall the Son of man be three 
days and three nights in the heart of the earth. 


Curys. Because the Lord had so oft repressed the shame- Chrys. 
less tongue of the Pharisees by His sayings, they now turn to ae 
His works, whereat the Evangelist wondering, says, Zhen 
certain of the Scribes and Pharisees answered, saying, 
Master, we would see a sign of thee ; and that at a time when 
they should have been moved, when they should have 
wondered, and been dumb with astonishment; yet even at 
such time they desist not from their malice. For they say, 

We would see a sign of thee, that they may take Him as in 
asnare. JEROME; They require a sign of Him, as though 

VOL. I. 2H 


466 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. NII. 


what they had seen were not signs; and in another Evangelist 
what they required is more fully expressed, We would see of 
thee a sign from heaven. Either they would have fire from 
heaven as Elias did; or after the example of Samuel they 
would that in summer-time, contrary to the nature of the 
climate, thunder should be heard, lightnings gleam, and 
rain descend; as though they could not have spoken falsely 
even against such miracles, and said that they befel by 
reason of divers hidden motions in the air. For if thou 
cavillest against what thou not only beholdest with thine eyes, 
but feelest with thine hand, and reapest the benefit of, what 
wilt thou do in those things which come down from heayen. 
You might make answer, that in Egypt the magi also had 
given many signs from heaven. CuHrys. But their words 
are full of hypocrisy and irony. But now they were railing 
against Him, saying that He had a demon; now they fawn 
upon Him, calling Him, Master. Wherefore the Lord 
rebukes them severely; He answered and said unto them, 
An evil and adulterous generation secketh after a sign. 
When they railed on Him, He had answered them mildly; 
now they approached Him with smooth and deceitful words, 
He rebukes them sharply; shewing that He was above 
either affection, and was neither moved to anger by evil 
speaking, nor was to be gained by flattery. What He says 
is this; What wonder that ye do thus to Me who am un- 
known to you, when you have done the same to the Father, 
of whom ye have had such large knowledge, in that, de- 
spising Him ye went after demons? He calls them an evil 
generation, because they have ever been ungrateful to their 
benefactors, and were made worse when they received 
benefits, which is the extreme of wickedness. JEROME; 
Excellently is that said, and adulterous, seeing she has put 
away her husband, and, according to Ezekiel, has joined 
herself to many lovers. CHRys. Which also proves Him to 
be equal to the Father, if not to believe in Him makes them 
adulterous. Rasan. Then He begins to answer them, 
giving them a sign not from heaven, which they were un- 
worthy to see, but giving it them from the deep beneath. 
But to His own disciples He gave a sign from heaven, to 
whom He shewed the glory of His blessed eternity both in a 


VER. 38—40. 8ST. MATTHEW. 467 


figure on the mount, and after in verity when He was taken 
up into heaven. Wherefore it follows, And there shall no 
sign be given it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas. Curys. 
For the signs He wrought were not in order to move them, 
for He knew that they were hard as stone, but for the profit 
of others. Or because they had not received it when He 
had given them a sign such as they now desired. And a 
sign was given them, when by their own punishment they 
learned His power. This He alludes to when He says, No 
sign shall be given it. As much as to say; I have shewn 
you many mercies; yet none of these has brought you to 
honour My power, which you will then know when you 
shall behold your city thrown down upon the ground in 
punishment. In the mean time He brings in a saying con- 
cerning the Resurrection which they should after understand 
by those things that they should suffer; saying, Except the 
sign of the Prophet Jonas. For venly His Cross would not 
have been believed, unless it had had signs to testify to it. 
But if that were not believed, truly the Resurrection would 
not have been believed. For this reason also He calls this a 
sign, and brings forward a figure thereof, that the verity 
itself may be believed. It follows, As Jonas was three 
days and three nights in the belly of the whale. Rasan. 
He shews that the Jews were as criminal as the Ninevites, 
and that. unless they repented they would be destroyed. 
But like as punishment was denounced against the Ninevites, 
and at the same time a remedy was set before them, so 
neither should the Jews despair of pardon, if at least 
after Christ’s resurrection they should do penitence. For 
Jonas, that is The Dove, or The mourner, is a sign of 
Him on whom the Holy Spirit descended in the form of 
a Dove, and who bare our sorrows. The fish which !s.53,4 
swallowed Jonas in the sea, shews forth the death which 
Christ suffered in the world. Three days and nights was 
the one in the whale’s belly, the other in the tomb; the 
one was cast up on dry land, the other arose in glory. Ava. Aug. De 
Some, not knowing the Scripture manner of speaking, would gy. iit 
interpret as one night those three hours of darkness when ** 
the sun was darkened from the sixth to the ninth hour; and 
as a day in like manner those other three hours in which it was 
2H2 


Aug. De 


Thin. iv. 
6. 


468 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. . 


again restored to the world, from the ninth hour till sunset. 
Then follows the night preceding the sabbath, which if 
we reckon with its own day we shall have thus two days and 
two nights. Then after the sabbath follows the night of 
the sabbath prime, that is of the dawning of the Lord’s 
day on which the Lord arose. Thus we shall only get two 
nights and two days, with this one night to be added if we 
might understand the whole of it, and it could not be shewn 
that that dawn was indeed the latter part of the night. 
So that not even by taking in those six hours, three of 
darkness, and three of restored light, can we establish the 
computation of three days and three nights. It remains 
therefore that we find the explanation in that usual manner 
of Scripture of putting a part for the whole. Jerome; Not 
that He remained three whole days and three nights in 
hell, but that this be understood to imply a part of the pre- 
paration day, and of the Lord’s day, and the whole sabbath 
day. Ava. For that the three days were not three full and 
entire days, Scripture witnesses; the first day is reckoned 
because the latter end of it comes in; and the third day is 
likewise reckoned, because the first part of it is included; 
while the day between, that is the second day, appears in all 
its twenty-four hours, twelve of the night and twelve of the 
day. For the succeeding night up to the dawn when the 
Lord’s resurrection was made known, belongs to the third 
day. For as the first days of creation were, because of man’s 
coming fall, computed from morning to night; so these days 
are because of man’s restoration computed from night to 
morning. Curys. He said not openly that He should rise 


again, because they would have derided him, but hints it 


distantly that even they might believe that He foreknew it. 
He said not in the earth, but in the heart of the earth, 
therein declaring His tomb, and that none might suspect 
that there was only the semblance of death. Therefore 
also He spake of three days, that it should be believed that 
He was dead. But the sign itself proves the truth of it; 
for Jonas was in the whale’s belly not in figure but in deed; 
and surely the .sign..did not. happen.in very deed, if the 
thing signified happened .only in figure. .Wherefore. it _ is 
manifest that they are children of the Devil who follow 


VER. 41, 42. ST. MATTHEW. 469 


Marcion asserting that the passion of Christ was only a 
phantasy. And that He should suffer for them also, though 
’ they would not profit by it, is shewn by that which He 
speaks, that to this generation should be given the sign of 
Jonas the Prophet. 


41. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment 
with this generation, and shall condemn it: because 
they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, 
a greater than Jonas is here. 

42. The queen of the south shall rise up in the 
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: 
for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to 
hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater 
than Solomon is here. 


Curys. That none should think that the same things 
would come to pass now among the Jews, as had of old been 
among the Ninevites; that as Jonas converted them and their 
city was delivered out of danger, so the Jews should be 
converted after the resurrection, the Lord now shews the 
contrary, that they should have no fruit of the benefit of the 
passion, but should suffer moreover grievous things, as 
He signifies below in the example of the demon. But now 
He first shews what just punishment they shall suffer, 
saying, The men of Nineveh shall rise tn gudgment with 
this generation. Remic. The Lord shews in these words 
that there shall be one resurrection of the good and the bad 
against certain heretics, who said that there should be two, 
one of the good, another of the bad. These words likewise 
overthrow that fable of the Jews, who use to say that the 
Resurrection shall be held a thousand years before the 
Judgment; these words clearly proving that the Judgment 
shall ensue straight upon the Resurrection. And shall con- 
demn it. JEROME; Not by a sentence of judgment, but by 
the comparison of their example; as He adds, For they re- 
pented at the preaching of Jonas ; and, behold, a greater than 
Jonas is here. This word ‘ hic’ is to be taken as an adverb 


470 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


Ai 3,of place, not as a pronoun. Jonas (according to the LXX) 


resis 


aieas. 


Ps.45.9. 


preached for three days, I for this so long time; he to the 
Assyrians an unbelieving nation, I to God’s own people 
the Jews; he preached with his voice only, doing no- 
miracles, J, doing so many wonders, am falsely accused as 
Beelzebub. Curys. Yet does not the Lord stay here, but 
adds another denunciation, saying, The queen of the south 
shall rise in the judgment uith this generation, and shall 
condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear 
the wisdom of Solomon. This was yet more than that first. 
Jonas went to them; the queen of the south waited not for 
Solomon to come to her, but herself sought him. Both a 
woman and a barbarian, and dwelling so far away, she was 
not afraid of death in her desire to hear his wise words. This 
woman went to Solomon, I came hither; she rose up from 
the ends of the earth, I go round about your towns and 
villages; he spake of trees and wood, I of unspeakable 
mysteries. JEXOME; So the queen of the south will con- 
demn the Jews in the same manner as the men of Nineveh 
will condemn unbelieving Israel. This is the queen of 
Saba, of whom we read in the book of Kings and Chronicles, 
who leaving her nation and kingdom came through so many 
difficulties to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and brought him 
many gifts. Also in these instances of Nineveh and the 
queen of Saba, the faith of the Gentiles is significantly set 
above that of Israel. Ranan. The Ninevites typify those 
who cease from sin—the queen those that know not to sin; 
for penitence puts away sin, wisdom shuns it. Remi. 
Beautifully is the Church gathered out of the Gentiles 
spoken of as a queen who knows how to rule her ways. 
Of her the Psalmist speaks; The queen stood on thy right 
hand. She is the queen of the south because she abounds 
in the fervour of the Holy Spirit. Solomon, interpreted 


* peaceful,’ signifies Him of whom it is said, He ts our 
peace. 


43. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, 


he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and 
findeth none. 


VER. 43—40. _ ST. MATTHEW. 471 


44. Then he saith, I will return into my house from 
whence I came out ; and when he is come, he findeth 
it empty, swept, and garnished. 

45. Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven 
other spirits more wicked than himself, and they 
enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that 
man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also 
unto this wicked generation. 


Curys. The Lord had said to the Jews, The men of 
Nineveh shall rise in the gudgment with this generation, and 
shall condemn it ; that they should not therefore be careless, 
He tells them that not only in the world to come but 
here also they should suffer grievous things; setting forth 
in a sort of riddle the punishment that should fall upon them; 
whence He says, When the unclean spirit has gone out of a 
man. JEROME; Some suppose that this place is spoken of 
heretics, because the unclean spirit who dwelt in them before 
when they were Gentiles, is cast out before the confession 
of the true faith; when after they went over to heresy, and 
garnished their house with feigned virtues, then it is that the 
Devil, having taken to him other seven evil spirits, returns 
and dwells in them; and their last state becomes worse than 
their first. And indeed heretics are in a much worse condi- 
tion than the Gentiles; for in the heretics was a hope of 
faith, in the Gentiles a war of discord. Yet though this 
exposition has a plausibility and a shew of learning, I am 
doubtful of its truth. For by the concluding words of this, 
whether it be parable or example, Thus shall it be to this 
evil generation, we are compelled to refer it, not to heretics, 
or to men in general, but to the Jewish people. So the 
context of the passage may not shift about loosely and vaguely, 
and be like unmeaning speeches, but may be consistent with 
itself from first to last. ‘The unclean spirit then went out 
from the Jews when they received the Law; and being cast 
out of the Jews, he walked through the wilderness of the 
Gentiles; as it follows, He walketh through dry places seeking 
rest. Remic. He calls the hearts of the Gentiles, dry places, 
as lacking all the moisture of wholesome waters, that is of the 


472 | GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII, 


holy Scriptures, and of spiritual gifts, and strangers to the 
pouring in of the Holy Spirit. Ragan. Or, the dry places 
are the hearts of the faithful, which after they have been 
purged from the weakness of loose thoughts, the crafty lier- 
in-wait tries if by any means he may fix his footsteps there; 
but flying from the chaste spirit, the Devil finds no resting- 
place to his mind but in the heart of the wicked; as it follows, 
and findeth none. Remic. The Devil supposed he should 
have rest for ever among the Gentiles, but it is added, and 
Jjindeth none, because when the Son of God appeared in the 
mystery of His incarnation, the Gentiles believed. JEROME; 
And when they believed on the Lord, the Devil, finding no 
place among the nations, said, J ell return into my house 
whence I came out ; I have the Jews from whom I formerly 
departed. And when he ts come, he findeth it empty, swept, 
and garnished. For the temple of the Jews was empty, and 


Soha 14, had not Christ to dwell therein, He having said, Arise, let us 


is.11,2. 


go hence. Seeing then they had not the protection of Angels, 
and were burdened with the useless observances of the Law, 
and the traditions of the Pharisees, the Devil returns to his 
former dwelling, and, taking to him seven other demons, 
inhabits it as before. And the last state of that nation is worse 
than the first, for they are now possessed by a larger number 
of demons in blaspheming Jesus Christ in their synagogues, 
than they were possessed with in Egypt before they had — 
knowledge of the Law ; for it is one thing to have no belief 
that He should come, another not to receive Him when He is 
come. A number seven-fold is joined with the Devil, either 
because of the sabbath, or from the number of the Holy 
Spirit; that as in Isaiah upon the bud which comes from the 
root of Jesse, seven spirits of virtues are related to have 
descended; so on the other hand an equal number of vices 
should be poured forth upon the Devil. Beautifully then are 
seven spirits said to be taken to him, either because of the 
breaking of the sabbath, or because of the heinous sins which 
are contrary to the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. Curys. 
Or, herein He may be shewing forth their punishment. As 
when damoniacs have been loosed from their infirmity, if 
they after become remiss, they draw upon themselves more 
grievous illusions, so shall it be among you—before ye were 


VER. 43—45. ST. MATTHEW. 473 


possessed by a demon, when you worshipped idols, and slew 

your sons to demons; yet I forsook you not, but cast out 

that demon by the Prophets, and afterwards came Myself 
seeking to punfy you altogether. Since then ye would not 
hearken to me, but have fallen into more heinous crime, (as it 

Is greater wickedness to slay Christ than to slay the Prophets,) 
therefore ye shall suffer more heavy calamities. For what 
befel them under Vespasian and Titus, were much more 
grievous than they had suffered in Egypt, in Babylon, and 
under Antiochus. And this indeed is not all He shews con- 
cerning them, but also that since they were destitute of every 
virtue, they were more fit for the habitation of daemons than 
before. It is reasonable to suppose that these things were 

said not to them only, but also to us. If after being enlight- 

ened and delivered from our former evils, we are again 
possessed by the same wickedness, the punishment of these 
latter sins will be greater than of the first; as Christ spake to 

the paralytic, Behold, thou art made whole, sin not, lest a@ John 5, 
corse thing come upon thee. Rasan. For when any one is!* 
converted to the faith, the Devil is cast out of him in Baptism, 

who driven thence wanders up and down through the dry Greg. 
places, that is, the hearts of the faithful. Grea. The dry places aa 
where no water is are the hearts of the righteous, which by 

the power of discipline are dried from all humours of carnal 

lust. The wet places are the minds of worldly men, which 

the humour of carnal lust fills, and makes watery ; in such 

the Devil imprints his footsteps the more deeply, inasmuch as 

in his wanderings he comes down upon such hearts as upon 

low and marshy ground. Rasan. And returning to his 
house whence he had gone out, he findeth zt empty, of good 
works through slothfulness, seept, that is, of its old vices by 
Baptism, and garnished with feigned virtues through hypo- 
crisy. AuG. So that in these words the Lord signifies that Aug. 
some shall so believe, as not to have strength for the work of = he 4 
continence, and shall return to the world. He tuketh unto == 
him other seven,is to be understood that when any has fallen 

from righteousness, he shall also have hypocrisy. For the 

lust of the flesh being cast out of its wonted works by 
penitence, when it finds not any delights in which it may 

rest, returns the more greedily, and again takes possession of 


Greg. 
Mor. 
vii. 17, 


474 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


the soul, if carelessness has ensued, and there has not been 
introduced as the dweller in the cleansed abode the word of 
God in sound doctrine. And as he will not only have the 
seven vices which are the contraries of the spiritual virtues, 
but will hypocritically feign that he has the virtues, therefore 
his old lust, taking to itself seven other worse, that is, this 
seven-fold hypocrisy, returns to him so as to make the last 
state of that man worse than the former. Grea. For it often 
happens that the soul in the commencement of its progress 
is lifted up, and prides itself on its virtues, that it opens an 
entrance to the adversary who is raging against it, and who 
shews himself the more violent in breaking into it, by how 


much he was grieved at being cast out, though but for a short 
space. 


46. While he yet talked to the people, behold, his 
mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to 
speak with him. | 

47. Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother 
and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak 
with thee. 

48. But he answered and said unto him that told 
him, Who is my mother ? and who are my brethren ? 

49. And he stretched forth his hand toward his 
disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my 
brethren! 

50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father 
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, 
and mother. 


Hivary ; Iccause He had spoken all the aforesaid things 
in the power of His Father’s majesty, therefore the Evangelist 
proceeds to tell what answer He made to one that 
told Him that His mother and His brethren waited for Him 
without; While he yet spake unto the people, his mother and 


Aug. Dehis brethren slood without desiring to see him. Auc. We 


Cons. 
Ev. i. 
40, 


are to understand without doubt that this happened close 
upon the foregoing; for he begins to tell it with the words, 


VER, 46— S50. ST. MATTHEW. 475 


And while he yet spake. What can that yet mean but that 

it was at the very time Ile spake the foregoing things? 
Mark also follows up that which He had said concerning Mark 8, 
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, by saying, dnd there” 
came his mother and his brethren. Luke has not observed 

the order of action here, but has placed this earlier as he 
happened to recollect it. JEROME; From this is taken one Hieron. 
of Helvidius’s propositions, on the ground that mention is Helvid. 
made in the Gospel of the brethren of the Lord. How, 4, et 
says he, are they called brethren of the Lerd, if they were" 
not his brethren? But now it should be known that in- 
divine Scripture men are said to be brethren in four different 
ways, by nature, by nation, by kindred, and by affection. 

By nature, as Esau and Jacob. By nation, as all Jews are 
called brethren, as in Deuteronomy, Thou shalt not set over Deut. 
thee a foreigner who is not thy brother. They are called eee 
brethren by kindred who are of one family, as in Genesis, 
Abraham said unto Lot, Let there not be strife between ce 
thee and me, for we are brethren. Also men are called © 
brethren by affection; which is of two kinds, special and 
general. Special, as all Christians are called brethren, as 

the Saviour says, Go tell my brethren. General, inasmuch John20, 
as all men are born of one father, we are bound together 

by a tle of consanguinity, as in that, Say unto them that - i 5. 
hate you, Ye are our brethren. I ask then, after which man- LXX. 
ner these are called the Lord’s brethren in the Gospel? 
According to nature? But Scripture saith not, neither calling 

them sons of Mary nor of Joseph. By nation: but it is 
absurd that some few out of all the Jews should be called 
brethren, seeing that all the Jews who were there might 

have thus been called brethren. By affection, either of a 
human sort, or of the Spirit? If that be true, yet how were 

they more His brethren than the Apostles, whom He in- 
structed in the inmost mysteries. Or if because they were 

men, and all men are brethren, it was foolish to say of them 

in particular, Behold, thy brethren seek thee. It only re- 
mains then that they should be His brethren by kindred, 

not by affection, not by privilege of nation, not by nature. 

Ip. But some suspect the brethren of the Lord to be sons of! TOR 
Joseph by another wife, following the idle fancies of apo-— oF 


476 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XII. 


cryphal writers, who have coined a certain woman called Esca. 
But we understand by the brethren of the Lord, not the sons of 
Joseph, but cousins of the Saviour, sons of a sister of Mary, an 
aunt of Our Lord, who is said to be the mother of James the 


it Less, and Joseph, and Jude, whom in another place of the 


Chrys. 


Hon. 
xiiv. 


Gospel we find called the brethren of the Lord. And that 
cousins are called brethren, appears from every part of 
Scripture. Curys. But mark the loftiness of His brethren’; 
when they should have come in and hearkened with the 
crowd, or if they would not this, to have waited the end of 
His speech, and then to have approached Hiin—they on the 
contrary call Him out to them, aud do this before the multi- 
tude, therein shewing their superabundant love of honour, 
and also, that with all authority they lay their commands 
upon Christ. This the Evangelist covertly hints when he 
says, While he yet spake; as much as to say, Was there no 
other time? But what did they seek to say? Was it aught 
of the dogmas of truth? then should they have brought it 
forth before all, that all might profit thereby. But if of other 
things that concerned themselves alone, they should not have 
called Him in such haste, whence it is plain that they did 


Aug. De this out of vain glory. AuG. But whatever may be decided 


Nat. et 


Grat.36, Concerning these brethren, yet concerning the holy Virgin 


Mary, (for the honour of Christ,) when sin in her is in 
question, I would not have it brought into doubt. For 
from this only we might know that more abundant grace was 


_ conferred upon her that she should overcome sin on all 


sides, because she merited to conceive and bring forth Him 
Who it is clear had no sin. It follows; Then said one unto 
him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without 
seeking thee. JEROME; He that delivers this message, seems 
to me not to do it casually and without meaning, but as set- 
ting a snare for Him, whether He would prefer flesh and blood 
to the spiritual work; and thus the Lord refused to go out, not 
because He disowned His mother and His brethren, but that 
He might confound him that had laid this snare for Him. 
Curys. For He said not, Go and say unto her, She is not My 
mother, but continues His discourse to him that had brought 
Him word; as it follows; But he answered and said unto him 
4 The text of S. Chrys. haz dpa youy wal aves xal latinas city dwrircsas 


VER. 46—50. . ST. MATTHEW. 477 


that told him, Whois my mother ? and who are my brethren ? 
Hivary; And He cannot be held to have thought meanly of 

His mother, seeing that in His passion He evinced the most 
extreme carefulness for her. Curys. But had He desired to 
disown His mother, He would have done it at the time when 

the Jews cast His birth in His teeth. JrERoME; He did not 
then, as Marcion and Manicheus say, disown His mother, so 

as to be thought to be born of a phantasm, but He preferred 

His Apostles to His kindred, that we also in a comparison 

of our affections should set the spirit before the flesh. 
AMBROSE ; Nor docs He overthrow the duty of filial submis- Ambros, 
sion, which is conveyed in the command, Honour thy father § oi" 
and thy mother, but shews that He owes more to the myste- Ex. 20, 
ries and relationship of His Father, than of His mother; asit ~ 
follows, And stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said, 
Behold my mother and my brethren. Grecory; The Lord Greg. | 
deigned to call faithful disciples His brethren, saying, Go, tell eta 
my brethren. Since then a man may be made a brother of the 

Lord by coming to the faith, it should be enquired how one 

may become also His mother. Be it known by us then, that 

he that by believing is made brother or sister of Christ, 
becomes His mother by preaching; for in pouring Him into the 

heart of the hearer, he may be said to beget the Lord; and 

he is made the Lord’s mother, when by his word love of the 
Lord is begotten in the mind of his neighbour. Carys. And 
besides what has been said, He taught also somewhat more, 
namely, that we should not neglect virtue relying on any 
kindred. For if it profited His mother nothing that she was 
such, if she had not had virtue, who is there that shall be 
saved by his kindred? For there is one only nobility, to do 

the will of God, and therefore it follows, Whoso shall do the 

will of my Father which isin heaven, the same is my brother, 

and sister, and mother. Many women have blessed that holy 
Virgin and her womb, and have desired to be made such 
mothers. What is it then that hinders? Behold, He hath set 
before you a broad way, and not women only, but men 
likewise, may become the mother of God. JEROME; Let us 

also expound in another way. ‘The Saviour is speaking to 

the multitude—that is, He teaches the Gentiles the inward ° 
mysteries; His mother and His brethren, that is the synagogue 


478 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. CHAP. XII. 


and the Jewish people, stand without. Huitary; Although 
they had like the rest power to come im, yet they abstain from 


John 1, all approach to Him, for he came unto his own, and his own 


G reg. 


received him not. GREGORY; Thus also His mother is 


ubi sup- declared to stand without, as though she was not acknow- 


ledged, because the synagogue is therefore not acknowledged 
by its Author, because it held to the observance of the 
Law, and having lost the spiritual discernment thereof, kept 
itself without to guard the letter. JEROME; And when they 
shall have asked and enquired, and sent a messenger, they 
shall receive for answer, that their will is free, and that they 
can enter in, if they will believe. 


CHAP. XIII. 


1. The same day went Jesus out of the house, and 
sat by the sea side. 

2. And great multitudes were gathered together 
unto him, so that he went into a ship, and sat; and 
the whole multitude stood on the shore. 

3. And he spake many things unto them in 
parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow; 

4. And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the way 
side, and the fowls came and devoured them up: 

5. Some fell upon stony places, where they had 
not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, 
because they had no deepness of earth: 

6. And when the sun was up, they were scorched ; 
and because they had no root, they withered away. 

7. And some fell among thorns; and the thorns 
sprung up, and choked them : 

8. But other fell into good ground, and brought 
forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some 
thirtyfold. 

9. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 


Curys. When He had rebuked him that told Him of His 
mother and His brethren, He then did according to their 
request ; He departed out of the house, having first corrected 
His brethren for their weak desire of vainglory; He then 
paid the honour due to His mother, as it is said, The same 
day Jesus went forth out of the house, and sat down by the 


480 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


Aug. Desea side. Avuc. By the words, The same day, he sufficiently 
Evii4],Shews that these things either followed immediately upon 
what had gone before, or that many things could not have 
intervened; unless indeed ‘ day’ here after the Scripture 
manner signifies a period. RaBAN. For not only the Lord’s 
words and actions, but His journeyings also, and the places 
in which He works His mighty works and preaches, are full 
of heavenly sacraments. After the discourse held in the 
house, wherein with wicked blasphemy He had been said 
to have a demon, He went out and taught by the sea, to 
signify that having left Judza because of their sinful un- 
belief, He would pass to the salvation of the Gentiles. For 
the hearts of the Gentiles, long proud and unbelieving, are 
rightly likened to the swelling and bitter waves of the sea. 
And who knows not that Judea was by faith the house of 
the Lord. JEROME; For it must be considered, that the 
multitude could not enter into the house to Jesus, nor be 
there where the Apostles heard mysteries; therefore the 
Lord in mercy to them departed out of the honse, and sat 
near the sea of this world, that great numbers might be 
gathered to Him, and that they might hear on the sea shore 
what they were not worthy to hear within; dnd great 
multitudes were gathered unto him, so that he went into 
a ship, and sat down, and all the people stood on the shore. 
Curys. The Evangelist did not relate this without a pur- 
pose, but that he might shew the Lord’s will therein, who 
desired so to place the people that He should have none 
behind Him, but all should be before His face. Hu1Lary; 
There is moreover a reason in the subject of His discourse 
why the Lord should sit in the ship, and the multitude stand 
on the shore. For He was about to speak in parables, and by 
this action signifies that they who were without the Church 
could have no understanding of the Divine Word. The 
ship offers a type of the Church, within which the word of 
life is placed, and is preached to those without, and who as 
being barren sand cannot understand it. JEROME; Jesus is 
in the midst of the waves; He is beaten to and fro by the 
_ waves, and, secure in His majesty, causes His vessel to come 
nigh the land, that the people not being in danger, not being 
surrounded by temptations which they could not endure, 


VER. 1—9. ST. MATTHEW. 48] 


might stand on the shore with a firm step, to hear what was 
said. RaBAN. Or, that He went into a ship and sat on the 
sea, signifies that Christ by faith should enter into the hearts 
of the Gentiles, and should gather together the Church in 
the sea, that is in the midst of the nations that spake against 
Him. And the crowd that stood on the sea shore, neither in 
the ship nor in the sea, offers a figure of those that receive 
the word of God, and are by faith separated from the sea, 
that 1s from the reprobate, but are not yet imbued with 
heavenly mysteries. It follows; And he spake many things 
unto them in parables. Crys. He had not done thus on 
the mount; He had not framed His discourse by parables. 
For there were the multitudes only, and a mixed crowd; 
but here the Scribes and Pharisees. But He speaks in 
parables not for this reason only, but to make His sayings 
plainer, and fix them more fully in the memory, by bringing 
things before the eyes. JEROME; And it is to be noted, that 
He spake not all things to them in parables, but many things, 
for had He spoken all things in parables, the people would have 
departed without benefit. He mingles things plain with things 
dark, that by those things which they understand they may be 
incited to get knowledge of the things they understand not. 
The multitude also is not of one opinion, but of divers wills 
in divers matters, whence He speaks to them in many para- 
bles, that each according to their several dispositions may 
receive some portion of His teaching. Curys. He first sets. 
forth a parable to make His hearers more attentive; and 
because He was about to speak enigmatically, He attracts the 
attention by this first parable, saying, Behold, a sower went 
forth to sow his seed. JEROME; By this sower is typified 
the Son of God, who sows among the people the word of 
the Father. Curys. Whence then went out He who is 
every where present, and how went He out? Not in place; 
but by His incarnation being brought nearer to us by the 
garb of the flesh. Forasmuch as we because of our sins could 
not enter in unto Him, He therefore came forth to us. 
RaBan, Or, He went forth, when having left Judea, He passed 
by the Apostles to the Gentiles. JxRomME; Or, He was 
within while He was yet in the house, and spake sacraments 
to His disciples. He went therefore forth from the house, 
VOL. I. 21 


Is. 5, 4. 


482 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII: 


that He might sow seed among the multitudes. Curys. 
When you hear the words, the sower went out to sow, do not 
suppose that is a tautology. For the sower goes out often- 
times for other ends; as, to break up the ground, to pluck up 
noxious weeds, to root up thorns, or perform any other 
species of industry, but this man went forth to sow. What 
then becomes of that seed? three parts of it perish, and one 
is preserved; but not all in the same manner, but with a 
certain difference, as it follows, And as he sowed, some fell 
by the wayside. JEROME; This parable Valentinus lays hold 
of to establish his heresy, bringing in three different natures ; 
the spiritual, the natural or the animal, and the earthly. 
But there are here four named, one by the wayside, one 
stony, one thorny, and a fourth the good ground. Currys. 
Next, how is it according to reason to sow seed among 
thorns, or on stony ground, or by the wayside? Indeed in the 
material seed and soil of this world it would not be reason- 
able; for it is impossible that rock should become soil, or 
that the way should not be the way, or that thorns should not 
be thorns. But with minds and doctrines it is otherwise ; 
there it is possible that the rock be made rich soil, that the 
way should be no more trodden upon, and that the thorns 
should be extirpated. That the most part of the seed then 
perished, came not of him that sowed, but of the soil that 
received it, that is the mind. For He that sowed put no 
difference between rich and poor, wise or foolish, but spoke 
to all alike; filling up his own part, though foreseeing all 
things that should come to pass, so that He might say, What 
ought I to have done that I have not done? He does not pro- 
nounce sentence upon them openly and say, this the indolent 
received and have lost it, this the rich and have choked it, 
this the careless and have lost it, because He would not 
harshly reprove them, that He might not alienate them alte- 
gether. By this parable also He instructs His disciples, that 
though the greater part of those that heard them were sueh 
as perished, yet that they should not therefore be remise ; for 
the Lord Himself who foresaw all things, did not on this 
account desist from sowing. JEROME; Note that this is the 
first parable that has been given with its interpretation, and 
we must beware where the Lord expounds His own teach- 


VER. 10—17. ST. MATTHEW. 483 


ings, that we do not presume to understand any thing either 
more or less, or any way otherwise than as so expounded by 
Him. Rasan. But those things which He silently left to our 
understanding, should be shortly noticed. The wayside is the 
- mind trodden and hardened by the continual passage of evil 
thoughts; the rock, the hardness of the self-willed mind ; 
the good soil, the gentleness of the obedient mind ; the sun, 
the heat of a raging persecution. The depth of soil, is the 
honesty of a mind trained by heavenly discipline. But in 
thus expounding them we should add, that the same things 
are not always put in one and the same allegorical significa- 
tion. JEROME; And we are excited to the understanding of 
His words, by the advice which follows, He that hath ears 
to hear, let him hear. Remic. These ears to hear, are ears 
of the mind, to understand namely and do those things which 
are commanded. 


10. And the disciples came, and said unto him, 
Why speakest thou unto them in parables ? 

11. He answered and said unto them, Because it is 
given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom 
of heaven, but to them it is not given. 

12. For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and 
he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath 
not, from him shall be taken away even that he 
hath. 

13. Therefore speak I to them in parables: because 
they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, nei- 
ther do they understand. 

14. And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, 
which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not 
understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not 
perceive : 

15. For this people’s heart is waxed gross, and 
their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they 
have closed: lest at any time they should see with 
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should under- 

212 


Gloss. 


ap. An- 


selm. 


Chrys. 
om. 
xlv. 


484 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


stand with their heart, and should be converted, and 
I should heal them. 

16. But blessed are your eyes, for they see: and 
your ears, for they hear. 

17. For verily I say unto you, That many prophets 
and righteous men have desired to see those things 
which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear 
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. 


Gtoss. The disciples understanding that the things which 
were spoken by the Lord to the people were obscure, desired 
to hint to Him that He should not speak in parables to them. 
And his disciples came to him, and said, Why speakest thou 
to them in parables? Currys. Wherein itis worthy admira- 
tion, that the disciples who desire to learn of Him, know 
when they ought to ask Him, for they do not this before the 
multitude. This Matthew declares, when he says, And they 


conn 4, came to him; and Mark more expressly says, that they came to 


Deut. 
33, 3. 


him when he was alone. JEROME; We must enquire how they 
could come to Him at that time when Jesus was sitting in the 
ship; we may understand that they had at the first entered into 
the ship, and standing there, made this enquiry of Him. Remia. 
The Evangelist therefore says, came to him, to express that 
they eagerly enquired of Him; or they might indeed approach 
Him bodily, though the space between them was small. 
Curys. And observe moreover their goodness, how great 
their thought for others, that they enquire about what con- 
cerns others, before what relates to themselves. For they say 
not, ‘Why speakest thou to us in parables?’ but to them. 
And he answered and said unto them, Because it is given to 
you to know the mystery of the kingdom of heaven. Remi. 
To you, I say, who adhere to Me, and believe in Me. By the 
mystery of the kingdom of heaven, He intends the Gospel 
doctrine. To them, that is, to them that are without, and 
who would not believe on Him, the Scribes namely and Pha- 
risecs, and to the rest who continue in unbelief, it is not 
given. Let us then, with the disciples, come unto the Lord 
with a pure heart, that He may think us worthy to interpret 
to us the cvangelic teaching ; according to that, They who 


VER. 10—17. ST. MATTHEW. 485 


draw near to his feet, shall receive of his doctrine. Curys. 
In saying this, He does not imply any necessity or fate, but 
shews at once, that they, to whom it is not given, are the 
-cause of all their own miseries, and yet that the knowledge 
of the Divine mysteries is the gift of God, and a grace given 
from above. Yet this does not destroy free will, as is mani- 
fest from what follows ; for to prevent that either these should 
despair, or those be remiss, when they hear that to you it is 
given, He shews that the beginning of all lays with ourselves, 
and then He adds, For whoso hath, to him shall be given, and 
he shall abound; and whoso hath not, from him shall be 
taken what he hath. As much as to say, Whoso has the 
desire and the zeal, to him shall be given all those things _ 
which are of God; but whoso lacketh these, and does not con- 
tribute that part that pertains to him, to him neither are the 
things which are of God given, but even those things that he 
hath are taken from him; not because God takes them away, 
but because he hath made himself unworthy of those that he 
has. Wherefore we also, if we see any hearkening carelessly, 
and having exhorted him to attend, he do not heed us, let us 
be silent ; for should we persevere in urging him, his sloth- 
fulness will be the more charged against him. But him that 
is zealous to learn, we draw onwards, pouring forth many 
things. And He well said according to another Evangelist, 
That which he seemeth to have; for, in truth, he has not even Luke 8, 
that he has. Remic. He that has a desire to read, shall have oe 
given to him power to understand, and whoso has not desire 
to read, that understanding which by the bounty of nature 
he seems to have, even that shall be taken from him, Or, 
whoso has charity, to him shall be given the other virtues 
also; and from bim who has not charity, the other virtues 
likewise shall be taken away, for without charity there can 
be nothing good. JEROME; Or, To the Apostles who believe 
in Christ there is given, but from the Jews who believed not 
on the Son of God there is taken away, even whatever good 
they might seem to have by nature. For they cannot under- 
stand any thing with wisdom, seeing they have not the head 
of wisdom. Huitary; For the Jews not having faith, have lost 
also the Law which they had; and Gospel faith has the perfect 
gift, inasmuch as if received it enriches with new fruit, if 


John 9, 
16. 


«As. 6, 9. 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


486 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIFI. 


rejected it subtracts from the riches of ancient possession. 
Curys. But that what He had said might be made more 
manifest He adds, Therefore speak I unto them in parables, 
because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither 
do they understand. Had this been a natural blindness, He 
ought to have opened their eyes; but forasmuch as it 1s 
voluntary, therefore He said not simply, * They see not,’ but, 
Seeing they see not. For they had seen the demons going 
out, and they said, He casts out demons by Beelzebub; they 
heard that He drew all men to God, and they say, This man 
is not of God. Therefore because they spake the very 
contrary to what they saw and heard, to see and to hear 
is taken from them; for they profit nothing, but rather fall 
under judgment. For this reason He spake to them at first 
not in parables, but with much clearness; but because they 
perverted all they saw and heard, He now speaks in parables. 
Remic. And it should be noted, that not only what He spake, 
but also what He did, were parables, that is, signs of things 
spiritual, which He clearly shews when He says, That seeing 
they may not see; but words are heard and not seen. JEROME; 
This He says of those who were standing on the shore, and 
separated from Jesus, and who because of the dashing of the 
waves heard not distinctly what was said. CuHrrs. And 
that they should not say, He slanders us as an enemy, He 
brings forward the Prophet declaring the same opinion, as 
it follows, Thal there might be fulfilled in them the prophecy 
of Isaiah, who said, With the hearing ye shall hear and shall 
not understand, and seeing ye shall see and shall not behold. 
Goss. That is; With the hearing ye shall hear words, but 
shall not understand the hidden meaning of those words; 
seeing ye shall see My flesh indeed, but shall not discern 
the divinity. Crrys. This He said because they had taken 
away their own sight and hearing, shutting their eyes, and 
hardening their hearts. For not only did they not hear 
at all, but they heard obtusely, as it follows, The heart of 
this people is waxed gross, and they have heard hardly with 
their ears. Rasan. The heart of the Jews is made gross 
with the grossness of wickedness, and through the abundance 
of their sins they hear hardly the Lord’s words, because 
they have received them ungratefully. Jerome; And that 


VER. 10—17. ST. MATTHEW. 487 


we should not suppose that this grossness of the heart and 
heaviness of the ears is of nature, and not of choice, He 
adds the fruit of their own wilfulness, For they have shut 
their eyes. Currys. Herein He points out how extreme 
their wickedness, how determined their aversion. Again 

to draw them towards Him, He adds, And be converted, and 

I should heal them; which shews that if they would be 
converted, they should be healed. As if one should say, If 

he would ask me I would immediately forgive him, this 
would point out how he might be reconciled; so here when 

He says, Lest they should be converted and I should heal 
them, He shews that it was possible they should be converted, 
and having done penitence should be saved. Ave. Otherwise; Aug. 
They have shut their eyes lest they should see with their aera 
eyes, that is, themselves were the cause that God shut their. 14. 
eyes. For another Evangelist says, He hath blinded their 
eyes. But is this to the end that they should never see? Or 
that they should not see so much as this, that becoming 
discontent with their own blindness and bewailing them- 
selves, should so be humbled, and moved to confession 

of their sins and pious seeking after God. For Mark thus 
expresses the same thing, Lest they should be converted, and 
their sins should be forgiven them. From which we learn, 
that by their sins they deserved not to understand ; and that 
yet this was allowed them in mercy that they should confess 
their sins, and should turn, and so merit to be forgiven. 
But when John relating this expresses it thus, There- John12, 
fore they could not believe because Esaias said again, He** 
hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that 
they should not see with their eyes, and understand with 
their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them, this 
seems to be opposed to this interpretation, and to compel us 

to take what is here said, Lest they should see with their 
eyes, not as though they might come to see after this fashion, 
but that they should never see at all; for he says it plainly, 
That they should not see with their eyes. And that he says, 
Therefore they could not believe, sufficiently shews that the 
blindness was not inflicted, to the end that moved thereby, 
and grieving that they understood not, they should be con- 
verted through penitence; for that they could not, unless 


Acts 2, 
37. 


488 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


they had first believed, and by believing had been converted, 
and by conversion had been healed, and having been healed 
understood; but it rather shews that they were therefore 
blinded that they should not believe. For he speaks most 
clearly, Therefore they could not believe. But if it be so, 
who would not rise up in defence of the Jews, and pro- 
nounce them to be free from all blame for their unbelief? 
For, Therefore they could not believe, because he hath blinded 
their eyes. But because we must rather believe God to be 
without fault, we are driven to confess that by some other 
sins they had thus deserved to be blinded, and that indeed 
this blinding prevented them from believing; for the words 
of John are these, They could not believe, because that Esatras 
said again, He hath blinded their eyes. It is in vain then to 
endeavour to understand it that they were therefore blinded 
that they should be converted; seeing they could not be 
converted because they believed not; and they could not 
believe because they were blinded. Or perhaps we should 
not say amiss thus—that some of the Jews were capable of 
being healed, but that being puffed up with so great swelling 
pride, it was good for them at first that they should not 
believe, that they might understand the Lord speaking in 
parables, which if they did not understand they would not 
believe; and thus not believing on Him, they together with 
the rest who were past hope crucified Him; and at length 
after His resurrection, they were converted, when humbled 
by the guilt of His death they loved Him the more because 
of the heavy guilt which had been forgiven them ; for their 
so great pride needed such an humiliation to overcome it. 
This might indeed be thought an inconsistent explanation, 
did we not plainly read in the Acts of the Apostles that thus 
it was. This then that John says, Therefore they could not 
believe, because he hath blinded their eyes that they should 
nol see, is not repugnant to our holding that they were there- 
fore blinded that they should be converted; that is to say, 
that the Lord’s meaning was therefore purposely clothed in 
the obscurities of parables, that after His resurrection they 
might turn them to wisdom with a more healthy penitence. 
For by reason of the darkness of His discourse, they being 
blinded did not understand the Lord's sayings, and not 


VER. 10—17. ST. MATTHEW. 489 


understanding them, they did not believe on Him, and not 
believing on Him they crucified Him; thus after His resur- 
rection, terrified by the miracles that were wrought in His 
name, they had the greater compunction for their great sin, 

and were more prostrated in penitence; and accordingly 
after indulgence granted they turned to obedience with a 
more ardent affection. Notwithstanding, some there were to 
whom this blinding profited not to conversion. Remic. In 

all the clauses the word ‘ not’ must be understood; thus; 
That they should not see with their eyes, and should not 
hear with their ears, and should not understand with their 
heart, and should not be converted, and I should heal them. 
GLoss. So then the eyes of them that see, and will not believe, Gloss. 
are miserable, but your eyes are blessed; whence it follows eae 
Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they 
hear. JEROME; If we had not read above that invitation to 

his hearers to understand, when the Saviour said, He that 
hath ears to hear let him hear, we might here suppose that 

the eyes and ears which are now blessed are those of the 
body. But I think that those eyes are blessed which can 
discern Christ’s sacraments, and those ears of which Isaiah Is.50, 4. 
speaks, Zhe Lord hath given me an ear. Gtoss. The mind Gloss. 
is called an eye, because it is intently directed upon what? 
is set before it to understand it; and an ear, because it 
learns from the teaching of another. Huitary; Or, He 

is speaking of the blessedness of the Apostolic times, 

to whose eyes and ears it was permitted to see and to hear 

the salvation of God, many Prophets and just men having 
desired to see and to hear that which was destined to be in the 
fulness of times ; whence it follows; Verily I say unio you, 
that many Prophets and just men have desired to see the 
things that ye see, and to hear the things that ye hear, and 
have not heard them. JEROME; This place seems to be 
contradicted by what is said elsewhere. Abraham rejoiced John 8, 
to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. RaBan. Also oe 
Isaiah and Micah, and many other Prophets, saw the glory of 

the Lord; and were thence called ‘seers... JEROME; But He 

said not, ‘The Prophets and the just men,’ but many; for 

out of the whole number, it may be that some saw, and others 

saw not. But as this is a perilous interpretation, that we 


1 conve- 
scimini. 


490 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


should seem to be making a distinction between the merits 
of the saints, at least as far as the degree of their faith 
in Christ, therefore we may suppose that Abraham saw in 
enigma, and not in substance. But ye have truly present 
with you, and hold, your Lord, enquiring of Him at your 
will, and eating with Him’. Curys. These things then which 
the Apostles saw and heard, are such as His presence, His 
voice, His teaching. And in this He sets them before not 
the evil only, but even before the good, pronouncing them 
more blessed than even the righteous men of old. For they 
saw not only what the Jews saw not, but also what the 
righteous men and Prophets desired to see, and had not seen. 
For they had beheld these things only by faith, but these by 
sight, and even yet more clearly. You see how He identifies 
the Old Testament with the New, for had the Prophets been 
the servants of any strange or hostile Deity, they would not 
have desired to see Christ. 


18. Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. 

19. When any one heareth the word of the king- 
dom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the 
wicked one, and catcheth away that which was sown 
in his heart. This is he which received seed by the 
way side. 

20. But he that received the seed into stony places, 
the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with 
joy receiveth it; 

21. Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for 
a while: for when tribulation or persecution ariseth 
because of the word, by and by he is offended. 

22. He also that received seed among the thorns 
is he that heareth the word; and the care of this 
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, 
and he becometh unfruitful. 

23. But he that received seed into the good ground 
is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; 
which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an 
hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty. 


VER. 18—23. ST. MATTHEW. 491 


Gtoss. He had said above, that it was not given to the Gloss. 
Jews to know the kingdom of God, but to the Apostles, and eas 
therefore He now concludes, saying, Hear ye therefore the 
parable of the sower, ye to whom are committed the myste- 
ries of heaven. Ava. It is certain that the Lord spoke the Aug. De 
things which the Evangelist has recorded; but what the Cee 
Lord spake was a parable, in which it is never required that 
the things contained should have actually taken place. 
Goss. He proceeds then expounding the parable; Every Gloss. 
man who hears the word of the kingdom, that is, My preach- ia 
ing which avails to the acquiring the kingdom of heaven, and 
understandeth it not; how he understands it not, is explained 
by, for the evil one—that is the Devil—cometh and taketh 
away that which is sown tn his heart; every such man is 
that which is sown by the way side. And note that that 
which is sown, is taken in different senses; for the seed is 
that which is sown, and the field is that which is sown, both 
of which are found here. For where He says carrieth away 
that which is sown, we must understand it of the seed; that 
which follows, zs sown by the tcay side, is to be understood 
not of the seed, but of the place of the seed, that is, of the 
man, who is as it were the field sown by the seed of the Divine 
word. Remic. In these words the Lord explains what the 
seed is, to wit, the word of the kingdom, that is of the Gos- 
pel teaching. For there are some that receive the word of 
the Lord with no devotion of heart, and so that seed of God's 
word which is sown in their heart, is by demons straight- 
way carried off, as it were the seed dropped by the way side. 

It follows, That which is sown upon the rock, ts he that : 
heareth the word, &c. For the seed or word of God, 
which is sown in the rock, that is,in the hard and un- 
tamed heart, can bring forth no fruit, inasmach as its 
hardness is great, and its desire of heavenly things small; 
and because of this great hardness, it has no root in itself. 
JEROME; Note that which is said, 7s straightway offended. 
There is then some difference between him who, by many 
tribulations and torments, is driven to deny Christ, and him 
who at the first persecution is Offended, and falls away, of 
which He proceeds to speak, That which 1s sown among 
thorns. To me He seems here to express figuratively that 


492 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


Gon: 3, which was said literally to Adam ; Amidst briers and thorns 
thou shalt eat thy bread, that he that has given himself up to 
the delights and the cares of this world, eats heavenly bread 
and the true food among thorns. Rasan. Rightly are they 
called thorns, because they lacerate the soul by the prickings 
of thought, and do not suffer it to bring forth the spiri- 
tual fruit of virtue. JEROME; And it is elegantly added, 
The deceitfulness of riches choke the word; for riches are 
treacherous, promising one thing and doing another. The 
tenure of them is slippery as they are borne hither and 
thither, and with uncertain step forsake those that have 
them, or revive those that have them not. Whence the 
Lord asserts, that rich men hardly enter into the kingdom of 
heaven, because their riches choke the word of God, and 
relax the strength of their virtues. Remic. And it should 
be known, that in these three sorts of bad soil are compre- 
hended all who can hear the word of God, and yet have not 
strength to bring it forth unto salvation. The Gentiles are 
excepted, who were not worthy even to hear it. It follows, 
That which is sown on the good ground. The good ground is 
the faithful conscience of the elect, or the spirit of the saints 
which receives the word of God with joy and desire and 
devotion of heart, and manfully retains it amid prosperous 
and adverse circumstances, and brings it forth in fruit; as 
it follows, And brings forth fruit, some a hundred-fold, some 
sixzty-fold, some thirty-fold. JEROME; And it is to be noted, 
that as in the bad ground there were three degrees of dif- 
ference, to wit, that by the way side, the stony and the 

- thorny ground; so in the good soil there is a three-fold 
difference, the hundred-fold, the sixty-fold, and the thirty- 
fold. And in this as in that, not the substance but the will 
is changed, and the hearts as well of the unbelieving as 
the believing receive seed; as in the first case He said, 
Then cometh the wicked one, and carrieth off that which 
ts sown in the heart; and in the second and third case 
of the bad soil He said, 7hzs is he that heareth the word. 
So also in the exposition of the good soil, This is he that 
heareth the word. ‘Therefore we ought first to hear, then to 
understand, and after understanding to bring forth the fruits 
of teaching, either an hundred-fold, or sixty, or thirty. 


VER. 18—23. ST. MATTHEW. 493 


Ava. Some think that this is to be understood as though Aug. De 
the saints according to the degree of their merits delivered he 
some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred persons; and this 

they usually suppose will happen on the day of judgment, 

not after the judgment. But when this opinion was observed 

to encourage men in promising themselves impunity, be- 
cause that by this means all might attain to deliverance, 

it was answered, that men ought the rather to live well, that 

each might be found among those who were to intercede 

for the liberation of others, lest these should be found to be 

so few that they should soon have exhausted the number 
allotted to them, and thus there would remain many un- 
rescued from torment, among whom might be found all such 

as in most vain rashness bad promised themselves to reap 

the fruits of others. Remic. The thirty-fold then is borne 

of him who teaches faith in the Holy Trinity; the sixty-fold 

of him who enforces the perfection of good works; (for in the 
number six this world was completed with all its equipments;) Gen.2,1. 
while he bears the hundred-fold who promises eternal life. 

For the number one hundred passes from the left band to 

the right; and by the left hand the present life is denoted, 

by the right hand the life to come. Otherwise, the seed of 

the word of God brings forth fruit thirty-fold when it begets 

good thoughts, sixty-fold when good speech, and an hun- 
dred-fold when it brings to the fruit of good works. Ava. Aug. 
Otherwise; There is fruit an hundred-fold of the martyrs are 
because of their satiety of life or contempt of death; a 
sixty-fold fruit of virgins, because they rest not warring 
against the use of the flesh; for retirement is allowed to 

those of sixty years’ age after service in war or in public 
business; and there is a thirty-fold fruit of the wedded, 
because theirs is the age of warfare, and their struggle is 

the more arduous that they should not be vanquished by 

their lusts. Or otherwise; We must struggle with our love 

of temporal goods that reason may be master; it should 
either be so overcome and subject to us, that when it 
begins to rise it may be easily repressed, or so extinguished 

that it never arises in us at all. Whence it comes to pass, 

that death itself is despised for truth’s sake, by some with 

brave endurance, by others with content, and by others with 


494 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, XIII. 


gladness—which three degrees are the three degrees of fruits 
of the earth—thirty-fold, sixty-fold, and an hundred-fold. 
And in one of these degrees must one be found at the time 
of his death, if any desires to depart well out of this life. 
JEROME; Or, The hundred-fold fruit is to be ascribed to 
“virgins, the sixty-fold to widows and continent persons, 


Hieron. the thirty-fold to chaste wedlock. Ip. For the joining to- 
EP: ae: gether of the hands, as it were in the soft embrace of a 


kiss, represents husband and wife. The sixty-fold refers 
to widows, who as being set in narrow circumstances and 
affliction are denoted by the depression of the finger; for 
by how much greater is the difficulty of abstaining from 
the allurements of pleasure once known, so much greater 
is the reward. The hundredth number passes from the left 
to the right, and by its turning round with the same fingers, 
not on the same hand, it expresses the crown of virginity *. 


24. Another parable put he forth unto them, 
saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a 
man which sowed good seed in his field : 

25. But while men slept, his enemy came and 
sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. 

26. But when the blade was sprung up, and 
brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. 

27. So the servants of the householder came and 
said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in 
thy field; from whence then hath it tares ? 

28. He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. 
The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we 
go and gather them up? 

29. But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the 
tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. 

30. Let both grow together until the harvest: and 
in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, 


® This alludes to the method of no- tatione,’ vol. i. 181. The expression, 
tation by the fingers described by Bede, atque sucs i= dextra computat an- 
(with reference to this passage of S. is, Juv. will occur immediately to the 
Jerome,) in his treatise ‘ De Indigi- classical reader. 


VER. 24—30. ST. MATTHEW. 4935 


Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them 
in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into 
my barn. 


Curys. In the foregoing parable the Lord spoke to such nye 
as do not receive the word of God; here of those who 
receive a corrupting seed. This is the contrivance of the 
Devil, ever to mix error with truth. JEROME; He set forth 
also this other parable, as it were a rich householder refiesh- 
ing his guests with various meats, that each one according 
to the nature of his stomach might find some food adapted 
to him. He said not ‘a second parable,’ but another; for 
had He said ‘a second,’ we could not have looked for a 
third; but another prepares us for many more. ReEMIG. 
Here He calls the Son of God Himself the kingdom of 
heaven; for He saith, The kingdom of heaven is like unto 
aman that sowed good seed in his field. Curys. He then 
points out the manner of the Devil’s snares, saying, While 
men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares in the midst of the 
wheat, and departed. He here shews that error arose after 
truth, as indeed the course of events testifies; for the false pro- 
phets came after the Prophets, the false apostles after the Apo- 
stles, and Antichrist after Christ. For unless the Devil sees 
somewhat to imitate, and some to lay in wait against, he 
does not attempt any thing. Therefore because he saw that 
this man bears fruit an hundred, this sixty, and this thirty- 
fold, and that he was not able to carry off or to choke that 
which had taken root, he tums to other insidious practices, 
mixing up his own seed, which is a counterfeit of the true, 
and thereby imposes upon such as are prone to be deceived. 
So the parable speaks, not of another seed, but of tares 
which bear a great likeness to wheat corn. Further, the 
malignity of the Devil is shewn in this, that he sowed 
when all else was completed, that he might do the greater 
hurt to the husbandman. Aug. He says, While men slept, Avg. 
for while the heads of the Church were abiding in supine- eee 
ness, and after the Apostles had received the sleep of death, 4% !!- 
then came the Devil and sowed upon the rest those whom 
the Lord in His interpretation calls evil children. But we 
do well to enquire whether by such are meant heretics, or 


xlvi. 


Aug. 
Quest. 
in Matt. 
q- 12. 


496 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO _ CHAP. XII. 


Catholics who lead evil lives. That He says, that they 
were sown among the wheat, seems to point out that they 
were all of one communion. But forasmuch as He inter- 
prets the field to mean not the Church, but the world, we 
may well understand it of the heretics, who in this world 
are mingled with the good; for they who live amiss in the 
same faith may better be taken of the chaff than of the 
tares, for the chaff has a stem and a root in common 
with the grain. While schismatics again may more fitly 
be likened to ears that have rotted, or to straws that are 
broken, crushed down, and cast forth of the field. Indeed 
it is not necessary that every heretic or schismatic should be 
corporally severed from the Church; for the Church bears 
many who do not so publicly defend their false opinions as 
to attract the attention of the multitude, which when they 
do, then are they expelled. When then the Devil had sown 
upon the true Church divers evil errors and false opinions ; 
that is to say, where Christ’s name had gone before, there 
he scattered errors, himself was the rather hidden and 
unknown ; for He says, And went his way. Though indeed 
in this parable, as we learn from His own interpretation, the 
Lord may be understood to have signified under the name 
of tares all stumbling-blocks and such as work iniquity. 
Currys. In what follows He more particularly draws the 
picture of an heretic, in the words, When the blade grew, 
and put forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. For 
heretics at first keep themselves in the shade; but when 
they have had long license, and when men have held com- 
munication with them in discourse, then they pour forth 
their venom. Avc. Or otherwise; When a man begins to 
be spiritual, discerning between things, then he begins to 
see errors ; for he judges concerning whatsoever he hears or 
reads, whether it departs from the rule of truth; but until he 
is perfected in the same spiritual things, he might be dis- 
turbed at so many false heresies having existed under the 
Christian name, whence it follows, And the servants of the 
householder coming to him said unto him, Didst thou not sow 
good seed in thy field? whence then hath it tares? Are 
these servants then the same as those whom He afterwards 
calls reapers? Because in His exposition of the parable, He 


VER, 24—30. ST. MATTHEW. 497 


expounds the reapers to be the Angels, and none would dare 

to say that the Angels were ignorant who had sowed tares, 

we should the rather understand that the faithful are here 
intended by the servants. And no wonder if they are also 
signified by the good seed; for the same thing admits of 
different likenesses according to its different significations ; 

as speaking of Himself He says that He is the door, He is 

the shepherd. Remic. They came to the Lord not with 

the body, but with the heart and desire of the soul; and 
from Him they gather that this was done by the craft of the 
Devil, whence it follows, And he saith unto them, An enemy 
hath done this. JtRromeE; The Devil is called a man that is an 
enemy because he has ceased to be God; and in the ninth 
Psalm it is written of him, Up, Lord, and let not man have the ver. 19. 
upper hand. Wherefore let not him sleep that is set over the 
Church, lest through his carelessness the enemy should sow 
therein tares, that is, the dogmas ofthe heretics. CHrys. He 
is called the enemy on account of the losses he inflicts on 
men; for the assaults of the Devil are made upon us, though 
their origin is not in his enmity towards us, but in his 
enmity towards God. Auc. And when the servants of God Aug. 
knew that it was the Devil who had contrived this fraud,» ee 
whereby when he found that he had no power in open 
warfare against a Master of such great name, he had intro- 
duced his fallacies under cover of that name itself, the desire 
might readily arise in them to remove such men from out of 
human affairs if opportunity should be given them; but they 

first appeal to God’s justice whether thev should so do; 
The servants said, Wilt thou that we go and gather them 
out? Currys. Wherein observe the thoughtfulness and 
affection of the servants; they hasten to root up the tares, 
thus shewing their anxiety about the good seed; for this is 

all to which they look, not that any should be punished, but 

that that which is sown should not perish. The Lord’s 
answer follows, And he saith unto them, Nay. JEROME; For 
room for repentance is left, aud we are warned that we 
should not hastily cut off a brother, since one who is to-day 
corrupted with an erroneous dogma, may grow wiser to- 
morrow, and begin to defend the truth; wherefore it is 
added, Lest in gathering together the tares ye root out the 

VOL. I. - Qk 


Aug. 
Quest. 


in Matt. 


q. 12. 


Pua 


498 | GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


wheat also. AuGc. Wherein He renders them more patient 
and tranquil. For this He says, because good men while 
yet weak, have need in some things of being mixed up with 
bad, either that they may be proved by their means, or that 
by comparison with them they may be greatly stimulated 
and drawn to a better course. Or perhaps the wheat is 
declared to be rooted up if the tares should be gathered out 
of it, on account of many who though at first tares would 
after become wheat; yet they would never attain to this 
commendable change were they not patiently endured while 
they were evil. Thus were they rooted up, that wheat 
which they would become in time if spared, would be rooted 
up inthem. It is then therefore He forbids that such should 
be taken away out of this life, lest in the endeavour to 
destroy the wicked, those of them should be destroyed 
among the rest who would tum out good; and lest also 
that benefit should be lost to the good which would accrue 
to them even against their will from mixing with the 
wicked. But this may be done seasonably when, in the end 
of all, there remains no more time for a change of life, or of 
advancing to the truth by taking opportunity and comparison 
of others’ faults; therefore He adds, Let both grow together 
until the harvest, that is, until the judgment. JEROME; But 
this seems to contradict that command, Put arcay the evil 


from among you. For if the rooting up be forbidden, and 


we are to abide in patience till the harvest-time, how are we 
to cast forth any from among us? But between wheat and 
tares (which in Latin we call ‘ lolium’) so long as it is only 
in blade, before the stalk has put forth an ear, there is very 
great resemblance, and none or little difference to distinguish 
them by. The Lord then warns us not to pass a hasty 
sentence on an ambiguous word, but to reserve it for His 
judgment, that when the day of judgment shall come, He 
may cast forth from the assembly of the saints no longer on 
suspicion but on manifest guilt. Aug. For when any one of 
the number of Christians included in the Church is found in 
such sin as to incur an anathema, this is done, where danger 
of schism is not apprehended, with tenderness, not for his 
rooting out, but for his correction. But if he be not con- 
scious of his sin, nor correct it by penitence, he will of his 


VER. 24—30. ST. MATTHEW. 499 


own choice go forth of the Church and be separated from 
her communion; whence when the Lord commanded, Suffer 
both to grow together till the harvest, He added the reason, 
saying, Lest when ye would gather out the tares ye root up 
the wheat also. This sufficiently shews, that when that fear 
has ceased, and when the safety of the crop is certain, that 
is, when the crime is known to all, and is acknowledged as 
so execrable as to have no defenders, or not such as might 
cause any fear of a schism, then severity of discipline does 
not sleep, and its correction of error is so much the more 
efficacious as the observance of love had been more careful. 
But when the same infection has spread to a large number 
at once, nothing remains but sorrow and groans. Therefore 
let a man gently reprove whatever is in his power; what is 
not so let him bear with patience, and mourn over with 
affection, until] He from above shall correct and heal, and let 
him defer till harvest-time to root out the tares and winnow 
the chaff. But the multitude of the unrighteous is to be 
struck at with a general reproof, whenever there is oppor- 
tunity of saying aught among the people; and above all 
when any scourge of the Lord from above gives opportunity, 
when they feel that they are scourged for their deserts ; for 
then the calamity of the hearers opens their ears submis- 
sively to the words of their reprover, seeing the heart in 
affliction is ever more prone to the groans of confession than 
to the murmurs of resistance. And even when no tribulation 
lays upon them, should occasion serve, a word of reproof is 
usefully spent upon the multitude; for when separated it is 
wont to be fierce, when in a body it is wont to mourn. 
Curys. This the Lord spake to forbid any putting to death. 
For we ought not to kill an heretic, seeing that so a never- 
ending war would be introduced into the world; and there- 
fore He says, Lest ye root out with them the wheat also; 
that is, if you draw the sword and put the heretic to 
death, it must needs be that many of the saints will fall 
with them. Hereby He does not indeed forbid all restraint 
upon heretics, that their freedom of speech should be 
cut off, that their synods and their confessions should 
be broken up—but only forbids that they should be 
put to death. Aua. This indeed was at first nty own Aug Ep. 
2K2 oo 


500 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


ypinion, that no man was to be driven by force into the 
unity of Christ; but he was to be led by discourse, con- 
tended with in controversy, and overcome by argument, that 
we might not have men feigning themselves to be Catholics 
whom we knew to be declared heretics. But this opinion 
of mine was overcome not by the authority of those who 
contradicted me, but by the examples of those that shewed 
it in fact; for the tenor of those laws in enacting which 
Princes scrve the Lord in fear, has had such good effect, that 
already some say, This we desired long ago; but now 
thanks be to God who has made the occasion for us, and 
has cut off our pleas of delay. Others say, This we have 
long known to be the truth; but we were held by a kind of 
old habit, thanks be to God who has broken our chains. 
Others again; We knew not that this was true, and had no 
desire to learn it, but fear has driven us to give our attention 
to it, thanks be to the Lord who has banished our careless- 
ness by the spur of terror. Others, We were deterred from 
entering in by false rumours, which we should not have 
known to be false had we not entered in, and we should not 
have entered in had we not been compelled ; thanks be to 
God who has broken up our preaching by the scourge of 
persecution, and has taught us by experience how empty 
and false things lying fame had reported concerning His 
Church. Others say, We thought indeed that it was of 
no importance in what place we held the faith of Christ; 
but thanks be to the Lord who has gathered us together out 
of our division, and has shewn us that it is consonant to the 
unity of God that He should be worshipped in unity. Let 
then the Kings of the earth shew themselves the servants of 


Aug.Ep. Christ by publishing Jaws in Christ’s behalf. Ip. But who 


185. 32 


et 22. 


is there of you who has any wish that a heretic should 
perish, nay, that he should so much as lose aught? Yet 
could the house of David have had peace in no other way, 
but by the death of Absalom in that war which he waged 
against his father; notwithstanding his father gave strict 
commands to his servants that they should save him alive 
and unhurt, that on his repentance there might be room for 
fatherly affection to pardon; what then remained for him 
but to mourn over him when lost, and to console his domestic 


VER. 24—30. ST. MATTHEW. 301 


affliction by the peace which it had brought to his kingdom. 
Thus our Catholic mother the Church, when by the loss of 
afew she gains many, soothes the sorrow of her motherly 
heart, healing it by the deliverance of so much people. 
Where then is that which those are accustomed to cry out, 
That it is free to all to believe? Whom hath Christ done 
violence to? Whom hath He compelled‘ Let them take 

the Apostle Paul; let them acknowledge in him Chnist 
first compelling and afterwards teaching ; first smiting and 
afterwards comforting. And it is wonderful to see hin 
who entered into the Gospel by the force of a bodily in-1 Cor. 
fliction labouring therein more than all those who are kes 
called by word only. Why then should not the Church 
constrain her lost sons to return to her, when her lost sons 
constrained others to perish? 

Remic. It follows, And in the time of harvest I «ill 
say to the reapers, Gather together first the tares, and bind 
them in bundles to burn them. The harvest is the season 
of reaping which here designates the day of judgment, in 
which the good are to be separated from the bad. Curkys. 
But why does He say, Gather first the tares? That the good 
should have no fears lest the wheat should be rooted up 
with them. JeERoME; In that He says that the bundles of 
tares are to be cast into the fire, and the wheat gathered 
into barns, it is clear that heretics also and hypocrites are 
to be consumed in the fires of hell, while the saints who 
are here represented by the wheat are received into thie 
barns, that is into heavenly mansions. AucG. It may be Aug. 
asked why He commands more than one bundle or heap wat 
of tares to be formed? Perhaps because of the variety 4. !2. 
of heretics differing not only from the wheat, but also 
among themselves, each several heresy, separated from 
communion with all the others, is designated as a bundle; 
and perhaps they may even then begin to be bound to- 
gether for burning, when they first sever themselves from 
the Catholic communion, and begin to have their in- 
dependent church; so that it is the burning and not the 
binding into bundles that will take place at the end of the 
world... But were this so, there would not be so many who 
would become wise again, and return from error into the 


902 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


Catholic Church. Wherefore we must understand the bind- 
ing into bundles to be what shall come to pass in the end, 
that punishment should fall on them not promiscuously, but 
in due proportion to the obstinacy and wilfulness of each 
separate error. RaBan. And it should be noted that, when 
He says, Sowed good seed, He intends that good will which 
is in the elect; when He adds, An enemy came, He intimates 
that watch should be kept against him; when as the tares 
grow up, He suffers it patiently, saying, An enemy hath done 
this, He recommends to us patience; when He says, Lest 
haply in gathering the tares, &c. He sets us an example 
of discretion; when He says, Suffer both to grow together 
till the harvest, He teaches us long-suffering; and, lastly, He 
inculcates justice, when He says, Bind them into bundles to 
burn. 


31. Another parable put he forth unto them, say- 
ing, The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of 
mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his 
field : 

32. Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but 
when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and 
becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come 
and lodge in the branches thereof. 


Curys. Seeing the Lord had said above that three parts 
of the seed perish, and one only is preserved, and of that one 
part there is much loss by reason of the tares that are sown 
upon it; that none might say, Who then and how many 
shall they be that believe ; He removes this cause of fear by 
the parable of the mustard seed: therefore it is said, Another 
parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of 
heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed. JEROME; The 
kingdom of heaven is the preaching of the Gospel, and the 
knowledge of the Scriptures which leads to life, concerning 


Mat.21,which it is said to the Jews, The kingdom of God shall be 


in Ev. 
ll. 


taken from you. It is the kingdom of heaven thus under- 
stood which is likened to a grain of mustard seed. Aus. 


_A grain of mustard seed may allude to the warmth of faith, 


VER. 31, 82. ST. MATTHEW. ~ 9003 


or to its property as antidote to poison. It follows; Which 

a man took and sowed tn his field. JEROME; The man 
who sows is by most understood to be the Saviour, who 
sows the seed in the minds of believers ; by others the man 
himself, who sows in his field, that is, in his own heart. 
Who indeed is he that soweth, but our own mind and under- 
standing, which receiving the grain of preaching, and nurtur- 
ing it by the dew of faith, makes it to spring up in the field 

- of our own breast? Which ts the least of all seeds. The 
Gospel preaching is the least of all the systems of the 
schools; at first view it has not even the appearance of truth, 
announcing a man as God, God put to death, and proclaim- 
ing the offence of the cross. Compare this teaching with 
the dogmas of the Philosophers, with their books, the 
splendour of their eloquence, the polish of their style, and 
you will see how the seed of the Gospel is the least of all 
seeds. ‘Curys. Or; The seed of the Gospel is the least of 
seeds, because the disciples were weaker than the whole of 
mankind ; yet forasmuch as there was great might in them, 
their preaching spread throughout the whole world, and 
therefore it follows, But when it is grown tt is the greatest 
among herbs, that is among dogmas. Aue. Dogmas are the Aug. 
decisions of sects', the points, that is, that they have deter- T placha 
mined. JEROME; For the dogmas of Philosophers when secta- 
they have grown up, shew nothing of life or strength, but” 
watery and insipid they grow into grasses and other greens, 
which quickly dry up and wither away. But the Gospel 
preaching, though it seem small in its beginning, when sown 

in the mind of the hearer, or upon the world, comes up not a 
garden herb, but a tree, so that the birds of the air (which 

we must suppose to be either the souls of believers or the 
Powers of God set free from slavery) come and abide in its 
branches. The branches of the Gospel tree which have 
grown of the grain of mustard seed, I suppose to signify the 
various dogmas in which each of the birds (as explained 
above) takes his rest. Let us then take the wings of the Pzs.55,6, 
dove, that flying aloft we may dwell in the branches of this 
tree, and may make ourselves nests of doctrines, and soaring 
above earthly things may hasten towards heavenly. Huitary; 
Or; The Lord compares Himself to a grain of mustard seed, 


Greg. 
Mor. 
xix. 1, 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


504 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO - CHAP. XI. 


sharp to the taste, and the least of all seeds, whose strength 
is extracted by bruising. Grec. Christ Himself is the grain 
of mustard seed, who, planted in the garden of the sepulchre, 
grew up a great tree; He was a grain of seed when He died, 
and a tree when He rose again; a grain of seed in the 
humiliation of the flesh, a tree in the power of His majesty. 
Hizary; This grain then when sown in the field, that is, 
when seized by the people and delivered to death, and as it 
were buried in the ground by a sowing of the body, grew up 
beyond the size of all herbs, and exceeded all the glory of — 
the Prophets. For the preaching of the Prophets was 
allowed as it were herbs to a sick man; but now the birds 
of the air lodge in the branches of the tree. By which we 
understand the Apostles, who put forth of Christ’s might, and 
overshadowing the world with their boughs, are a tree to 
which the Gentiles flee in hope of life, and having been 
long tossed by the winds, that is by the spirits of the Devil, 
may have rest in its branches. GreG. The birds lodge in its 
branches, when holy souls that raise themselves aloft from 
thoughts of earth on the wings of the virtues, breathe again 
from the troubles of this life in their words and comfortings. 


33. Another parable spake he unto them; The 
kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a 
woman took, and hid-in three measures of meal, 
till the whole was leavened. 


Curys. The same thing the Lord sets forth in this 
parable of the leaven; as much as to say to His disciples, 
As leaven changes into its own kind much wheat-flour, so 
shall ye change the whole world. Note here the wisdom 
of the Saviour; He first brings instances from nature, 
proving that as the one is possible so is the other. And 
He says not simply ‘ put,’ but Azd; as much as to say, So 
ye, when ye shall be cast down by your enemies, then ye 
shall overcome them. And so leaven is kneaded in, without 
being destroyed, but gradually changes all things into its 
own nature; so shall it come to pass with your preaching. 


‘Fear ye not then because J said that many tribulations shall 


come upon you, for so shall ye shine forth, and shall over- 


VER. 33. ST. MATTHEW. — 505 


come them all. He says, three measures, to signify a great 
abundance ; that definite number standing for an indefinite 
quantity. JEROME; The ‘ satum’ is a kind of measure in 

use in Palestine containing one modius and a half. Ava. Aug. 
Or, The leaven signifies love, because it causes activity and R°?"), 
fermentation; by the woman He means wisdom. By the 
three measures He intends either those three things in man, 

with the whole heart, with the whole soul, with the whole 
mind ; or the three degrees of fruitfulness, the hundred-fold, 

the sixty-fold, the thirty-fold; or those three kinds of men, 

Noe, Daniel, and Job. Rasan. He says, Until the whole 

was leavened, because that love implanted in our mind 
ought to grow until it changes the whole soul into its 

own perfection ; which is begun here, but is completed here- 

after. JEROME; Or otherwise ; The woman who takes the 
leaven and hides it, seems to me to be the Apostolic preach- 

ing, or the Church gathered out of divers nations. She takes 

the leaven, that is, the understanding of the Scriptures, and 
hides it in three measures of meal, that the three, spirit, 

soul, and body, may be brought into one, and may not 
differ among themselves. Or otherwise; We read in PlatoR. P. 
that there are three parts in the soul, reason, anger, and Ahi 
desire; so we also if we have received the evangelic leaven *+», te:- 
of Holy Scripture, may possess in our reason prudence, in ape 
our anger hatred against vice, in our desire love of the ss 
virtues, and this will all come to pass by the Evangelic 
teaching which our mother Church has held out to us. 

I will further mention an interpretation of some; that the 
woman is the Church, who has mingled the faith of man 

in three measures of meal, namely, belief in the Father, the 

Son, and the Holy Spirit; which when it has fermented into 

one Jump, brings us not to a threefold God, but to the know- 

ledge of one Divinity. This is a pious interpretation; but 
parables and doubtful solutions of dark things, can never 
bestow authority on dogmas. HiLary; Or otherwise; The 

Lord compares Himself to Jeaven; for leaven is produced 

from meal, and communicates the power that it has received 

‘to a heap of its own kind. ‘The woman, that is the 
Synagogue, taking this leaven hides it, that is by the 
sentence of death; but it working in the three measures 


Chrys. 


Hom. 
xlvii. 


506 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


of meal, that is equally in the Law, the Prophets, and the 
Gospels, makes all one; so that what the Law ordains, that 
the Prophets announce, that is fulfilled in the developements 
of the Gospels. But many, as I remember, have thought 
that the three measures refer to the calling of the three 
nations, out of Shem, Ham, and Japhet. But 1 hardly 
think that the reason of the thing will allow this inter- 
pretation ; for though these three nations have indeed been 
called, yet in them Christ is shewn and not hidden, and in 
so great a multitude of unbelievers the whole cannot be said 
to be leavened. 


34. All these things spake Jesus unto the multi- 
tude in parables; and without a parable spake he 
not unto them. 

35. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken 
by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in 
parables; I will utter things which have been kept 
secret from the foundation of the world. 


Curys. After the foregoing parables, that none might 
think that Christ was bringing forward any thing new, the 
Evangelist quotes the Prophet, foretelling even this His 


Mark 4, manner of preaching: Mark’s words are, And with many 


Aug. 


Quest. 


such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were 
able to hear it. So marvel not that, in speaking of the 
kingdom, He uses the similitudes of a seed, and of leaven ; 
for He was discoursing to common men, and who needed to 
be led forward by such aids. Remic. The Greek word 
‘ Parable,’ is rendered in Latin ‘ Similitude,’ by which truth 
is explained; and an image or representation of the reality 
is set forth. JeRome; Yet He spoke not in parables to the 
disciples, but to the multitude; and even to this day the 
multitude hears in parables; and therefore it is said, And 
without a parable spake he not unto them. Curys. For 
though He had spoken many things not in parables, when 
not speaking before the multitudes, yet at this time spake 
He nothing without a parable. Auge. Or, this is said, not 


in Matt.that He uttered nothing in plain words; but that He 


q- 15 


VER. 34, 35. ST. MATTHEW. 507 


concluded no one discourse without introducing a parable 
in the course of it, though the chief part of the discourse 
might consist of matter not figurative. And we may indeed 
find discourses of His parabolical throughout, but none 
direct throughout. And by a complete discourse, I mean, 
the whole of what He says on any topic that may be 
brought before Him by circumstances, before He leaves 
it, and passes to a new subject. For sometimes one 
Evangelist connects what another gives as spoken at 
different times; the writer having in such a case followed 
not the order of events, but the order of connexion in his 
own memory. ‘The reason why He spake in parables the 
Evangelist subjoins, saying, That it might be fulfilled that 
was spoken by the Prophet, saying, I will open my mouth Ps.78,2. 
in parables, I will utter things kept secret from the 
foundation of the world. JEROME; This passage is taken 
from the seventy-seventh Psalm. I have seen copies which 
read, ‘ by Esaias the Prophet,’ instead of what we have 
adopted, and what the common text has by the Prophet. 
Remiae. From which reading Porphyry took an objection 
to the believers; Such was your Evangelist’s ignorance, that 
he imputed to Isaiah what is indeed found in the Psalms. | 
JEROME; But because the text was not found in Isaiah, 
his name was, I suppose, therefore erased by such as had 
observed that. But it seems to me that it was first written 
thus, ‘ As was written by Asaph the Prophet, saying;’ for 
the seventy-seventh Psalm out of which this text is taken 
is ascribed to Asaph the Prophet; and that the copyist not 
understanding Asaph, and imputing it to error in the tran- 
scription, substituted the better known name Isaiah. For 
it should be known that not David only, but those others 
also whose names are set before the Psalms, and hymns, 
and songs of God, are to be considered pruphets, namely, 
Asaph, Idithum, and Heman the Esraite, and the rest who 
are named in Scripture. And so that which is spoken in 
the Lord’s person, I will open my mouth in parables, if con- 
sidered attentively, will be found to be a description of the 
departure of Israel out of Egypt, and a relation of all the 
wonders contained in the history of Exodus. By which 
we learn, that all that is there written may be taken in a 


Gloss. 
ap. An- 
selm. 


508 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


figurative way, and contains hidden sacraments ; for this is 
what the Saviour is there made to preface by the words, 
I will open my mouth in parables. Goss. As though He 
had said, I who spoke before by the Prophets, now in My 
own person will open My mouth in parables, and will bring 
forth out of My secret store mysteries which have been hidden 
ever since the foundation of the world. 


36. Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went 
into the house: and his disciples came unto him, 
saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the 
field. 

37. He answered and said unto them, He that 
soweth the good seed is the Son of man; 

38. The field is the world; the good seed are the 
children of the kingdom; but the tares are the chil- 
dren of the wicked one ; 

39. The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the 
harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are 
the angels. 

40. As therefore the tares are gathered and burned 
in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world. 

41. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, 
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things 
that offend, and them which do iniquity ; 

42. And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: 
there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. 

43. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun 
in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to 
hear, let him hear. 


Curys. The Lord had spoken to the multitude in parables, 
that He might induce them to ask Him of their meaning; 


‘yet, though He had spoken so many things in parables, no 


man had yet asked Him aught, and therefore He sends them 
away; Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went inlo 
the house. None of the Scribes followed Him here, from 


VER. 836—43. ST. MATTHEW. 509 


which it is clear that they followed Him for no other 
purpose than that they might catch Him in His discourse. 
JEROME; The Lord sends away the multitude, and enters 

the house that His disciples might come to Him and ask 
Him privately of those things which the people neither 
deserved to hear, nor were able. Rasan. Figuratively ; 
Having sent away the multitude of unquiet Jews, He enters 

the Church of the Gentiles, and there expounds to believers 
heavenly sacraments, whence it follows, And his disciples 
came lo him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the 
fares of the field. Curys. Before, though desirous to 
learn, they had feared to ask; but now thev ask freely 
and confidently because they had heard, Jo you it ts 
given to know the mystery of the kingdom of heaven; and 
therefore they ask when alone, not envying the multitude to 
whom it was not so given. They pass over the parables of 

the leaven and the mustard-seed as plain; and ask con- 
cerning the parable of the tares, which has some agreement 
with the foregoing parable concerning the seed, and shews 
somewhat more than that. And accordingly the Lord 
expounds it to them, as it follows, He answered and said 
unto them, He that sows the good seed is the Son of man. 
Remic. The Lord styles Himself the Son of Man, that m 
that title He might set an example of humility; or perhaps 
because it was to come to pass that certain heretics would 
deny Him to be really man; or that through belief in His 
Humanity we miglit ascend to knowledge of His Divinity. 
Currys. The field is the world. Seeing it is He that sows 

His own field, it is plain that this present world is His. It 
follows, The good seed are the children of the kingdom. 
Remic. That is, the saints, and elect men, who are counted 

as sons. Ava. The tares the Lord expounds to mean, Aug. 
not as Manicheus interprets, certain spurious parts inserted Faust, 
among the true Scriptures, but all the children of the Evil vii. 7. 
one, that is, the imitators of the fraud of the Devil. As it 
follows, The tares are the children of the evil one, by whom 
He would have us understand all the wicked and impious. 
Ip. For all weeds among corn are called tares. It Aug. 
follows, The enemy who sowed this ts the Devil. Curys. > ae 
For this is part of the wiles of the Devil, to be ever mixing 


510 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


up truth with error. The harvest is the end of the world. 
In another place He says, speaking of the Samaritans, 
John 4, Lift up your eyes, and consider the fields that they are 
iio, already white for the harvest ; and again, The harvest truly 
as great, but the labourers are few, in which words He 
speaks of the harvest as being already present. How then 
does He here speak of it as something yet to come? Because 
He has used the figure of the harvest in two significations ; 
as He says there that it is one that soweth, and another that 
reapeth; but here it is the same who both sows and reaps; 
indeed there He brings forward the Prophets, not to dis- 
tinguish them from Himself, but from the Apostles, for 
Christ Himself by His Prophets sowed among the Jews 
and Samaritans. The figure of harvest is thus applied to 
two different things. Speaking of first conviction and 
turning to the faith, He calls that the harvest, as that 
in which the whole is accomplished; but when He 
enquires into the fruits ensning upon the hearing the 
word of God, then He calls the end of the world the 
harvest, as here. Remia. By the harvest is denoted the 
day of judgment, in which the good are to be separated from 
the evil; which will be done by the ministry of Angels, as it 
is said below, that the Son of Man shall come to judgment 
with His Angels. As then the tares are gathered and burned 
tn the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world. The 
Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather 
out of his kingdom all offences, and them which do iniquity. 
Aug. DeAuG. Out of that kingdom in which are no offences? The 
Civ-Dei, kingdom then is His kingdom which is here, namely, the 
Aug. Church. Ip. That the tares are first separated, signifies 
= be nab: that by tribulation the wicked shall be separated from the 
righteous; and this is understood to be performed by good 
Angels, because the good can discharge duties of punish- 
ment with a good spirit, as a judge, or as the Law, but the 
wicked cannot fulfil offices of mercy. CHRys. Or we may 
understand it of the kingdom of the heavenly Church; and 
then there will be held out here a two-fold punishment ; first 
that they fall from glory as that is said, And they shall 
gather out of his kingdom all offences, to the end, that no 
offences should be seen in His kingdom ; and then that they 


VER, 44. ST. MATTHEW. 511 


are burned. And they shall cast them into a furnace of fire. 


JEROME; The offences are to be referred to the tares. GLoss. Gloss. 


The offences, and, them that do iniquity, are to be distin- 


guished as heretics and schismatics; the offences referring to 
heretics; while by them that do iniquity are to be understood 
schismatics. Otherwise; By offences may be understood 
“those that give their neighbour an occasion of falling, by 
those that do iniquity all other sinners. RaBAN. Observe, 
He says, Those that do iniquity, not, those who have 
done ; because not they who have turned to penitence, but 
they only that abide in their sins are to be delivered to 
eternal torments. Currys. Behold the unspeakable love of 
God towards men! He is ready to shew mercy, slow to 
punish; when He sows, He sows Himself; when He 
punishes, He punishes by others, sending His Angels to 
that. It follows, There shall be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. Remic. In these words is shewn the reality of the 
resurrection of the body; and further, the twofold pains of 
hell, extreme heat, and extreme cold. And as the offences 
are referred to the tares, so the righteous are reckoned among 
the children of the kingdom; concerning whom it follows, 
Then the righteous shall shine as the sun in the kingdom 
of their Father. For in the present world the light of the 
saints shines before men, but after the consummation of all 
things, the nghteous themselves shall shine as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father. CHrys. Not that they shall not 
shine with higher brightness, but because we know no 
degree of brightness that surpasses that of the sun, there- 
fore He uses an example adapted to our understanding. 
Remic. That He says, Then shall they shine, implies 
that they now shine for an example to others, but they 
shall then shine as the sun to the praise of God. He that 
hath ears to hear, let him hear. Rasan. That is, Let him 
understand who has understanding, because all these things 
are to be understood mystically, and not literally. 


44. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto 
treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath 
found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and 
selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field. 


OCC. 


$12 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, XIII. 


Curys. The foregoing parables of the leaven, and the 
grain of mustard-seed, are referred to the power of the 
Gospel preaching, which has subdued the whole world; 
in order to shew its value and splendour, He now puts 
forth parables concerning a pearl and a treasure, saying, 
The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field. 
For the Gospel preaching is hidden in this world; and if 
you do not sell your all you will not purchase it; and this 
you ought to do with joy; wherefore it follows, which when 
aman hath found, he hideth it. Hitary; This treasure is 
indeed found without cost; for the Gospel preaching is 
open to all, but to use and possess the treasure with 
its field we may not without price, for heavenly riches are 
not obtained without the loss of this world. JEROME; That 
he hides it, does not proceed of envy towards others, but as 
one that treasures up what he would not lose, he hides in 
his heart that which he prizes above his former possessions. 

ne ss GREGORY; Otherwise; The treasure hidden in the field is 
Ev.xi.1.the desire of heaven; the field in which the treasure is 
hidden is the discipline of heavenly learning; this, when 
a man finds, he hides, in order that he may preserve it; 
for zeal and affections heavenward it is not enough that 
we protect from evil spints, if we do not protect from 
human praises. For in this present life we are in the way 
which leads to our country, and evil spirits as robbers beset 
us in our journey. Those therefore who carry their treasure 
openly, they seek to plunder in the way. When I say this, 
1 do not mean that our neighbours should not see our 
works, but that in what we do, we should not seek praise 
from without. The kingdom of heaven is therefore com- 
pared to things of earth, that the mind may rise from things 
familiar to things unknown, and may learn to love the 
unknown by that which it knows is loved when known. 
It follows, And for joy thereof he goeth and selleth all that 
he hath, and buyeth that field. He it is that selleth all he 
hath and buyeth the field, who, renouncing fleshly delights, 
tramples upon all his worldly desires in his anxiety for the 
Col.2,3. heavenly discipline. JEROME; Or, That treasure in which 
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knoucledge, is either 
God the Word, who seems hid in Christ’s flesh, or the Holy 


VER. 45, 46. ST. MATTHEW. 313 


Scriptures, in which are laid up the knowledge of the 
Saviour. Auc. Or, He speaks of the two testaments in Aug. 
the Church, which, when any hath attained to a partial a 
understanding of, he perceives how great things lie hid !3. 
there, and goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth 

that; that is, by despising temporal things he purchases 

to himself peace, that he may be rich in the knowledge of 

God. 


45. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a 
merchant man, seeking goodly pearls : 

46. Who, when he had found one pearl of great 
price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it. 


Curys. The Gospel preaching not only offers manifold 
gain as a treasure, but is precious as a pearl; wherefore 
after the parable concerning the treasure, He gives that 
concerning the pearl. And in preaching, two things are 
required, namely, to be detached from the business of this 
life, and to be watchful, which are denoted by this merchant- 
man. “Truth moreover is one, and not manifold, and for this 
reason it is one pearl that is said to be found. And as one 
who is possessed of a pearl, himself indeed knows of his 
wealth, but is not known to others, ofttimes concealing it in 
his hand because of its small bulk, so it is in the preaching 
of the Gospel; they who possess it know that they are rich, 
the unbelievers, not knowing of this treasure, know not of 
our wealth. JEROME; By the goodly pearls may be under- 
stood the Law and the Prophets. Hear then Marcion and 
Manicheus; the good pearls are the Law and the Prophets. 
One pearl, the most precious of all, is the knowledge of the 
Saviour and the sacrament of His passion and resurrection, 
which when the merchantman has found, like Paul the 
Apostle, he straightway despises all the mysteries of the 
Law and the Prophets and the old observances in which 
he had lived blameless, counting them as dung that he 
may win Christ. Not that the finding of a new pearl is Phil. 3, 
the condemnation of the old pearls, but that in comparison | 
of that, all other pearls are worthless. GReGorY; Or by aS a 
VOL, I. 21 Ev. m1. 2. 


Aug. 
Quest. 


in Matt. 


q. 13. 


Rom. 
13, 9. 


Jobn 1, 
l. 


514 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


the pearl of price is to be understood the sweetness of the 
heavenly kingdom, which, he that hath found it, selleth all 
and buyeth. For he that, as far as is permitted, has had 
perfect knowledge of the sweetness of the heavenly life, 
readily leaves all things that he has loved on earth; all 
that once pleased him among earthly possessions now 
appears to have lost its beauty, for the splendour of that 
precious pearl is alone seen in his mind. AvuG. Or, A man 
seeking goodly pearls has found one pearl of great price; 
that is, he who is seeking good men with whom he may live 
profitably, finds one alone, Christ Jesus, without sin; or, 
seeking precepts of life, by aid of which he may dwell 
righteously among men, finds love of his neighbour, m 
which one rule, the Apostle says, are comprehended all 
things; or, seeking good thoughts, he finds that Word in 
which all things are contained, Jn the beginning tas the 
Word, which is lustrous with the light of truth, stedfast with 
the strength of eternity, and throughout like to itself with the 
beauty of divinity, and when we have penetrated the shell 
of the flesh, will be confessed as God. But whichever of 
these three it may be, or if there be any thing else that 
can occur to us, that can be signified under the figure of 
the one precious pearl, its preciousiess is the possession 
of oursclves, who are not free to possess it unless we despise 
all things that can be possessed in this world. Tor having 
sold our possessions, we receive no other return greater than 
ourselves, (for while we were involved in such things we 
were not our own,) that we may again give ourselves for that 
pearl, not because we are of equal value to that, but because 
we cannot give any thing more. 


47. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a 
net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every 
kind : 

48. Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, 
and sat down, and gathered the Boee into vessels, but 
cast the bad away. 


49. So shall it be at the ana of the world: the 


VER. 47—50. ST. MATTHEW. 515 


angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from 
the just, 

50. And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: 
there shal] be wailing and gnashing of teeth. 


Curys. In the foregoing parables He has commended the 
Gospel preaching; now, that we may not trust in preaching 
only, nor think that faith alone is sufficient for our salvation, 
He adds another fearful parable, saying, Again, the kingdom 
of heaven ts like unto a net cast into the sea. JEROME; In 
fulfilment of that prophecy of Ifieremtas, who said, J «ill send get 16, 
unto you many fishers, when Peter and Andrew, James and !® 
John, heard the words, Follow me, I will make you fishers 
of men, they put together a net for themselves formed of the 
Old and New Testaments, and cast it into the sca of this 
world, and that remains spread until this day, taking up out 
of the salt and bitter and whirlpools whatever falls into it, 
that is good men and bad; and this is that He adds, And 
gathered of every kind. GRecory; Or otherwise; The ae. 
Holy Church is likened to a net, Beaucs it is given into i Z 
the hands of fishers, and by it each man is drawn into the 
heavenly kingdom out of the waves of this present world, 
that he should not be drowned in the depth of eternal 
death. This net gathers of every kind of fishes, because 
the wise and the foolish, the free and the slave, the rich 
and ‘the poor, the strong and the weak, are called to forgive- 
ness of sin; it is then fully filled when in the end of all 
things the sum of the human race is completed; as it 
follows, Which, when it was filled, they drew out, and 
sitting down on the shore gathered the good into vessels, 
but the bad they cast away. For as the sea signifies the 
world, so the sea shore signifies the end of the world; and 
as the good are gathcred into vessels, but the bad cast 
away, so each man is received into eternal abodes, while 
the reprobate having lost the light of the inward kingdom 
are cast forth into outer darkness. But now the net of 
faith holds good and bad mingled together in one; but 
the shore shall discover what the net of the Church has 
brought to land. JzERomME; For when the net shall be 

2L2 


Greg. 


ubi sup. 


Gloss. 


nop occ. 


516 GUSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


drawn to the shore, then shall be shewn the true test for 
separating the fishes. CHrys. Wherein does this parable 
differ from the parable of the tares? There, as here, some 
perish and some are saved; but there, because of their 
heresy of evil dogmas; in the first parable of the sower, 
because of their not attending to what was spoken; here, 
because of their evil life, because of which, though drawn 
by the net, that is, enjoying the knowledge of God, they 
cannot be saved. And when you hear that the wicked 
are casi away, that you may not suppose that this punishment 
may be risked, He adds an exposition shewing its severity, 
saying, Thus shall it be in the end of the world; the angels 
shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just, 
and shall cast them into the furnace of fire, there shall be 
wailing and gnashing of teeth. Though He elsewhere 
declares, that He shall separate them as a shepherd sepa- 
rates the sheep from the goats; He here declares, that 
the Angels shall do it, as also in the parable of the tares. 
GREGORY; To fear becomes us here, rather than to ex- 
pound ; for the torments of sinners are pronounced in plain 
terms, that none might plead his ignorance, should eternal 
punishment be threatened in obscure sayings. JEROME; For 
when the end of the world shall be come, then shall be 
shewn the true test of separating the fishes, and as in a 
sheltered harbour the good shall be sent into the vessels 
of heavenly abodes, but the flame of hell shall seize the 
wicked to be dried up and withered. 


51. Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all 
these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord. 

52. Then said he unto them, Therefore every 
Scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of 
heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, 


which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new 
and old. 


GLoss. When the multitude had departed, the Lord 
spoke to His disciples in parables, by which they were 
instructed only so far as they understood them; wherefore 


VER. 51, 52. ST. MATTHEW. 517 


He asks them, Have ye understood all these things? They 

say unto him, Yea, Lord. Jerome; For this is spoken 
especially to the Apostles, whom He would have not to 

hear only as the multitude, but to understand as having 

to teach others. Currys. ‘Then He praises them because 

they had understood; He saith unto them; Therefore every 
Scribe instructed in the kingdom of heaven is like unto an 
householder who bringeth out of his treasure things new and 

old. Avc. He said not ‘ old and new,’ as He surely would Aug. De 
have said had He not preferred to preserve the order of value a 
rather than of time. But the Manichzans while they think 

they should keep only the new promises of God, remain in 

the old man of the ficsh, and put on newness of error. 

Ip. By this conclusion, whether did He desire to shew Aug. 
whom He intended by the treasure hid in the field—in?"", 
which case we might understand the Holy Scriptures to4- '6. 
be here meant, the two Testaments by the things new and 
old—or did He intend that he should be held learned in 

the Church who understvod that the Old Scriptures were 
expounded in parables, taking rules from these new Scrip- 
tures, seeing that in them also the Lord proclaimed many 
things in parables. If He then, in whom all those old 
Scriptures have their fulfilment and manifestation, yet speaks 

in parables until His passion shall rend the vail, when there 

is nothing hid that shall not be revealed; much more those 
things which were written of Him so long time before we , 
see to have been clothed in parables; which the Jews took 
literally, being unwilling to be learned in the kingdom of 
heaven. GreGorRyY; But if by things new and old in this Greg. 
passage we understand the two Testaments, we deny Abra- oe 
ham to have been learned, who although he knew indced 

some deeds of the Old Testament, yet had not read the 
words. Neither Moses may we compare to a learned house- 
holder, for although he composed the Old Testament, yet 

had he not the words of the New. But what is here said 

may be understood as meant not of those who had been, 

but of such as might hereafter be in the Church, who then 

bring forth things new and old when they speak the preach- 

ings of both Testaments, in their words and in their lives. 
Hitary; Speaking to His disciples, He calls them Scribes 


c. 7. 13. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


518 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIIL 


on account of their knowledge, because they understood the 
things that He brought forward, both new and old, that is 
from the Law and from the Gospels; both being of the same 
householder, and both treasures of the same owner. He 
compares them to Himself under the figure of a householder, 
because they had received doctrine of things both new and 
old out of His treasury of the Holy Spirit. JEROME; Or 
the Apostles are called Scribes instructed, as being the 
Saviour’s notaries who wrote His words and precepts on 
fleshly tables of the heart with the sacraments of the 
heavenly kingdom, and abounded in the wealth of a house- 
holder, bringing forth out of the stores of their doctrine 
things new and old; whatsoever they preached in the 
Gospels, that they proved by the words of the Law and 
the Prophets. Whence the Bride speaks in the Song of 
Songs; [ have kept for thee my beleved the new with the 
old. Grecory; Otherwise; The things old are, that the 
human race for its sin should suffer in eternal punishment ; 
the things new, that they should be converted and live in 
the kingdom. First, He brought forward a comparison of 
the kingdom to a treasure found and a pearl of price; and 
after that, narrated the punishment of hell in the burning 
of the wicked, and then concluded with Therefore cvery 
Scribe, Sc. as if He had said, He is a learned preacher 
in the Church who knows to bring forth things new con- 
cerning the sweetness of the kingdom, and to speak things 
old concerning the terror of punishment; that at least 
punishment may deter those whom rewards da not excite, 


53. And it came to pass, that when Jesus had 
finished these parables, he departed thence. 

54. And when he was come into his own country, 
he taught them in their synagogue, insomuch that 
they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this 
man this wisdom, and these mighty works ? 

55. Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his 
mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and 
Joses, and Simon, and Judas? 


VER. 58—858. ST. MATTHEW. 519 


56. And his sisters, are they not all with us? 
Whence then hath this man all these things ? 

57. And they were offended in him. But Jesus 
said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, 
save in his own country, and in his own house. 

08. And he did not many mighty works there 
because of their unbelief. 


JEROME; After the parables which the Lord spake to the 
people, and which the Apostles only understand, He goes 
over into His own country that He may teach there also. 
Auc. From the foregoing discourse consisting of these Aug. De 
parables, He passes to what follows without any very," "4s 
evident connexion between them. Besides which, Mark 
passes from these parables to a different event from what 
Matthew here gives; and Luke agrees with him, so con- 
tinuing the thread of the story as to make it much more 
probable that that which they relate followed here, namely, 
about the ship in which Jesus slept, and the miracle of the 
demons cast out; which Matthew has introduced above. 
Curys. By his own country here, He means Nazareth; for Chrys. 
it was not there but in Capharnaum that, as is said below, ber 
He wrought so many miracles; but to these He shews His 
doctrine, causing no less wonder than His miracles. Remie. 

He taught in their synagogues where great numbers were 
met, because it was for the salvation of the multitude that 
He came from heaven upon earth. It follows; So that they 
marvelled, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, 
and these many mighty works? Wis wisdom is referred to 
His doctrine, His mighty works to His miracles. JEROME; 
Wonderful folly of the Nazarenes! They wonder whence 
Wisdom itself has wisdom, whence Power has mighty works! 
But the source of their error is at hand, because they regard 
Him as the Son of a carpenter; as they say, Is not this the 
‘carpenter’s son? Curys. Therefore were they in all things 
‘insensate, seeing they lightly esteemed Him on account of 
‘him who was regarded as His father, notwithstanding the 
many instances in old times of sons illustrious sprung from 
ignoble fathers; as David was the son of a husbandman, 


520 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIII. 


Jesse; Amos the son of a shepherd, himself a shepherd. 
Aud they ought to have given Him more abundant honour, 
because, that coming of such parents, He spake after such 
manner; clearly shewing that it came not of human industry, 


Pseudo- but of divine grace. Psgupo-Avua. For the Father of Christ 


Auvg.non, 


oce. cf 
Serm. 
135. 


is that Divine Workman who made all these works of nature, 
who set forth Noah’s ark, who ordained the tabernacle of 
Moses, and instituted the Ark of the covenant; that Workman 
who polishes the stubborn mind, and cuts down the proud 
thoughts. Hiztary; And this was the carpenter’s son who 
subdues iron by means of fire, who tries the virtue of this 
world in the judgment, and forms the rude mass to every 
work of human need; the figure of our bodies, for 


.example, to the divers ministrations of the limbs, and all 


the actions of life eternal. JEROME; And when they are 
mistaken in His Father, no wonder if they are also mistaken 
in His brethren. Whence it is added, Js not his mother 
Mary, and his brethren, James, and Joseph, and Simon, 
and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us? 


-Ip. Those who are here called the Lord’s brethren, 
id, are the sons of a Mary, His Mother’s sister; she is the 


mother of this James and Joseph, that is to say, Mary the 
wife of Cleophas, and this is the Mary who is called the 
mother of James the Less. Ava. No wonder then that any 


tt. kinsmen by the mother’s side should be called -the Lord's 


brethren, when even by their kindred to Joseph some are 
here called His brethren by those who thought Him the 
son of Joseph. HiLary; Thus the Lord is held in no 
honour by His own; and though the wisdom of His teach- 
ing, and the power of His working raised their admiration, 
yet do they not believe that He did these things in the 
name of the Lord, and they cast His father’s trade in His 
teeth. Amid all the wonderful works which He did, they 
were moved with the contemplation of His Body; and 
hence they ask, Whence hath this man these things? 
And thus they were offended in him. Jerome; This error 
of the Jews is our salvation, and the condemnation of the 
heretics, for they perceived Jesus Christ to be man so far 
as to think Him the son of a carpenter. CuHrys. Observe 
Christ’s mercifulness; He is evil spoken of, yet He answers 


VER. 53—858. ST. MATTHEW. 021 


with mildness; Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not with- 
out honour, but in his own country, and in his own house. 
Remic. He calls Himself a Prophet, as Moses also declares, 
when he says, A Prophet shall God raise up unto you of your Deut. 
brethren. And it should be known, that not Christ only, '® '8- 
who is the Head of all the Prophets, but Jeremiah, Daniel, 
and the other lesser Prophets, had more honour and regard 
among strangers than among their own citizens. JEROME; 
For it is almost natural for citizens to be jealous towards 
one another; for they do not look to the present works of 
the man, but remember the frailties of his childhood; as 
if they themselves had not passed through the very same 
stages of age to their maturity. HiLary; Further, He 
makes this answer, that a Prophet is without honour in 
his own country, because it was in Judza that He was to 
be condemned to the sentence of the cross; and forasmuch 
as the power of God is for the faithful alone, He here 
abstained from works of divine power because of their 
unbelief; whence it follows, And he did not there many 
mighty works because of their unbelief. JEROME; Not that 
because they did not believe He could not do His mighty 
works; but that He might not by doing them be condemn- 
ing His fellow-citizens in their unbelief. Curys. But if His 
miracles raised their wonder, why did He not work many? 
Because He looked not to display of Himself, but to what 
would profit others; and when that did not result, He | 
despised what pertained only to Himself that He might 
not increase their punishment. Why then did He even 
these few miracles? That they should not say, We should 
have believed had any miracles been done among us. 
JEROME; Or we may understand it otherwise, that Jesus 
is despised in His own house and country, signifies in the 
Jewish people; and therefore He did among them few 
miracles, that they might not be altogether without excuse ; 
but among the Gentiles He does daily greater miracles by 
His Apostles, not so much in healing their bodies, as in 
saving their souls. 


Gloss. 
Non occ. 


Aug. De 
Cons, 


Ev. ii.43. 


CHAP. XIV. 


1. At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the 
fame of Jesus. 


2. And said unto his servants, This is John the 
Baptist; he is risen from the dead; and therefore 
mighty works do shew forth themselves in him. 

3. For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound 
him, and put him in prison for Herodias’ sake, his 
brother Philip’s wife. 


4. For John said unto him, It is not lawful for 
thee to have her. 

5. And when he would have put him to death, he 
feared the multitude, because they counted him as a 
prophet. 


Gross. THE Evangelist had above shewn the Pharisees 
speaking falsely against Christ’s miracles, and just now His 
fellow-citizens wondering, yet despising Him; he now re- 
lates what opinion Herod had formed concerning Christ on 
hearing of His miracles, and says, At that time Herod the 
tetrarch heard the fame of Jesus. Crys. It is not without 
reason that the Evangelist here specifies the time, but that 
‘you may understand the pride and carelessness of the tyrant; 
inasmuch as he had not at the first made himself acquainted 
with the things concerning Christ, but now only after long 
time. Thus they, who in authority are fenced about with 
much pomp, learn these things slowly, because they do not 
much regard them. Auc. Matthew says, At that time, not, 
On that day, or, In that sane hour; for Mark relates the 
same circumstances, but not in the same order. He places 


VER. 1—5. GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. $23 


this after the mission of the disciples to preach, though not 
implying that it necessarily follows there; any more than 
Luke, who follows the same order as Mark. Curys. Observe 
how great a thing is virtue; Herod fears John even after he 
is dead, and philosophizes concerning the resurrection; as 
it follows; And he saith to his servants, This is John the 
Baptist, he is risen from the dead, and therefore mighty 
works are wrought in him. Rapax. From this place we 
may learn how great the jealousy of the Jews was; that 
John could have risen from the dead, Herod, an alien-bom, 
here declares, without any witness that he had risen: con- 
cerning Christ, whom the Prophets had foretold, the Jews 
preferred to believe, that He had not risen, but had been 
carried away by stealth. This intimates that the Gentile heart 
is more disposed to belief than that of the Jews. JEROME; 
One of the Ecclesiastical interpreters asks what caused 
Herod to think that John was risen from the dead; as 
though we had to account for the errors of an alien, or 
as though the heresy of metempsychosis was at all supported 
by this place—a heresy which teaches that souls pass 
through various bodies after a long period of years— 
for the Lord was thirty years old when John was beheaded. 
Rapan. All men have well thought concerning the power 
of the resurrection, that the saints shall have greater power 
after they have risen from the dead, than they had while 
they were yet weighed down with the infirmity of the flesh ; 
wherefore Herod says, Therefore mighty works are wrought 
in him. Ava. Luke’s words are, John have If beheaded: Avg. 
who is he of whom I hear such things? As Luke has eral 
thus represented Herod as in doubt, we must understand 9 
rather that he was afterwards convinced of that which 
was commonly said—or we must take what he here 
says to his servants as expressing a doubt—for they 
admit ‘of either of these acceptations. Rem:c. Perhaps 
some one may ask how it can be here said, At that time 
Herod heard, seemg that we have long before read that 
‘Terod was dead, and that on that the Lord returned out of 
Kgvypt. This question is answered, if we remember that 
‘there were two Herods. On the death of the first Herod, 
-his son Archelaus succeeded him, and after ten years was 


Gloss. 
ord. 


5024 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


sent into exile to Vienne in Gaul. Then Cesar Augustus 
gave command that the kingdom should be divided into 
tetrarchies, and gave three parts to the sons of Herod. This 
Herod then who beheaded John is the son of that greater 
Herod under whom the Lord was born; and this is con- 
firmed by the Evangelist adding the tetrarch. GLoss. 
Having mentioned this supposition of John’s resurrection, 
because he had never yet spoken of his death, he now 
returns, and narrates how it came to pass. Currys. And 
this relation is not set before us as a principal matter, 
because the Evangelist’s only object was to tell us con- 
cerning Christ, and nothing beyond, unless so far as it 
furthered this object. He says then, For Herod had seized 


Aug. De John, and bound him. Avuc. Luke does not give this in the 
aa same order, but where he is speaking of the Lord’s baptism, 


so that he took beforehand an event which happened long 
afterwards. For after that saying of John’s concerning the 
Lord, that His fan is in His hand, he straightway adds this, 
which, as we may gather from John’s Gospel, did not follow 
immediately. For he relates that after Jesus was baptized, 
He went into Galilee, and thence returned into Judza, and 
baptized there near to the Jordan before John was cast into 
prison. But neither Matthew nor Mark have placed John’s 
imprisonment in that order in which it appears from their 
own writings that it took place; for they also say that when 
John was delivered up, the Lord went into Galilee, and 
after many things there done, then by occasion of the fame 
of Christ reaching Herod they relate what took place in the 
imprisonment and beheading of John. The cause for which 
he had been cast into prison he shews when he says, On 
account of Herodias his brother's wife. For John had said 
unto him, It ts not lawful for thee to have her. JEROME; 
The old history tells us, that Philip the son of Herod the 
greater, the brother of this Herod, had taken to wife He- 
rodias daughter of Aretas, king of the Arabs; and that he, 
the father-in-law, having afterwards cause of quarrel with 
his son-in-law, took away his daughter, and to grieve her 
husband gave her in marriage to his enemy Herod. John 
the Baptist therefore, who came in the spirit and power of 
Elias, with the same authority that he had exerted over 


VER. 6—12. ST. MATTHEW. 525 


Ahab and Jezebel, rebuked Herod and Herodias, because 
that they had entered into unlawful wedlock; it being 
unlawful while the own brother yet lives to take his wife. 

He preferred to endanger himself with the King, than to be 
forgetful of the commandments of God in commending 
himself to him. CHrys. Yet he speaks not to the woman 

but to the husband, as he was the chief person. Goss. And Gloss 
perhaps he observed the Jewish Law, according to which” 
John forbade him this adultery. And desiring to kill him, 

he feared the people. JEROME; He feared a disturbance 
among the people for John’s sake, for he knew that multi- 
tudes had been baptized by him in Jordan; but he was 
overcome by love of his wife, which had already made him 
neglect the commands of God. Gutoss. The fear of God Gloss. 
amends us, the fear of man torments us, but alters not our” - 
will; it rather renders us more impatient to sin as it has 
held us back for a time from our indulgence. 


6. But when Herod’s birthday was kept, the 
daughter of Herodias danced before them, and 
pleased Herod. 

7. Whereupon he promised with an oath to give 
her whatsoever she would ask. : 

8. And she, being before instructed of her mother, 
said, Give me here John Baptist’s head in a charger. 

9. And the king was sorry: nevertheless for the 
oath’s sake, and them which sat with him at meat, 
he commanded it to be given her. 

10. And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison. 

11. And his head was brought in a charger, and 
given to the damsel: and she brought it to her 
mother. 

12. And his disciples came, and took up the body, 
and buried it, and went and told Jesus. 


Gtoss. The Evangelist having related John’s imprison- Gloss. 
ment, proceeds to his putting to death, saying, But on“ °° 
Herod's birthday, the daughter of Herodias danced in the 


Isidore, 
Lib. 


§26 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


midst. J&RoME; We find no others keeping their birthday 
besides Herod and Pharaoh, that they who were alike in 
their wickedness might be alike in their festivities. REMIG. 
It should be known that it is customary not for rich only 
but for poor mothers also, to educate their daughters so 
chastely, that they are scarce so much as scen by strangers. 
But this unchaste woman had so brought up her daughter 
after the same manner, that she had taught her not chastity 
but dancing. Nor is Herod to be less blamed who forgot 
that his was a royal palace, but this woman made it a 
theatre; And it pleased Herod, so that he swore with an 
oath that he would give her whatsoever she should ask of 
him. JEROME; I do not excuse Herod that he committed 
this murder against his will by reason of his oath, for 
perhaps he took the oath for the very purpose of bringing 
about the murder. But if he says that he did it for his oath’s 
sake, had she asked the death of her mother, or her father, 
would he have granted it or not? What then he would have 
refused in his own person, he ought to have rejected in that 
of the Prophet. Isipore; In evil promises then break 


; faith. That promise is impious which must be kept by 


crime; that oath is not to be observed by which we have 
unwittingly pledged ourselves to evil. It follows, And she 
being before instructed of her mother said, Give me here 
John Baptist’s head in a charger. JEROME; For Herodias, 
fearing that Herod might some time recover his senses, and 
be reconciled to his brother, and dissolve their unlawful 
union by a divorce, instructs her daughter to ask at once 
at the banquet the head of John, a reward of blood worthy 
of the deed of the dancing. Curys. Here is a twofold 
accusation against the damsel, that she danced, and that she 
chose to ask an execution as her reward. Observe how 
Herod is at once cruel and yielding ; he obliges himself by 
an oath, and leaves her free to choose her request. Yet 
when he knew what evil was resulting from her request, 
he was grieved, And the king was sorry, for virtue gains 
praise and admiration even among the bad. JEROME; 
Otherwise ; It is the manner of Scripture to speak of events 
as they were commonly viewed at the time by all. So 
Joseph is called by Mary herself the father of Jesus; so here 


VER. 6—12. ST. MATTHEW. 527 


Herod is said to be sorry, because the guests believed that 

he was so. -This dissembler of his own inclinations, this 
contriver of a murder displayed sorrow in his face, when 

he had joy in his mind. For his oath’s sake, and them 
which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given. 

He excuses his crime by his oath, that his wickedness 
might be done under a pretence of piety. That he adds, 
and them that sat at meat with him, he would have them 

all sharers in his crime, that a bloody dish might be brought 

in in a luxurious feast. Cuerys. If he was afraid to have so 
many witnesses of his perjury, how much more ought he to 
have feared so many witnesses of a murder? Remic. Here 

is a less sin done for the sake of another greater; he would 

not extinguish his lustful desires, and therefore he betakes 
him to luxurious living; he would not put any restraint 

on his luxury, and thus he passes to the guilt of murder; 

for, He sent and beheaded John in prison, and his head was 
brought in a charger. JERoME; We read in Roman history, Hieron. 
that Flaminius, a Roman general, sitting at supper with his a, 
mistress, on her saying that she had never seen a man 43. 
beheaded, gave permission that a man under sentence for a 
capital crime should be brought in and beheaded during the 
entertainment. For this he was expelled the senate by the 
censors, because he had mingled feasting with blood, and 

had employed death, though of a criminal, for the amuse- 
ment of another, causing murder and enjoyment to be joined 
together. How much more wicked Herod, and Herodias, 

and the damsel who danced; she asked as her bloody 
reward the head of a Prophet, that she might have in her 
power the tongue that reproved the unlawful nuptials. 
Grea. But not without most deep wonder do I consider, Greg. 
that he who in his mother’s womb was filled with the spirit his si 
of prophecy, than whom there arose not a greater among 
them that are born of women, is cast into prison by wicked 
men, and is beheaded because of the dancing of a girl, and 

that a man of such severe life dies for the sport of shameful 
men. Are we to think that there was any thing in his life 
which this so shameful death should wipe away ? God thus 
oppresses His people in the least things, because He sees 
how He may reward them in the highest things. And 


Gree, 
Mor. 
K\iX. 7. 


Raban. 
Antiq. 
xviii. 5. 
Macha- 
rus. 
Chrys. 
Hom. 
xlix. 


528 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


hence may be gathered what they will suffer whom He casts 
away, if He thus tortures those He loves. Ip. And John 
is not sought out to suffer concerning the confession of 
Christ, but for the truth of righteousness. But because 
Christ is truth, he goes to death for Christ in going for 
truth. It follows, And his disciples came, and took up his 
body, and buried it. JEROME; By which we may under- 
stand both the disciples of John himself, and of the Saviour. 
Raxsan. Josephus relates, that John was sent bound to the 
castle of Mecheron, and there beheaded; but ecclesiastical 
history relates that he was buried in Sebastia, a town of 
Palestine, which was formerly called Samaria. CHrys. 
Observe how John’s disciples are henceforth more attached 
to Jesus; they it is who told Him what was done con- 
cerning John; And they came and told Jesus. For leaving 
all they take refuge with Him, and so by degrees after their 
calamity, and the answer given by Christ, they are set right. 
Hitary ; Mystically, John represents the Law; for the Law 
preached Chnist, and John came of the Law, preaching 
Christ out of the Law. Herod is the Prince of the people, 
and the Prince of the people bears the name and the cause of 
the whole body put under him. John then warned Herod 
that he should not take to him his brother’s wife. For there 
are and there were two people, of the circumcision, and of 
the Gentiles; and these are brethren, children of the same 
parent of the human race, but the Law warned Israel that 
he should not take to him the works of the Gentiles and un- 
belief which was united to them as by the bond of conjugal 
love. On the birthday, that is amidst the enjoyments of the 
things of the body, the daughter of Herodias danced ; for 
pleasure, as it were springing from unbelief, was carried in its 
alluring course throughout the whole of Israel, and the 
nation bound itself thereto as by an oath, for for sin and 
worldly pleasures the Israelites sold the gifts of eternal life. 
She (Pleasure), at the suggestion of her mother Unbelief, 
begged that there should be given her the head of John, 
that is, the glory of the Law; but the people knowing the 
good that was in the Law, yielded these terms to pleasure, 
not without sorrow for its own danger, conscious that it 
ought not to have given up so great glory of its teachers. 


VER. 13, 14. ST. MATTHEW. 529 


But forced by its sins, as by the force of an oath, as well as 
overcome by the fear, and corrupted by the example of the 
neighbouring princes, it sorrowfully yields to the blandish- 
ments of pleasure. So among the other gratifications of a 
debauched people the head of John is brought in in a dish, 
that is by the loss of the Law, the pleasures of the body, 
and worldly luxury is increased. It is carried by the damsel 
to her mother; thus depraved Israel offered up the glory of 
the Law to pleasure and unbelief. The times of the Law 
being expired, and buried with John, his disciples declare 
what is done to the Lord, coming, that is, to the Gospels 
from the Law. Rasan. Otherwise; Even at this day we 
see that in the head of the Prophet John the Jews have lost 
Christ, who is the head of the Prophets. JERomE; And the 
Prophet has lost among them both tongue and voice. 
Remic. Otherwise; The beheading of John marks the 
merease of that fame which Christ has among the people, 
as the exaltation of the Lord upon the cross marks the 
progress of the faith; whence John had said, He must hae 3, 
increase, but I must decrease. ; 


. 


13. When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence 
by ship into a desert place apart: and when the 
people had heard thereof, they followed him on foot 


out of the cities. 
14. And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multi- 
tude, and was moved with compassion toward them, 


and he healed their sick. 


_Gtoss. The Saviour having heard the death of His Baptist, Gloss. 
retired into the desert; as it follows, which when Jesus had ta 
heard, he departed thence by ship into a desert place. AUG. Aug. De 
This the Evangelist relates to have been done immediately Bene ik 
after the passion of John, therefore after this were those things 
done that were spoken of above, and moved Herod to 
say, This is John. For we must suppose those things to 
have been after his death which report carried to Herod, 
and which moved him to doubt who he could be concerning 


VOL. I. QM 


§30 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


whom he heard such things; for himself had put John to 
death. JEROME; He did not retire into the desert through 
fear of death, as some suppose, but in mercy to His enemies, 
that they might not add murder to murder; putting off His 
death till the day of His passion; on which day the lamb is 
to be slain as the sacrament, and the posts of them that 
believe to be sprinkled with the blood. Or, He retired to 
leave us an example to shun that rashness which leads men 
to surrender themselves voluntarily, because not all persevere 
with like constancy under torture with the which they 
offered themselves to it. For this reason He says in another 
place, When they shall persecute you in one city, flee ye to 
another. Whence the Evangelist says not ‘ fled,’ but 
elegantly, deparled thence, (or, ‘ withdrew,’) shewing that 
He shunned rather than feared persecution. Or for another 
reason He might have withdrawn into a desert place on 
hearing of John’s death, namely, to prove the faith of the 
believers. Currys. Or; He did this because He desired to 
prolong the economy of His humanity, the time not being 
yet come for openly manifesting His deity ; wherefore also 
He charged His disciples that they should tell no man that 
He was the Christ. But after His resurrection He would 
have this made manifest. Therefore although He knew of 
Himself what was done, yet before it was told Him He 
withdrew not, that He might shew the verity of His incar- 
nation in all things; for He would that this should be 
assured not by sight only, but by His actions. And when 
He withdrew, He did not go into the city, but into the 
desert by ship that none might follow Him. Yet do not the 
multitudes Jeave Him even for this, but still follow after 
Him, not deterred by what had been done concerning John ; 
whence it follows, And when the multitudes had heard 
thereof, they followed him on foot out of the cities. 
JERoME; They followed on foot, not riding, or in carriages, 
but with the toil of their own legs, to shew the ardour of 
their mind. Curys. And they immediately reap the reward 
of this; for it follows, And he went out and saw a great 
multitude, and he had compassion upon them, and healed 
their sick. For though great was the affection of those 
who had left their cities, and sought Him carefully, yet the 


VER. 15—2I. ST. MATTHEW. o3l 


things that were done by Him surpassed the reward of any 
zeal. Therefore he assigns compassion as the cause of this 
healing. And it is great compassion to heal all, and not to 
require faith. H1itary; Mystically ; The Word of God, on 
the close of the Law, entered the ship, that is, the Church ; 

and departed into the desert, that is, leaving to walk with 
Israel, He passes into breasts void of Divine knowledge. 
The multitude learning this, follows the Lord out of the city 
into the desert, going, that is, from the Synagogue to the 
Church. The Lord sees them, and has compassion upon 
them, and heals all sickness and infirmity, that is, He 
cleanses their obstructed minds, and unbelieving hearts 
for the understanding of the new preaching. JEROME; It is 
to be observed moreover, that when the Lord came into the 
desert, great crowds followed Him; for before He went 
into the wilderness of the Gentiles, He was worshipped 
by only one people. They leave their cities, that is, their 
former conversation, and various dogmas. ‘That Jesus went 
out, shews that the multitudes had the will to go, but 
not the strength to attain, therefore the Saviour departs out 
of His place and goes to meet them. 


15. And when it was evening, his disciples came 
to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time 
is now past; send the multitude away, that they 
may go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals. 

16. But Jesus said unto them, They need not 
depart; give ye them to eat. 

17. And they say unto him, We have here but 
five loaves, and two fishes. 

18. He said, Bring them hither to me. 

19. And he commanded the multitude to sit down 
on the grass, and took the five loaves, and the two 
fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and 
brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the 
disciples to the multitude. 

20. And they did all eat, and were filled: and 

2M 2 


Ps. 78, 
19. 


532 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


they took up of the fragments that remained twelve 
baskets full. 

21. And they that had eaten were about five 
thousand men, beside women and children. 


Curys. It is a proof of the faith of these multitudes that 
they endured hunger in waiting for the Lord even till 
evening; to which purpose it follows, And when tt was 
evening, his disciples came unto him, saying, This is a desert 
place, and the time is now past. The Lord purposing to 
feed them waits to be asked, as always not stepping forward 
first to do miracles, but when called upon. None out of the 
crowd approached Him, both because they stood in great 
awe of Him, and because in their zeal of love they did not 
feel their hunger. But even the disciples do not come and 
say, Give them to eat; for the disciples were as yet in an 
imperfect condition; but they say, 7his 7s a desert place. 
So that what was proverbial among the Jews to express a 
miracle, as it is said, Can he spread a table in the uwilder- 
ness ? this also He shews among his other works. For this 
cause also He leads them out into the desert, that the 
miracle might be clear of all suspicion, and that none might 
suppose that any thing was supplied towards the feast from 
any neighbouring town. But though the place be desert, 
yet is He there who feeds the world; and though the hour 
is, as they say, past, yet He who now commanded was not 
subjected to hours. And though the Lord had gone before 
His disciples in healing many sick, yet they were so im- 
perfect that they could not judge what He would do con- 
cerning food for them, wherefore they add, Send the 
multitude away, that they may go into the towns, and buy 
themselves food. Observe the wisdom of the Master; He 
says not straightway to them, ‘ I will give them to eat;’ for 
they would not easily have received this, but, Jesws said 
unto them, They need not depart, Give ye them to eat. 
JEROME; Wherein He calls the Apostles to breaking of 
bread, that the greatness of the miracle might be more 


Aug. Deevident by their testimony that they had none. Ava. It 
Ey ii.46. may perplex some how, if the Lord, according to the relation 


VER. 15—21. ST. MATTHEW. 533 


of John, asked Philip whence bread was to be found for 
them, that can be true which Matthew here relates, that the 
disciples first prayed the Lord to send the multitudes away, 

that they might buy food from the nearest towns. Suppose 

then that after these words the Lord looked upon the multi- 

tude and said what John relates, but Matthew and the others 

have omitted. And by such cases as this none ought to be 
perplexed, when one of the Evangelists relates what the 

rest have omitted. CHryrs. Yet not even by these words 

were the disciples set right, but speak yet to Him as to 
man; They answered unto Him, We have here but five 
loaves and tico fishes. From this we learn the philosophy 

of the disciples, how far they despised food; they were 
twelve in number, yet they had but five loaves and two 
fishes; for things of the body were contemned by them, 

they were altogether possessed by spiritual things. But 
because the disciples were yet attracted to earth, the Lord 
begins to introduce the things that were of Himself; He 
saith unto them, Bring them hither to me. Wherefore does 

He not create out of nothing the bread to feed the multi- 

tude with? That He might put to silence the mouth of 
Marcion and Manicheus, who take away from God Hisi.e. deny 
creatures, and by His deeds might teach that all things at Got 
that are seen are His works and creation, and that it is He the visi- 
that has given us the fruits of the earth, who said in the world. 
beginning, Let the earth bring forth the green herb; forGen.1, 
this is no less a deed than that. For of five loaves to make" 

so many loaves, and fishes in like manner, is no less a thing 

than to bring fruits from the earth, reptiles and other 
living things from the waters; which shewed Him to be 
Lord both of land and sea. By the example of the disciples 

also we ought to be taught, that though we should have but 
little, we ought to give that to such as have need. For 

they when bid to bring their five loaves say not, Whence 

shall we satisfy our own hunger? but immediately obey ; 

And He commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, 

and look the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up 

to heaven blessed them, and brake. Why did He look to 
heaven and bless? For it should be believed concerning 

Him that He is from the Father, and that He is equal with 


534 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


the Father. His equality He shews when He does all 
things with power. That He is from the Father He shews 
by referring to Him whatsoever He does, and calling upon 
Him on all occasions. To prove these two things therefore, 
He works His miracles at times with power, at other times 
with prayer: It should be considered also that in lesser 
things He looks to heaven, but in greater He does all with 
power. When He forgave sins, raised the dead, stilled the 
sea, opened the secrets of the heart, opened the eyes of him 
that was born blind, which were works only of God, He is 
not seen to pray ; but when He multiplies the loaves, a work 
less than any of these, He looks up to heaven, that you may 
learn that even in little things He has no power but from 
His Father. And at the same time He teaches us not to 
touch our food, until we have returned thanks to Him who 
gives it us. For this reason also He looks up to heaven, 
because His disciples had exainples of many other miracles, 
but none of this. JEROME; While the Lord breaks there is 
a sowing of food; for had the loaves been whole and not 
broken into fragments, and thus divided into a manifold 
harvest, they could not have fed so great a multitude. The 
multitude receives the food from the Lord through the 
Apostles; as it follows, And he gave the loaves to his 
disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. Curys. In 
doing which He not only honoured them, but would that 
upon this miracle they should not be unbelieving, nor forget 
it when it was past, seeing their own hands had bore 
witness to it. Therefore also He suffers the multitudes first 
to feel the sense of hunger, and His disciples to come to 
Him, and to ask Him, and He took the loaves at their 
hands, that they might have many testimonies of that that 
was done, and many things to remind them of the miracle. 
From this that He gave them, nothing more than bread and 
fish, and that He set this equally before all, He taught 
them moderation, frugality, and that charity by which they 
should have all things in common. This He also taught 
them in the place, in making them sit down upon the grass ; 
for He sought not to feed the body only, but to instruct the 
mind. But the bread and fish multiplied in the disciples’ 
hands; whence it follows, And they did all eat, and tere 


VER. 15—21. ST. MATTHEW. 535 


Jfilled. But the miracle ended not here; for He caused to 
abound not only whole loaves, but fragments also; to shew 
that the first loaves were not so much as what was left, and 
that they who were not present might learn what had been 
done, and that none might think that what had been done 
was a phantasy; And they took up fragments that were left, 
twelve baskets full. JeRoME; Each of the Apostles fills his 
basket of the fragments left by his Saviour, that these frag- 
ments might witness that they were true loaves that were 
multiplied. CHrys. For this reason also He caused twelve 
baskets to remain over and above, that Judas might bear his 
basket. He took up the fragments, and gave them to the 
disciples and not to the multitudes, who were yet more 
imperfectly trained than the discipies. J&RoME; To the 
number of loaves, five, the number of the men that ate is 
apportioned, five thousand; And the number of them that 
had eaten was about five thousand men, besides women and 
children. CuHrys. This was to the very great credit of the 
people, that the women and the men stood up when these 
remnants still remained. HILARY; The five loaves are not 
multiplied into more, but fragments succeed to fragments; 
the substance growing whether upon the tables, or in the 
hands that took them up, I know not. RaBan. When John 
is to describe this miracle, he first tells us that the passover 
is at hand; Matthew and Mark place it immediately after 
the execution of John. Hence we may gather, that he was 
beheaded when the paschal festival was near at hand, and 
that at the passover of the following year, the mystery of the 
Lord’s passion was accomplished. JEROME; But all these 
things are full of mysteries ; the Lord does ¢hese things not 
in the morning, nor at noon, but in the evening, when the 
Sun of nghteousness was set. Remic. By the evening the 
Lord’s death is denoted ; and after He, the true Sun, was set 
on the altar of the cross, He filled the hungry. Or by 
evening 1s denoted the last age of this world, in which the 
Son of God came and refreshed the multitudes of those that 
believed on Him. Rasan. When the disciples ask the Lord 
to send away the multitudes that they might buy food in 
the towns, it signifies the pride of the Jews towards the 
multitudes of the Gentiles, whom they judged rather fit 


936 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


to seek for themselves food in the assemblies of the Pharisees 
than to use the pasture of the Divine books. Hitary; But 
the Lord answered, They have no need to go, shewing that 
those whom He heals have no need of the food of mercenary 
doctrine, and have no necessity to return to Judza to buy 
food; and He commands the Apostles that they give them 
food. Did He not know then that there was nothing to give 
them? But there was a complete series of types to be set 
forth; for as yet 1t was not given the Apostles to make 
and minister the heavenly bread, the food of eternal life ; 
and their answer thus belongs to the chain of spiritual 
interpretation; they were as yet confined to the five loaves, 
that is, the five books of the Law, and the two fishes, that 
is, the preaching of the Prophets and of John. RasBan. Or, 
by the two fishes we may understand the Prophets, and the 
Psalins, for the whole of the Old Testament was compre- 
hended in these three, the Law, the Prophets, and the 
Psalms. Hitary; These therefore the Apostles first set 
forth, because they were yet in these things ; and from these 
things the preaching of the Gospel grows to its more abun- 
dant strength and virtue. Then the people is commanded 
to sit down upon the grass, as no longer lying upon the 
ground, but resting upon the Law, each one reposing upon 
the fruit of his own works as upon the grass of the earth. 
JEROME; Or, they are bid to lie down on the grass, and 
that, according to another Evangelist, by fifties and by 
hundreds, that after they have trampled upon their flesh, 
and have subjugated the pleasures of the world as dried 
grass under them, then by the presence* of the number 
fifty, they ascend to the eminent perfection of a hundred. 
He looks up to heaven to teach us that our eyes are 
to be directed thither. The Law with the Prophets 
is broken, and in the midst of them are brought forward 
mysteries, that whereas they partook not of 1t whole, when 
broken into pieces it may be food for the multitude of the 


* Vallarsi reads penitentiam, Jerome number fifty; for fifty twice taken 


has borrowed the intcrpretation from 
Origen who refers to the year of jubilee; 
and the Glossa ordinaria on this verse 
is, ‘* The rest of the Jubilee is here 


contained under the mystery of the ~ 


makes a hundred; because we must 
first rest from evil actions, that the 
soul may afterwards more fully repose 
in meditation.” 


VER, 22—33. ST. MATTHEW. 537 


Gentiles. L{inary; Then the loaves are given to the 
Apostles, because through them the gifts of divine grace 
were to be rendered. And the number of them that did eat 
is found to be the same as that of those who should believe; 
for we find in the book of Acts that out of the vast number 
of the people of Israel, five thousand men believed. JEROME; 
There partook five thousand who had reached maturity ;_ for 
women and children, the weaker sex, and the tender age, 
were unworthy of number; thus in the book of Numbers, 
slaves, women, children, and an undistinguished crowd, are 
passed over unnumbered. Rasan. The multitude being 
hungry, He creates no new viands, but having taken what 
the disciples had, He gave thanks. In like manner when 
He came in the flesh, He preached no other things than 
what had been foretold, but shewed that the writings of the 
Law and the Prophets were big with mysteries. That 
which the multitude leave is taken up by the disciples, 
because the more secret mysteries which cannot be compre- 
hended by the uninstructed, are not to be treated with 
neglect, but are to be diligently sought out by the twelve 
Apostles (who are represented by the twelve baskets) and 
their successors. For by baskets servile offices are per- 
formed, and God has chosen the weak things of the world 
to confound the strong. The five thousand for the five 
senses of the body are they who in a secular condition 
know how to use rightly things without. 


22. And straightway Jesus constrained his dis- 
ciples to get into a ship, and to go before him unto 
the other side, while he sent the multitudes away. 

23. And when he had sent the multitudes away, 
he went up into a mountain apart to pray: and when 
the evening was come, he was there alone. 

24. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, 
tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary. 

25. And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus 
went unto them, walking on the sea. 

26. And when the disciples saw him walking on 


538 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit ; 
and they cried out for fear. 

27. But straightway Jesus spake unto them, say- 
ing, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid. 

28. And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it 
be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water. 

29. And he said, Come. And when Peter was 
come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, 
to go to Jesus. 

30. But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was 
afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, 
Lord, save me. 

31. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his 
hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of 
little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt ? 

32. And when they were come into the ship, the 
wind ceased. 

33. Then they that were in the ship came and 
worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son 
of God. 


Currys. Desiring to occasion a diligent examination of 
the things that had been done, He commanded those who 
had beheld the foregoing sign to be separated from Him ; 
for even if He had continued present it would have been 
said that He had wrought the miracle fantastically, and not 
in verity ; but it would never be urged against Him that He 
had done it in His absence; and therefore it is said, And 
straightway Jesus compelled his disciples to get into a ship, 
and to go before him to the other side, while he sent the 
multitudes away. JEROME; These words shew that they 
left the Lord unwillingly, not desiring through their love for 
their teacher to be separated from Him even for a moment. 
Curys. It should be observed, that when the Lord works a 
great miracle, He sends the multitudes away, teaching us 
thereby never to pursue the praise of the multitude, nor to 
attract them to us. Further, He teaches us that we should 


VER. 22—33. ST. MATTHEW. 539 


not be ever mixed with crowds, nor yet always shunning 
them; but that both may be done with profit; whence it 
follows, And when he had sent the multitude away, he went 
up into a mountain apart to pray; shewing us that solitude 

is good, when we have need to pray to God. For this also 
He goes into the desert, and there spends the night in 
prayer, to teach us that for prayer we should seek stillness 
both in time and place. JEROME; That He withdraws to 
pray alone, you should refer not to Him who fed five thousand 
on five loaves, but to Him who on hearing of the death of 
John withdrew into the desert; not that we would separate 
the Lord’s person into two parts, but that His actions are 
divided between the God and the man. Auc. This may Aus. De 
seem contrary to that Matthew says, that having sent the ae 
multitudes away, He went up into a mountain that He might 
pray alone ; and John again says, that it was on a mountain 
that He fed this same multitude. But since John himself 
says further, that after that miracle He retired to a mountain 
that He might not be held by the multitude, who sought to 
make Him a king, it is clear that He had come down from the 
mountain when He fed them. Nor do Matthew’s words, He 
went up inio a mountain alone to pray, disagree with this, 
though John says, When he knew that they would come to John 6, 
make him a king, he withdrew into a mountain himself alone.” 
For the cause of His praying is not contrary to the cause of 
His retiring, for herein the Lord teaches us that we have great 
cause for prayer when we have cause for flight. Nor, again, 

is it contrary to this that Matthew says first, that He bade 
His disciples go into the boat, and then that He sent the 
multitudes away, and went into a mountain alone to pray; 
while John relates that He first withdrew to the mountain, 
and then, when it was late, his disciples went down to the 
sea, and when they had entered into a boat, Sc. for who does 
not see that John is relating as afterwards done by His disci- 
ples what Jesus had commanded before He retired into the 
mountain? JEROME; Rightly had the Apostles departed from 
the Lord as unwilling, and slow to leave Him, lest they 
should suffer shipwreck whilst Ie was not with them. For 

it follows, Now when it was evening he was there alone; that 
is,in the mountain; bul the boat was in the middle of the 


540 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


sea tossed with the waves; for the wind was contrary. 
Currys. Again, the disciples suffer shipwreck, as they had 
done before; but then they had Him in the boat, but now 
they are alone. This gradually He leads them to higher 
things, and instructs them to endure all manfully. JEROME; 
While the Lord tarries in the top of the mountam, straightway 
a wind arises contrary to them, and stirs up the sea, and 
the disciples are in imminent peril of shipwreck, which con- 
tinues till Jesus comes. CuHrys. But He suffers thein to be 
tossed the whole night, exciting their hearts by fear, and 
inspiring them with greater desire and more Jasting recollec- 
tion of Him; for this reason He did not stand by them 
immediately, but as it follows, zn the fourth watch of the 
night he came to them walking upon the sea. JEROME; The 
military guards and watches are divided into portions of three 
hours each. When then he says that the Lord came to them 
in the fourth watch, this shews that they had been in danger 
the whole night. CuHrys. Teaching them not to seek a 
speedy riddance of coming evil, but to bear manfully such 
things as befal them. But when they thought that they were 
delivered, then was their fear increased, whence it follows, 
And seeing him walking upon the sea, they were troubled, 
saying, It is a vision, and through fear they cried out. For 
this the Lord ever does; when He is to rescue from any evil, 
He brings in things terrible and difficult. For since it is 
impossible that our temptation should continue a long time, 
when the warfare of the righteous is to be finished, then He 
increases their conflicts, desiring to make greater gain of 
them ; which He did also in Abraham, making his hot con- 
flict his trial of the loss of his son. JrERomME; A confused 
noise and uncertain sound is the mark of great fear. But if, 
according to Marcion and Manicheus, our Lord was not 
born of a virgin, but was seen in a phantasm, how is it that 
the Apostles now fear that they have seen a phantasm (or 
vision)? Curys. Christ then did not reveal Himself to His 
disciples until they cried out ; for the more intense their fear, 
the more did they rejoice in His presence ; whence it follows, 
And immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying, Be of good 
cheer, tt is I, be nol afraid. This speech took away their 
fear, and prepared their confidence. JEROME; Whereas He 


VER. 22—83. ST. MATTHEW. 541 


says, Zt is I, without saying who, either they might be able 
to understand Him speaking through the darkness of night; 
or they might know that it was He who had spoken to Moses, 
Say unto the children of Israel, He that is has sent me unto Exod.3, 
you. On every occasion Peter is found to be the one of the os 
most ardent faith. And with the same zeal as ever, so now, 
while the others are silent, he believes that by the will of his 
Master he will be able to do that which by nature he cannot 
do; whence it follows, Peter answered and said unto him, 
Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee upon the water. 
As much as to say, Do thou command, and straightway it 
will become solid; and that body which is in itself heavy 
will become light. Auc. This I am not able by myself, but Aug. 
in Thee I am able. Peter confessed what he was in himself, ae 
and what he should receive from Him by whose will he be- 
lieved he should be enabled to do that which no human 
infirmity was equal to. Curys. See how great his warmth, 
how great his faith. He said not, Pray and entreat for me; 
but Bid me; he believes not only that Christ can Himself 
walk on the sea, but that He can lead others also thereon ; 
also he wishes to come to Him speedily, and this, so great a 
thing, he asks not from ostentation, but from love. For he 
said not, Bid me walk upon the waters, but, Bid me come 
unto thee. And it seems that having shewn in the first 
miracle that He has power over the sea, He now leads them 
to a more powerful sign; He saith unto him, Come. And 
Peter, going forth of the boat, walked on the sea, that he 
might go to Jesus. JEROME; Let those who think that the 
Lord’s body was not real, because He walked upon the yield- 
ing waters as a light ethereal substance, answer here how 
Peter walked, whom they by no means deny to be man. 
RaBan. Lastly, Theodorus wrote that the Lord had not bodily 
weight in respect of His flesh, but without weight walked on 
the sea. But the catholic faith preaches the contrary; for 
Dionysius says that He walked on the wave, without the feet 
being immersed, having bodily weight, and the burden of 
matter. CHrys. Peter overcame that which was greater, the 
waves, namely, of the sea, but is troubled by the lesser, the 
blowing wind, for it follows, But seeing the wind boisterous, 
he was afraid. Such is human nature, in great trials ofttimes 


od 


Aug. 
Serm.76. 
8. 


Raban. 
non occ. 


3942 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


holding itself aright, and in lesser falling into fault. This 
fear of Peter shewed the difference between Master and 
disciple, and thereby appeased the other disciples. For if 
they had indignation when the two brothers prayed to sit on 
the right and left hand, much more had they now. For they 
were not yet made spiritual ; afterwards when they had been 
made spiritual, they every where yield the first place to Peter, 
and appoint him to lead in harangues to the people. JEROME; 
Moreover he is left to temptation for a short season, that his 
faith may be increased, and that he may understand that he is 
saved not by his ability to ask, but by the power of the Lord. 
For faith burned at his heart, but human frailty drew him into 
thedeep. Ava. Peter then presumed on the Lord, he tottered 
as man, but returned to the Lord, as it follows, And when 
he began to sink, he cried out, saying, Lord, save me. Does 
the Lord then desert him in his peril of failure whom he had 
hearkened to when he first called on Him? Immediately 
Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him. Curys. 
He bade not the winds to cease, but stretched forth His hand 
and caught him, because his faith was required. For when 
our own means fail, then those which are of God stand. 
Then to shew that not the strength of the tempest, but the 
smallness of his faith worked the danger, He saith unto him, 
O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt ? which shews 
that not even the wind would have been able to hurt him, 
if his faith had been firm. But as the mother bears on her 
wings and brings back to the nest her chick which has left 
the nest before its time and has fallen, so did Christ. And 
when they were come into the boat, the wind ceased. Then 
they that were in the boat came and worshipped him, saying, 
Truly thou art the Son of God. Rasan. This may be 
understood either of the sailors, or of the Apostles. Curys. 
Observe how He leads all gradually to that which is above 
them; He had before rebuked the sea, now He shews forth 
His power yet more by walking upon the sea, by bidding 
another to do the same, and by saving him in his peril; 
therefore they said unto Him, 77vuly thou art the Son of 
God, which they had not said above. JEROME; If then 
upon this single miracle of stilling the sea, a thing which 
often happens by accident after even great tempests, the 


VER. 22—33. ST. MATTHEW. 543 


sailors and pilots confessed them to be truly the Son of God, 
how does Arrius preach in the Church itself that He is a crea- 
ture? Pseupo-Auc. Mystically ; The mountain is loftiness. Pseudo. 
But what is higher than the heavens in the world? And4 mug: 
Who it was that ascended into heaven, that our faith knows. Se 
Why did He ascend alone into heaven? Because no man a 
has ascended into heaven, but He that came down from 
heaven. For even when He shall come in the end, and 
shall have exalted us into heaven, He will yet ascend alone, 
inasmuch as the head with its body is One Christ, and now 
the head only is ascended. He went up to pray, because 
He is ascended to make intercession to His Father for us. 
Hitary; Or, that He is alone in the evening, signifies 
His sorrow at the time of His passion, when the rest were 
scattered from Him in fear. JERomME; Also He ascends 
into the mountain alone because the multitude cannot follow 
Him aloft, until He has instructed it by the shore of the sea. 
Ava. But while Christ prays on high, the boat is tossed Aug. 
with great waves in the deep; and forasmuch as the waves eee 
rise, that boat can be tossed; but because Christ prays, it 
cannot be sunk. Think of that boat as the Church, and the 
stormy sea as this world. Huitary; That He commands 
His disciples to enter the ship and to go across the sea, 
while He sends the multitudes away, and after that He 
goes up into the mountain to pray; He therein bids us to 
be within the Church, and to be in peril until such time 
as returning in His splendour He shall give salvation to all 
the people that sha]] be remaining of Israel, and shall for- 
give their sins ; and having dismissed them into His Father's 
kingdom, returning thanks to His Father, He shall sit down 
in His glory and majesty. Meanwhile the disciples are 
tossed by the wind and the waves; struggling against all 
the storms of this world, raised by the opposition of the 
unclean spirit. Auc. For when any of a wicked will and Aw. 
of great power, proclaims a persecution of the Church, pants 
then it is that a mighty wave rises against the boat of 
Christ. Rasan. Whence it is well said here, that the ship 
was in the middle of the sea, and He alone on the land, 
because the Church is sometimes oppressed with such per- 
secution that her Lord may seem to have forsaken her for 


544 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 
Quest. 
Ev.i.15. 


1Cor.3, 
15. 


Rom. 9, 


16. 


a season. AuG. The Lord came to visit His disciples who 
are tossed on the sea in the fourth watch of the night—that 
is, at its close; for each watch consisting of three hours, 
the night has thus four watches. Hu1tary; The first watch 
was therefore of the Law, the second of the Prophets, the 
third His coming in the flesh, the fourth His return in glory. 
Ava. Therefore in the fourth watch of the night, that is 
when the night is nearly ended, He shall come, in the end 
of the world, when the night of iniquity is past, to judge 
the quick and the dead. But His coming was with a wonder. 
The waves swelled, but they were trodden upon. Thus how- 
soever the powers of this world shall swell themselves, our 
Head shall crush their head. Htcary; But Christ coming 
in the end shall find His Church wearied, and tossed by 
the spirit of Anti-Christ, and by the troubles of the world. 
And because by their long experience of Anti-Christ they 
will be troubled at every novelty of trial, they shall have 
fear even at the approach of the Lord, suspecting deceitful 
appearances. But the good Lord banishes their fear, saying, 
Itis I; and by proof of His presence takes away their dread 
of inpending shipwreck. Avuc. Or; That the disciples here 
say, It isa phantasm, figures those who yielding to the Devil 
shall doubt of the coming of Christ. That Peter cries to 
the Lord for help that he should not be drowned, signifies 
that He shall purge His Church with certain trials even 
after the last persecution; as Paul also notes, saying, He 
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. Hitary; Or; That Peter 
alone out of all the number of those that were in the vessel 
has courage to answer, and to pray that the Lord would 
bid him come to Him upon the waters, figures the frowardness 
of his will in the Lord’s passion, when following after the 
Lord’s steps he endeavoured to attain to despise death. But 
his fearfulness shews his weakness in his after trial, when 
through fear of death, he was driven to the necessity of 
denial. His crying out here is the groaning of his re- 
pentance there. Rasan. The Lord looked back upon him, 
and brought him to repentance ; He stretched forth His hand, 
and forgave him, and thus the disciple found salvation, which 
ts not of him that willeth or of him that runneth, but of God 
that sheweth mercy. Hitary; That when Reter was seized 


VER. 34—936. ST MATTHEW. ‘“  §45 


with fear, the Lord gave him not power of coming to Him, 
but held him by the hand and sustained him, this is the 
signification thereof; that He who alone was to suffer for 
all alone forgave the sins of all; and no partner is admitted 
into that which was bestowed upon mankind by one. AUG. Aug. 
For in one Apostle, namely Peter, first and chief in the on 
order of Apostles in whom was figured the Church, both 
kinds were to be signified ; that is, the strong, in his walking 
upon the waters ; the weak, in that he doubted ; for to each 

of us our lusts are as a tempest. Dost thou love God? 
Thou walkest on the sea; the fear of this world is under 
thy feet. Dost thou love the world? It swallows thee up. 
But when thy heart is tossed with desire, then that thou 
mayest overcome thy lust, call upon the divine person of 
Christ. Remic. And the Lord will be with thee to help 
thee, when lulling to rest the perils of thy trials, He restores 
the confidence of His protection, and this towards the break 

of day; for when human frailty beset with difficulties con- 
siders the weakness of its own powers, it looks upon itself as 

in darkness; when it raises its view to the protection of 
heaven, it straightway beholds the rise of the morning star, 
which gives its light through the whole of the morning watch. 
RaBaNn. Nor should we wonder that the wind ceased when 
the Lord had entered into the boat; for in whatsoever heart 
the Lord is present by grace, there all wars cease. HILARY; 
Also by this entrance of Christ into the boat, and the calm 

of the wind and sea thereupon, is pointed out the eternal 
peace of the Church, and that rest which shall be after His 
‘return in glory. And forasmuch as He shall then appear 
manifestly, rightly do they all cry out now in wonder, Truly 
thou art the Son of God. For there shall then be a free and 
public confession of all men that the Son of God is come no 
longer in lowliness of body, but that He has given peace to 
the Church in heavenly glory. Avg. For it is here conveyed Aug. 
to us that His glory will then be made manifest, seeing that — a 
‘now they who walk by faith see it in a figure. 


34. And when they were gone over, they came 
into the land of Gennesaret. 

35. And when the men of that place had know- 

VOL. I. 2N 


046 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XIV. 


ledge of him, they sent out into all that country 
round about, and brought unto him all that were 
diseased ; 

36. And besought him that they might only touch 
the hem of his garment: and as many as touched 
were made perfectly whole. 


Remic. The Evangelist had related above that the Lord 
had commanded His disciples to enter the boat, and to go 
before Him across the strait; he now proceeds with the 
same intention to relate whither they arrived by their passage, 
And when they were gone over, they came into the land of 
Gennezareth. Rasan. The land of Gennezar, by the lake of 
Gennezareth, takes its name from a natural power which it 
is said to have of spontaneously modulating its waters so as 
to excite a breeze; the Greek words importing, ‘ creating for 
itself the breeze.’ Currys. But the Evangelist shews that it 
was now long time since Christ had come into these parts; 
for it follows, And when the men of that place knew him, 
they sent into all that region. JéEROME; They knew Him by 
fame, not by sight; although indeed by reason of the great- 
ness of the signs which He did among the people, He was 
known by face to great numbers. And note how great the 
faith of the men of the land of Gennezareth, that they were 
not content with the healing of the men of that country only, 
but sent to all the towns round about. CuHrys. Nor do they 
now as before drag Him to their houses, and seek the touch 
of His hand, but they draw Him by their greater faith, for 
they brought unto him all them that were sick, and besought 
him that they might touch but the hem of his garment. For 
the woman who suffered under the issue of blood had taught 
them all this wisdom, namely, that by touching the hem only 
of Christ’s garment they might be saved; therefore it follows, 
And as many as touched, were mude whole. JEROME; If we 
knew what the word Gennezareth would convey in our 
tongue, we might understand how under the type of the 
Apostles and the boat, Jesus guides to shore the Church 
when He has delivered it from the wreck of persecution, and 
makes it to rest in a most tranquil harbour. RaBan. Genezar 


VER. 84—36. ST. MATTHEW. ° 547 


is interpreted, ‘rise,’ ‘ beginning.’ For then will complete 
rest be given to us, when Christ shall have restored to us our 
inheritance of Paradise, and the joy of our first robe. HiLary; 
Otherwise; When the times of the Law were ended, and five 
thousand out of Israel were entered within the Church, it 
was then that the people of believers met Him, then those 
that were saved out of the Law by faith set before the Lord 
the rest of their sick and weak; and they that were thus 
brought sought to touch the hem of His garment, because 
through their faith they would be healed. And as the virtue 
of the hem proceeded from the whole garment, so the virtue 
of the grace of the Holy Spirit went forth from our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and imparted to the Apostles, who proceeded 
as it were from the same body, administers salvation to such 
as desire to touch. JEROME; Or, by the hem of the garment 
understand His least commandment, which whosoever trans- 
gresses, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; or, 
again, His assumption of the body, by which we come to the 
Word of God. Curys. But we have not a hem ora garment 
only of Christ, but have even His body, that we may eat 
thereof. If then they who touched the hem of His garment 
derived so much virtue therefrom, much more they that shall 
receive Himself whole. 


2n2 


CHAP. XV. 


_1. Then came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, 
which were of Jerusalem, saying, 

2. Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of 
the elders? for they wash not their hands when they 
eat bread. 

3. But he answered and said unto them, Why do 
ye also transgress the commandment of God by your 
tradition ? 

4. For God commanded, saying, Honour thy father 
and mother: and, He that curseth father or mother, 
let him die the death. 

5. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his father or 
his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest 
be profited by me; 

6. And honour not his father or his mother, he 
shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment 
of God of none effect by your tradition. 


RaBan. The men of Gennezareth and the less learned 
believe; but they who seem to be wise come to dispute with 

Him; according to that, Thou hast hid these things from the 

wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. 
Whence it is said, Zhen came to him from Jerusalem Scribes 

Aug. deand Phurisees. AuG. The Evangelist thus constructs the 
ae order of his narrative, Then came unto him, that, as appeared 
49. in the passage over the lake, the order of the events that 
Chrys. followed that might be shewn. Curys. For this reason also 
Hom.li-the Evangelist marks the time that He may shew their 


VER. 1—6. GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. 549 


iniquity overcome by nothing; for they came to Him at 

a time when He had wrought many miracles, when He had 
healed the sick by the touch of His hem. That the Scribes 

and Pharisees are here said to have come from Jerusalem, it 
should be known that they were dispersed through all the 
tribes, but those that dwelt in the Metropolis were worse than 

the others, their higher dignity inspiring them with a greater 
degree of pride. Remic. They were faulty for two reasons; 
because they had come from Jerusalem, from the holy city ; 
and because they were elders of the people, and doctors of 

the Law, and had not come to learn but to reprove the Lord; 

for itis added, Saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the 
tradition of the elders? JEROME; Wonderful infatuation of 

the Pharisees and Scribes! They accuse the Son of God 
that He does not keep the traditions and commandments of 
men. CuHrys. Observe, how they are taken in their own 
question. They say not, ‘ Why do they transgress the Law 

of Moses?’ but, the tradition of the elders; whence it is 
manifest that the Priests had introduced many new things, 
although Moses had said, Ye shall not add ought to the word Deut. 4, 
which I set before you this day, neither shall ye take ought” 
away from it; and when they ought to have been set free 
from observances, then they bound themselves by many 
more; fearing lest any should take away their rule and 
power, they sought to increase the awe in which they were 
held, by setting themselves forth as legislators. Remic. Of 
what kind these traditions were, Mark shews when he says, 
The Pharisees and all the Jews, except they wash their Mark 
hands oft, eat not. Here then also they find fault with the en 
disciples, saying, For they wash not their hands when they 

eat bread. Bepe; Taking carnally those words of the Pro- Beda in 
phets, in which it is said, Wash, and be ye clean, they > arb 
observed it only in washing the body; hence they had laid Is. 16. 
it down that we ought not to eat with unwashen hands. 
JEROME; But the hands that are to be washed are the acts 

not of the body, but of the mind; that the word of God may 

be done in them. Curys. But the disciples now did not eat 
with washen hands, because they already despised all things 
superfluous, and attended only to such as were necessary ; 
thus they accepted neither washing nor not washing as a 


550 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


rule, but did either as it happened. For how should they 
who even neglected the food that was necessary for them, 
have any care about this rite? Remic. Or the Pharisees 
found fault with the Lord’s disciples, not concerning that 
washing which we do from ordinary habit, and of necessity, 
but of that superfluous washing which was invented by the 
tradition of the elders. CHrys. Christ made no excuse for 
them, but immediately brought a counter charge, shewing 
that he that sins in great things ought not to take offence at 
the slight sins of others. He unswered and said unto them, 
Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God because 
of your tradition? He says not that they do well to trans- 
gress that He may not give room for calumny; nor on the 
other hand does He condemn what the Apostles had done, 
that He may not sanction their traditions; nor again does 
Hie bring any charge directly against them of old, that they 
might not put Him from them as a calumniator; but He 
points His reproof against those who had come to Him; thus 
at the same time touching the elders who had laid down 
such a tradition; saying, JEROME; Since ye because of the 
tradition of men neglect the commandment of God, why do 
ye take upon you to reprove my disciples, for bestowing little 
regard upon the precepts of the elders, that they may observe 
the commands of God? For God hath said, Honour thy 
father and thy mother. Honour in the Scriptures is shewn 
not so much in salutations and courtesies as in alms and 


1Tim.5, gifts. Honour, says the Apostle, the widows who are widows 


3. 


indeed; here ‘honour’ signifies a gift. The Lord then 
having thought for the infirmity, the age, or the poverty of 
parents, commanded that sons should honour their parents in 
providing them with necessaries of life. CHrys. He desired 
to shew the great honour that ought to be paid to parents, 
and therefore attached buth a reward and a penalty. But in 
this occasion the Lord passes over the reward promised to 
such as did honour their parents, namely, that they should 
live long upon the earth, and brings forward the terrible part 
only, namely, the punishment, that He might strike these 
dumb and attract others; And he that curseth father and 
mother, let him die the death; thus He shews that they 
deserved even death. For if he who dishonours his parent 


VER. 1—6. ST. MATTHEW. 551 


even in word is worthy of death, much more ye who dis- 
honour him in deed; and ye not only dishonour your parents, 

but teach others to do so likewise. Ye then who do not 
deserve even to live, how accuse ye my disciples? But how 

they transgress the commandment of God is clear when He 

adds, But ye say, Whoso shall say to his father or his mother, 

ft ts @ gift, whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me. 
JBROME; For the Scribes and Pharisees desiring to overturn 

this foregoing most provident law of God, that they might 
bring in their impiety under the mask of piety, taught bad 

sons, that should any desire to devote to God, who is the 

true parent, those things which ought to be offered te 
parents, the offering to the Lord should be preferred to the 
offering them to parents. Goss. In this interpretation the Gloss. 
sense will be, What I offer to God will profit both you and oe 
myself; and therefore you ought not to take of my goods for 

your own needs, but to suffer that I offer them to God. 
JEROME; And thus the parents refusing what they saw thus 
dedicated to God, that they might not incur the guilt of 
sacrilege, perished of want, and so it came to pass that what 

the children offered for the needs of the temple and the 
service of God, went to the gain of the Priests. Gtoss. Or Gloss. 
the sense may be, Whosoever, that is, of you young men, a 
shall say, that is, shall either be able to say, or shall say, to 

his father or mother, O father, the gift that is of me devoted 

to God, shall it profit thee? as it were an exclamation of 
surprise; you ought not to take it that you may not incur 

the guilt of sacrilege. Or, we may read it with this ellipsis, 
Whosoever shall say to his father, §c. he shall do the com- 
mandment of God, or shall fulfil the Law, or shall be worthy 

of life eternal. JEROME; Or it may briefly have the follow- 

ing sense; Ye compel children to say to their parents, What 

gift soever I was purposing to offer to God, you take and 
consume upon your living, and so it profits you; as much as 

to say, Do not so. Goss. And thus through these argu- Gloss. 
ments of your avarice, this youth shall Honour not his father oo 
or his mother. As if He had said; Ye have led sons into 

most evil deeds; so that it will come to pass that afterwards 

they shall not even honour their father and mother. And 

thus ye have made the commandment of God conceming the 


Aug. 
cont, 
Adv. 
Leg. et 
Proph. 
ii. 1. 
Aug. 
cont. 
Faust. 
Xvi. 24, 


Aug. 
Quest. 
Ev.i.16. 


552 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


support of parents by their children vain through your 
traditions, obeying the dictates of avarice. Aue. Christ 
here clearly shews both that that law which the heretic 
blasphemes is God’s law, and that the Jews had their . 
traditions foreign to the prophetical and canonical books ; 
such as the Apostle calls profane and vain fables. Ip. The 
Lord here teaches us many things; That it was not He that 
turned the Jews from their God; that not only did He not 
infringe the commandments, but convicts them of infringing 
them; and that He had ordained no more than those by the 
hand of Moses. Ip. Otherwise; The gift whatsoever thou 
offerest on my account, shall profit thee; that is to say, 
Whatsoever gift thou offerest on my account, shall henceforth 
remain with thee; the son signifying by these words that 
there is no longer need that parents should offer for him, 
as he is of age to offer for himself. And those who were 
of age to be able to say thus to their parents, the Pharisees 
denied that they were guilty, if they did not shew honour to 
their parents. 


7. Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, 
saying, 

8. This people draweth nigh unto me with their 
mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their 
heart is far from me. 

9. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for 
doctrines the commandments of men. 

10. And he called the multitude, and said unto 
them, Hear, and understand : 

11. Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth 
a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, 
this defileth a man. 


Curys. The Lord had shewn that the Pharisees were not 
worthy to accuse those who transgressed the commands of 
the elders, seeing they overthrew the law of God themselves; 
and He again proves this by the testimony of the Prophet ; 
Hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This 


VER. 7—11. ST. MATTHEW. 558 


people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart ts far 
from me. Remic. Hypocrite signifies dissembler, one who 
feigns one thing in his outward act, and bears another thing 

in his heart. These then are well called hypocrites, because 
under cover of God’s honour they sought to heap up for 
themselves earthly gain. Rasan. Esaias saw before the 
hypocrisy of the Jews, that they would craflily oppose 
the Gospel, and therefore he said in the person of the 
Lord, This people honoureth me wtth their lips, &c. 
Remic. For the Jewish nation seemed to draw near to 
God with their lips and mouth, inasmuch as they buasted 
that they held the worship of the One God; but in their 
hearts they departed from Him, because after they had 
seen His signs and miracles, they would neither acknow- 
ledge His divinity, nor receive Him. Rasan. Also, they 
honoured Him with their lips when they said, Master, we Mat. 22, 
know that thow art true, but their heart was far from Him ~ 
when they sent spies to entangle Him in His talk. GLOss. Gloss. 
Or, They honoured Him in commending outward purity ;°% 4™ 
- but in that they lacked the inward which is the true purity, 
their heart was far from God, and such honour was of no 
avail to them; as it follows, But without reason do they 
worship me, teaching doctrines and commandments of men. 
RaBan. Therefore they shall not have their reward with 
the true worshippers, because they teach doctrines and 
commandments of men to the contempt of the law of God. 
Curys. Having added weight to His accusation of the 
Pharisees by the testimony of the Prophet, and not having 
amended them, He now ceases to speak to them, and turns 
to the multitudes, And he called the multitude, and said 
unto them, Hear and understand. Because He was about 
to set before them a high dogma, and full of much philo- 
sophy, He does not utter it nakedly, but so frames His 
speech that it should be received by them. First, by 
exhibiting anxiety on their account, which the Evangelist 
expresses by the words, And he called the multitude to 
him. Secondly, the time He chooses recommends His 
speech; after the victory He has just gained over the 
Pharisees, And He not merely calls the multitude to Him, 


554 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


but rouses their attention by the words, Hear and under- 
stand; that is, Attend, and give your minds to what ye are 
to hear. But He said not unto them, The observance of 
meats is nought; nor, Moses bade you wrongly; but in 
the way of warning and advice, drawing His testimony from 
natural things ; Not what entereth in at the mouth defileth 
a man, but what goeth forth of the mouth that defileth a 
man. JtROME; The word here* ‘ makes a man common’ 
is peculiar to Scripture, and is not hackneyed in common 
parlance. The Jewish nation, boasting themselves to be 
a part of God, call those meats common, of which all men 
partake; for example, swine’s flesh, shell fish, hares, and 
those species of animals that do not divide the hoof, and 
chew the cud, and among the fish such as have not scales. 


Act 10, Hence in the Acts of the Apostles we read, What God hath 


Aug. 

cont. 

Faust. 
vi. 6. 


A l, 
15. 

1 Tim. 
4, 4. 


cleansed, that call not thou common. Common then in this 
sense is that which is free to the rest of mankind, and as 
though not in part of God, is therefore called unclean. 
Avec. This declaration of the Lord, Not that which entereth 
into the mouth defileth a man, is not contrary to the Old 
Testament. As the Apostle also speaks, Zo the pure all 
things are pure; and Every creature of God is good. Let 
the Manichzans understand, if they can, that the Apostle 
said this of the very natures and qualities of things; while 
that letter (of the mtual law) declared certain animals un- 
clean, not in their nature but typically, for certain figures 
which were needed for a time. Therefore to take an 
instance in the swine and the lamb, by nature both are 
clean, because naturally every creature of God is good; but 
in a certain typical meaning the lamb is clean, and the 
swine unclean. ‘Take the two words, ‘ fool,’ and ‘ wise,’ in 
their own nature, as sounds, or letters, both of them are 
pure, but one of them because of the meaning attached to it, 
not because of any thing in its own nature, may be said 
to be impure. And perhaps what the swine are in typical 
representation, that among mankind is the fool; and the 
animal, and this word of two syllables (stultus) signify some 


4 Jerome reads ‘ communicat.’ The Vulg. has ‘ coinquinat. 


VER. 7—l11. ST. MATTHEW. 555 


one and the same thing. That animal is reckoned unclean 
in the law because it does not chew the cud; but this is 
not its fault but its nature. But the men of whom this 
animal is the emblem, are impure by their own fault, not by 
nature; they readily hear the words of wisdom, but never 
think upon them again. Whatever of profit you may hear, 
to summon this up from the internal region of the memory 
through the sweetness of recollection into the mouth of 
thought, what is this but spiritually to chew the cud? They 
who do not this are represented by this species of animal. 
Such resemblances as these in speech, or in ceremonies, 
having figurative signification, profitably and pleasantly 
move the rational mind; but by the former people, many 
such things were not only to be heard, but to be kept as 
precepts. For that was a time when it behoved not in 
words only, but in deeds, to prophesy those things which 
hereafter were to be revealed. When these had been 
revealed through Christ, and in Christ, the burdens of 
observances were not imposed on the faith of the Gentiles ; 
but the authority of the prophecy was yet confirmed. But I 
ask of the Manichezans, whether this declaration of the 
Lord, when He said that a man is not defiled by what 
enters into his mouth, is true or false? If false, why then 
does their doctor Adimantus bring it forward against the 
Old Testament? If true, why contrary to its tenor do they 
consider that they are thus defiled? Jerome; The thoughtful 
reader may here object and say, If that which entereth into 
the mouth defileth not a man, why do we not feed on meats 
offered to idols? Be it known then that meats and every 
creature of God is in itself clean; but the invocation of 
idols and demons makes them unclean with those at least 
who with conseience of the idol eat that which is offered to 
idols; and their conscience being weak is polluted, as the 
Apostle says. Remic. But if any one’s faith be so strong 
that he understands that God’s creature can in no way be 
defiled, let him eat what he will, after the food has been 
hallowed by the word of God and of prayer; yet so that 
this his liberty be not made an offence to the weak, as the 
Apostle speaks. 


556 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


12. Then came his disciples, and said unto him, 
Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended, after 
they heard this saying ? 

13. But he answered and said, Every plant, which my 
heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up. 

14. Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the 
blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall 
fall into the ditch. 


JEROME; In one of the Lord’s discourses the whole 
superstition of Jewish observances had been cut down. 
They placed their whole religion in using or abstaining 
from certain meats. CHRys. When the Pharisees heard 
the things that went before, they made no reply to them, 
because He had so mightily overthrown them, not only 
refuting their arguments, but detecting their fraud, but they, 
not the multitudes, were offended at them; Then came his 
disciples unto him and said, Knowest thou that the Pharisees 
were offended after they heard this saying? JEROME; As 
this word ‘ scandalum’ (offence or stumblingblock) is of 
such frequent use in ecclesiastical writings, we will shortly 
explain it. We might render it in Latin, ‘ offendiculum, or 
‘ ruina,’ or ‘ impactio;’ and so when we read, Whosoever 
shall scandalize, we understand, Whoso by word or deed 
has given an occasion of falling to any. CHurRys. Christ 
does not remove the stumblingblock out of the way of the 
Pharisees, but rather rebukes them; as it follows, But he 
answered and said, Every plant which my heavenly Father 
has not planted shall be rooted up. This Manicheus 
affirmed was spoken of the Law, but what has been already 
said is a sufficient refutation of this. For if He had said 
this of the Law, how would He have above contended for 
the Law, saying, Why transgress ye the commandment of 
God through your tradition? Or would He have cited the 
Prophet? Or how, if God said, Honour thy father and thy 
mother, is not this, being spoken in the Law, a plant of 
God? Hitary; What He intends then by a plant not 
planted of His lather, is that tradition of men under cover 


VER. 12—14. ST. MATTHEW. 557 


of which the Law had been transgressed, this He instructs 
them must be rooted up. Remic. Every false doctrine 

and superstitious observance with the workers thereof cannot 
endure ; and because it is not from God the Father, it shall 

be rooted up with the same. And that only shall endure 
which is of God. JEROME; Shall that plant also be rooted 

up of which the Apostle says, Z planted, Apollos watered ? ' “ or. 
The question is answered by what follows, but God gave the ° 
increase. He says also, Ye are God’s husbandry, a building 

of God; and in another place, We are workers together of 
God. And if when Paul plants, and Apollos waters, they 

are in so doing workers together with God, then God plants 

and waters together with them. This passage is abused 

by some who apply it at once to two different kinds of men; 
they say, ‘ If every plant which the Father hath not planted 
shall be rooted up, then that which He has planted cannot 

be rooted up.’ But let them hear these words of Jeremiah, 

I had planted thee a true vine, wholly a right seed, how Jer. 2, 
then art thou turned into the bitterness of a strange vine ? 
God indeed has planted it, and none may root up His 
planting. But since that planting was through the dis- — 
position of the will of him which was planted, none 
other can root it up uunless its own will consents thereto. 
Gtioss. Or, the plant here spoken of may be the doctors of Gloss. 
the Law with their followers, who had not Christ for their” een 
foundation. Why they are to be rooted up, He adds, Let 
them alone; they are blind, leaders of the blind. RaBan. 
They are blind, that is, they want the light of God’s com- 
mandments; and they are leaders of the blind, inasmuch as 

they draw others headlong, erring, and leading into error ; 
whence it is added, Jf the blind lead the blind, they both 

fall into the ditch. JEROME; This is also the same as that 
Apostolic injunction, A heretic after the first and second Tit. 3, 
admonition reject, knowing that such a one ts perverse. To eee 
the same end the Saviour commands evil teachers to be left 

to their own will, knowing that it is hardly that they can be. 
brought to the truth. 


15. Then answered Peter and said unto him, De- 
clare unto us this parable. 


558 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


16. And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without under- 
standing ? 

17. Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever 
entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is 
cast out into the draught? 

18. But those things which proceed out of the 
mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile 
the man. 

19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, 
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, 
blasphemies : 

20. These are the things which defile a man: 
but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man. 


Remic. The Lord was used to speak in parables, so that 
Peter when he heard, That which entereth into the mouth 
defileth not a man, thought it was spoken as a parable, and 
asked, as it follows; Then answered Peter, and said unto 
him, Declare unto us this parable. And because he asked 
this on behalf of the rest, they are all included in the 
rebuke, Bui he said, Are ye also yet without understanding? 
JEROME; He is reproved by the Lord, because He supposed 
that to be spoken parabolically, which was indeed spoken 
plainly. Which teaches us that that hearer is to be blamed 
who would take dark sayings as clear, or clear sayings as 
obscure. Curys. Or, The Lord blames him, because it was 
not from any uncertainty that he asked this, but from offence 
which he had taken. The multitudes had not understood 
what had been said; but the disciples were offended at it, 
whence at the first they had desired to ask Him concerning 
the Pharisees, but had been stayed by that mighty declara- 
tion, Every plant, &c. But Peter, who is ever zealous, is 
not silent even so; therefore the Lord reproves him, adding 
a reason for His reproof, Do ye not understand, that what- 
soever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and ts 
cast out into the draught? JEROME; Some cavil at this, that 
the Lord is ignorant of physical disputation in saying that 
all food goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught; 


VER. 15—20. ST. MATTHEW. 559 


for that the food, as soon as it is taken, is distributed through 
the limbs, the veins, the marrow, and the nerves. But it 
should be known, that the lighter juices, and liquid food 
after it has been reduced and digested in the veins and 
vessels, passes into the lower parts through those passages 
which the Greeks call ‘ pores,’ and so goes into the draught. 
Ava. The nourishment of the body being first changed into Aug. de 
° ° ° . ; Vera 
corruption, that is, having lost its proper form, is absorbed Relig. 
into the substance of the limbs, and repairs their waste, 4 
passing through a medium into another form, and by the 
spontaneous motion of the parts is so separated, that such 
portions as are adapted for the purpose are taken up into 
the structure of this fair visible, while such as are unfit are 
rejected through their own passages. One part consisting 
of feeces is restored to earth to reappear again in new forms; 
another part goes off in perspiration; and another is taken 
up by the nervous system for the purposes of reproduction 
of the species. Curys. But the Lord in thus speaking 
answers His disciples after Jewish infirmity; He says that 
the food does not abide, but goes out; but if it did abide, 
yet would it not make a man unclean. But they could not 
yet hear these things. Thus Moses also pronounces that 
they continued unclean, so long as the food continued in 
them; for he bids them wash in the evening, and then 
they should be clean; calculating the time of digestion and 
egestion. AuaG. And the Lord includes herein man’s two Aug. de 
mouths, one of the body, one of the heart. For when He ae 
says, Not all that goeth into the mouth defileth a man, 
He clearly speaks of the body’s mouth; but in that which 
follows, He alludes to the mouth of the heart; But those 
things which proceed out of the mouth, come forth from the 
heart, and they defile a man. Curys. For the things 
which are of the heart, remain within a man, and defile 
him in going out of him, as well as in abiding in him; 
yea, more in going out of him; wherefore He adds, Out 
of the heart proceed evil thoughts; He gives these the first 
place, because this was the very fault of the Jews, who laid 
snares for Him. JeRoME; The principle therefore of the 
soul is not according to Plato in the brain, but according 
to Christ in the heart, and by this passage we may refute 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Gloas. 
non oce. 


560 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


those who think that evil thoughts are suggestions of the 
Devil, and do not spring from our proper will. The 
Devil may encourage and abet evil thoughts, but not 
originate them. And if he be able, being always on the 
watch, to blow into flame any small spark of thought in 
us, we should not thence conclude that he searches the 
hidden places of the heart, but that from our manner and 
motions he judges of what is passing within us. For 
instance, if he see us direct frequent looks towards a fair 
woman, he understands that our heart is wounded through 
the eye. Guoss. And from evil thoughts proceed evil deeds 
and evil words, which are forbidden by the law; whence He 
adds Murders, which are forbidden by that commandment of 
the Law, Thou shalt not kill; Adulteries, fornicattons, which 
are understood to be forbidden by that precept, Thou shalt 
not commit adultery; Thefts, forbidden by the command, 
Thou shalt not steal; False witness, by that, Thou shalt 
not bear false witness against thy neighbour ; Blasphemies, 
by that, Zhou shalt not take the name of God in vain. 
Remic. Having named the vices which are forbidden by 
the divine Law, the Lord beautifully adds, These are they 
that defile a man, that is, make him unclean and impure. 
Gross. And because these words of the Lord had been 
occasioned by the iniquity of the Pharisees, who preferred 
their traditions to the commands of God, He hence con- 
cludes that there was no necessity for the foregoing tradition, 
But to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man. 
Curys. He said not that to eat the meats forbidden in 
the Law defiles not a man, that they might not have 
what to answer to Him again; but He concludes in that 
concerning which the disputation had been. 


21. Then Jesus went thence, and departed into 
the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. 

22. And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of 
the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have 
mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my 
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. 


VER. 23—28., ST. MATTHEW. 561 


23. But he answered her not a word. And his 
‘disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her 
away; for she crieth after us. 

24. But he answered and said, I am not sent but 
unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 

25. Then came she and worshipped him, saying, 
Lord, help me. 

26. But he answered and said, It is not meet to 
take the children’s bread, and to cast it to dogs. 

27. And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat 
of the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table. 

28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O 
woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even 
as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole 
from that very hour. 


JEROME; Leaving the Scribes and Pharisees and those 
cavillers, He passes into the parts of Tyre and Sidon, that 
He may heal the Tyrians and Sidonians; And Jesus went 
thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. 
Remic. Tyre and Sidon were Gentile towns, for Tyre 
was the metropolis of the Chananzans, and Sidon the 
boundary of the Chananzans towards the north. Carys. Chrys, 
It should be observed, that when He delivered the Jews a 
from the observance of meats, He then also opened the 
door to the Gentiles, as Peter was first bidden in the vision 
to break this law, and was afterwards sent to Cornelius. 
But if any should ask, how it is that He bade His disciples 
go not into the way of the Gentiles, and yet now Himself 
walks this way; we will answer, first, that that precept 
which He had given His disciples was not obligatory on 
Him; secondly, that He went not to preach, whence Mark 
even says, that He purposely concealed Himself. Remie. 
He went that He might heal them of Tyre and Sidon; 
or that He might deliver this woman’s daughter from the 
demon, and so through her faith might condemn the 
wickedness of the Scribes and Pharisees. Of this woman 
it proceeds; And, behold, a woman, a Chananite, came out 

VOL. I. 20 


562 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


from those parts. Curys. The Evangelist says that she 
was a Chananzan, to shew the power of Christ’s presence. 
For this nation, which had been driven out that they might 
not corrupt the Jews, now shewed themselves wiser than 
the Jews, leaving their own borders that they might go 
to Christ. And when she came to Him, she asked only 
for mercy, as it follows, She cried unto Him, saying, Have 
Gloss. mercy on me, Lord, thou Son of David. Gtoss. The great 
igs faith of this Chananzan woman is herein shewed. She 
believes Him to be God, in that she calls Him Lord; 
and man, in that she calls Him Son of David. She claims 
nothing of her own desert, but craves only God’s mercy. 
And she says not, Have mercy on my daughter, but Have 
mercy on me; because the affliction of the daughter is the 
affliction of the mother. And the more to excite His 
compassion, she declares to Him the whole of her grief, 
My daughter is sore vexed by a demon; thus unfolding to 
the Physician the wound, and the extent and nature of the 
disease ; its extent, when she says ts sore vexed; its nature, 
Chrys. 5y a@ demon. Curys. Note the wisdom of this woman, 
Hom.inghe went not to men who promised fair, she sought not 
ioe, “" useless bandages, but leaving all devilish charms, she came 
pen to the Lord. She asked not James, she did not pray John, 
ga» or apply to Peter, but putting herself under the protection 
of penitence, she ran alone to the Lord. But, behold, a new 
trouble. She makes her petition, raising her voice into 
a shout, and God, the lover of mankind, answers not a 
word. JEROME; Not from phanisaical pride, or the super- 
ciliousness of the Scribes, but that He might not seem to 
contravene His own decision, Go not tnto the way of the 
Gentiles. For He was unwilling to give occasion to their 
cavils,.and reserved the complete salvation of the Gentiles 
Gloss. for the season of His passion and resurrection. Goss. And 
ap. An- by this delay in answering, He shews us the patience and 
se perseverance of this woman. And He answered not for this 
reason also, that the disciples might petition for her; shewing 
herein that the prayers of the Samts are necessary in order 
to obtain any thing; as it follows, And hts disciples came 
unto him, saying, Send her away, for she crieth after ‘us. 
JEROME; The disciples, as yet ignorant of the mysteries 


VER, 23—28. ST. MATTHEW. 563 


of God or moved by compassion, beg for this Chananean 
woman; or perhaps seeking to be rid of her importunity. 
AuG. A question of discrepancy is raised upon this, that Aug. de 
Mark says the Lord was in the house when the woman aba 
came praying for her daughter. Indeed Matthew might 49. 
have been understood to have omitted mention of the house, 
and yet to have been relating the same event; but when he 
says, that the disciples suggested to the Lord, Send her 
away, for she crieth after us, he seems to indicate clearly 
that the woman raised her voice in supplication, in following 
the Lord who was walking. We must understand then, that, 
as Mark writes, she entered in where Jesus was, that is, as 
he had noticed above, in the house; then, that as Matthew 
writes, He answered her not a word, and during this silence 
of both sides, Jesus left the house; and then the rest follows 
without any discordance. CuHrys. I judge that the disciples 
were sorry for the woman’s affliction, yet dared not say 
‘Grant her this mercy,’ but only Send her away, as we, 
when we would persuade any one, oftentimes say the very 
contrary to what we wish. He answered and said, Iam 
not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 
JEROME; He says that He is not sent to the Gentiles, 
but that He is sent first to Israel, so that wheu they would 
not receive the Gospel, the passing over to the Gentiles 
might have just cause. Remic. In this way also He was 
sent specially to the Jews, because He taught them by His 
bodily presence. JERoME; And He adds of the house of 
Israel, with this design, that we might rightly interpret 
by this place that other parable concerning the stray sheep. 
Curys. But when the woman saw that the Apostles had 
no power, she became bold with commendable boldness ; 
for before she had not dared to come before His sight; 
but, as it is said, She crieth after us. But when it seemed 
that she must now retire without being relieved, she came 
nearer, But she came and worshipped him. JEROME; Note 
how perseveringly this Chananzan woman calls Him first 
Son of David, then Lord, and lastly came and worshipped 
him, as:'God. Currys. And therefore she said not Ask, or 
Pray God for me, but Lord, help me. But the more the 
woman urged her petition, the more He strengthened His 
202 


564 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


denial; for He calls the Jews now not sheep but sons, and 
the Gentiles dogs; He answered and said unto her, It 2 
not meet to take the children’s bread, and give it to dogs. 
Gloss. GLtoss. The Jews were born sons, and brought up by the 
cee Law in the worship of one God. The bread is the Gospel, 
its miracles and other things which pertain to our salvation. 
It is not then meet that these should be taken from the 
children and given to the Gentiles, who are dogs, till the 
Jews refuse them. JEROME; The Gentiles are called dogs 
because of their idolatry; who, given to the eating of 
blood, and dead bodies, turn to madness. CHrys. Observe 
this woman’s prudence; she does not dare to contradict 
Him, nor is she vexed with the commendation of the Jews, 
and the evil word applied to herself; But she said, Yea, 
Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their 
masters’ table. He said, It is not good; she answers, ‘ Yet 
even so, Lord;’ He calls the Jews children, she calls them 
masters; He called her a dog, she accepts the office of a 
dog; as if she had said, I cannot leave the table of my Lord. 
JEROME; Wonderful are shewn the faith, patience, and humi- 
lity of this woman; faith, that she believed that her daughter 
could be healed; patience, that so many times overlooked, 
she yet perseveres in her prayers; humility, that she com- 
pares herself not to the dogs, but to the whelps. I know, 
she says, that I do not deserve the children’s bread, and that 
I cannot have whole meat, nor sit at the table with the 
master of the house, but I am content with that which is 
left for the whelps, that through humble fragments I may 
come to the amplitude of the perfect bread. Currys. This 
was the cause why Christ was so backward, that He knew 
what she would say, and would not have her so great 
excellence hid; whence it follows, Then Jesus answered 
and said unto her, O woman, great ts thy faith, be it unto 
thee according to thy will. Observe how the woman herself 
had contributed not a little to her daughter’s healing; and 
therefore Christ said not unto her, ‘ Let thy daughter be 
healed,’ but, Be zt unto thee according to thy will; that you 
may perceive that she had spoken in sincerity, and that her 
words were not words of flattery, but of abundant faith. 
Gen. 1, And this word of Christ is like that word which said, Let 


VER. 23—28. ST. MATTHEW. 565 


there be a firmament, and it was made; so here, And her 
daughter was made whole from that hour. Observe how 
she obtains what the Apostles could not obtain for her; so 
great a thing is the earnestness of prayer. He would rather 
that we should pray for our own offences ourselves, than 
that others should pray for us. Remic. In these words is 
given us a pattern of catechizing and baptizing children; 
for the woman says not ‘ Heal my daughter,’ or ‘ Help her, 
but, Have mercy upon me, and help me. Thus there has 
come down in the Church the practice that the faithful are 
sponsors to God for their young children, before they have 
attained such age and reason that they can themselves 
make any pledge to God. So that as by this woman’s faith 
her daughter was healed, so by the faith of Catholics of 
mature age their sins might be forgiven to infants. Allego- 
rically; This woman figures the Holy Church gathered out 
of the Gentiles. The Lord leaves the Scribes and Pharisees, 
and comes into the parts of Tyre and Sidon; this figures 
His leaving the Jews and going over to the Gentiles. This 
woman came out of her own country, because the Holy 
Church departed from former errors and sins. JEROME; 
And the daughter of this Chananzan I suppose to be the souls 
of believers, who were sorely vexed by a demon, not knowing 
their Creator, and bowing down to stones. RrEMic. Thuse of 
whom the Lord speaks as children are the Patriarchs and 
Prophets of that time. By the table is signified the Holy Scrip- 
ture, by the fragments the best precepts, or inward mysteries 
on which Holy Church feeds; by the crumbs the carnal pre- 
cepts which the Jews keep. The fragments are said to be eaten 
under the table, because the Church submits itself humbly 
to fulfilling the Divine commands. Raban. But the whelps 
eat not the crust only, but the crumbs of the children’s 
bread, because the despised among the Gentiles on turning 
to the faith, seek out in Scripture not the outside of the 
letter, but the spiritual sense, by which they may be able 
to profit in good acts. JEROME; Wonderful change of 
things! Once Israel the son, and we the dogs; the change 
in faith has led to a change im the order of our names. 
Concerning them is that said, Many dogs have come about Ps, 22, 
me; while to us is said, as to this woman, Thy faith hath \® 


Gloss. 
non occ. 


Aug. 
Quest. 
Ev.i.18. 


566 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


made thee whole. RaBan. Great indeed was her faith ; for 
the Gentiles, neither trained in the Law, nor educated by the 
words of the Prophets, straightway on the preaching of the 
Apostles obeyed with the hearing of the ear, and therefore 
deserved to obtain salvation. Gtoss. And if the Lord delays 
the salvation of a soul at the first tears of the supplicating 
Church, we ought not to despair, or to cease from our 
prayers, but rather continue them earnestly. Aue. And 
that to heal the Centurion’s servant, and the daughter of this 
Chananean woman, He does not go to their houses, signifies 
that the Gentiles, among whom He Himself went not, should 
be saved by His word. That these are healed on the prayer 
of their parents, we must understand of the Church, which 
is at once mother and children; the whole body of those 
who make up the Church is the mother, and each individual 
of that body is a son of that mother. H1iLary; Or, This 
mother represents the proselytes, in that she leaves her own 
country, and forsakes the Gentiles for the name of another 
nation; she prays for her daughter, that is, the body of the 
Gentiles possessed with unclean spirits; and having learned 
the Lord by the Law, calls Him the Son of David. Rasan. 
Also whosoever has his conscience polluted with the defile- 
ment of any sin, has a daughter sorely vexed by a demon. 
Also whosoever has defiled any good that he has done by 
the plague of sin, has a daughter tossed by the furies of an 
unclean spirit, and has need to fly to prayers and tears, and 
to seek the intercessions and aids of the saints. 


29. And Jesus departed from thence, and came 
nigh unto the sea of Galilee; and went up into a 
mountain, and sat down there. 

30. And great multitudes came unto him, having 
with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, 
maimed, and many others, and cast them down at 
Jesus’ feet; and he healed them: 

31. Insomuch that the multitude wondered, when 
they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be 
whole, the Jame to walk, and the blind to see: and 
they glorified the God of Israel. 


VER. 29—3]. 8ST. MATTHEW. 567 


JEROME; Having healed the daughter of this Chananzan, 
the Lord returns into Judea, as it follows, And Jesus 
departed from thence,and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee. 
Remic. This sea is called by various names; the sea of 
Galilee, because of its neighbourhood to Galilee ; the sea of 
Tiberias, from the town of Tiberias. And going up into a 
mountain, he sat down there. Curys. It should be con- 
sidered that sometimes the Lord goes about to heal the 
sick, sometimes He sits and waits for them to come; and 
accordingly here it is added, And there came great multi- 
tudes unto him, having with them those that were dumb, 
lame, blind, maimed, and many others. JEROME; What 
the Latin translator calls ‘ debiles’ (maimed), is in the Greek 
xvAdous, which is not a general term for a maimed person, 
but a peculiar species, as he that is lame in one foot is 
called ‘ claudus,’ so he that is crippled in one hand is called 
xudrdés. Currys. These shewed their faith in two points 
especially, in that they went up the mountain, and in 
that they believed that they had need of nothing beyond 
but to cast themselves at Jesus’ feet; for they do not now 
touch the hem even of His garment, but have attained to 
a loftier faith; And cast them down at Jesus’ feet. The 
woman’s daughter He healed with great slackness, that He 
might shew her virtue; but to these He administers healing 
immediately, not because they were better than that woman, 
but that He might stop the mouths of the unbelieving Jews; 
as it follows, and he healed them all. But the multitude of 
those that were healed, and the ease with which it was done, 
struck them with astonishment. Jnsomuch that the multi- 
tude wondered when they saw the dumb to speak. JEROME ; 
He said nothing concerning the maimed, because there was 
no one word which was the opposite of this". 

RaBan. Mystically; Having in the daughter of this 
Chananzan prefigured the salvation of the Gentiles, He 
came into Judza; because, when the fulness of the Gentiles Rom, 
shall have entered in, then shall all Israel be saved. Goss, 1) ia 


The sea near to which Jesus came significs the turbid ap. oe 
selm. 


* The Vulgate and old Italic have which is also wanting in many ancient 
no clause answering to xwvAAevs dyis'¢, versions. : 
(the maimed to be whole) of the Greek, 


Gloss. 
ord. 


568 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


swellings of this world; it is the sea of Galilee when men 
pass from virtue to vice. JEROME; He goes up into the 
mountain, that as a bird He may entice the tender nestlings 
to fly. Rasan. Thus raising his hearers to meditate on 
heavenly things. He sat down there to shew that rest is not 
to be sought but in heavenly things. And as He sits on the 
mountain, that is, in the heavenly height, there come unto 
Him multitudes of the faithful, drawing near to Him with 
devoted mind, and bringing to Him the dumb, and the 
blind, &c. and cast them down at Jesus’ feet ; because they 
that confess their sins are brought to be healed by Him 
alone. These He so heals, that the multitudes marvel and 
magnify the God of Israel; because the faithful when they 
see those that have been spiritually sick richly endued with 
all manner of works of virtuousness, sing praise to God. 
Guioss. The dumb are they that do not praise God; the 
blind, they who do not understand the paths of life; the 
deaf, they that obey not; the lame, they that walk not 
firmly through the difficult ways of good works; the maimed, 
they that are crippled in their good works. 


32. Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and 
said, I have compassion on the multitude, because 
they continue with me now three days, and have 
nothing to eat: and I will not send them away 
fasting, lest they faint in the way. 

33. And his disciples say unto him, Whence should 
we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so 
great a multitude ? 

34. And Jesus saith unto them, How many loaves 
have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few little 
fishes. 

35. And he commanded the multitude to sit down 
on the ground. 

36. And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, 
and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his 
disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. 


VER. 32—838. ST. MATTHEW. 069 


37. And they did all eat, and were filled: and 
they took up of the broken meat that was left seven 
baskets full. 


38. And they that did eat were four thousand 
men, beside women and children. 


JEROME; Christ first took away the infirmities of the sick, 
and afterwards supplied food to them that had been healed. 
Also He calls His disciples to tell them what He is about to 
do; Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said, I 
have compassion on the multitude. ‘This He does that He 
may give an example to masters of sharing their counsels 
with the young, and their disciples; or, that by this dialogue 
they might come to understand the greatness of the miracle. 
Curys. For the multitude when they came to be healed, had Chrys. 
not dared to ask for food, but He that loveth man, and hath fa = 
care of all creatures, gives it to them unasked ; whence He 
says, I have compassion upon the multitude. That it should 
not be said that they had brought provision with them on 
their way, He says, Recause they continue with me now three 
days, and have nothing to eat. For though when they came 
they had food, it was now consumed, and for this reason He 
did it not on the first or second day, but on the third, when 
all was consumed that they might have brought with them; 
and thus they having been first placed in need, might take 
the food that was now provided with keener appetite. That 
they had come from far, and that nothing was now left them, 
is shewn 1n what He says, And I will not send them away 
fasting, lest they faint by the way. Yet He does not im- 
mediately proceed to work the miracle, that He may rouse 
the disciples’ attention by this questioning, and that they 
may shew their faith by saying to Him, Create loaves. 
And though at the time of the former miracle Christ had 
done many things to the end that they should remember it, 
making them distribute the loaves, and divide the baskets 
among them, yet they were still imperfectly disposed, as 
appears from what follows; And his disciples say unto him, 

Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness as 
to fill so great a multitude? This they spoke out of the 


870 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, XV. 


infirmity of their thoughts, yet thereby making the ensuing 
miracle to be beyond suspicion; for that none might suspect 
that the loaves had been got from a neighbouring village, 
this miracle is wrought in the wilderness far distant from 
villages. Then to arouse His disciples’ thoughts, He puts a 
question to them, which may call the foregone miracle to their 
minds; And Jesus satth unto them, Hove many loaves have 
ye? They said unto him, Seven, and a few little fishes. 
But they do not add, ‘ But what are they among so many ?’ 
as they had said before; for they had advanced somewhat, 
though they did not yet comprehend the whole. Admire in 
the Apostles their love of truth, though themselves are the 
writers, they do not conceal their own great faults; and it is 
no light self-accusation to have so soon forgotten so great a 
miracle. Observe also their wisdom in another respect, how 
they had overcome their appetite, taking so little care of 
their meals, that though they had been three days in the 
desert, yet they had with them only seven loaves. Some 
other things also He does like to what had been done before. 
He makes them to sit down on the ground, and the bread to 
grow in the hands of the disciples; as it follows, And he 
commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground. 
Sup.c. JEROME; As we have spoken of this above, it would be 
mv 15+ tedious to repeat what has been already said; we shall 
therefore only dwell on those particulars in which this 
differs from the former. CuHrRys. The end of the two 
miracles is different; And they took up of the broken meat 
that was left seven baskets full. Now they that had eaten 
were four thousand men, besides children and women. 
Whence are the fragments fewer in this miracle than in the 
former, although they that ate were not so many? It is 
\eporta either that the basket' in this miracle is of larger capacity 
? cophi- than the basket* in the former, or that by this point of differ- 
mm ence they might remember the two separate miracles; for 
which reason also He then made the number of baskets 
equal to the number of the disciples, but now to the number 
of the loaves. Remic. In this Gospel lection we must 
consider in Chnist the work of His humanity, and of His 
divinity. In that He has compassion on the multitudes, He 
shews that He has feeling of human frailty; in the multi- 


VER. 32—8938. ST. MATTHEW. 571 


plication of the loaves, and the feeding the multitudes, is 
shewn the working of His divinity. So here is overthrown 

the error of Eutyches', who said, that in Christ was one Ivid. sup. 
nature only. Aue. Surely it will not be out of place tonne ” 
suggest upon this miracle, that if any of the Evangelists who Cons. 
had not given the miracle of the five loaves had related this ch u 
of the seven loaves, he would have been supposed to have 
contradicted the rest. But because those who have related 

the one, have also related the other, no one is puzzled, but 

it is understood at once that they were two separate miracles. 
This we have said, that wherever any thing is found done by 

the Lord, wherein the accounts of any two Evangelists seem 
irreconcilable, we may understand them as two distinct 
occurrences, of which one is related by one Evangelist, and 

one by another. Gtoss. It should be noted, that the Lord Gloss. 
first removes their sicknessess, and after that feeds them ; °° 4 
because sin must be first wiped away, and then the soul fed 

with the words of God. HuLary; As that first multitude 
which He fed answers to the people among the Jews that 
believed ; so this is compared to the people of the Gentiles, the 
number of four thousand denoting an innumerable number of 
people out of the four quarters of the earth. JEROME; For 
these are not five, but four thousand; the number four being 

one always used in a good sense, and a four-sided stone 

is firm and rocks not, for which reason the Gospels also have 
been sacredly bestowed in this number. Also in the former 
miracle, because the people were neighbours unto the five 
senses’, it is the disciples, and not the Lord, that calls to mind 
their condition; but here the Lord Himself says, that He 

has compassion upon them, because they continue now three 
days with Him, that is, they believed on the Father, Son, 

and Holy Spirit. H1tary; Or, they spend the whole time 

of the Lord’s passion with the Lord; either because when 
they should come to baptism, they would confess that they 
believed in His passion and resurrection ; or, because through 

the whole time of the Lord’s passion they are joined to the 
Lord by fasting in a kind of union of suffering with Him. 
RaBAN. Or, this is said because in all time there have only 


° That is, there were five thousand, and they were fed with five loaves. 


Gloss. 
ord, 


le. xiv. 


19. 


972 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XV. 


been three periods when grace was given; the first, before 
the Law; the second, under the Law; the third, under grace ; 
the fourth, is in heaven, to which as we journey we are 
refreshed by the way. Remie. Or, because correcting by 
penitence the sins that they have committed, in thought, 
word, and deed, they turn to the Lord. These multitudes 
the Lord would not send away fasting, that they should not 
faint by the way; because sinners turning in penitence, 
perish in their passage through the world, if they are sent 
away without the nourishment of sacred teaching. GLoss. 
The seven loaves are the Scripture of the New Testament, in 
which the grace of the Holy Spirit is revealed and given. 
And these are not as those former loaves, barley, because it 
is not with these, as in the Law, where the nutritious sub- 
stance is wrapped in types, as in a very adhesive husk; here 
are not two fishes, as under the Law two only were anointed, 
the King, and the Priest, but a few, that is, the saints of the 
New Testament, who, snatched from the waves of the world, 
sustain this tossing sea, and by their example refresh us lest 
we faint by the way. H1iLtary; The multitudes sit down 
on the ground; for before they had not reposed on the 
works of the Law, but they had supported themselves on 
their own sins, as men standing on their feet. Gtoss. Or, 
they sit down there! on the grass, that the desires of the flesh 
may be controlled, here on the ground, because the earth 
itself is commanded to be left. Or, the mountain in which 
the Lord refreshes them is the height of Christ; there, there- 
fore, is grass upon the ground, because there the height of 
Christ is covered with carnal hopes and desires, on account 
of the carnal; here, where all carnal lust is banished, the 
guests are solidly placed on the basis of an abiding hope; 
there, are five thousand, who are the carnal subjected to the 
five senses; here, four thousand, on account of the four 
virtues, by which they are spiritually fortified, temperance, 
prudence, fortitude, and justice; of which the first is the 
knowledge of things to be sought and avoided; the second, 
the restraining of desire from those things that give pleasure 
in the world; the third, strength against the pains of life ; 
the fourth, which is spread over all the love of God and our 
neighbour. Both there and here women and children are 


VER. 32—39. ST. MATTHEW. 573 


excepted, because in the Old and New Testament, none are 
admitted to the Lord who do not endure to the perfect man, 
whether through the infirmity of their strength, or the levity 
of their tempers. Both refreshings were performed upon a 
mountain, because the Scriptures of both Testaments com- 
mend the loftiness of the heavenly commands and rewards, 
and both preach the height of Christ. The higher mysteries 
which the multitudes cannot receive the Apostles discharge, 
and fill seven baskets, to wit, the hearts of the perfect which 
are enlightened to understand by the grace of the seven-fold Js. 11,2. 
Spirit. Baskets are usually woven of rushes, or palm leaves ; 
these signify the saints, who fix the root of their hearts in the 
very fount of life, as a bulrush in the water, that they may 
not wither away, and retain in their hearts the palm of their 
eternal reward. 


39. And he sent away the multitude, and took 
ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala. 

Cnap. XVI. 1. The Pharisees also with the 
Sadducees came, and tempting desired him that he 
would shew them a sign from heaven. 

2. He answered and said unto them, When it 
Is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather: for the 
sky is red. 

3. And in the morning, It will be foul weather 
to-day: for the sky is red and lowring. O ye 
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but 
can ye not discern the signs of the times ? 

4. A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh 
after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, 
but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, 
and departed. 


Crys. As the Lord sent the multitudes away after the 
miracle of the five loaves, so also now, not on foot, but 


574 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XVI. 


by boat, that the multitudes may not follow Him; And he 
sent away the multitude, and entered into a ship, and 
Aug.de came into the coasts of Magedan. Ava. Mark says Dal- 
ts manutha; no doubt the same place under a different name ; 
51. for many copies of the Gospel according to Mark have 
Magedan. Rasan. This Magedan is the country opposite 
Gerasa, and is interpreted ‘ fruits, or ‘a messenger.’ It 
aoe, of signifies a garden, of which it is said, A garden enclosed, 
12, ’ @ fountain sealed, wherein the fruits of virtues grow, and 
where the name of the Lord is announced. It teaches 
us that preachers having ministered the word to the mul- 
titude ought to be refreshed themselves with the fruits of the 
virtues within the chamber of their own heart. It follows; 
And there come unto him Pharisees and Sadducees tempting 
him, and desired him to shew them a sign from heaven. 
Remic. Wondrous blindness of the Pharisees and Sadducees ! 
They asked a sign from heaven, as though the things they 
now saw were not signs. John shews what sign it was they 
John 6, desired ; for he relates, that after the feeding with the five 
30, loaves, the multitudes came to the Lord and said, What 
sign doest thou, that we may see it and believe on thee ? 
Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it ts written, 
He gave them bread to eat from heaven. Therefore when 
they say here, Shew us a sign from heaven, they mean, 
Cause that it rain manna for one or two days, that the 
whole people may eat, as was done for a long time in the 
desert. He looking into their thoughts as God, and knowing 
that even if a sign from heaven should be shewed them 
they would not believe, would not give them the sign 
for which they asked, as it follows, But he answered and 
said unto them, When the evening is come, ye say, It will 
be fair weather; for the sky is red, §c. JEROME; This 
is not found in most copies of the Greek text”. But the 
sense is clear, that fair and rainy days may be foretold by the 
condition and harmony of the elements. But the Scribes 
and Pharisees who seemed to be doctors of the Law could | 
not discern the Saviour’s coming by the predictions of 


Aug. the Prophets. Auc. We might also understand this saying, 
Quest. 
Ev.i.20. 

P That is, ver 2. and 3. They are omitted in many Mas. and Versions. 


VER. 1—4. ST. MATTHEW. 575 


When it ts evening, ye say, It will be fair weather, for 
the sky is red, in this way, By the blood of Christ’s passion 

at His first coming, indulgence of sin is given. And in the 
morning, It will be foul weather to-day, for the sky is red 
and lowring; that is, at His second coming He will come 
with fire before Him. Gtoss. Otherwise; The sky is red 
and lowring ; that is, the Apostles suffer after the resurrec- 
tion, by which ye may know that I shall judge hereafter; for 

if I spare not the good who are mine from present suffering, 

I shall not spare others hereafter; Ye can therefore discern 

the face of the sky, but the signs of the times ye cannot. 
RaBAN. The signs of the times He means of His own 
coming, or passion, to which the evening redness of the 
heavens may be likened ; and the tribulation which shall be 
before His coming, to which the morning redness with the 
lowring sky may be compared. Carys. As then in the sky 
there is one sign of fair weather, and another of rain, so 
ought ye to think concerning me; now, in this My first 
coming, there is need of these signs which are done in the 
earth ; but those which are done in heaven are reserved for 

the time of the second coming. Now I come as a physician, 
then as a judge; now I come in secret, then with much 
pomp, when the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. 
But now is not the time of these signs, now have I come to 
die, and to suffer humiliations; as it follows, An evil and 
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign, and there shall 

no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. 
AvuG. This Matthew has already given; whence we may Aug. 
store up for our information, that the Lord spoke the same peer, 
things many times, that where there are contradictions which 
cannot be explained, it may be understood that the same 
sayings were uttered on two different occasions. GLOss. Gloss. 
He says, Evil and adulterous generation, that is, unbelieving, neta: 
having carnal, and not spiritual understanding. RaBAn. 
To this generation that thus tempted the Lord is not given 

a sign from heaven, such as they sought for, though many 
signs are given on the earth; but only to the generation of 
such as sought the Lord, in whose sight He ascended into 
heaven, and sent the Holy Spirit. JERoME; But what is 


576 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XVI. 


meant by the sign of Jonas has been explained above. 
Currys. And when the Pharisees heard this, they ought 
to have asked Him, What it was He meant? But they had 
not asked at first with any desire of learning, and therefore 
the Lord leaves them, as it follows, And he left them, 
and went his way. JEROME; That is, leaving the evil 
generation of the Jews, He passed over the strait, and the 
people of the Gentiles followed Him. HutLary; Observe, 
we do not read here as in other places, that He sent the 
multitudes away and departed; but because the error of 
unbelief held the minds of the presumptuous, it is said that 
He left them. 


5. And when his disciples were come to the other 
side, they had forgotten to take bread. 

6. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and 
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the 
Sadducees. 

7. And they reasoned among themselves, saying, 
It is because we have taken no bread. 

8. Which when Jesus perceived, he said unto 
them, O ye of little faith, why reason ye among 
yourselves, because ye have brought no bread ? 

9. Do ye not yet understand, neither remember 
the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many 
baskets ye took up? 

10. Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, 
and how many baskets ye took up ? 

11. How is it that ye do not understand that 
I spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye 
should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and 
of the Sadducees ? 

12. Then understood they how that he bade them 
not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine 
of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. 


VER. 3—12. ST. MATTHEW. 377 


Gtoss. As the Lord had left the Pharisees on account of Gloss. 
their unbelief, so now He teaches His disciples to be on" 
their guard against their doctrine; whence it follows, And 
when hs disciples were come to the other side, they had 
forgotten fo take bread. Remic. They were bound to their 
Master with so great affection, that they were unwilling to 
part from Him for even a moment of time. And herein it 
should be observed how far they were from any longing for 
delicacies, when they took so small care for necessaries, that 
they had even forgotten to take bread, without which human 
weakness cannot support itself. He said unto them, Take heed 
and beware of the leaven of the Phariseesand of the Sadducees. 
Hivtary; Herein the Apostles are admonished not to be 
partakers in the doctrine of the Jews; for the works of the 
Law were established to produce faith, and to prefigure the 
things that were to follow; and they on whose times truth 
ttself had chanced should look for no further types of truth ; 
lest the teaching of the Pharisees, which knew not of 
Christ, should stay the effect of Gospel truth. JEROME; For 
he that takes heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and the 
Sadducees, does not observe the precepts of the Law and 
of the letter, and neglects the traditions of men that he may 
do the commandments of God. This is the leaven of which 
the Apostle speaks, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 1 Cor. 5, 
By every means also we should avoid that leaven which © 
Marcion, Valentinus, and all the heretics had. For the 
nature of leaven is such, that when mixed with flour, that 
which seemed a little increases to a large quantity, and 
brings the whole mixture to its own flavour. Thus heretical 
doctrine if it have cast but a small spark ito your breast, 
in 4 short time a mighty flame is raised, and drives the whole 
temper ef the man along with it. Carys. Why did He 
not say plainly, Take heed of the doctrine of the Pharisees ? 
Because He would remind them of those things that had 
been done in the multiplication of the loaves, knowing them 
to be forgetful. To have given them this charge at once 
bluntly would have seemed unreasonable; but to find fault 
with them on occasion furnished by themselves prepared the 
way for the charge; therefore it is that the Evangelist brings 
forward their thoughts; But they thought within themselves, 
VOL. I. 2P 


Gloss. 
ord. 


578 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XVI. 


saying, It is because we have taken no bread. JEROME; 
How had they no bread, seeing that as soon as they had 
filled seven baskets they entered into the boat, and came 
into the parts of Magedan? There they hear that they ought 
to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees. 
But the Scripture is witness that they had forgotten to take 
the baskets with them. Curys. Because the disciples still 
grovelled about Jewish observances, the Lord sharply rebukes 
them for the benefit of all; whence it follows, But Jesus 
knowing thetr thoughts said unto them, O ye of little fatth, 
why consider ye among yourselves because ye have no bread ? 
Goss. As much as to say; Why do ye think that I spake 
of earthly bread, for which ye ought not to have a thought, 
having beheld Me of so little make such abundant overplus ? 
Curys. This He does that He may put away from them all 
care for food. But why did He not reprove them, when they 
said, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilder- 
ness? for that seemed a more fitting occasion. He did not 
blame them at that time that He might not seem to be by 
that urged on to do miracles, and He was unwilling to find 
fault with them before the people. Also there was more 
reason in the charge, when after two miracles of multiplication 
of loaves, they had anxiety about food. Observe with what 
mildness He rebukes them; He makes an excuse in answer 
Himself, saying, Do ye not yet understand, nor remember the 


Gloss. jive loaves ? Guoss. As much as to say, Do ye not understand 


interlin. 


the mystery, nor remember the miracle? Curys. By this 
calling to mind what was past, and rousing their attention to 
what was to come. JEROME; Thus He takes this occasion 
to instruct them what is meant by the five loaves and the 
seven loaves, the five thousand and the four thousand, who 
were fed in the desert. For if the leaven of the Pharisees 
and Sadducees signified not earthly food, but corrupt tradi- 
tions and heretical dogmas, why should not the food with 
which the people of God is nourished signify the true and 
uncorrupt doctrine? Curys. But that you may learn what 
force Christ’s reproof had upon His disciples, and how it roused 
their sluggish spimt, hear what says the Evangelist; Then 
they understood how that he bade them not beware of the 
leaven of bread, but of the doctrine. of the Pharisees and 


VER. 18—19. ST. MATTHEW. 579 


the Sadducees; yet He had not interpreted this to them. 
This instruction of the Lord then drew them away from 
Jewish observances, and made them attentive instead of 
careless, and raised them out of their little faith, that when- 
ever they should seem to have but little provision of bread 
they should have no fear about food, but should despise all 
those things. 


13. When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea 
Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do 
men say that I the Son of man am? 

14. And they said, Some say that thou art John 
the Baptist; some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or 
one of the prophets. 

15. He saith unto them, But whom say ye that 
Iam? 

16. And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou 
art the Christ, the Son of the living God. 

17. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed 
art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath 
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is 
in heaven. 

18. And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock I will build my Church: and the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 

19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind 
on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever 
thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 


Goss. As soon as the Lord had taken His disciples out of Gloss. 
the teaching of the Pharisees, He then suitably proceeds to °°" °° 
lay deep the foundations of the Gospel doctrine ; and to give 
this the greater solemnity, it is introduced by the name of the 
place, When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi. 
Curys. He adds ‘ of Philip,’ to distinguish it from the other Chrys. 
Cwsarea, of Strato. And He asks this question in the former j,°™ 

2P2 


580 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, XVI. 


place, leading His disciples far out of the way of the Jews, that 
being set free from all fear, they might say freely what was in 
their mind. JERoME; This Philip was the brother of Herod, 
the tetrarch of Iturza, and the region of Trachonitis, who 
gave to the city, which is now called Panzas, the name of 
Gloss.. Ceesarea in honour of Tiberius Cesar. GtLoss. When about 
ap- An- to confirm the disciples in the faith, He would first take away 
from their minds the errors and opinions of others, whence it 
follows, And he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men 
say that the Son of Man is? ORiGEN; Chnist puts this 
question to His disciples, that from their answer we may learn 
that there were at that time among the Jews various opinions 
concerning Christ; and to the end that we should always 
investigate what opinion men may form of us; that if any ill be 
said of us, we may cut off the occasions of it; or if any good, 
Gloss. we may multiply the occasions ofit. GLoss; So by thisinstance 
ee" of the Apostles, the followers of the Bishops are instructed, that 
whatever opinions they may hear out of doors concerning 
their Bishops, they should tell them to them. JEROME; 
Beautifully is the question put, Whom do men say that the 
Son of Man is? For they who speak of the Son of Man, 
are men: but they who understood His divine nature are 
called not men but Gods. Currys. He says not, Whom do 
the Scribes and Pharisees say that I am? but, Whom do men 
say that [ am? searching into the minds of the common 
people, which were not perverted: to evil. For though their 
opinion concerning Christ was much below what it ought to 
have been, yet it was free from wilful wickedness; but. the 
opinion of the Pharisees concerning Christ was fall of much 
malice. H1ILtary; By asking, Whom do men say that the 
Son of Man is? He implied that something ought to be 
thought respecting Him beyond what appeared, for He was 
the Son of Man. And in thus enquiring after men’s opinion 
respecting Himself, we are not. to think that He made con- 
fession of Himself; for that which He asked for was something 
concealed, to which the faith of believers ought to extend iteelf. 
We must hold that form of confession, that we so mention the 
Son of God as not to forget the Son of Man, for the one-without 
the other offers us no hope of salvation; and therefore He said 
emphatically, Whom do men say that the Son of Man ta? 


VER. 1[8—19. ST. MATTHEW. 581 


JEROME; He says not, Whomdo men say thatlam? but, Whom 
do men say that the Son of Man is? that He should not seem 
to ask ostentatiously concerning Himself. Observe, that 
wherever the Old Testament has ‘ Son of Man,’ the phrase in 
the Hebrew is ‘ Son of Adam.’ Origen; Then the disciples 
recount the divers opinions of the Jews relating to Christ; 
And they said, Some say John the Baptist, following Herod’s vid. 
opinion; others Elias, supposing either that Elias had gone ae 
through a second birth, or that having continued alive in the 
body, He had at this time appeared; others Jeremias, whom 
the Lord had ordained to be Prophet among the Gentiles, not 
understanding that Jeremias was a type of Christ; or one of 
the Prophets, in a like way, because of those things which 
God spoke to them through the Prophets, yet they were not 
fulfilled in them, but in Christ. JEROME; It was as easy for 
the multitudes to be wrong in supposing Him to be Elias 
and Jeremias, as Herod in supposing Him to be John the 
Baptist; whence I wonder that some interpreters should have 
sought for the causes of these several errors. Curys. The 
disciples having recounted the opinion of the common people, 
He then by a second question invites them to higher thoughts 
concerning Him; and therefore it follows, Jesus satth unto 
them, Whom say ye that Iam? You who are with Me always, 
and have seen greater miracles than the multitudes, ought not 
to agree in the opinion of the multitudes. For this reason He 
did not put this question to them at the commencement of 
His preaching, but after He had done many signs; then also 
He spoke many things to them concerning His Deity. 
JEROME; Observe how by this connexion of the discourse 
the Apostles are not styled men but Gods. For when He 
had said, Whom say ye that the Son of Manis? He adds, 
Whom say ye that I am? as much as to say, They being 
men think of Me as man, ye who are Gods, whom do you 
think Me? Rasan. He enquires the opinions of His disciples 
and of those without, not because He was ignorant of them; 
His disciples He aske, that He may reward with due reward 
their confession of a right faith; and the opinions of those 
without He enquires, that having the wrong opinions first set 
forth, it might be proved that the disciples had received the 
truth of their confession not from common opinion, but out 


582 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XVI. 


of the hidden treasure of the Lord’s revelation. CHRYS. 
When the Lord enquires concerning the opinion of the 
multitudes, all the disciples answer; but when all the 

'xev- disciples are asked, Peter as the mouth and head’ of the 
?ai¢ Apostles answers for all, as it follows, Simon Peter answered 
and said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. ORIGEN; 

Peter denied that Jesus was any of those things which the 

Jews supposed, by his confession, Thou art the Christ, which 

the Jews were ignorant of; but he added what was more, the 

zs ve. Son of the living God, who had said by his Prophets, I live, 
"saith the Lord. And therefore was He called the living 
Lord, but in a more especial manner as being eminent above 

all that had life; for He alone has immortality, and is the 

fount of life, wherefore He is nghtly called God the Father; 

for He is life as it were flowing out of a fountain, who said, 
John14, fam the life. JEROME; He calls Him the living God, in 
comparison of those gods who are esteemed gods, but are 
dead; such, I mean, as Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, Hercules, and 

the other monsters of idols. HiLary; This is the true and 
unalterable faith, that from God came forth God the Son, 

who has eternity out of the eternity of the Father. That this 

God took unto Him a body and was made man is a perfect 
confession. Thus He embraced all in that He here expresses 

both His nature and His name, in which is the sum of virtues. 
RaBan. And by a remarkable distinction it was that the 

Lord Himself puts forward the lowliness of the humanity 
which He had taken upon Him, while His disciple shews us 

the excellence of His divine eternity. Hixary; This con- 
fession of Peter met a worthy reward, for that he had seen 

the Son of God in the man. Whence it follows, Jesus 
answered and satd unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- 
jonas, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but 

my Father who ts in heaven. JEROME; This return Christ 
makes to the Apostle for the testimony which Peter had 
spoken concerning Him, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living 

God. The Lord said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- 
jonas? Why? Because flesh and blood has not revealed this 

unto thee, but My Father. That which flesh and blood could 

not reveal, was revealed by the grace of the Holy Spirit. By 

. his confession then he obtains a title, which should signify that 


VER. 13—19. ST. MATTHEW. 083 


he had received a revelation from the Holy Spirit, whose 
son he shall also be called; for Barjonas in our tongue 
signifies The son of a dove. Others take it in the simple 
sense, that Peter is the son of John‘, according to that 
question in another place, Simon, son of John, lovest thou me? ie 
affirming that it is an error of the copyists in writing here 
Barjonas for Barjoannas, dropping one syllable. Now Joanna 
is interpreted ‘ The grace of God.’ But either name has 
its mystical interpretation; the dove signifies the Holy Spirit; 
and the grace of God signifies the spiritual gift. CuHrys. It 
would be without meaning to say, Thou art the son of 
Jonas, unless he intended to shew that Christ is as naturally 
the Son of God, as Peter is the son of Jonas, that is, of the 
same substance as him that begot him. JEROME; Compare 
what is here said, flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto 
thee, with the Apostolic declaration, Immediately I was Gal. ), 
not content wilh flesh and blood, meaning there by this” 
expression the Jews; so that here also the same thing is shewn 
in different words, that not by the teaching of the Pharisees, but 
by the grace of God, Christ was revealed to him the Son of 
God. Hitary; Otherwise; He is blessed, because to have 
looked and to have seen beyond human sight is matter of 
praise, not beholding that which is of fiesh and blood, but 
seeing the Son of God by the revelation of the heavenly 
Father; and he was held worthy to be the first to acknowledge 
the divinity which was in Chnst. OrIGen; It must be 
enquired m this place whether, when they were first sent out, 
the disciples knew that He was the Christ. For this speech 
shews that Peter then first confessed Him to be the Son of 
the living God. And look whether you can solve a question 
of this sort, by saying that to believe Jesus to be the Christ 
is less than to know Him; and so suppose that when they — 
were sent to preach they believed that Jesus was the Christ, 
and afterwards as they made progress they knew Him to be 
so. Or must we answer thus; That then the Apostles had 
the beginnings of a knowledge of Chnist, and knew some little 
concerning Him; and that they made progress afterwards in 
the knowledge of Him, so that they were able to receive the 
knowledge of Christ revealed by the Father, as Peter, who is 
«In John 21, 15. the Vulgate has ‘ Johannis,’ but in John 1, 43. ‘ Jona, 


x | 


584 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO | CHAP. XVI. 


here blessed, not only for that he says, Thou art the Christ, 
but much more for that he adds, the Son of the living God. 
Curys. And truly if Peter had not confessed that Christ was 
in a peculiar sense born of the Father, there had been no need 
of revelation ; nor would he have been worthy of this blessing 
for confessing Christ to be one of many adopted sons; for 
before this they who were with Him in the ship had said, 


John 1, Truly thou art the Son of God. Nathanael also said, Rabbi, 


Ang. 


thou art the Son of God. Yet were not these blessed because 
they did not confess such sonship as does Peter here, but 
thought Him one among many, not in the true sense a son ; 
or, if chief above all, yet not the substance of the Father. 
But see how the Father reveals the Son, and the Son the 
Father; from none other comes it to confess the Son than of 
the Father, and from none other to confess the Father than 
of the Son; so that from this place even it is mauifest that 
the Son is of the same substance, and to be worshipped 
together with the Father. Christ then proceeds to shew that 
many would hereafter believe what Peter had now confessed, 
whence He adds, And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter. 
JEROME; As much as to say, You have said to me, Thou art 
Christ, the Son of the living God, therefore I say unto thee, 
not in a mere speech, and that goes not on into operation; 
but I say unto thee, and for Me to speak isto make it so‘, that 
; thou art Peter. For as from Christ proceeded that light 
' to the Apostles, whereby they were called the light of the 


! world, and those other names which were imposed upon 
' them by the Lord, so upon Simon who believed in Christ 
. ¢ the Rock, He bestowed the name of Peter (Rock.) Ava. 
i, .But let none suppose that Peter received that name here; 


he received it at no other time than where John relates that 
it was said unto him, Thou shalt be called Cephas, which 
1s interpreled, Peter. JEROME; And pursuing the metaphor 
of the rock, it is rightly said to him as follows: And upon 
| this rock E eill build my Church. Currys. That is, On On this 

faith and confession I will build my Church. Herein shewing 
| That many should believe what Peter had confessed, and 


: raising his understanding, and making him His shepherd. 


| "4 Retrae ag. AUS: I have said in a certain place of the Apostle Peter, that 


' See Mr. Newman’s Lectures on Justification, Lect iii. p. 87. 


‘ “ poe oe -# fo: z 
‘Fr ae ry gee coe , med Peat de AGKCK. 


NER. 18—19. ST. MATTHEW. 585 


it was on him, as on a rock, that the Church was built. But 


I know that since that T have often explained these words.of | 


the Lord, Thou art Peter, and on this rock will I build 
my Church, as meaning upon Him whom Peter had confessed 
in the words, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living Gods and 
so that Peter, taking his name from this rock, would represent 


the Church, which is built upon this rock. 


4d 
r 
‘ 


For it is not said | Cor. 


to him, Thou art the rock, but, Thox art Peter. But the i 


rock was Christ, whom because Simon thus confessed, as the 


whole Church confesses Him, he was named Peter. Let the | 


reader choose whether of these two opinions seems to him the 
more probable. Hirary; But in this bestowing of a new name 
is a happy foundation of the Church, and a rock worthy of 
that building, which should break up the laws of hell, burst 
the gates of Tartarus, and all the shackles of death. And to 
shew the firmness of this Church thus built upon a rock, He 
adds, And the gates of hell shall not prevail aguinst it. 
Goss. That is, shall not separate it from the love and faith 
of Me. JEROME; I suppose the gates of hell to mean vice 
and sin, or at least the doctrines of heretics by which men are 
ensnared and drawn into hell. Oricen; But in heavenly 
things every spiritual sin is a gate of hell, to which are op- 
posed the gates of righteousness. RaBan. The gates of hell 
are the torments and promises of the persecutors. Also, the 
evil works of the unbelievers, and vain conversation, are gates 
of hell, because they shew the path of destruction. ORIGEN; 
He does not express what it is which they shall not prevail 
against, whether the rock on which He builds the Church, 
or the Church which He builds on the rock; but it is clear 
that neither against the rock nor against the Church will the 
gates of hell prevail. Cyrit*; According to this promise of 
the Lord, the Apostolic Church of Peter remains pure and 
spotless from all leading into error, or heretical fraud, above all 
Heads and Bishops, and Primates of Churches and people, 


® This passage is quoted in the 
Catena from ‘Cyril in Lib. Thes.’ 
but does not occur in any of S. Cyril's 
works, On the subject of this inter- 
polation, vid. Launoy’s Epistles, part i. 
Kp. 1—3. and v. Ep. 9.c. 6—12. From 
him it appears that, besides the passage 
introduced into the Catena, S. Thomas 
‘ascribes similar ones to 8. Cyril in his 
comment on the Sentencea, Lib. iv.d. 24. 


3. and in his books ‘ contr. impugn.religq.’ 
and ‘ contraerrores Gre.’ e is ap- 
parently the first to cite them, and they 
seem to have been written later than 
Nicholas I. and Leo IX. (A. D. 867— 
1064.) He was young when he used them, 
andhe is silent about them in his Summa, 
(which was the work of his last ten 
years,) in three or four places where the 
reference might have been expected. 


Gloss. 
interlin. 


586 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XVI. 


with its own Pontiffs, with most abundant faith, and the 
authority of Peter. And while other Churches have to blush 
for the error of some of their members, this reigns alone im- 
moveably established, enforcing silence, and stopping the 
mouths of all heretics; and we’, not drunken with the wine of 
pride, confess together with it the type of truth, and of the 
holy apostolic tradition. JERoME; Let none think that this 
is said of death, implying that the Apostles should not be 
subject to the condition of death, when we see their mar- 
tyrdoms so illustrious. Origen; Wherefore if we, by the 
revelation of our Father who is in heaven, shall confess that 
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, having also our conversation 
in heaven, to us also shall be said, Zhou art Peter; for every 
one is a Rock who is an imitator of Christ. But against 
whomsoever the gates of hell prevail, he is neither to be 
called a rock upon which Christ builds His Church; neither 
a Church, or part of the Church, which Christ builds upon 
a rock. Crys. Then He speaks of another honour of 
Peter, when He adds, And I will give thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven; as much as to say, As the Father hath 
given thee to know Me, I also will give something unto thee, 
namely, the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Rasan. For 
as with a zeal beyond the others he had confessed the King 
of heaven, he is deservedly entrusted more than the others 
with the keys of the heavenly kingdom, that it might be 
clear to all, that without that confession and faith none ought 
to enter the kingdom of heaven. By the keys of the kingdom 
oe He means discernment’ and power; power, by which he 
"binds and looses; discernment, by which he separates the 
eet worthy from the unworthy. Gtuoss. It follows, And what- 
" soever thou shalt bind; that is, whomsoever thou shalt judge 
unworthy of forgiveness while he lives, shall be judged un- 
worthy with God ; and whatsoever thou shalt loose, that is, 
whomsoever thou shalt judge worthy to be forgiven while 
he lives, shall obtain forgiveness of his sins from God. 
OrIGEN ; See how great power has that rock upon which the 
Church is built, that its sentences are to continue firm as 
though God gave sentence by it. CHrys. See how Christ 
leads Peter to a high understanding concerning himself. 


* The editions read here, ‘et nos says Nicolai, it is impossible to divine. 
necessario salutis,’ the meaning ofwhich, 


VER. 13—19. ST. MATTHEW. 587 


These things that He here promises to give him, belong to 

God alone, namely to forgive sins, and to make the Church 
immoveable amidst the storms of so many persecutions 

and trials. Rasan. But this power of binding and loosing, 
though it seems given by the Lord to Peter alone, is indeed 
given also to the other Apostles, and is even now in the vid. 
Bishops and Presbyters in every Church. But Peter re-‘°t, 
ceived in a special manner the keys of the kingdom of heaven, 
and a supremacy of judicial power, that all the faithful 
throughout the world might understand that all who in any 
‘manner separate themselves from the unity of the faith, or 
from communion with him, such should neither be able to 

be loosed from the bonds of sin, nor to enter the gate of 

the heavenly kingdom. Gutoss. This power was committed Gloss. 
specially to Peter, that we might thereby be inyited to unity. va 
For He therefore appointed him the head of the Apostles, 

that the Church might have one principal Vicar of Christ, 

to whom the different members of the Church should have 
recourse, if ever they should have dissensions among them. 

But if there were many heads in the Church, the bond of 
unity would be broken. Some say that the words upon earth 
denote that power was not given to men to bind and loose 

the dead, but the living; for he who should loose the dead 
would do this not upon earth, but after the earth. SECOND Concil. 
CoUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE; How is it that some do pre- aoe : 
sume to say that these things are said only of the living? 8. 
Know they not that the sentence of anathema is nothing 

else but separation? They are to be avoided who are held 

of grievous faults, whether they are among the living, or not. 

For it is always behoveful to fly from the wicked. Moreover 

there are divers letters read of Augustine of religious memory, vid. 
who was of great renown among the African bishops, which Epis. 
affirmed that heretics ought to be anathematized even after 4. 
death. Such an ecclesiastical tradition other African Bishops 
also have preserved. And the Holy Roman Church also 
has anathematized some Bishops after death, although no ac- 
cusation had been brought against their faith in their life- 
time*. JEROME; Bishops and Presbyters, not understanding 


® This passage is quoted from the of whose lost works against Theodorus 
sentence of the Council. It alleges the sentence beginning, ‘* They are 
the authority of S. Cyril, from one to be avoided, &c.’’ is quoted. 


$88 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. XVI. 


this passage, assume to themselves something of the lofty pre- 
tensions of the Pharisees, and suppose that they may either 
condemn the innocent, or absolve the guilty ; whereas what 
will be enquired into before the Lord ‘will be not the sentence 
of the Pnests, but the life of him that is being judged. We 
read in Leviticus of the lepers, how they are commanded to 
shew themselves to the Priests; and if they have the leprosy, 
then they are made unclean by the Priest; not that the 
Priest makes them leprous and unclean, but that the Priest 
has knowledge of what is leprosy and what is not leprosy, 
and can discern who is clean, and who is unclean. In the 
same way then as there the Priest makes the leper unclean, 
here the Bishop or Presbyter binds or looses not those who 
are without sin, or guilt, but in discharge of his function 
when he has heard the varieties of their sins, he knows who 
is to be bound, and who loosed. OricEN; Let him then be 
without blame who binds or looses another, that he may be 
found worthy to bind or loose in heaven. Moreover, to him 
who shall be able by his virtues to shut the gates of hell, 
are given in reward the keys of the kingdom of heaven. 
For every kind of virtue when any has begun to practise it, 
as it were opens itself before Him, the Lord, namely, opening 
it through His grace, so that the same virtue is found to be 
both the gate, and the key of the gate. But it may be that 
each virtue is itself the kingdom of heaven. 


20. Then charged he his disciples that they should 
tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ. 

21. From that time forth began Jesus to shew 
unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jeru- 
salem, and suffer many things of the elders and Chief 
Priests and Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again 
the third day. 


OrIGEN; Seeing Peter had confessed Him to be Christ 
the Son of the living God, because He would not have them 
preach this in the mean time, He adds, Zhen charged he 
his disciples that they should tell no man that he was 
Jesus the Christ. JEROME; When then above He sends 
His disciples to preach, and commands them to proclaim 


VER. 20, 21. ST. MATTHEW. 589 


His advent, this seems contrary to His command here, that 
they should not say that He is Jesus the Christ. To me 
it seems that it is one thing to preach Christ, and another 
to preach Jesus the Christ. Christ is a common title of 
dignity, Jesus the proper name of the Saviour. ORIGEN; 
Or they then spake of Him in lowly words, as only a great 
and wonderful man, but as yet proclaimed Him not as the 
Christ. Yet rf any will have it that He was even at the 
first proclaimed to be Christ, he may say that now He chose 
that first short announcement of His name to be left m 
silence and not repeated, that that little which they had heard 
concerning Christ might be digested into their minds. Or 
the difficulty may be solved thus: that the former relation 
eoncerning their preaching Christ does not belong to the 
time before His Resurrection, but to the time that should be 
after the Resurrection; and that the command now given is 
meant for the time present; for it were of no use to preach 
Him, and to be silent concerning His cross. Moreover, He 
commanded them