Catena Aurea. 


Digitized by Google 


Catena Aurea. 


COMMENTARY 


. ON THE 


FOUR GOSPELS, 


COLLECTED OUT OF THE 


WORKS OF THE FATHERS 


BY 


S. THOMAS AQUINAS. 


VOL. II. PART I. 
ST. LUKE. 


OXFORD, 
JOHN HENRY PARKER; 
J. G@. F. AND J. RIVINGTON, LONDON. 
- MDCCCXLUI. 


DAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD. 


iw 4591510 


_—s 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


THE following Compilation not being admissible into the 
‘brary of the Fathers from the date of some few of the 


. ‘thors introduced into it, the Editors of the latter work 


at 


ive been led to publish it in a separate form, being assured 


at those who have subscribed to their Translations of the 


tire Treatises of the ancient Catholic divines, will not feel 


a 


3s interest, or find less benefit, in the use of so very 


_ dicious and beautiful a selection from them. The Editors 
_fer to the Preface for some account of the natural and 


— 


aracteristic excellences of the work, which will be. found 


« useful in the private study of the Gospels, as it is well 


-‘apted for family reading, and full of thought for those who 
2 engaged in religious instruction. 


Oaford, May 6, 1841. 


Digitized by Google 


PREFACE. 


THE Catena on St. Luke differs from those on the three 
other Gospels, in its more frequent citations from the Greek 
writers. For besides the Commentaries of S. Ambrose and 
Bede, and certain Homilies of S. Augustine and Gregory, 
there seems to have been no other Latin work on St. Luke's 
Gospel which St. Thomas could have used. How far he 
was himself acquainted with Greek, it seems difficult to 
determine; but from the expression fect transferri, in his 
preface to the three later Gospels, it has been supposed, that 
for this part of his work he employed others to make trans- 
lations for him from the Greek writers, which he afterwards 
inserted in his Catena, not always (as he says himself) giving 
the very words, but frequently only the sense of the passage. 

From the ignorance of the Greek language at that time, it 
was not to be supposed that these translations would be free 
from error; and when we couple with this the carelessness 
of transcribers, we cannot be surprised that in course of time 
the text of the Catena should have become very corrupt, and 
the sense of whole passages, but particularly the names of their 
authors, involved in great doubt and obscurity. The mistakes 
on this latter point Nicolai thinks were chiefly owing to the 
abbreviated form and character in which the names were writ- 
ten, so that one name was often put for another, from its 
similarity ; as Theophilus for Theophylact; while others were 
altogether omitted. In Nicolai’s edition, however, (which has 


vill PREFACE, 


been followed in the present volume,) very great corrections 
were made, for which, as the original works of most of 
the Greek writers quoted by S. Thomas no longer exist, he 
was chiefly indebted to the Greek Catene. By their assist- 
ance not only was the text carefully restored and amended 
from the original Greek, but the references verified afresh, 
and many for the first time supplied. 

It may here then perhaps be useful to give first some account 
of the Cateneze used by Nicolai, and others which have been 
referred to in the following translation; next to mention those 
Fathers whose names are cited in St. Thomas, but their works 
from which his extracts are taken are either not to be found 
at all, or at least only fragments of them, in the published 
editions ; and after them a number of inferior writers whom 
St. Thomas had included under the general title of Grecus, 
but whose names have now been furnished from the Greek 
Catenz. 

(1.) The Catena of most use to Nicolai was one formerly in 
the Mazarin, now in the Royal Library at Paris, (Montf. MSS. 
p. 1339.) Itis said to be of the 13th century, and is com- 
piled from fifty-six Fathers, whose names are clearly marked. 
But it embraces only the twelve first chapters of St. Luke. 
For the twelve latter he employed Corderius; but it is much 
to be regretted that he had not possessed the remainder of 
the Mazarin MSS. which seems to be existing in the Vatican 
from the description Maii gives of a fragment he discovered 
there ; and Montfaucon says of the former part, that not the 
sixth part of it is contained in Corderius. Besides, Corderius 
is not at all to be trusted as to the names of authors, as 
may be seen from Maii* and Lambecius’°. 

Maii has published a considerable part of another Catena, 
in his ninth vol. Vet. Script. Its date is very near the end 


® Maii 6th vol. Scriptores Classicil, © Com. Bibl. Casar. Vindob. vol. iii. 
P- 15—17. Pp. 163. 


PREFACE. 1X 


of the 11th century, and it is entitled, &xd tijs txdoyis rod 
Nixyrot 2eppay. He ascribes the first Catena to the same author, 
and a similar title is prefixed to a MS. in the Coislin Library, 
(Bibl. Coisl. No. 201.) of a later date, and containing a Catena 
on St. Luke of sixty-two Fathers. These three Catene, 
though differing in date, yet very similar in the names and 
number of the authors cited, must all be traced to the same 
source. Nor does there seem any reason why they should 
not be successive copies, only increased as time went on, of 
the original MS. of Nicetas, whose name they bear. Nicetas 
flourished about 1077. He was at first Deacon at Constan- 
tinople, then Bishop of Serrse in Macedonia, afterwards Arch- 
bishop of Heraclea in Thrace. He is proved by Wolf (De 
Catenis) to have been the author of a Catena on Job, generally 
assigned to Olympiodorus; and Lambecius (v. 63. iu. 81.) 
describes a Catena of his on the Psalms. That published 
by Possinus on St. Matthew, from a MS. in the Library of the 
Elector of Bavaria, contains extracts from thirty Fathers, with 
a prologue and several expositions under the name of Nicetas. 
It seems very probable then that Nicetas was the author of a 
new class of Catene, far exceeding in size and completeness 
those which previously existed. For among a great number 
of MSS. Catenz on the Gospels in the Paris, Venice, and 
Vienna Libraries, which bear date of the 10th or 11th cen- 
turies, there are scarcely any which number more than twelve 
Fathers, none certainly which approach to the extent of those 
above mentioned. 

Of the MSS. Catenz on St. Luke, of this date, some have 
the title prefixed to them, “ From Chrysostom and other 
Fathers.” Some again bear the names of Cyril and Origen, 
but by far the greater number, particularly in the Paris 
Library, are ascribed to Titus Bostrensis. It is however 
quite plain, that the Titus Bostrensis, who flourished under 
Julian in the -fourth century, could not have been the 


>. ¢ PREFACE. 


author of a Catena containing extracts from the works of 
Cyril, Chrysostom, and Isidore of Peleusium, who alllived some 
time later. Combefis (Bibl. Concion. Rec. Auct. p. 49.' 
thinks that this Titus wrote Commentaries on the Gospels 
of which only fragments remain, and also the four books 
ascribed to him against the Manicheans; but that there 
was a later writer of the same name, perhaps in the 6th 
century, who was the author of this Catena, and of the 
Commentary published under the name of Titus in the 
Bibl. Pat. For he says that there exist, in a MS. Catena on 
St. Matthew, passages assigned to Titus, which are not in 
that on St. Luke, and are very far superior to it. And these he 
conceives to belong to the elder Titus. It seems however most 
probable, that this Catena on St. Luke which Combefis speaks 
of, is an abridgment of a larger one, which was compiled 
from the ancient Titus and other later Fathers*,and by the same 
anonymous hand which also compiled that on Matthew, for 
the latter is always referred to by the former whenever St. Luke 
repeats what has been before related by St. Matthew’. 

There is the same reference also in the Commentary on 
St. Luke above mentioned, which was first published in Greek 
with a Latin Translation by Peltanus, (Bib. Pat. Gr. Lat. 1548.) 
which is plainly nothing but an abridgment of the Catena, 
though in a different form, making no distinction between the 
separate authors. 

Of the extracts given by St. Thomas from Titus, the greater 
number are accordingly to be found in the two Catenz on 
St. Luke and St. Matthew, edited by Dr. Cramer, from Paris 
and Bodl. MSS. It appears also that these Catenz are 
substantially the same as those mentioned by Savile, (vol. 


® Kollarius (Supp. Lamb. p. 19. serted in the margin, but afterwards 
cod. 4.) mentions a very old MS. con- incorporated into the text. 
taining a Catena on St. Luke, from > Conf. Bodl. Auct. T. 1. 4. Paris. 
Titus and Origen, to whom he thinks Coisl. 23. Montf. 
later Fathers were added, at first in- 


PREFACE. x1 


viii. p. 218.) of which the one on Matthew was published 
in a Latin Translation by Chris. Serrarigius at Venice, 1554, 
and is found also in the Lat. Ed. of Chrysostom, 2 vol. 
p.- 1151. under the title of Libellus Questionum. Paris, 
1588. 

(2.) The extracts cited by St. Thomas from Chrysostom are 
chiefly taken from the Homilies on Matthew, but there are 
some which seem to be gathered from different parts of his 
works by some writer who was well acquainted with them. 
Wastell assigns these to John of Jerusalem, whom he thinks 
he has proved to be the author of the Opus Imperfectum, 
generally inrputed to Chrysostom, as well as of a Com- 
mentary on St. Luke, frequently quoted therein, and from 
which therefore he concludes these passages have been derived. 
However this may be, they are clearly from their occurrence 
in the oldest Catenz to be attributed to some very early 
iImitator or epitomist of Chrysostom. 

The greater part of Origen’s Homilies on St. Luke are 
contained in St. Thomas, which St. Jerome tells us were 
written by Origen when he was young. Jerome gives a Latin 
translation of them, to which in the Ben. Ed. are affixed frag- 
ments of the Greek collected by Grabe, but they are published 
more at length both in Greek and Latin by Gallandi, Bibl. Pat. 
vol. 14. Maii has given some extracts in the Greek (6 vol. 
Class. Auct.) notin Gallandi. A passage on Luke viii. 4. quoted 
by St. Thomas, is found in Origen on the Proverbs, published 
in the Bibl. Pat. as above. It may be remarked, that in the 
MSS. in the Library of St. Mark at Venice, from which Gal- 
landi has published these works, what is ascribed to Titus 
and Origen, is in the Paris MSS. given to Titus alone. 

A Commentary on St. Luke by Cyril is very largely quoted 
throughout this Catena. Nothing of the kind exists in the 
published Editions of his works, but Maii has lately given 
almost the whole of it in his 6th vol. Cl]. Auct. A remarkable 


xii PREFACE. 


passage on the Eucharist quoted by St. Thomas, Luke 
xxii. 17. is found there, p. 371. 

Several quotations from Athanasius, which have not been 
found in his published works, are supposed to be taken from 
a Commentary on St. Luke, of which a few fragments only 
remain, some in the Ben. Ed. and a few more in Montfau- 
con’s Ed. 1706. 

A Commentary of Eusebius on St. Luke, but imperfect, has 
been published by Maii, (Ist vol. Script. Vet.) as well as parts 
of his three books of Evangelical Questions, which seem to 
take in much of what is wanting to complete the Commentary 
on St. Luke. These have been edited from a MS. in the Vati- 
can of the 10th century, and supply several of the quotations 
given by St. Thomas. 

(3.) Of the other Greek writers cited by St. Thomas, and in 
the earlier editions of the Catena Aurea under no other title 
than Grecus, almost all have been found in the cuveyay) 
eEnynoewy published by Maii from the second Catena of Nicetas 
before mentioned. Some of them are but little known, and 
may therefore require a slight notice. 

Alexander, a monk, perhaps a native of Cyprus, who wrote 
a book De Inventione S. Crucis, edited by Gretser, Gr. Lat. 
in his Tom. de Cruce, supposed also to be the same Alexan- 
der who recited an Oration on the Apostle Barnabas before 
the Abp. of Cyprus. See Leo Allatins de Symeonum. Sc. 
p- 99. 

Amphilochius Bp. of Iconitum in Lycaonia, 370. He wasa 
Cappadocian by birth, and for some time lived a monastic life 
with S. Basil and Gregory, in 381. Theodosius committed to 
him the care of the Asiatic Diocese. His principal writ- 
ings were a work against the Massilian Heretics, which is 
lost, and several Orations on the events of our Saviour’s 
Life, published by Combefis, 1644. 

Antipater, Bp. of Bostrum in Arabia, 460. He is said to 


PREFACE. Kill 


have answered the Apology of Eusebius for Origen. There 
are certain Sermons of his extant on St. John the Baptist, 
Zacharias, and the Salutation of the B. Virgin, which are 
among the works ascribed to Metaphrastes. See Leo Allat. 
p- 89. 

Apollinaris, Bp. of Laodicea, celebrated for his opposi- 
tion to Heathen books in the Christian schools. Before he 
promulgated his heretical doctrine, 376, he was the friend of 
Basil, Greg. Naz., Athanasius, and others. His heresy was 
condemned at Rome, 378. He wrote Commentaries on most 
of the books of Scripture; part of his Comm. on Luke is 
given in Mail, 1 vol. Vet. Script. p. 179. 

Asterius, Bp. of Amasea in Pontus, flourished 401, under 
Julian, and wrote Homilies on the Gospels, some of which are 
in Mag. Bib. Pat. t. 4. and in Combefis Auctarium 1661; and 
fragments of others in Photius, Bibl. 271. 

Evagrius, a Pontian by birth, studied under Greg. Naz. at 
Constantinople, and afterwards a disciple of S. Macarius in 
Egypt, wrote many monastic works, of which some are pub- 
lished among the writings of John Damascene. 

Eutychius, Patriarch of Constantinople, 558, formerly a 
monk of Amasea. He wrote a book denying a sensible 
resurrection from the dead, concerning which there was a 
dispute held between him and Gregory the Great, then the 
Apocrisiary of Pope Vigilius at Constantinople. It was after- 
wards condemned by Tiberius the Emperor. See Greg. 
Mor. 1. 14. c. 29. where the retractation of this work is 
mentioned. 

Isaac, a Syrian by birth, Bp. of Nineve 540, afterwards 
embraced the monastic life. Wrote several ascetic works, 53 
‘Sermons under the title of De contemptu mundi, published 
Max. Bib. Pat. v.11. See Lambec. lib. v. p. 73. | 

Geometer, Combefis places about the 7th century. 
He is chiefly known for his Hymns, (published Morell 1691,) 


X1V PREFACE, 


in honour of the B. Virgin, and some Homilies; see also 
Allatius, p. 62. 

Macarius the elder, flourished 373, a monk of Scetus and 
disciple of Antony in Egypt, lived 60 years in the desert, 
and died 391. Wrote 50 Homilies, De integritate que 
decet Christianos, which were published at Paris 1659, and 
in the works of Greg. Thaumaturgus 1622. 

Nilus, Prefect of Constantinople 440. He was a disciple 
of Chrysostom, and after living for some time a secular life, 
he entered a monastery at Nitria in Egypt, where he wrote 
several works chiefly ascetic; these were published by Suares, 
1673. 

Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople, 858. Deposed in 
Council of Const. 869. For a list of his works, see Fabricius, 
vol. xi. c. 835. Some fragments of a Commentary on St. Luke 
are published by Maii, 1 vol. Script. Vet. but many of the 
extracts from his works in Catenz on the Gospels are to be 
found in the Amphilochian Questions, of which some have 
been edited by Wolf, Schottus, and others; but several lately 
edited by Maii have never before been published; they are 
taken from a MS. in the Vatican, containing the whole 313. 

Severus, Bp. of Antioch, 513; he was the first of the 
Monophysites, and was condemned by Justin, 519, for 
opposing the Council of Chalcedon. See Niceph. Hist. 
Ecce. 16. c. 35. His Commentary on Luke, which Mont- 
faucon mentions, (Coisl. 54.) Maii gives, (6th vol. Cl. Auct. 
p. 418.) ; 

Symeon Metaphrastes and Logotheta, born at Constanti- 
nople, secretary to the Emperor Leo, began to write his 
Lives of the Saints, 918. according to Cave and Allatius. Ou- 
dinus places him in the 12th century. His life of St. Luke 
is quoted by St. Thomas, as also a Commentary on that 
Gospel, which does not however exist except in the Gr. 
Catenez. 


PREFACE. Xv 


Symeon, Prefect of the Monastery of S. Maman in 
Xerocercus at Constantinople, 1050, wrote 33 Orations, De 
Fide et Moribus tum Christianis tum Monasticis, published 
in Latin, 1603, at Ingolstadt by Pontanus. See Allat. 167. 

Theophanes is generally cited in the Greek Catenz on St. 
Luke, together with Eusebius. Corderius doubts whether he 
was Theophanes Cerameus, Bp. of Tauromeniain Sicily, who 
wrote annals from Dioclesian to the Emperor Michael, and 
Homilies In Dominicas et Festa; or Theophanes, Bp. of 
Nicza, who wrote against the Jews. Maii thinks the name 
has been mistaken for the Theophania Eusebii, 

Victor, Presbyter of Antioch. See Preface to Catena on 
St. Mark. 

Of the Latin Fathers quoted by St. Thomas, Bede is the only 
one which requires any mention here. His Commentary on 
St. Luke, as we learn from his letter to Acca prefixed to it, 
is chiefly a compilation from the wnitings of the four Doctors 
of the Latin Church, but particularly St. Ambrose. Some things 
however he has added himself “ quz auctor lucis ei aperuit,” 
and from these St. Thomas has chiefly taken his extracts. 
The Glosses not to be found in the Glossa ordinaria or inter- 
linearis, are supposed to be St. Thomas’s own. 


These introductory remarks have been supplied by the 
friend, who has translated the portion of St. Thomas’s 
Commentary to which they relate, and which is contained 
in the following Volume, THomas DupiEey Ryper, M. A. 
of Oriel College. ) 


J. H. N. 


ERRATA. 


Page 25. line 1. for JEROME read PsEUDO-JEROMRE 
5. for JEROME read PSEUDO-JEROME 
13. for AuaG. read PsEUDO-AUG. 
40. 1. after throne insert GREEK EX. 
77. note f. for 388. read 378. 
for cenalem read canalem 
110. line 22. for painful read weary 
135. 3. for Aua. read PsEUDO-AUG. 
144. 39. for on to four more read up to four 
209. 23.for Grea. Naz. read Grea. Nyss. 


PREFACE 


TO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


ST. LUKE. 


EL RTE EI 


Amone those mysteries of Christ’s Incarnation which the 
Prophet Esaias expressly and plainly foretels, he says, 

I will clothe the heavens with blackness, and make sack- 1.50, 3. 
cloth their covering. The Lord hath given me the tongue — 

of the learned, that I should know how by my word to 
uphold the weary. He wakeneth me at morn. At morn 

He wakeneth my ear to hearken unto Him as my Master. 

From these words we may understand the subject-matter 
of St. Luke’s Gospel, the method of his writing, the object 
and condition of the writer. AUGUSTINE; St. Luke seems to Aug. de 
dwell more than the other Evangelists upon the Priestly vanes 
lineage and person of our Lord, and hence he has been?. 2,6. 
represented under the symbol of a calf, because that is the 
principal victim of the Priest. 

AMBROSE; The calf being the Priestly victim, this book ae. 
of the Gospel aptly answers to it, commencing as it does with Lue. 
the Priests, and ending in the calf, which, taking upon itself 
the sins of men, was sacrificed for the life of the whole world. 

This sacrifice of the calf also St. Luke describes with greater 
fulness than the rest. Gtoss. As then St. Luke’s intention was 
mainly to set forth the Passion of Christ, the subject of his 
Gospel may be signified by these words; J wll clothe the 
heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their covering. 
VOL. III. B 


2 PREFACE TO THE GOSPEL 


For literally at Christ’s Passion there was darkness, and the 
Hieron. faith of the disciples was clouded. JEROME; And Christ was 
Esai.b3, despised and made as one of no account, and His face was 
3. hidden and put to shame, that in the human flesh the Divine 
sup. Power might be concealed. Ip. St. Luke’s style, as well 
aes * in his Gospel as in the Acts of the Apostles, is more 

polished than that of the others, and has a tone of secular 
Ambr. eloquence. Hence it is added, The Lord hath given me 
Ps the tongue of the learned. AmMBRosE; For although the 

divine Scriptures set aside the exercise of secular wisdom 
as of that which is rather decked out with a show of 
words than based upon true reason, yet will those who seek 
therein find the very examples which they consider most 
worthy of admiration. For St. Luke, while he has pre- 
served a kind of historic order in his narrative, and made 
known to:us more of our Lord’s wonderful works than 
the other Evangelists, has at the same time contrived to 
unite the excellences of each kind of wisdom in the course 
of his Gospel. What more extraordinary in natural wisdom 
than his revelation that the Holy Spirit was also the Creator 
of our Lord’s Incarnation! In the same book, he teaches 
Luke morals, as, for example, 72 what manner I ought to love 
ee my enemy. Again, he appeals to my reason, when I read, 
Luke for he that 1s faithful in a little will be faithful also in 
16, 10. * ch. 
Euseb, §EuseBius; St. Luke, a native of Antioch, by profession a 
Hist. ill. Dhysician, has left us concerning that medicine which he had 
received from the Apostles either through his intercourse with 
them or by tradition, two medical books, whereby not our 
bodies but our souls may be healed. And hence it follows, 

That I should know how by my word to uphold the weary. 
een: JEROME; For he says that he has received the word from 
Eeai.60, the Lord, by which he supports the weary and wanderer, and 
Meta. restores them to health. Grezx Expositor; St. Luke, being 

hrastes by nature of a noble and ardent mind, acquired in his 
as youth the learning of the Greeks. He made himself perfectly 
acquainted with Grammar and Poetry, as well as complete 
master of the art of Rhetoric and the power of persuasion. 

Nor was he surpassed by any one in the gifts of Philosophy ; 

last of all, he learns Medicine. And now by his natural quick- 


~ 


ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 3 


ness having drunk deep enough of human wisdom, he takes 

flight to something higher. He hastens accordingly to Judza, 

and gains access to the presence and hearing of Christ. Being 

soon convinced of the truth, he becomes a true disciple of 
Christ, and has frequent intercourse with his Master. Hence 

it follows, He wakeneth me at morn, (in my youth, as it were, 

to secular wisdom). At morn He wakeneth my ear (to divine 
wisdom) to hearken unto Him as my Master, i.e. Christ Him- 

self. Evusesius; It is said that St. Luke wrote his Gospel as it Euseb. 
was declared to him by the mouth of St. Paul, as St. Mark also ?’ 
wrote those things which were told him by St. Peter. CHRy- Chrys. 
sostoM; Each of them imitated his master; the one Paul, 4°, 
flowing more rapidly than the torrent; the other Peter, study- Hom.iv. 
ing conciseness. AUGUSTINE; They wrote at a time when Aug. de 
they both were able to receive the approbation not only of the Evang. 
Church of Christ, but of the Apostles themselves, still abiding iv. 9. 
in the flesh. And thus much may suffice to have been said 

by way of Preface. 


B® 


COMMENTARY 


ON THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 


ST. LUKE. 


CHAP. I. 


Ver. |. Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to 
set forth in order a declaration of those things which 
are most surely believed among us, 

2. Even as they delivered them unto us, which 
from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers 
of the word : 

3. It seemed good to me also, having had perfect 
understanding of all things from the very first, to 
write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, 

4. That thou mightest know the certainty of those 
things, wherein thou hast been instructed. 


Evusesius; St. Luke at the commencement of his Gospel Euseb, . 
has told us the reason of his writing, which was, that many ;; i 
others had rashly taken upon themselves to give accounts of i ii, 4 
those things: of which he had a more certain knowledge. 

And this is his meaning when he says, Forasmuch as many 

have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of 
things. AMBROSE; For as many among the Jewish people ambr. 
prophesied by inspiration of the Spirit of God, but others; ends 
were false prophets rather than prophets, so now also havel. rare 
many attempted to write Gospels which the good money- 
changer refuses to pass. One gospel is mentioned which the 


6 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


twelve Apostles are said to have written; another Basilides 
presumed to write; and another is said to have been by 
Matthias. 

Bedain BEDE; The many who are mentioned, he reckons not 

tee, 80 much by their number, as by the variety of their manifold 

heresies; men who were not endued with the gift of the 

Holy Spint, but engaging in a vain work, have rather set 

forth in order a relation of events, than woven a true history. 

AMBROSE; Now they who have attempted to set forth these 

things in order have laboured by themselves, and have not 

succeeded in what they attempted. For without the assistance 

of man come the gifts and the grace of God, which, when it 

is infused, is wont so to flow, that the genius of the wniter is 

not exhausted, but ever abounding. He well says therefore, 

Of things which have been fully accomplished among us, or 

which abound among us. For that which abounds is lacking to 

none, and no one doubts about that which is fulfilled, since 

the accomplishment builds up our faith, and the end manifests 

Tit it. Titus Bostrensis; He says, of things, because not 

Bos. in by shadows, as the heretics say, did Jesus accomplish His 

uce. advent in the flesh, but being as He was the Truth, so in 

Orig. very truth He performed His work. Origen; The effect 

Hom. i+ ypon his own mind, St. Luke explains by the expression, 

of the things which have been fully accomplished among us, 

i.e. have had their full. manifestation among us, (as the 

Greek word xerAngodognuéyay signifies, which the Latin can- 

not express in one word,) for he had been convinced of them 

by sure faith and reason, and wavered not in any thing. 

Chrys. CHRysosToM; The Evangelist was so far from being content 

wre with his single testimony, that he refers the whole to. the 

Apost. Apostles, seeking from them a confirmation of. his words ; 

""" and therefore he adds, as they handed them down, to us, who 
were themselves from the beginning eyewitnesses. 

Euseb} §EKusenius; Luke is asure witness, because he obtained his 

*eP- —_ knowledge of the truth either from St, Paul’s instructions, 

or the instructions and traditions, of the other Apostles, 

who were themselves eyewitnesses from the beginning. 

Chrys, Curys. He. says, were eyewitnesses, hecause this, is our 

‘up. chief ground for believing in. 4 thing, that we derive it 

from those who were actually eyewitnesses. ORIGEN; It 


VER. 1—4. ST. LUKE. 7 


is plain that of one kind of knowledge, the end is in the 
knowledge itself, as in geometry; but of another kind, the 

end is counted to be in the work, as in medicine; and so it is 

in the word of God, and therefore having signified the 
knowledge by the words were themselves eyewitnesses, he 
points out the work by what follows, and were ministers of 

the word. AMBROSE; This expression is used, not that we 
should suppose the ministry of the word to consist rather in 
seeing than hearing, but that, because by the word was meant 

not a word that can be spoken by the mouth, but one of real 
existence, we may understand that to have been not a com- 
mon, but a Heavenly Word, to which the Apostles ministered. 
Cyri_; In what he says of the Apostles having been eye- Cyril. 
witnesses of the word, he agrees with John, who says, The"™ per: 
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw His 
glory. For the Word by means of the flesh was made visible. 
AMBROSE ; Now not only did they see the Lord in the body, 

but also in the Word. For they saw the Word, who with 
Moses and Elias saw the glory of the Word. Others did 

not see it, who could only see the body. OrRiIGEN; It is 
written in Exodus, The people saw the voice of the Lord. Exod. 
Now a voice is rather heard than seen. But it was so7”!® 
written, to shew us that men see the voice of the Lord 

with other eyes, which they only have who are worthy 

of them. Again in the Gospel, it is not the voice that 

is perceived, but the Word, which is more excellent than 

the voice. THEOPHYLACT; By these words it is plainly Theoph. 
implied, that Luke was not a disciple from the beginning, test in 
but became one in course of time; others were disciples 
from the beginning, as Peter, and the sons of Zebedee. 
BEDE; Nevertheless both Matthew and John were obliged in 
many things that they wrote to consult those who had had 
means of knowing the infancy, childhood, and genealogy of 

our Lord, and of seeing the things which he did. ORIGEN; 

St. Luke hereby explains to us the source of his writing; 
seeing that what things he wrote, he gained not from 
report, but had. himself traced them up from the beginning. 
Hence it follows, Jé seemed good to me also, having carefully 
investigated every thing. from the very. first, to write to thee 

in order, most excellent Theophilus. AMBROSE; When he 


8 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


says, It seemed good to me, he does not deny that it 
seemed good to God: for it is God who predisposes the 
wills of men. Now no one has doubted that this book of the 
Gospel is more full of details than the others; by these words 
then he claims to himself, not any thing that is false, but 
the truth; and therefore he says, “It seemed good to me, 
having investigated every thing, to write.” Not to write 


John21, every thing, but from a review of every thing; “ for if all the 


things which Jesus did were written, I do not think the world 
itself could contain them.” But purposely bas Luke passed 
by things that were written by others, in order that each 
book of the Gospel might be distinguished by certain 


Theoph. mysteries and miracles peculiar to itself. THEOPHYLACT 


in loc. 


He writes to Theophilus, a man probably of some distinction, 
and a governor; for the form, Most excellent, was not 
used except to rulers and governors. As for example, Paul 


ig 26,says to Festus, Most excellent Festus. Brpe; Theophilus 


Beda 
sup. 


Chrys. 


sup. 


means, “ loving God,” or “ being loved by God.” Whoever 
then loves God, or desires to be loved by Him, let him think 
this Gospel to have been written to him, and preserve it as 
a gift presented to him, a pledge entrusted to his care. 
The promise was not to explain the meaning of certain 
new and strange things to Theophilus, but to set forth the 
truth of those words in which he had been instructed; 
as it is added, That thou mightest know the truth of 
those words in which thou hast been instructed; that is, 
“that thou mightest be able to know in what order each 
thing was said or done by the Lord.” Curysostom; Or it 
may be, “ That thou mightest feel certain and satisfied as 
to the truth of those things which thou hast heard, now that 
thou beholdest the same in writing.” THEOPHYLACT; For 
frequently, when a thing is asserted by any one, and not ex- 
pressed in writing, we suspect it of falsehood; but when a 
man has written what he asserts, we are the more inclined to 
believe it, as if, unless he thought it to be true, he would 


Photius, not commit it to writing. GREEK Ex. The whole preface of 
ment.inthis Evangelist contains two things; first, the condition of 


Luce. 


those who wrote Gospels before him, (Matthew and Mark for 
example;) secondly, the reason why he also himself proposed 
to write one. 


VER. 5—?7. ST. LUKE. 9 


Having said, “ attempted,” a word which may be ap- 
plied both to those who presumptuously engage upon a 
subject, and those who reverently handle it, he determines 
the doubtful expression by two additions; first, by the words, 
Of things which have been fully accomplished among us; and 
secondly, As they handed them down to us, who were eye- 
witnesses from the beginning. The word handed down seems 
to shew, that the eye-witnesses themselves had a com- 
mission to transmit the truth. For as they handed it down, 
so it became others also receiving it in due order, in their 
turn to publish it. But from the not depositing in writing 
what had been delivered, several difficulties through lapse of 
time sprang up. Rightly then did those who had received 
the tradition from the first eye-witnesses of the Word, esta- 
blish it in writing for the whole world; thereby repelling 
falsehood, destroying forgetfulness, and making up from 
tradition itself a perfect whole. 


5. There was in the days of Herod, the king of 
Judea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course 
of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, 
and her name was Elisabeth. 

6. And they were both righteous before God, 
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of 
the Lord blameless. 

7. And they had no child, because that Elisabeth 
was barren, and they both were now well stricken in 
years. 


CuRrysostom; St. Luke commences the history of his Chrys. 
Gospel with Zacharias and the birth of John; relating one "°° 
marvellous event before another, the less before the greater. 

For since a virgin was about to become a mother, it had been 
fore-ordained by grace that the old should previously conceive. 

He fixes the time, when he says, In the days of Herod, and 

in the following words adds his rank, king of Judea. Therein Matt. 
was another Herod, who killed John; he was tetrarch, whereas °°?" "* 
this one was king. BrpE; Now the time of Herod, i. e. of Beda, in 
a foreign king, bears witness to our Lord’s coming, for it Evang. 


10 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


- 49,had been foretold, Zhe sceptre shall not depart from Judah, 
nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come. For 
from the time that our fathers came out of Egypt, they were 
governed by judges of their own uation, until the Prophet 
Samuel; and then by kings, until the carrying away to Babylon. 
But after the return from Babylon, the chief power was in the 
hands of priests, until the time of Hyrcanus, who was both 
king and high priest. He was slain by Herod, after which the 
government of the kingdom was delivered over by the com- 
mand of Augustus Cesar to this same Herod, a foreigner, in 
whose thirty-first year, according to the prophecy we have 
mentioned, Shzloh came. 

AMBROSE; Divine Scripture teaches us with respect to 
those whom we commemorate, that not only the characters 
of the men themselves, but of their parents also, ought to be 
praised, that they might be distinguished by an inheritance, 
as it were, handed down to them of unspotted purity. Now 
not only from his parents, but also from his ancestors, 
St. John derives his illustrious descent, a descent not exalted 
by secular power, but venerable from its sanctity. Complete 
then is that praise which comprehends birth, character, office, 
actions, and judgments. 

The office was that of the Priesthood, as it is said, A 
Beda,incertain Priest of the name of Zacharias. BEDE; For John 
fa a was allotted a Priestly tnbe, that he might with the more 
S. Joh. authority herald forth a change of priesthood. AMBROSE; 

His birth is implied in the mention made of his ancestors. 
Of the course of Abia, i.e. of high rank among the noblest 
families. BrepE; There were Princes of the Sanctuary or 
High Priests, both of the sons of Eleazar and the sons of 
Thamar, whose courses according to their respective services 
when they entered into the House of God David divided 
into twenty-four lots, of which the family of Abia (from which 
1Chron. Zacharias was descended) obtained the eighth lot. But it 
was not without meaning that the first preacher of the new 
covenant was born with the rights of the eighth lot; because 
as the old Covenant is often expressed by the seventh num- 
ber on. account of the Sabbath, so frequently is the new Cove- 
nant by the eighth, because of the sacrament of our Lord’s or 
our resurrection. THEOPHYLACT; Wishing to shew also that 


VER. 5—7. ST. LUKE. 11 


John was legally of Priestly descent, Luke adds, And his 
wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name. was 
Elisabeth, for it was not permitted to the Jews to take a wife 
from any other tribe but their own. Elisabeth by interpret- 
ation signifies “ rest,” Zacharias “ the remembrance of the 
land.” Bebe; John was born of just parents, that so he 
might the more boldly give precepts of justice to the people, 
which he had not learnt as novelties, but had received by 
right of inheritance from his ancestors. Hence it follows, 
And they were both just before God. A™MBRosE; Here their 
whole character is comprehended in their justice, but it is 
well said before God, for a man by affecting a popular 
good-will might seem. just to me, but not be just before 
God, if that justice instead. of springing from simpleness of 
heart, was a mere pretence carried. on by flattery. Perfect 
then is the praise, “that a man is just before God;” for he 
only is perfect. who is approved by Him who cannot be 
deceived. St. Luke comprehends the action in the command- 
ment, the doing justice in the justification. Hence it follows, 
walking in all.the commandments and justifications of the 
Lord. Yor when we obey the command of heaven we walk 
in the commandments of the Lord, when we observe justice 
we seem to possess the justification of the Lord. But to be 
‘“‘ blameless” we must “ provide things honest, not only before Prov. 3, 
God, but also before men; there is no blame when. both* 
motive and action are alike good, but.a too austere righteous- 
ness often provokes censure. A righteous act may also be 
done unrighteously, as when a man out of ostentation gives 
largely to the poor, which is not without: just cause of blame. 
It follows, And they had no son, because Elisabeth was barren. 
CurysosTom; Not. only Elisabeth, but the wives. of. the Chrys. 
Patriarchs. also, Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, were barren, which ;~ a 
was counted a disgrace among the ancients. Not-that their49- 
barrenness was the effect of sin, since all were just and vir- 
tuous, but ordained rather for your benefit, that when you saw 

a virgin giving birth to the Lord, you might not be faithless, or. 
perplexing your mind with respect:to the womb of the barren. ; 
THEOPHYLACT; And that you might learn that the law of 
God seeketh not a bodily increase of sons but a spiritual, 
both were far advanced, not only in the — but in the 


Livre “y OL 
an iINARY 
EOLUSG SIOAL pia 
UNION THE oschenre 


Ps.84,6. 
1 Thess. 
5, 5. 


Heb. 9, 
8. 


12 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


Spirit, “ making ascents in their heart’,” having their life as 
the day not as the night, and walking honestly as in the day. 


8. And it came to pass, that while he executed the 
Priest’s office before God in the order of his course, 

9. According to the custom of the Priest’s office, 
his lot was to burn incense when he went into the 


temple of the Lord. 
10. And the whole multitude of the people were 
praying without at the time of incense. 


BEDE; The Lord appointed by the hand of Moses one 
High Priest, at whose death another was to succeed in due 
order. This was observed until the time of David, who by the 
command of the Lord increased the number of the Priests; 
and so at this time Zacharias is said to have been per- 
forming his Priest’s office in the order of his course, as it 
follows: But it came to pass, when Zacharias was performing 
the Priest’s office in the order of his course before God, 
according to the custom of the Priesthood, his lot was, &c. 
AMBROSE; Zacharias seems here to be designated High Priest, 
because into the second tabernacle went the High Priest alone 
once every year, not without blood, which he offered for 
himself and the sins of the people. BEpE; It was not by a 
new lot that he was chosen when the incense was to be 
burnt, but by the old lot, whereby according to the order of 
his Priesthood he succeeded in the course of Abia. It 
follows, And all the multitude of the people, &c. Incense 
was ordered to be carried into the Holy of Holies by the 
High Priest, the whole people waiting without the temple. 
It was to be on the tenth day of the seventh month, and this 
day was to be called the day of expiation or propitiation, the 
mystery of which day the Apostle explaining to the Hebrews, 


b Ascensiones in corde ponentes. 
Vulg. Jerome reads ‘ semite,’ and other 
versions have ‘ vise strate,’ the literal 


translation of the Hebrew word MDD, 
which our own version has followed, 
“whose ways.’ The LXX reads ava- 
Réeus. The Fathers commonly explain 
ascensiones by ‘ gradus_ virtutum,’ 
as of one gradually advancing in virtue 


and rising up from earthly things to 
divine; conf. 2 Cor. 4,16; Phil. 3, 13. 
They refer also to the ‘Cantica gra- 
duum,’ or the fifteen Psalms, (119 to 
133,) sung by the priests on going up the 
fifteen stepsin the temple. See Augus- 
tine in Ps. 83. Greg. lib. iii. c. 7. in 
Ezech. preef. in Ps. 6. Peen. 


VER. 11—14. ST. LUKE. 13 


points to Jesus as the true High Pnest, who in His own 
blood has entered the secret places of heaven that he might 
reconcile the Father unto us, and intercede for the sins of 
those who still wait praying before the doors. AMBROSE; 
This then is that High Priest who is still sought by lot, for as 
yet the true High Priest is unknown; for he who is chosen 
by lot is not obtained by man’s judgment. That High Priest 
therefore was sought for, and another typified, the true 
High Priest for ever, who not by the blood of victims, but 
by His own blood, was to reconcile God the Father to 
mankind. Then indeed there were changes in the Priest- 
hood, now it is unchangeable. 


11. And there appeared unto him an angel of the 
the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of 
incense. | 

12. And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, 
and fear fell upon him. 

13. But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacha- 
rias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth 
shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John. 
14. And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and 
many shall rejoice at his birth. 


CHRysosTOM; When Zacharias entered into the temple to Chrys. 
offer up prayers to God for all men, interceding between God ae 
and man, he saw an angel standing within, as it is said, And DeiNat. 
there appeared unto him an angel. AMBROSE; It is well said 
that there appeared an angel to Zacharias, who suddenly 
beheld him; and this is the expression especially used by 
Divine Scripture with respect to angels or God, that 
what cannot be seen beforehand may be said to appear. For 
things which are the objects of our senses are not seen as 
He is seen, Who is seen only as He will, and Whose nature 
is not to be seen. OricEN; And we speak thus not only - 
of the present time, but also of the future. When we shall 
have passed from the world, God will not appear unto all. 
men, nor will the angels, but unto him only who has a clean 
heart. The place will neither hinder nor serve any one. 


DeiNat. 


Athan. 
in vita 
Anton. 


Aug. de 


Quest. 
Evan. 


L. ii, q. 1. 


14 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. 1. 


. Crrvsostom; But the angel evidently came not in a dream, 
“tt, Decause the tidings he brought were too hard to be uhdet- 


stood, and needed therefore a more visible and marvellous 


. manifestation. DamascENE; Angels, however, aré revealed not 


as they really are, but transformed (as men are able to be- 
hold them) into whatever the Lord commands. THEOPHYLACT; 
It is said the altar of incense, because the other altar was set 
apart for burnt offerings. AMBROsE; It was not without 
good réason that the angel appeared in the temple, for the 
coming of the true High Priest was now announced, and the 
Heavenly Sacrifice was prepating at which angels were to 
minister. For one cannot doubt that an angel stands by 
where Christ is sacrificed. But he appeared at the nght hand 
of the altar of incense, because he brought down the token of 


.Divine mercy. For the Lord is on my right hand; so that I 
. should not be moved. CHRysostomM; The justest of meti 


can not without fear behold an angel; Zacharias therefore, 
not sustaining the sight of the angel’s presence, nor able to 
withstand his brightness, is troubled, as it is added, Zacharias 
was troubled. But as it happens, when a charioteer is 
frightened, and has let loose his reins, the horses run head- 
long, and the chatiot is overturned ; so is it with the soul, 
when it is taketi by any surprise or alarin; as it is here added, 
and fear fell upon him. ORicEN; A new fate suddenly 
presenting itself to the human eye, troubles and startles the - 
tind. The angel knowiig this to be the nature of man, first 
dispels the alarm, as it follows, But the angel said tinto him, 
Fear not. AtHANasiv8; Whereby it is not difficult to discern 
between godd and bad spirits, for if joy has sucreéded to fear, 
we may ktiow that relief has ctitie from God, because the 
péace of the soul is a sign of the Divine Preserice; but if the 
fear rethaihs tinshaken, it is An énemy who is seen. ORIGEN; 

The arigel not only soothes his feats, but gladdens him with 
good tidings, ddding, For thy prayer is heard, and thy wife 
Elisabeth shall bear a son. 

AvucusTineE; Now here We must first consider that it is 
not likely that Zacharias, when offering sacrifice for the sins 
or for the salvation or redemption of tle people, would 
néglect the publi¢ petitions, to pray (thotigh himéelf dn old 
man, aiid his wifé also old) that he might réeceive children ; 


VER. LI—14. ST. LUKE. 15 


and, next, above all that no one prays for what he 
despairs of ever obtaining. And even up to this time, so 
much had he despaired of ever having children, that he 
would not believe, even when an angel promised it to him. 
The words, Thy prayer ts heard, must be understood there- 
fore to refer to the people; and as salvation, redemption, 
and the putting away of the sins of the people was to be 
through Christ, it is told Zacharias that a son shall be 
born to him, because that son was ordained to be the 
forerunner of Christ. 

CHRYSsosToM ; Or it means, that this was to be the proof of Chrys, 

his prayer having been heard, namely, that a son should be ™. 
born to him, crying, Behold the Lamb of God! 'THEOPHYLACT ; 
As if when Zacharias asks, How shall I know this? the 
angel answers, Because Elisabeth shall bring forth a son, thou 
shalt believe that the sins of thy people are forgiven. AMBROSE; 
Or, as follows; Divine mercy is ever full and overflowing, not 
nalrowed to a single gift, but pouring in an abundant store 
of blessings; as in this case, where first the fruit of his 
prayer is promised ; and next, that his barren wife shall bear 
a child, whose name is announced as follows; And thou 
shalt call his name John. 

BEDE; It is meant as a token of particular merit, when a 
man has a name given him or changed by God. CuRYSOSTOM; Chrys, 
Which must be the meaning here, for those who from Joann. 
their earliest years were destined to shine forth in virtue, #°™- 
received their names at the very first from a divine source ; 
while those who were to rise up in later years, had a name 
given them afterwards. 

BEDE; John is therefore interpreted, “ one in whom is 
grace, or the grace of Ged;” by which name it is declared, 
first, that grace was given to his parents, to whom in their 
old age a son was to be born; next, to John himself, who was 
to become great before the Lord ; lastly, also to the children 
of Israel, whom he was to convert to the Lord. Hence it 
follows, And he shall be a joy unto thee, and a cause of 
rejoicing. ORIGEN; For when a just man is born into the 
world, the authors of his birth rejoice ; but when one is born 
who is to be as it were an exile to labour and punishment, 
they are struck with terror and dismay. AMBROSE; Buta 


Numb. 
6, 5. 


16 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


saint is not only the blessing of his parents, but also the 
salvation of many; as it follows, And many shall rejoice at 
his birth. Parents are reminded here to rejoice at the birth 
of saints, and to give thanks. For it is no slight gift of God 
to vouchsafe unto us children, to be the transmitters of our 
race, to be the heirs of succession. 


15. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, 
and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink; and 
he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his 
mother’s womb. 

16. And many of the children of Israel shall he 
turn to the Lord their God. 

17. And he shall go before him in the spirit and 
power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the 
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the 
just ; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. 


AMBROSE; Next to his becoming the rejoicing of many, the 
greatness of his virtue is prophesied; as itis said, For he shall be 
great tn the sight of the Lord. The greatness signified is not of 
the body, but of the soul. Greatness in the sight of the Lord 
is greatness of soul, greatness of virtue. THEOPHYLACT; For 
many are called great before men, but not before God, as the 
hypocrites. And so in like manner was John called great, as the 
parents of John were called just, before the Lord. Am- 
BROSE; He extended not the boundaries of an empire, nor 
brought back in triumph the spoils of war, (but, what is far 
greater,) preaching in the desert he overcame by his great 
virtue the delights of the world, and the lusts of the flesh. 
Hence it follows; And he shall drink no wine nor strong 
drink. BEDE; Sicera is interpreted “ drunkenness,” and by 
the word the Hebrews understand any drink that can in- 
toxicate, (whether made from fruits, corn, or any other thing.) 
But it was part of the law of the Nazarites to give up wine 
and strong drink at the time of their consecration. Hence 
John, and others like him, that they might always remain 
Nazarites, (i.e. holy,) are careful always to abstain from 


VER, 15—17. ST. LUKE. 17 


these things. For he ought not to be drunk with wine (in 
which is licentiousness) who desires to be filled with the new 
wine of the Holy Spirit; rightly then is he, from whom all 
drunkenness with wine is utterly put away, filled with the 
grace of the Spirit. But it follows, And he shall be filled 
with the Holy Spirit. AMBROSE; On whomsoever the Holy 
Spirit is poured, in him there is fulness of great virtue; as in. 
St. John, who before he was born, when yet in his mother’s 
womb, bore witness to the grace of the Spirit which he had 
received, when leaping in the womb of his parent he hailed 
the glad tidings of the coming of the Lord. There is one 
spirit of this life, another of grace. The former has its 
beginning at birth, its end at death; the latter is not tied 
down to times and seasons, is not quenched by death, is not 
shut out of the womb. GREEK Expositor; But what John’s Meta- 
work is to be, and what he will do through the Holy Spirit, alas 
is shewn as follows; And many of the children of Israel 
shall he turn, &c. Origen; John indeed tured many, but 
it is the Lord’s work to turn all to God their Father. BEpE; 
Now since John (who, bearing witness to Christ, baptized 
the people in His faith) is said to have turned the children 
of Israel to the Lord their God, it is plain that Christ is the 
God of Israel. Let the Arians then cease to deny that 
Christ our Lord is God. Let the Photinians‘ blush to ascribe 
Christ’s beginning to the Virgin. Let the Manichezans 
no longer believe that there is one God of the people of 
Israel, another of the Christians. AMBROSE; But we need 
no testimony that St. John turned the hearts of many, for to 
this point we have the express witness of both prophetic and 
and evangelical Scriptures. For the voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make 
His paths straight; and his baptisms thronged by the 
people, declare the rapid progress of conversion. For the 
forerunner of Christ preached, not himself, but the Lord ; and 
therefore it follows, And he shall go before Him. It was 


€ So called from Photinus, Bp. of 
Sirmio in the middle of the fourth cen- 
tary. 
ddpeves, and bad His beginning from 
the Virgin Mary. His heresy was 
condemned in the Council of Antioch 


VOL. IIT. 


He taughtthat Christ was ¥23¢ posed 


A.D. 344, and in those of Sardis and 
Milan 347, 848. He was finally de- 
in the seoond Council of Sir- 
mio 351, and banished. See Epiphan. 
Heres. b), tit. iii. Tom. 1. ; 


18 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


well said, that he shall go before Him, who both in birth 
and in death was His forerunner. ORrIGEN; In the spirit 
and power of Elijah.—He says not, in the mind of Elijah, 
but in the spirit and power. For the spint which was 
in Elijah came upon John, and in like manner his power. 
AMBROSE; For never is the spirit without power, nor 
power without the spirit. And therefore it is said, in the 
spirit and power; because holy Elyah had great power 
and grace. Power, so that he turned back the false hearts 
of the people to faith; power of abstinence, and patience, 
and the spirit of prophecy. Elijah was in the wilderness, 
in the wilderness also was John. The one sought not 
the favour of king Ahab; the other despised that of Herod. 
The one divided Jordan; the other brought men to the 
Saving waters; John, the forerunner of our Lord’s first 
coming ; Elijah of His latter. 

BEDE; But what was foretold of Ehas by Malachi, is 
now spoken by the angel of John; as it follows, That he 
should turn the hearts of the parents to the children; 
pouring into the minds of the people, by his preaching, the 
spiritual knowledge of the ancient saints. And the dis- 
obedient to the wisdom of the just; i. e. not laying claim to 
. righteousness from the works of the law, but seeking salvation 
by faith. GREEK Ex. Or else; The Jews were the parents of 
John and the Apostles; but, nevertheless, from pride and 
infidelity raged violently against the Gospel. Therefore, like 
dutiful children, John first, and the Apostles after him, declared 
to them the truth, winning them over to their own righteous- 
ness and wisdom. So also will Elias convert the remnant of 
Hebrews to the truth of the Apostles. 

BEDE; But because he had said that Zacharias’ prayer for 
the people was heard, he adds, To make ready a people pre- 
pared’ for the Lord; by which he teaches in what manner 
the same people must be healed and prepared; namely, by 
répenting at the preaching of John and believing on Christ. 
THEOPHYL. Or, John made ready a people not disbelieving 
but prepared, that is, previously fitted to receive Christ. 

. OnicENn ; This sacrament? of preparation is even now ful- 
filled 3 in the world, for even now the spirit and power: of John 
must come upon the soul, before it believes in Jesus Christ. 


VER, 18—22. ST. LUKE. 19 


18. And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby 
shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife 
well stricken in years. 

19. And the angel answering said unto him, I am 
Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am 
sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad 
tidings. 

20. And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able 
to speak, until the day that these things shall be 
performed, because thou believest not my words, 
which shall be fulfilled in their season. 

21. And the people waited for Zacharias, and 
marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple. 

22. And when he came out, he could not speak 
unto them: and they perceived that he had seen 
a vision in the temple: for he beckoned unto them, 
and remained speechless. 


Curysostom ; Considering his own age, and moreover the Chrys. 
barrenness of ae wife, Zacharias doubted ; as it is said, And p, fae 
Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this ? aaa 
as if he said, “ How shall this be?” And he adds the reason - 
of his doubting; For Iam an old man. An unseasonable time 
of life, an ill-suited nature; the planter infirm, the soil 
barren. But it is thought by some a thing unpardonable. 
in the priest, that he raises a course of objections ; for when- 
ever God declares any thing, it becomes us to receive it in 
faith, and moreover, disputes of this kind are the mark of 
a rebellious spirit. Hence it follows; And the angel answer- 
ing said unto him, I am Gabriel, who stand before God. 
BevE; As if he says, “ If it were man who promised these 
miracles, one might with intpunity demand a sign, but 
when an angel promises, it is then not right to doubt. 

It follows; And I am sent to speak to thee. Curys. Chrys. 
That when you hear that I am sent from God, you should ses 2 
deem none of the things which are said unto thee to be of 
man, for I speak not of myself, but declare the message 
‘of Him who sends ‘me. And this is the merit and excellence 

c 2 


Greg. 
Hom. 
xxxiv. 
in 
Evan 


Chrys. 


sup. 


cap. i. 


nepds 


Chrys. 
sup. 


Anti = 
ter 
ieueie: 


20 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


of a messenger to relate nothing of his own. BEDE; Here 
we must remark, that the angel testifies, that he both stands 
before God, and is sent to bring good tidings to Zacharias. 
GreG. For when angels come to us, they so outwardly 
fulfil their ministry, as at the same time inwardly to be 
never absent from His sight; since, though the angelic 


spirit is circumscribed, the highest Spirit, which is God, is 


not circumscribed. The angels therefore even when sent 
are before Him, because on whatever mission they go, they — 
pass within Him. 

BeEpE; But he gives him the sign which he asks for, that 
he who spoke in unbelief, might now by silence learn to 
believe; as it follows; and, behold, thou shalt be dumb. 
Curys. That the bonds might be transferred from the 
powers of generation to the vocal organs. From no regard 
to the priesthood was he spared, but for this reason was the 
more smitten, because in a matter of faith he ought to have 
set an example to others. THEOPHYL. Because the word 
in the Greek may also signify deaf, he well says, Because 
thou believest not, thou shalt be deaf, and shall not be 
able to speak. For most reasonably he suffered these two 
things; as disobedient, he incurs the penalty of deafness; as 
an objector, of silence. Carys. But the Angel says, And, 
behold; in other words, “ At this instant.” But mark the 
mercy of God in what follows: Until the day in which 
these things shall be performed. As if he said, “ When by 
the issues of events I shall have proved my words, and thou 
shalt perceive that thou art rightly punished, I will remove 
the punishment from thee.” And he points out the cause of 
the punishment, adding, Because thou believest not my words, 
which shall be fulfilled in thetr season ; not considering His 
power Who sent me, and before Whom I stand. But if he 
who was incredulous about a mortal birth 7s punished, how 
shall he escape vengeance, who speaks falsely of the heavenly 
and unspeakable birth? 

GREEK Ex. Now while these things were going on within, 
‘the delay excited surprise among the multitudes who were 
waiting without, as it follows: And the people waited for 
Zacharias,and marvelled that he tarried. And while various 


“uspicions were going about, each man repeating them as it 


VER. 23—25. ST. LUKE. 21 


pleased him, Zacharias coming forth told by his silence what 
he secretly endured. Hence it follows, And when he came 
out, he could not speak. 'THeopHyL. But Zacharias 
beckoned to the people, who perhaps enquired the cause of 
his silence, which, as he was not able to speak, he signified 
to them by nodding. Hence it follows, And he beckoned to 
them, and remained speechless. AMBROSE; But a nod is a 
certain action of the body, without speech endeavouring to 
declare the will, yet not expressing it. 


23. And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days 
of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to 
his own house. 

24. And after those days his wife Elisabeth con- 
ceived, and hid herself five months, saying, 

25. Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days 
wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach 
among men. 


Beve; During the time of their course, the priests of the 
temple were so occupied by their office, that they kept 
themselves not only from the society of their wives, but 
even from the very threshold of their houses. Hence it is 
said, And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days were ac- 
complished, &c. For as there was then required a priestly 
succession from the root of Aaron, of necessity then a time 
was appointed for keeping up the inheritance. But as now 
not a carnal succession, but spiritual perfection, is looked for, 
the priests are enjoined (in order that they might ever be 
able to serve the altar) the perpetual observance of chastity. 

It follows: But after those days, &c. that is, after the days 

of Zacharias’s ministration were completed. But these 
things were done in the month of September, the twenty- 
second day of the month, upon which the Jews were bound to 
observe the feast of the Tabernacles, just before the equinox, 

at which the night began to be longer than the day, because 
Christ must increase, but John must decrease. And those 

days of fasting were not without their meaning; for by the seeJohn 
mouth of John, repentance and mortification were to be 8, 30, 


Chrys. 


22 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


preached to men. It follows: And she hid herself. Am- 
BROSE; What reason then for concealment, except shame? 
For there are certain allowed times in wedlock, when it 1s 
becoming to attend to the begetting of children; while the 
years thrive, whi'e there is hope of child-bearing. But when 
in good time old age has come on, and the period of life is 
more fitted for governing children, than begetting them, it is a 
shame to bear about the signs of pregnancy, however lawful. 
It is a shame to be laden with the burden of another age, 
and for the womb to swell with the fruit of not one’s own 
time of life. It was a shame then to her on account of her 
age; and hence we may understand the reason why they 
did not at this time come together, for surely she who 
blushed not at their coming together in their old age, would 
not blush at her child-bearing; and yet she blushes at the 
parental burden, while she yet is unconscious of the religious 
mystery. But she who hid herself because she had con- 
ceived a son, began to glory that she carried in her womb a 
prophet. 

OricEN; And therefore he says, Five months, that is, until] 
Mary should conceive, and her babe leaping with joy should 
prophesy. AMBROoSE; And though she might blush at the 
time of her child-bearing, on the other hand she rejoiced 
that she was free from reproach, saying, Thus hath the Lord 
dealt ecith me. 

Cunrys. Truly He has loosed her barrenness, a super- 
natural gift He has bestowed upon her, and the unfruitful 
rock has produced the green blade. He has taken away her 
disgrace, in that He has made her to bring forth. Hence it 
follows: In the days wherein he looked on. me, to take away 
my reproach among men. AMBROSE; For it is a shame 
among women not to receive that reward of marriage, which 


s. is the only cause of their being married. Carys. Her 
’ joy therefore is twofold. The Lord has taken away from her 


the mark of barrenness, and also given her an illustrious 
offspring. In the case of other births, the coming together 
of the parents only occurs; this birth was the effcct of 
heavenly grace. | 

BEepE; Now mystically by Zacharias may be signified 
the Jewish Priesthood, by Elisabeth the law itself; which, 


VER. 26, 27. ST. LUKE. 23 


well administered by the teaching of the Priests, ought 

to have borne spiritual children to God, but was not able, Heb. 7, 
because the Law made no one perfect. Both were just, 7. 
because the law is good, and the Priesthood for that time], 8. 
holy; both were well stricken in years, because at Christ’s 
coming both the Law and Priesthood were just bending to old 

age. Zacharias enters the temple, because it is the priest’s 
office to enter into the sanctuary of heavenly mysteries. There 

was a multitude without the doors, because the multitude 
cannot penetrate mysteries. When he places frankincense on 

the altar, he discovers that John will be born; for while the 
teachers are kindled with the flame of divine reading, they 

find the grace of God flow to them through Jesus: and this Gal. 3, 
is done by an angel, for the Law was ordained by angels. '*" 
AMBROSE; But in one man the voice of the people was put 

to silence, because in one man the whole people was address- 

ing God. For the word of God has come over to us, and in 

us is not silent. He is dumb who understands not the Law; 

for why should you think the man who knows not a sound, 

to be more dumb than him who knows not a mystery. The 
Jewish people are hike to one beckoning, who cannot make 

his actions intelligible. Brpre; And yet Elisabeth conceives — 
John, because the more inward parts of the Law abound with 
sacraments of Christ. She conceals her conception five 
months, because Moses in five books set forth the mysteries 

of Christ; or because the dispensation of Christ is repre- 
sented by the words or deeds of the saints, in the five ages of 

the world. 


26. And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was 
sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Naza- 
reth, 

27. To a virgin espoused to a man whose name 
was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin’s 
name was Mary. | 


BEDE; Because either the Incarnation of Christ was to be 
in the sixth age of the world, or because it was to serve to the 


24 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. k. 


fulfilling of the law, rightly in the sixth month of John’s 
conception was an angel sent to Mary, to tell her that a 
Saviour should be born. Hence it is said, And in the sixth 
month, &c. We must understand the sixth month to be 
March, on the twenty-fifth day of which our Lord is reported 
to have been conceived, and to have suffered, as also to have 
been born on the twenty-fifth day of December. But if either 
the one day we believe to be the vernal equinox, or the 
other the winter solstice, it happens that with the increase of 
light He was conceived or born Who lighteneth every man 
that cometh into the world, But if any one shall prove, that 
before the time of our Lord’s nativity or conception, light 
began either to increase, or supersede the darkness, we then 
say, that it was because John, before the appearance of His 
coming, began to preach the kingdom of heaven. 
Basil.in | Bast. The heavenly spirits visit us, not as it seems fit to 
en them, but as the occasion conduces to our advantage, for 
they are ever looking upon the glory and fulness of the 
Divine Wisdom; hence it follows, The angel Gabriel was 
Greg. sent. GREG. To the virgin Mary was sent, not any one of 
a in the angels, but the archangel Gabriel; for upon this 
Evan gervice it was meet that the highest angel should come, as 
being the bearer of the highest of all tidings. He is there- 
fore marked by a particular name, to signify what was his 
effectual part in the work. For Gabriel is interpreted, “ the 
strength of God.” By the strength of God then was He to 
be announced Who was coming as the God of strength, and 
Gloss. mighty in battle, to put down the powers of the air, GLoss. 
ee But the place is also added whither he is sent, as it follows, 
To a city, Nazareth. For it was told that He would come 
a Nazarite, (i. ec. the holy of the holy.) 
Bedain BeveE; It was a fit beginning for man’s restoration, that an 
apa angel should be sent down from God to consecrate a virgin 
Annunt. by a divine birth, for the first cause of man’s perdition 
was the Devil sending a serpent to deceive a woman by 
Aug. dethe spirit of pride. AvuG. Jo a virgin, for Christ could 
Virg. be born from virginity alone, seeing He could not have 
cap-xv. an equal in His birth. It was necessary for our Head 
by this mighty miracle to be born according to the flesh — 
of a virgin, that He might signify that his members 


VER. 26, 27. ST. LUKE. 25 


were to be born in the spirit of a virgin Church. JEROME ; Hieron. 
And rightly an angel is sent to the virgin, because theg Tole a 
virgin state is ever akin to that of angels. Surely in the De As- 
flesh to live beyond the flesh is not a life on earth but in PS 
heaven. . 

Curys. The angel announces the birth to the virgin Chrys. 
not after the conception, lest she should be thereby too much Mat 
troubled, but before the conception he addresses her, not in Hom. 4. 
a dream, but standing by her in visible shape. For as great 
indeed were the tidings she receives, she needed before the 
issue of the event an extraordinary visible manifestation. 

AMBROSE; Scripture has rightly mentioned that she was 
espoused, as well as a virgin, a virgin, that she might 
appear free from all connexion with man; espoused, that 
she might not be branded with the-disgrace of sullied 
virginity, whose swelling womb seemed to bear evident 
marks of her corruption. But the Lord had rather that 
men should cast a doubt upon His birth than upon His 
mother’s purity. He knew how tender is a virgin’s mo- 
desty, and how easily assailed the reputation of her chastity, 
nor did He think the credit of His birth was to be built 
up by His mother’s wrongs. It follows therefore, that the 
holy Mary’s virginity was of as untainted purity as it was 
also of unblemished reputation. Nor ought there, by an 
erroneous opinion, to he left the shadow of an excuse to living 
virgins, that the mother of our Lord even seemed to be evil 
spoken of. But what could be imputcd to the Jews, or to 
Herod, if they should seem to have persecuted an adulterous 
offspring ? And how could He Himself say, I came not to Matt. 5. 
abolish the luw, but to fulfil it, if He should seem to have oe 
had his beginning from a violation of the law, for the issue of Deut. 
an unmatried person is condemned by the law? Not to ee 
add that also greater credit is given to the words of Mary, 
and the cause of falsehood removed? For it might seem 
that unmarried becoming pregnant, she had wished to shade 
her guilt by a lie; but an espoused person has no reason 
for lying, since to women child-birth is the reward of 
wedlock, the grace of the marriage bed. Again, the virginity 
of Mary was meant to baffle the prince of the world, who, 
when he perceived her espoused to a man, could cast 


26 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


no suspicion on her offspring. ORIGEN; For if she had 
had no husband, soon would the thought have stolen 
into the Devil’s mind, how she who had known no man 
could be pregnant. It was right that the conception 
should be Divine, something more exalted than human nature. 
AMBROSE; But still more has it baffled the princes of the 
world, for the malice of devils soon detects even hidden 
things, while they who are occupied in worldly vanities, can 
not know the things of God. But morcover, a more powerful 
witness of her purity is adduced, her husband, who might 
both have been indignant at the injury, and revenged the 
dishonour, if he also had not acknowledged the mystery ; of 
whom it is added, Whose name was Joseph, of the house of 
Beda in David. BEDE; Which last applies not only to Joseph, but 
ee also to Mary, for the Law commanded that every one should 
nunt. take a wife out of his own tribe or family. It follows, dnd 
the virgin’s name was Mary. Ip. Maria, in Hebrew, is the 
star of the sea; but in Syriac it is interpreted Mistress, and 
well, because Mary was thought worthy to be the mother of 
the Lord of the whole world, and the light of endless ages. 


28. And the angel came in unto her, and said, 
Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with 
thee: blessed art thou among women. 

29. And when she saw him, she was troubled at 
his saying, and cast in her. mind what manner of 
salutation this should be. 


AMBROSE; Mark the virgin by her manner of life. Alone 
in an inner chamber, unseen by the eyes of men, discovered 
only by an angel; as it is said, And the angel came in unto 
her. That she might not be dishonoured by any ignoble 

Diem address, she is saluted by an angel. Grec. Nyss. Far 
ae ., different then to the news formerly addressed to the woman; 
Christi. is the announcement now made to the Virgin. In the former, 
the cause of sin was punished by the pains of childbirth ; 
in the latter, through gladness, sorrow is driven away. 
Hence the angel not unaptly proclaims joy to the Virgin, 
Gone; saying, Hail. Greek Ex. But that she was judged worthy of 


VER. 28, 29. _ ST. LUKE. 27 


the nuptials is attested by his saying, Full of grace. For it 
is signified as a kind of token or marriage gift of the bride- 
groom, that she was fruitful in graces. For of the things 
which he mentions, the one appertains to the bride, the other 
to the bridegroom. JEROME; And it is well said, Full of 5 Jerome 
grace, for to others, grace comes in part; into Mary at 
once the fulness of grace wholly infused itself. She truly is 
full of grace through whom has been poured forth upon 
every creature the abundant rain of the Holy Spint. But 
already He was with the Virgin Who sent the angel to the 
Virgin. The Lord preceded His messenger, for He could 
not be confined by place Who dwells in all places. 
Whence it follows, Zhe Lord is with thee. Auc. More Avg. in 
than with me, for He Himself is in thy heart, He is plead 
(made) in thy womb, He fills thy soul, He fills thy re 
womb. ; 
GreEK Ex. But this is the sum of the whole message. | oe 
The Word of God, as the Bridegroom, effecting an a 
comprehensible union, Himself, as it were, the same both 
planting, and being planted, hath moulded the whole nature 
of man into Himself. But comes last the most perfect and 
comprehensive salutation; Blessed art thow among women. 
1.e. Alone, far before al! other women; that women also 
should be blessed in thee, as men are in thy Son; but rather 
both in both. For as by one man and one woman came at 
once both sin and sorrow, so now also by one woman and one 
man hath both blessing and joy been restored, and pourcd 
forth upon all. 
AMBROSE; But mark the Virgin by her bashfulness, for 
she was afraid, as it follows; And when she heard, she was 
troubled, It is the habit of virgins to tremble, and to be 
ever afraid at the presence of man, and to be shy when he 
addresses her, Learn, O virgin, to avoid light talking. Mary 
feared even the salutation of anangel. GREEK Ex. Butas she sup, 
might be accustomed to these visions, the Evangelist ascribes 
her agitation not to the vision, but to the things told her, 
saying, she was troubled at his words. Now observe both 
the modesty and wisdom of the Virgin; the soul, and at the 
same time the voice. When she heard the joyful words, she 
pondered them in her mind, and neither openly resisted 


Photius. 


28 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


through unbelief, nor forthwith lightly complied; avoiding 
equally the inconstancy of Eve, and the insensibility of 
Zacharias. Hence it is said, And she cast in her mind what 
manner of salutation this was, it is not said conception, 
for as yet she knew not the vastness of the mystery. But 
the salutation, was there aught of passion in it as from a man 
to a virgin? or was it not of God, seeing that he makes 
mention of God, saying, The Lord is with thee. AMBROSE; 
She wondered also at the new form of blessing, unheard of 
before, reserved for Mary alone. Origen; For if Mary had 
known that similar words had been addressed to others, such 
a salutation would never have appeared to her so strange and 


alarming. 


30. And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary : 
for thou hast found favour with God. 

31. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, 
and bring forth a son, and shalt call hisname JESUS. 

32. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son 
of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto 
him the throne of his father David: 

33. And he shall reign over the house of Jacab 
for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end, 


When the angcl saw that she was troubled at this unusual 
salutation, calling her by her name as if she was well known 
to him, he tells her she must not fear, as it follows; And the 
angel said, Fear not, Mary. GREEK Ex. As if he said, I 
came not to deceive you, nay rather to bring down deliverance 
from deception; I came not to rob you of your inviolable 
virginity, but to open a dwelling-place for the Author and 
Guardian of thy purity; I am nota servant of the Devil, 
but the ambassador of Him that destroyeth the Devil. I am 
come to form a marriage treaty, not to devise plots. So far 
then was he from allowing her to be harassed by distracting 
thoughts, lest he should be counted a servant unfaithful to 


his trust. Carys. But he who earns favour in the sight 


of God has nothing to fear. Hence it follows, For thou hast 


\ 


VER. 380—83. ST. LUKE. 29 


found favour before God. But how shall any one find it, 
except through the means of his humility. For God gireth aa 
grace to the humble. GReEK Ex. For the Virgin found {7 Pot. 
favour with God, in that decking her own soul in the bright 5, 5. 
robes of chastity, she prepared a dwelling-place pleasing to fs 
God. Not only did she retain her virginity inviolate, but 
her conscience also she kept from stain. As many had 
found favour before Mary, he goes on to state what was 
peculiar to her. Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb. 
GREEK Ex. By the word behold, he denotes rapidity and Geome- 
actua] presence, implying that with the utterance of the '*™ 
word the conception is accomplished. GREEK Ex. Thou Sev. An- 
shalt conceive in thy womb, that he might shew that our fioche- 
Lord from the very Virgin’s womb, and of our substance, took 
our flesh upon Him. For the Divine Word came to purify 
man’s nature and birth, and the first elements of our generation. 
And so without sin and human seed, passing through every 
stage as we do, He is conceived in the flesh, and carried in 
the womb for the space of nine months. GREEK Ex. But Geome- 
since it happens also that to the spiritual mind is given in an 
especial manner to conceive the Divine Spirit, and bring 
forth the Spirit of salvation, as says the Prophet; therefore 
he added, And thou shalt bring forth a Son. AMBROSE; But Is 34, 
all are not as Mary, that when they conceive the word of the !® 
Holy Spirit, they bring forth; for some put forth the word 
prematurely, others have Christ in the womb, but not yet formed. 
Grec. Nyss. While the expectation of child-birth strikes Greg. 
@ woman with terror, the sweet mention of her offspring D's+ in 
calms her, as it is added, And thou shalt call his name Nat. 
Jesus. The coming of the Saviour is the banishing of all 
fear. BEpDE; Jesus is interpreted Saviour, or Healing. 
GREEK Ex. And he says, Thow shalt call, not His father shall Geom. 
call, for He is without a father as regards His lower birth, as?” 
He is without a mother in respect of the higher. CyRIL; But de fide 
this name was given anew to the Word in adaptation to His Theale 
nativity in the flesh; as that prophecy saith, Thou shalt be 1s.62,2. 
called bya new name which the mouth of the Lord hath 
named. GREEK Ex. But as this name was common to Him with sup. 
the successor of Moses, the angel therefore implying that He 
should not be after Joshua's likeness, adds, He shall be great. Josh. 1. 


Photius. 


Matt. 
11, 27. 


Matt. 
17, 5. 


Chrys. 


non occ. 


Severus 
Antio- 
chenus. 


30 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


AMBROSE; It was said also of Jolin, that he shall be great, 
but of him indeed as of a great man, of Chirist, as of the great 
God. For abundantly is poured forth the power of God; widely 
the greatness of the heavenly substance extended, neither 
confined by place, nor grasped by thought; neither de- 
termined by calculation, nor altered by age. ORIGEN; See 
then the greatness of the Saviour, how it is diffused over the 
whole world. Go up to heaven, see there how it has filled 
the heavenly places; carry thy thoughts down to the deep, 
behold, there too He has descended. If thou seest this, 
then, in like manner, beholdest thou fulfilled in very deed, 
He shall be great. 

GREEK Ex. The assumption of our flesh does not diminish 
ought from the loftiness of the Deity, but rather exalts the 
lowness of man’s nature. Hence it follows, And he shall 
be called the Son of the Highest. Not, Thou shalt give 
Him the name, but He Himself shall be called. By 
whom, but His Father of like substance with Himself? For 
no one hath known the Son but the Father. But He in 
Whom exists the infallible knowledge of His Son, is the true 
interpreter as to the name which should be given Him, when 
He says, This is my beloved Son; for such indeed from 
everlasting He is, though His name was not revealed 
till now; therefore he says, He shall be called, not shall 
be made or begotten. For before the worlds He was of like 
substance with the Father. Him therefore thou shalt con- 
ceive; His mother thou shalt become; Him shall thy virein 
shrine enclose, Whom the heavens were not able to contain. 
Curys. But since it seems shocking or unworthy to some 
men that God should inhabit a body, is the Sun, I would 
ask, the heat whereof is felt by each body that receives 
its rays, at all sullied as to its natural purity? Much more 
then does the Sun of Righteousness, in taking upon Himself 
a most pure body from the Virgin’s womb, escape not only 
defilement, but even shew forth His own mother in greater 
holiness. GREEK Ex. And to make the Virgin mindful of the 
prophets, he adds, And the Lord God shall give unto him 
the seat of David, that she might know clearly, that He Who 
is to. be born of her is that very Christ, Whom the prophets 
promised should be born of the seed of David. 


Pal 


VER. 34, 35. ST. LUKE. at 


Cyrit; Not however from Joseph proceeded the most © eles 
pure descent of Christ. For from one and the same line of Julian 
connexion had sprung both Joseph and the Virgin, and from ae a 
this the only-begotten had taken the form of man. Basi; Epist. 
Our Lord sat not on the earthly throne of David, the Jewish cern 
kingdom having been transferred to Herod. The seat of David 
is that on which our Lord reestablished His spiritual kingdom 
which should never be destroyed. Hence it follows, And he 
shall reign over the house of Jacob. Curys. Now He Chrys. 
assigns to the present house of Jacob all those who were of ae 
the number of the Jews that believed on Him. For as Paul Matt. 
says, They are not all Israel which are of Israel, but the Rom.9, 
children of the promise are counted for the seed. Brepr;* ® 
Or by the house of Jacob he means the whole Church which 
either sprang from a good root, or though formerly a wild 
olive branch, has yet been for a reward of its faith grafted into es 11, 
the good olive tree. GREEK Ex. But to reign for ever is of 27 Racha! 
none save God alone; and hence though because of the incar- ter. 
nation Christ is said to receive the seat of David, yet as 
being Himself God He is acknowledged to be the eternal 
King. It follows, And his kingdom shall have no end, not 
in that He is God, but in that He is man also. Now in- 
deed He has the kingdom of many nations, but finally he shall 
reign over all, when all things shall be put under Him. BEDE ;1 Cor. 
Let Nestorius then cease to say that the Virgin’s Son is only '® 25 
man, and to deny that He is taken up by the Word of God 
into the unity of the Person. For the Angel when he says 
that the very same has David for His father whom he declares 
is called the Son of the Highest, demonstrates the one Person 
of Christ in two natures. The Angel uses the future tense vocabi- 
not because, as the Heretics say, Christ was nol before Mary, ee 
but because in the same person, man with God shares the 
same name of Son. 


34. Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall 
this be, seeing I know not a man? 

35. And the angel answered and said unto her, 
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power 
of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also 


Is. 7,14. 


Orat. in 
Diem 


$2 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be 
called the Son of God. 


AMBROSE; It was Mary’s part neither to refuse belief in the 
Angel, nor too hastily take unto herself the divine message. 
How subdued her answer is, compared with the words of 
the Priest. Then said Mary to the Angel, How shall 
this be? She says, How shall this be? He answers, 
Whereby shall I know this? We refuses to believe that 
which he says he does not know, and. seeks as it were 
still further authority for belief. She avows herself willing to 
do that which she doubts not will be done, but how, she is 
anxious to know. Mary had read, Behold, she shall conceive 
and bear a son. She believed therefore that it should be, 
but how it was to take place she had never read, for even to 
so great a prophet this had not been revealed. So great a 
mystery was not to be divulged by the mouth of man, but of 
an Angel. ‘ 

Grec. Nyss. Hear the chaste words of the Virgin. The 


Nat. Angel tells her she shall bear a son, but she rests upon her 


Christi. 


Basil. 
235. Ep. 
Amph. 


Greg. 
sup. 


virginity, deeming her inviolability a more precious thing 
than the Angel’s declaration. Hence she says, Seeing that I 
know nota man. Basit; Knowledge is spoken of in various 
ways. The wisdom of our Creator is called knowledge, and 
an acquaintance with His mighty works, the keeping also of 
His commandments, and the constant drawing near to Him; 
and besides these the marriage union is called knowledge, 
as it is here. 

Greco. Nyss. These words of Mary are a token of what 
she was pondering in the secrets of her heart; for if for 
the sake of the marriage union she had wished to be espoused 
to Joseph, why was she seized with astonishment when 
the conception was made known unto her? seeing in truth 
she might herself be expecting at the time to become a 
mother according to the law of nature. But because it was 
meet that her body being presented to God as an holy offering 
should be kept inviolate, therefore she says, Seeing that I 
know nota man. Asif she said, Notwithstanding that thou 
who speakest art an Angel, yet that 1 should know a man is 


VER. 34, 35. ST. LUKE. 33 


plainly an impossible thing. How then can I be a mother, 
having no husband? For Joseph I have acknowledged as 
my betrothed. GREEK Ex. But mark, how the Angel Geome- 
solves the Virgin’s doubts, and shews to her the unstained " 
marriage and the unspeakable birth. And the Angel an- 
swered, and said unto her, The Holy Spirit shall come upon 
thee. Curys. As if he said, Look not for the order of Chrys. 
nature in things which transcend and overpower nature. 4g.) 
Dost thou say, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? Gev. 
Nay rather, shall it happen to thee for this very reason, that 
thou hast never known a husband. For if thou hadst, thou 
wouldest not have been thought worthy of the mystery, 
not that marriage is unholy, but virginity more excellent. 
It became the common Lord of all both to take part 
with us, and to differ with us in His nativity; for the 
being born from the womb, He shared in common with 
us, but in that He was bom without cohabitation, He was 
exalted far above us. Gree. Nyss. O blessed is that Greg. 
womb which because of the overflowing purity of the Virgin 3". 
Mary has drawn to itself the gift of life! For in others Nat. 
scarcely indeed shall a pure soul obtain the presence of 
the Holy Spirit, but in her the flesh is made the receptacle 
of the Spirit. Ip. For the tables of our nature which Greg. 
guilt had broken, the true Lawgiver has formed anew to woe 
Himself from our dust without cohabitation, creating a Moysis. 
body capable of taking His divinity, which the finger of 
God hath carved, that is to say, the Spirit coming upon the 
Virgin. Ip. Moreover, the power of the Highest shall Gieg. in 
overshadow thee. Christ is the power of the most high King, n,,,), 
who by the coming of the Holy Spirit is formed in the Virgin. 
GREG. By the term overshadowing, both natures of the Incar- Greg. 
nate God are signified. For shadow is formed by light and aon 
matter. But the Lord by His Divine nature is light. Be- Bee 
cause then immaterial light was to be embodied in the Virgin’s9), ’ 
womb, it is well said unto her, The power of the Highest 
Shall overshadow thee, that is, the human body in thee 
shall receive an immaterial light of divinity. For this is 
said to Mary for the heavenly refreshing of her soul. 
BEDE; Thou shalt conceive then not by the seed of man 
whom thou knowest not, but by the operation of the Holy 

VOL. III. D 


34 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. f. 


Spirit with which thou art filled. There shall be no flame of 
desire in thee when the Holy Spirit shall overshadow thee. 
Greg. GReG. Nyss. Or he says, overshadow thee, because as a 
Dut "shadow takes its shape from the character of those bodies 
Nat. which go before it, so the signs of the Son’s Deity will appear 
non oce. from the power of the Father. For as in us a certain hife- 
Nae giving power is seen in the material substance, by which 
man is formed; so in the Virgin, has the power of the 
Highest in like manner, by the life-giving Spirit, taken 
from the Virgin’s body a fleshly substance inherent in the 
body to form anew man. Hence it follows, Therefore also 
Athan. that holy thing which shall be born of thee. ATHAN. For we 
Evite. confess that which then was taken up from Mary to be of the 
tum. nature of man and a most real body, the very same also 
according to nature with our own body. For Mary is our 
Basil. sister, seeing we have all descended from Adam. BasiL; 
Snivite Hence also, St. Paul says, God sent forth his Son, born not 
Sanct. (by a woman) but of a woman. For the words by a woman 
Gal4,4. might convey only a mere passing expression of birth, but 
when it is said, of a woman, there is openly declared a 
communion of nature between the son and the parent. 
Greg. GReEG. To distinguish His holiness from ours, Jesus is stated 
re in an especial manner to be born holy. For we although 
cae indeed made holy, are not born so, for we are constrained 
ig, by the very condition of our corruptible nature to cry out 
Ps. 51, with the Prophet, Behold, I was conceived in iniquity. 
ss But He alone is in truth holy, who was not conceived 
by the cementing of a fleshly union, nor as the heretics 
rave, one person in His human nature, another in His 
divine; not conceived and brought forth a mere man, and 
afterwards by his merits, obtained that He should be God, 
but the Angel announcing and the Spirit coming, first the 
Word in the womb, afterwards within the womb the Word 
made flesh. Whence it follows, Shall be called the Son 
Victor of God. GREEK Ex. But observe, how the Angel has 
ou declared the whole Trinity to the Virgin, making mention 
of the Holy Spirit, the Power, and the Most High, for the 
Trinity is indivisible °. 
© This passage, except the words be found both in ‘Tit. Bost. and Theo- 
*¢ For the Trinity is indivisible,” is to phylact. 


VER. 36—38. ST. LUKE. 35 


36. And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath 
also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the 
sixth month with her, who was called barren. 

37. For with God nothing shall be impossible. 

38. And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the 
Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And 
the angel departed from her. 


Curys. Seeing that his previous words had overcome the Chrys. 
mind of the virgin, the angel drops his discourse to a humbler ig 
subject, persuading her by reference to sensible things. 
Hence he says, And, behold, Elisabeth thy cousin, §&c. Mark 
the discretion of Gabriel; he did not remind her of Sarah, 
or Rebecca, or Rachel, because they were examples of 
ancient times, but he brings forward a recent event, that he 
might the more forcibly strike her mind. For this reason also 
he noticed the age, saying, She also hath conceived a son 
tn her old age; and the natural infirmity also. As it follows, 
And this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. 

For not immediately at the beginning of Elisabeth’s con- 
ception did he make this announcement, but after the space 

of six months, that the swelling of her womb might confirm 

its truth. GRreEG. Naz. But some one will ask, How iscarmn. 
Christ related to David, since Mary sprang from the blood of es 
Aaron, the angel having declared Elisabeth to be her kins- Christi. 
woman? But this was brought about by the Divine counsel, 

to the end that the royal race might be united to the 
priestly stock; that Christ, Who is both King and Priest, 
might be descended from both according to the flesh. 

For it is written, that Aaron, the first High Priest according Exod. 
to the law, took from the tribe of Judah for bis wife Elisabeth, © 2%: 
the daughter of Aminadab. And observe the most holy ad- 
ministration of the Spirit, in ordering that the wife of Zacharias 
should be called Elisabeth, so bringing us back to that Elisabeth 
whom Aaron married. BEDE; So it was then, lest the virgin 
should despair of being able to bear a son, that she 
received the example of one both old and barren about 

to bring forth, in order that she might learn that all things 

are possible with God, even those which seem to be opposed 

D 2 


verbum. 


Aug. 
contra 
Faust. 
1. xxv. 
e. 5. 


meter. 


36 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Tf. 


to the order of nature. Whence it follows, For there shall 
be no word impossible with God. Curys. For the Lord 
of nature can do all things as He will, Who executes and 
disposes all things, holding the reins of life and death. 
Aug. But whoever says, “If God is omnipotent, let Him 
cause those things which have been done to have not been 
done,” does not perceive that he says, “‘ Let Him cause those 
things which are true, in that very respect in which they 
are true to be false.” For He may cause a thing not to 
be which was, as when He makes a man who began to be 
by birth, not to be by death. But who can say that He 
makes not to be that which no longer is in being? For 
whatever is past is no longer in being. But if aught can 
happen to a thing, that thing is still in being to which any 
thing happens, and if it is, how is it past? Therefore that is 
not in bemg which we have truly said has been, because the 
truth is, in our opinions, not in that thing which no longer is. 
But this opinion God can not make false; and we do not so 
call God omnipotent as supposing also that He could die. 
He plainly is alone truly called omnipotent, who truly is, 
and by whom alone that is, whatever in any wise exists, 
whether spirit or body. 

AMBROSE; Behold now the humility, the devotion of the 
virgin. For it follows, But Mary said, Behold the handmaid 
of the Lord. She calls herself His handmaid, who is chosen 
to be His mother, so far was she from being exalted by the 
sudden promise. At the same time also by calling herself 
handmaid, she claimed to herself in no other way the prerogative 
of such great grace than that she might do what was com- 
manded her. For about to bring forth One meek and lowly, 
she was bound herself to shew forth lowliness. As it follows, 
Be it unto me according to thy word. You have her sub- 
mission, you see her wish. Behold the handmaid of the 
Lord, signifies the readiness of duty. Be tt unto me according 
to thy word, the conception of the wish. GREEK Ex. Some 
men will highly extol one thing, some another, in these words 
of the virgin. One man, for example, her constancy, another 
her willingness of obedience; one man her not being 
tempted by the great and glorious promises of the great 
archangel; another, her self-command in not giving an 


vER. 39—45. ST. LUKE, 37 


instant assent, equally avoiding both the heedlessness of Eve 

and the disobedience of Zacharias. But to me the depth of 

her humility is an object no less worthy of admiration. 
Gree. Through an ineffable sacrament of a holy conception Greg. 
and a birth inviolable, agreeable to the truth of each na-*"P- 
ture, the same virgin was both the handmaid and mother of 

the Lord. 

Breve; Having received the consent of the virgin, the 
angel soon returns heavenward, as it follows, And the angel 
departed from her. Euses. Not only having obtained what vel Geo- 
he wished, but wondering at her virgin beauty, and the meter 
ripeness of her virtue. 


39. And Mary arose in those days, and went into 
the hill country with haste, into a city of Juda; 

40. And entered into the house of Zacharias, and 
saluted Elisabeth. | 

41. And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth 
heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her 
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: 

42. And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, 
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the 
fruit of thy womb. 

43. And whence is this to me, that the mother of 
my Lord should come to me? 

44. For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation 
sounded in my ears, the babe leaped in my womb 
for joy. 

45. And blessed is she that believed: for there 
shall be a performance of those things which were 
told her from the Lord. 


AMBROSE; The Angel, when he announced the hidden 
mysteries to the Virgin, that he might build up her faith by an 
example, related to her the conception of a barren woman. 
When Mary heard it, it was not that she disbelieved the oracle, 
or was uncertain about the messenger, or doubtful of the ex- 
ample, but rejoicing in the fulfilment of her wish, and con- 


38 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


scientious in the observance of her duty, she gladly went forth 

si into the hill country. For what could Mary now, filled with 
' God, but ascend into the higher parts with haste! OrIcEN; 
For Jesus who was in her womb hastened to sanctify John, still 

in the womb of his mother. Whence it follows, with haste. 
AMBROSE; The grace of the Holy Spirit knows not of slow 
workings. Learn, ye virgins, not to loiter in the streets, 

nor mix in public talk. THrorHyt. She went into the 
mountains, because Zacharias dwelt there. As it follows, 

To a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias. 
Learn, O holy women, the attention which ye ought to shew 

for your kinswomen with child. For Mary, who before dwelt 

alone in the secret of her chamber, neither virgin modesty 
caused to shrink from the public gaze, nor the rugged 
mountains from pursuing her purpose, nor the tediousness of 

the journey from performing her duty. Learn also, O virgins, 

the lowliness of Mary. She came a kinswoman to her next 

of kin, the younger to the elder, nor did she merely come to 

her, but was the first to give her salutations; as it follows, 

And she saluted Elisabeth. For the more chaste a virgin is, 

the more humble she should be, and ready to give way to 

her elders. Let her then be the mistress of humility, in whom 

is the profession of chastity. Mary is also a cause of piety, 

in that the higher went to the lower, that the lower might be 

Hae assisted, Mary to Elisabeth, Christ to John. Cuarys. Or 
ia Matt, else the Virgin kept to herself all those things which have 
been said, not revealing them to any one, for she did not 
believe that any credit would be given to her wonderful story ; 

nay, she rather thought she would suffer reproach if she told 
Geome- it, as if wishing to screen her own guilt. GREEK Ex. But 
ter. to Elisabeth alone she has recourse, as she was wont to do 
from their relationship, and other close bonds of union. 
AMBROSE; But soon the blessed fruits of Mary’s coming 

and our Lord’s presence are made evident. For it follows, 

And it came to pass, that when Elisabeth heard the saluta- 

tion of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb. Mark the 
distinction and propriety of each word. Elisabeth first 

heard the word, but John first experienced the grace. She 
heard by the order of nature, he leaped by reason of the mystery. 

She perceived the coming of Mary, he the coming of the Lord. 


VER. 39—45. ST. LUKE. 39 


GREEK Ex. For the Prophet sees and hears more acutely Seon: 
than his mother, and salutes the chief of Prophets; but as he 
could not do this in words, he leaps in the womb, which was 
the greatest token of his joy. Who ever heard of leaping 
at a time previous to birth? Grace introduced things to which 
nature was a stranger. Shut up in the womb, the soldier 
acknowledged his Lord and King soon to be born, the 
womb’s covering being no obstacle to the mystical sight. 
OriceN; He was not filled with the Spirit, until she stood vid. 
near him who bore Christ in hcr womb. Then indecd he Fit Bos. 
was both filled with the Spirit, and leaping imparted the 
grace to his mother; as it follows, And Elisabeth was filled 
with the Holy Spirit. But we cannot doubt that she who was 
then filled with the Holy Spirit, was filled because of her son. 
AMBROSE; She who had hid herself because she conceived 
a son, began to glory that she carried in her womb a 
prophet, and she who had before blushed, now gives her 
blessing; as it follows, And she spake out with a loud voice, 
Blessed art thou among women. With a loud voice she ex- 
claimed when she perceived the Lord’s coming, for she 
believed it to be a holy birth. But she says, Blessed art 
thou among women. For none was ever partaker of such 
grace or could be, since of the one Divine seed, there is one 
only parent. BrpE; Mary is blessed by Elisabeth with 
the same words as before by Gabriel, to shew that she was to 
be reverenced both by men and angels. THEOoPHYL. But 
because there have been other holy women who yet have 
borne sons stained with sin, she adds, And blessed is the 
Srut & thy womb. Or another interpretation is, having said, 
Blessed art thou among women, she then, as if some one 
enquired the cause, answers, And blessed is the fruit Of thy 
womb: as it is said, Blessed be he that cometh in the name pg. 118, 
of the Lord. The Lord God, and he hath shewed us light ; 26. 27. 
for the Holy Scriptures often use and, instead of because. 

Tit. Bos. Now she rightly calls the Lord the fruit of the 
virgin’s womb, because He proceeded not from man, but from 
Mary alone. For they who are sown by their fathers are the 
fruits of their fathers. GREEK Ex. This fruit alone then is Geome- 
blessed, because it is produced without man, and without sin. ™ 
BepE; This is the fruit which is promised to David, Of the Ps. 132, 


40 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I, 


Severus fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne. From 


non occ. 
vide 
Theoph, 
et Tit. 
Bost. 


Aug. 
Epist. 
ad Dar- 
danum 
57. 


this place we derive the refutation of Eutyches, in that Christ 
is stated to be the fruit of the womb. For all fruit is of the 
same nature with the tree that bears it. Itremains then that 
the virgin was also of the same nature with the second Adam, 
who takes away the sins of the world. But let those also who 
invent curious fictions concerning the flesh of Christ, blush 
when they hear of the real child-bearing of the mother of God. 
For the fruit itself proceeds from the very substance of the 
tree. Where too are those who say that Christ passed through 
the virgin as water through an aqueduct? Let these consider 
the words of lisabeth who was filled with the Spirit, that 
Christ was the fruit of the womb. It follows, And whence 
ts this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? 
AMBROSE; She says it not ignorantly, for she knew it was 
by the grace and operation of the Holy Spirit that the 
mother of the prophet should be saluted by the mother of 
his Lord, to the advancement and growth of her own pledge; 
but being aware that this was of no human deserving, but a 
gift of Divine grace, she therefore says, Whence is this to me, 
that is, By what right of mine, by what that I have done, for 
what good deeds? OricEn; Now in saying this, she coincides 
with her son. For John also felt that he was unworthy 
of our Lord’s coming to him. But she gives the name of 
“the mother of our Lord” to one still a virgin, thus fore- 
stalling the event by the words of prophecy. Divine fore- 
knowledge brought Mary to Elisabeth, that the testimony 
of John might reach the Lord. For from that time Christ 
ordained John to be a prophet. Hence it follows, For, lo, 
as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded, §c. AuvG. 
But in order to say this, as the Kvangelist has premised, 
she was filled with the Holy Spirit, by whose revelation 
undoubtedly she knew what that leaping of the child meant; 
namely, that the mother of Him had come unto her, whose 
forerunner and herald that child was to be. Such then 
might be the meaning of so great an event; to be known 
indeed by grown up persons, but not understood by a little 
child; for she said not, “The babe leaped in faith in my 
womb,” but leaped jor joy. Now we see not only children 
leaping for joy, but cven the cattle; not surely from any 


VER. 39—45. ST. LUKE. 4l 


faith or religious feeling, or any rational knowledge. But this 
joy was strange and unwonted, for it wasin the womb; and at 
the coming of her who was to bring forth the Saviour of the 
world. This joy, therefore, and as it were reciprocal salutation 
to the mother of the Lord, was caused (as miracles are) by 
Divine influences in the child, not in any human way by him. 
For even supposing the exercise of reason and the will had 
been so far advanced in that child, as that he should be able 
in the bowels of his mother to know, believe, and assent; yet 
surely that must be placed among the miracles of Divine power, 
not referred to human examples. 

THEOPHYL. The mother of our Lord had come to see 
Elisabeth, as also the miraculous conception, from which 
the Angel had told her should result the belief of a far 
greater conception, to happen to herself; and to this belief 
the words of Elisabeth refer, And blessed art thou who 
hast believed, for there shall be a performance of those 
things which were told thee from the Lord. AMBROSE; 
You see that Mary doubted not but believed, and therefore 
the fruit of faith followed. 

BEDE; Nor is it to be wondered at, that our Lord, about 
to redeem the world, commenced His mighty works with 
His mother, that she, through whom the salvation of all men 
was prepared, should herself be the first to reap the fruit 
of salvation from her pledge. AMBRosE; But happy are ye 
also who have heard and believed, for whatever soul hath 
believed, both conceives and brings forth the word of God, 
and knows His works. BEDE; But every soul which has 
conceived the word of God in the heart, straightway climbs 
the lofty summits of the virtues by the stairs of love, so as 
to be able to enter into the city of Juda, (into the citadel 
of prayer and praise, and abide as it were for three months 
in it,) to the perfection of faith, hope, and charity. GREG. Greg. 
She was touched with the spirit of prophecy at once, ;P 
both as to the past, present, and future. She knew that lib. i. 
Mary had believed the promises of the Angel; she per- = ee 
ceived when she gave her the name of mother, that Mary 
was carrying in her womb the Redeemer of mankind; and 
when she foretold that all things would be accomplished, she 
saw also what was to follow in the future. 


42 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


46. And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the 
Lord. 


AMBROSE; As evil came into the world by a woman, so 
also is good introduced by women; and so it seems not without 
meaning, that both Elisabeth prophesies before John, and 
Mary before the birth of the Lord. But it follows, that as Mary 
was the greater person, so she uttered the fuller prophecy. 


on in Basit; For the Virgin, with lofty thoughts and deep pene- 
sa 


XXxili, 


tration, contemplates the boundless mystery, the further she 
advances, magnifying God; And Mary said, My soul doth 


aad magnify the Lord. GrrrK Ex. As if she said, Marvellous 


magnifi- 


cat. 


ubi sup. 


exulta- 
vit. 


things hath the Lord declared that He will accomplish in 
my body, but neither shall my soul be unfruitful before 
God. It becomes me to offer Him the fruit also of my 
will, for inasmuch as I am obedient to a mighty miracle, am I 
bound to glorify Him who performs His mighty works in me. 
OrIGEN; Now if the Lord could neither receive increase 
or decrease, what is this that Mary speaks of, My soul doth 
magnify the Lord? But if I consider that the Lord our 
Saviour is the image of the invisible God, and that the 
soul is created according to His image, so as to be an image 
of an image, then I shall see plainly, that as after the manner 
of those who are accustomed to paint images, each one 
of us forming his soul after the image of Christ, makes it 
great or little, base or noble, after the likeness of the original ; 
so when I have made my soul great in thought, word, and 
deed, the image of God is made great, and the Lord Himself, 
whose image it is, is magnified in my soul. 


47. And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. 


Bast; The first-fruit of the Spirit is peace and joy. Be- 
cause then the holy Virgin had drunk in all the graces of the 
Spirit, she rightly adds, And my spirit hath leaped for joy. 
She means the same thing, soul and spirit. But the frequent 
mention of leaping for joy in the Scriptures implies a cer- 
tain bright and cheerful state of mind in those who are 
worthy. Hence the Virgin exults in the Lord with an 
unspeakable springing (and bounding) of the heart for joy, 


VER. 48. ST. LUKE. 43 


and in the breaking forth into utterance of a noble affection. 
It follows, in God my Saviour. BrEpDE; Because the spirit of 
the Virgin rejoices in the eternal Godhead of the same Jesus, 
(i. e. the Saviour,) whose flesh is formed in the womb by a tem- 
poral conception. AMBROSE; The soul of Mary therefore mag- 
nifies the Lord, and her spirit rejoiced in God, because with 
soul and spirit devoted to the Father and the Son, she wor- 
ships with a pious affection the one God from whom are all 
things. But let every one have the spirit of Mary, so that he 
may rejoice inthe Lord. If according to the flesh there is one 
mother of Christ, yet, according to faith, Christ is the fruit of 
all. For every soul receives the word of God if only he be 
unspotted and free from sin, and preserves it with unsullied 
purity. ‘THEopHyL. But he magnifies God who wor- 
thily follows Christ, and now that he is called Christian, 
lessens not the glory of Christ by acting unworthily, but does 
great and heavenly things; and then the Spirit (that is, the 
anointing of the Spirit) shall rejoice, (i. e. make him to prosper,) 
and shall not be withdrawn, so to say,and putto death. Bast; ubi sup. 
But if at any time light shall have crept into his heart, and 
loving God and despising bodily things he shall have gained 
the perfect standing of the just, without any difficulty shall 
he obtain joy in the Lord. Origen; But the soul first 
magnifies the Lord, that it may afterwards rejoice in God ; 
for unless we have first believed, we can not rejoice. 


48. For he hath regarded the low estate of his 
handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all genera- 
tions shall call me blessed. 


GREEK Ex. She gives the reason why it becomes her to Isidore. 
magnify God and to rejoice in Him, saying, For he hath re- 
garded the lowliness of his handmaiden; as if she said, “ He 
Himself foresaw, therefore I did not look for Him.” I was 
content with things lowly, but now am I chosen unto counsels 
unspeakable, and raised up from the carth unto the stars. 

Aug. O true lowliness, which hath borne God to men, hath Pseudo- 
given life to mortals, made new heavens and a pure earth, a de 
opened the gates of Paradise, and set free the souls of men. aoe 


Tsa. 31, 
9. apud 
LX xX. 


Meta- 
ooh 
tes, 


Aug. 


sup. 


44 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, f. 


Thelowliness of Mary was made the heavenly ladder, by which 
God descended upon earth. For what does regarded mean but 
“ approved?” For many seem in my sight to be lowly, but their 
lowliness is not regarded by the Lord. For if they were truly 
lowly, their spirit would rejoice not in the world, but in God. 
ORIGEN; But why was she lowly and cast down, who carried 
in her womb the Son of God? Consider that lowkness, 
which in the Scriptures is particularly praised as one of the 
virtues, is called by the philosophers “ modestia.” And we 
also may paraphrase it, that state of mind in which a man 
instead of being puffed up, casts himself down. BEpE; But 
she, whose humility is regarded, is rightly called blessed | 
by all; as it follows, For, behold, from henceforth all 
shall call me blessed. ATHAN. For if as the Prophet 
says, Blessed are they who have seed in Sion, and kinsfolk 
in Jerusalem, how great should be the celebration of the 
divine and ever holy Virgin Mary, who was made ac- 
cording to the flesh, the Mother of the Word? GREEK Ex. 
She does not call herself blessed from vain glory, for 
what room is there for pride in her who named herself the 
handmaid of the Lord? But, touched by the Holy Spirit, she 
foretold those things which were to come. BEDE;: For it was 
fitting, that as by the pride of our first parent death came 
into the world, so by the lowliness of Mary should be opened 
the entrance into life. THropHyt. And therefore she 
says, all generations, not only Elisabeth, but also every 
nation that believed. 


49. For he that is mighty hath done to me great 
things; and holy is his name. 


THEOPHYL. The Virgin shews that not for her own virtue is 
she to be pronounced blessed, but she assigns the cause, 
saying, For he that is mighty hath magnified me. 

Auc. What great things hath He done unto thee? 
I believe that a creature thou gavest birth to the Creator, a 
servant thou broughtest forth the Lord, that through thee 
God redeemed the world, through thee He restored it to 
life. Titus Bos. But where are the great things, if they be 


VER. 50. ST. LUKE. 435 


not that I still a virgin conceive (by the will of God) over- 
coming nature‘ Ihave been accounted worthy, without being 
joined to a husband, to be made a mother, not a mother of 
any one, but of the only-begotten Saviour. 

BeveE; But this has reference to the beginning of the 
hymn, where it is said, My soul doth magnify the Lord. For 
that soul can alone magnify the Lord with due praise, for 
whom he deigns to do mighty things. Tirus Bos; But she 
says, that is mighty, that if men should disbelieve the work of 
her conception, namely, that while yet a virgin, she conceived, 
‘she might throw back the miracles upon the power of 
the Worker. Nor because the only-begotten Son has come 
to a woman is He thereby defiled, for holy is his name. 

Basi. But holy is the name of God called, not because in Ps.33. 
in its letters it contains any significant power, but because 
in whatever way we look at God we distinguish his purity 
and holiness. BerEbDE; For in the height of His marvellous 
power He is far beyond every creature, and is widely removed 
from all the works of His hands. This is better understood 
in the Greek tongue, in which the very word which means 
holy, signifies as it were to be “ apart from the earth.” dyin 


50. And his mercy is on them that fear him from 
generation to generation. 


BepE; Turning from God’s special gifts to His general 
dealings, she describes the condition of the whole human 
race, And his mercy is from generation to generation on 
them that fear him. As if she said, Not only for me hath He 
that is mighty done great things, but in every nation he that 
feareth God is accepted by Him. Oricen; For the mercy 
of God is not upon one generation, but extends to eternity 
from generation to generation. GREEK Ex. According to Victor 
the mercy which He hath upon generations of generations, *"®* 
I conceive, and He Himself is united to a living body, 
out of mercy alone undertaking our salvation. Nor is His 
mercy shewn indiscriminately, but upon those who are 
constrained by the fear of Him in every nation; as it 
is said, wpon those who fear him, that is, upon those who 
being brought by repentance are turned to faith and renewal 


Matt. 
19, 29. 


Photius. 


intelli- 
gibiles. 


46 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, I. 


for the obstinate unbelievers have by their sin shut against 
themselves the gate of mercy. THEOPHYL. Or by this 
she means that they who fear shall obtain mercy, both in 
that generation, (that is, the present world,) and the generation 
which is to come, (i. e. the life everlasting.) For now they 
receive a hundred-fold, but hereafter far more. 


51. He hath shewed strength with his arm, he 
hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their 
hearts. 


BEDE; In describing the state of mankind, she shews what 
the proud deserve, and what the humble; saying, He hath 
shewed strength with his arm, §c. i. e. with the very Son of 
God. For as your arm is that whereby you work, so the arm 
of God is said to be His word by whom He made the world. 
ORIGEN; But to those that fear Him, He hath done mighty 
things with His arm; though thou comest weak to God, 
if thou hast feared Him thou shalt obtain the promised 
strength. THEOPHYL. Forin His arm, that is, His incarnate 
Son, He hath shewed strength, seeing that nature was van- 
quished, a virgin bringing forth, and God becoming man. 
GREEK Ex. Or she says, Hath shewed, for will shew strength, 
not as long ago by the hand of Moses against the Egyptians, | 
nor as by the Angel, (when he slew many thousand of the 
rebel Assyrians,) nor by any other instrument save His own 
power, He openly ¢riwmphed, overcoming spiritual enemies. 
Hence it follows, he hath scattered, §c. that is to say, every 
heart that was puffed up and not obedient to His coming He 
hath laid bare, and exposed the wickedness of their proud 
thoughts. Cyrit or JERus. But these words may be more ap- 
propriately taken to refer to the hostile ranks of the evil spirits. 
For they were raging on the earth, when our Lord’s coming put 
them to flight, and restored those whom they had bound, to 
His obedience. THEOPHYL. This might also be understood 
of the Jews whom He scattered into all lands as they are now 
scattered. 


52. He hath put down the mighty from their 
seats, and exalted them of low degree. 


VER. 53. ST. LUKE. 47 


BepE; The words, He hath shewed strength with his arm, 
and those which went before, And his mercy is on them that 
fear him from generation to generation, must be joined to 
this verse by acomma only. For truly through all generations 
of the world, by a merciful and just administration of Divine 
power, the proud do not cease to fall, and the humble to be 
exalted. As it is said, He hath put down the mighty from 
their seat, he hath exalted the humble and meek. Cyrit; 
The mighty in knowledge were the evil spirits, the Devil, 
the wise ones of the Gentiles, the Scribes and Pharisees; yet 
these He hath put down, and raised up those who humbled 1 Pet. 
themselves under the mighty hand of God; giving them the my 0s 
power of treading upon serpents and scorpions and every Luke 
power of the enemy. The Jews were also at one time puffed ee 
up with power, but unbelief slew them, and the mean and 
lowly of the Gentiles have through faith climbed up to the 
highest summit. GREEK Ex. For our understanding is ac- Maca- 
knowledged to be the judgment-seat of God, but after oe 
the transgression, the powers of evil took their seat in the 
heart of the first man as on their own throne. For this 
reason then the Lord came and cast out the evil spirits from 
the seat of our will, and raised up those who were vanquished 
by devils, purging their consciences, and making their hearts 
his own dwelling place. 


53. He hath filled the hungry with good things; 
and the rich he hath sent empty away. 


Goss. Because human prosperity seems to consist chiefly Gloss. 
in the honours of the mighty and the abundance of their"? °° 
riches, after speaking of the casting down of the mighty, 
and the exalting of the humble, he goes on to tell of the 
impoverishing of the rich and the filling of the poor, He 
hath filled the hungry, &c. 

Basit; These words regulate our conduct even with ubi sup. 
respect to sensible things, teaching the uncertainty of 
all worldly possessions, which are as shortlived as_ the 
wave which is dashed about to and fro by the violence 
of the wind. But spiritually all mankind suffered hunger 
except the Jews; for they possessed the treasures of 


Gloss. 
ordin. 


Gloss. 


non occ. 


non occ. 


vide 
etiam 
Tit. 
Bost. 


Gen. 12, 


48 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


legal tradition and the teachings of the holy prophets. But 
because they did not rest humbly on the Incarnate Word, 
they were sent away empty, carrying nothing with them, 
neither faith nor knowledge, and were bereft of the hope 
of good things, being shut out both of the earthly Jerusalem, 
and the life to come. But those of the Gentiles, who were 
brought low by hunger and thirst, because they clung to 
the Lord, were filled with spiritual goods. GtLoss. They 
also who desire eternal life with their whole soul, as it 
were hungering after it, shall be filled when Christ shall 
appear in glory; but they who rejoice in earthly things, shall 
at the end be sent away emptied of all happiness. 


54. He hath holpen his servant Israel, in re- 
membrance of his mercy ; 

55. As he spake to our fathers, Abraham, and to 
his seed for ever. 


Goss. After a general mention of the Divine mercy and 
holiness, the Virgin changes the subject to the strange and 
marvellous dispensation of the new incarnation, saying, He 
hath holpen his servant Israel, §&c. as a physician relieves 
the sick, becoming visible among men, that He might make 
Tsrael (i. e. him who sees God) Hisservant. BEDE; That is, 
obedient and humble; for he who disdains to be made 
humble, cannot be saved. BasiL; For by Israel] she means not 
Israel after the flesh, whom their own title made noble, but 
the spiritual Israel, which retained the name of faith, strain- 
ing their eyes to see God by faith. 

THEOPHYL. It might also be applied to Israel after the flesh, 
seeing that out of that body multitudes believed. But this He 
did remembering His mercy, for He hath fulfilled what He 
promised to Abraham, saying, For in thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed. This promise then the mother 
of God called to mind, saying, As he spake to our father 


a 17, Abraham; for it was said to Abraham, I will place my 


covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, for 
an eternal covenant, that I shall be thy God, and the God of 
thy see after thee. BEDE; But by sced he means not so 
much those who are begotten in the flesh, as those who have 


VER. 56, 57. ST, LUKE. 49 


followed the steps of Abraham’s faith, to whom the Saviour’s 
coming was promised for evermore. Gtoss. For this promise Gloss. 
of heritage shall not be narrowed by any limits, but to the %™'™ 
very end of time there shall never lack believers, the glory of 
whose happiness shall be everlasting. 


56. And Mary abode with her about three months, 
and returned to her own house. 


AMBROSE; Mary abode with Elisabeth until she had 
accomplished the time of her bringing forth; as it is said, 
And Mary abode, §c. THEorsy.. For in the sixth month 
of the conception of the forerunner, the Angel came to Mary, 
and she abode with Elisabeth three months, and so the nine 
months are completed. AMBRosE; Now it was not only 
for the sake of friendship that she abode so long, but for 
the increase also of so great a prophet. For if at her first 
coming the child had so far advanced, that at the salutation 
of Mary he leaped in the womb, and his mother was filled with 
the Holy Spirit, how much must we suppose the presence 
of the Virgin Mary to have added during the experience of so 
longatime? Rightly then is she represented as having shewn 
kindness to Elisabeth, and preserved the mystical number. 
BEpDE; For the chaste soul which conceives a desire of the 
spiritual word must of necessity submit to the yoke of heavenly 
discipline, and sojourning for the days as it were of three 
months in the same place, cease not to persevere until it is 
illuminated by the light of faith, hope, and charity. THEOPHYL. 
But when Elisabeth was going to bring forth, the Virgin 
departed, as it follows, And she returned; or, probably because 
of the. multitude, who were about to assemble at the birth. 
But it became not a virgin to be present on such an occasion. 
GREEK Ex. For it is the custom for virgins to go away when Meta- 
the pregnant woman brings forth. But when she reached Prt. 
her own home, she went to no other place, but abode there __ 
until she knew the time of her delivery was at hand. And 
Joseph doubting, is instructed by an Angel. 


57. Now Elisabeth’s full time came that she should 
be delivered; and she brought forth a son. 
VOL. III. K 


50 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


58. And her neighbours and her cousins heard 
how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her ; 
and they rejoiced with her. 


AMBROSE; If you carefully observe, you will find that the 
word signifying fulness is no where used except at the birth 
of the righteous. Hence it is said, Now Elisabeth's full 
time came. For the hfe of the righteous hath fulness, but 
the days of the wicked are empty. Curys. And for that 
reason the Lord kept back the delivery of Elisabeth, that her 
joy might be increased, and her fame the greater. Hence it 
follows, And her neighbours and cousins heard, §c. Yor they 
who had known her barrenness were made the witnesses of 
the Divine grace, and no one seeing the child departed in 
silence, but gave praise to God, Who had vouchsafed him 
beyond their expectation. AMBROSE; For the bringing forth 
of saints causes the rejoicing of many; it is a common bless- 
ing; for justice is a public virtue, and therefore at the birth 
of a just man a sign of his future life is sent beforehand, and 
the grace of the virtue which is to follow is represented, being 
foreshadowed by the rejoicing of the neighbours. 


59. And it came to pass, that on the eighth day 
they came to circumcise the child; and they called 
him Zacharias, after the name of his father. 

60. And his mother answered and said, Not so; 
but he shall be called John. 

61. And they said unto her, There is none of thy 
kindred that is called by this name. 

62. And they made signs to his father, how he 
would have him called. | 

63. And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, 
saying, His name is John. And they marvelled 
all. 

64. And his mouth was opened immediately, and 
his tongue loosed, and he spake, and praised God. 


ver. 59—64. ST. LUKE. 51 


Curys. The rite of circumcision was first delivered to Chrys. 
Abraham as a sign of distinction, that the race of the Patriarch e pc 
might be preserved in unmixed purity, and so might be able 39. 
to obtain the promises. But now that the promise of the 
covenant is fulfilled, the sign attached to it is removed. So 
then through Christ circumcision ceased, and baptism came in 
its place; but first it was right that John should be circum- 
cised; as it is said, And tt came to pass, that on the eighth 
day, §c. For the Lord had said, Let the child of eight days gen. 17, 
be circumcised among you. But this measurement of time 13. 
I conceive was ordered by Divine mercy for two reasons. 

_ First, because in its most tender years the child the more 
easily bears the cutting of the flesh. Secondly, that from the 
very operation itself we might be reminded that it was 
done for a sign; for the young child scarcely distinguishes 
any of the things that are around him. But after the circum- 
cision, the name was conferred, as it follows, And they called 
him. But this was done because we must first receive the | 
seal of the Lord, then the name of man. Or, because no man 
except he first cast aside his fleshly lusts, which circumcision 
signifies, is worthy to have his name written in the book of 
life.. 

AmMBROSE; The holy Evangelist has especially remarked, 
that many thought the child should be called after his father 
Zacharias, in order that we might understand, not that any 
name of his kinsfolk was displeasing to his mother, but that 
the same word had been communicated to her by the Holy 
Spirit, which had been foretold by the Angel to Zacharias. 
And in truth, being dumb, Zacharias was unable to mention his 

son’s name to his wife, but Elisabeth obtained by prophecy 
what she had not learnt from her husband. Hence it follows, 
And she answered, §c. Marvel not that the woman pronounced 
the name which she had never heard, seeing the Holy Spirit 
who imparted it to the Angel revealed it to her; nor could 
she be ignorant of the forerunner of the Lord, who had pro- 
phesied of Christ. And it well follows, And they said unto her, 
§c. that you might consider that the name belongs not to the 
family, but to the Prophet. Zacharias also is questioned, and 
signs made to him, as it follows, And they made signs to the 
Sather, §c. But since unbelief had so bereft him of utterance 
E 2 


Orig. 
non occ. 


Greg. 
Naz. 
Orat. vi. 


52 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


and hearing, that he could not use his voice, he spoke by his 
hand-writing, as it follows, And he asked for a writing table, 
and wrote, saying, His name is John; that is, we give no 
name to him who has received his name from God. ORIGEN; 
Zacharias is by interpretation “ remembering God,” but John 
signifies “pointing to.” Now “memory” relates to some- 
thing absent, “ pointing to,” to something present. But John 
was not about to set forth the memory of God as absent, but 
with his finger to point him out as present, saying, Behold the 
Lamb of God. Curys. But the name John is also interpreted 
the grace of God. Because then by the favour of Divine grace, 
not by nature, Elisabeth conceived this son, they engraved the 
memory of the benefit on the name of the child. THEOPHYL. 
And because with the mother the dumb father also agreed as 
to the name of the child, it follows, And they all marvelled. 
For there was no one of this name among their kinsfolk that 
any one could say that they had both previously determined 
upon it. Gree. Naz. The birth of John then broke the 
silence of Zacharias, as it follows, And his mouth was opened. 
For it were unreasonable when the voice of the Word had 
come forth, that his father should remain speechless. AM- 
BROSE; Rightly also, from that moment was his tongue loosed, 
for that which unbelief had bound, faith set free. Let us 
then also believe, in order that our tongue, which has been 
bound by the chains of unbelief, may be loosed by the voice 
of reason. Let us write mysteries by the Spirit if we wish to 
speak. Let us write the forerunner of Christ, not on 
tables of stone, but on the fleshly tablets of the heart. For 
he who names John, prophesies Christ. For it follows, dnd 
he spake, giving thanks. 

BEDE; Now in an allegory, the celebration of John’s 
birth was the beginning of the grace of the New Covenant. 
His neighbours and kinsfolk had rather give him the name 
of his father than that of John. For the Jews, who by 
the observance of the Law were united to him as it were 
by ties Of kindred, chose rather to follow the righteousness 
which is of the Law, than receive the grace of faith. 
But the name of John, (i. e. the grace of God,) his mother 
in word, his father in writing, suffice to announce, for both 
the Law itself as well as the Psalms and the Prophecies, 


VER. 65—68. ST. LUKE. 53 


in the plainest language foretel the grace of Christ; and that 
ancient priesthood, by the foreshadowing of its ceremonies 

and sacrifices, bears testimony to the same. And well 

doth Zacharias speak on the eighth day of the birth of his 
child, for by the resurrection of the Lord, which took place 

on the eighth day, i. e. the day after the sabbath, the hidden sents 
secrets of the legal priesthood were revealed. SA EBAG: 


65. And fear came on all that dwelt round about 
them: and all these sayings were noised abroad 
throughout all the hill country of Judza. 

66. And all they that heard them laid them up 
in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall 
this be! And the hand of the Lord was with him. 


TuHEOPHYL. As at the silence of Zacharias the people 
marvelled, so likewise when he spoke. Hence it is said, dnd 
fear came upon all; that from these two circumstances all 
might believe there was something great in the child that 
was born. But all these things were ordained, to the end 
that he who was to bear witness of Christ might also be 
esteemed trustworthy. Hence it follows, And all they that 
heard them laid them up in their heart, saying, What 
manner of child, Gc. BrEprE; For forerunning signs prepare 
the way for the forerunner of the truth, and the future prophet 
is recommended by auspices sent before him; hence it follows, 

For the hand of the Lord was with him. GREEK Ex. For Meta- 
God worked miracles in John which he did not himself, but Phrastes. 
the right hand of Godin him. Gtoss. But mystically, at the Glogs, 
time of our Lord’s resurrection, by the preaching of the grace °'4in- 
of Christ, a wholesome dread shook the hearts not only 

of the Jews, (who were neighbours, either from the place of 

their dwelling, or from the knowledge of the law,) but of the 
foreign nations also. The name of Christ surmounts not 

only the hilly country of Judea, but all the heights of worldly 
dominion and wisdom. 


67. And his father Zacharias was filled with the 
Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying, 


Matt. 
15, 24. 


04 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he 
hath visited and redeemed his people. 


AMBROSE; God in His mercy and readiness to pardon 
our sins, not only restores to us what He has taken away, 
but grants us favours even beyond our expectations. Let 
no one then distrust Him, let no one from consciousness of 
past sins despair of the Divine blessing. God knoweth how 
to change His sentence, if thou hast known how to correct 
thy sin, seeing he that was long silent prophesies; as 
it is said, And Zacharias was filled with the Holy Spirit. 
Curys. That is, “with the: working of the Holy Spirit ;” 
for he had obtained the grace of the Holy Spirit, not in 
any manner, but fully; and the gift of prophecy shone forth 
in him; as it follows, And he prophesied. OrRiGEN; Now 
Zacharias being filled with the Holy Spirit utters two pro- 
phecies, the first relating to Christ, the second to John. And 
this is plainly proved by those words in which he speaks of 
the Saviour as present and already going about in the world, 
saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath 
visited, §&c. CHkys. Zacharias, when he is blessing God, 
says, that He hath visited His people, meaning thereby either 
the Israelites in the flesh, for He came to the lost sheep of 
the house Qf Israel; or the spiritual Israel, that is, the 
faithful, who were worthy of this visitation, making the 
providence of God of good effect towards them. BEDE; But 
the Lord visited His people who were pining away as it 
were from long sickness, and by the blood of His only 
begotten Son, redeemed them who were sold under sin. 
Which thing Zacharias, knowing that it would soon be accom- 
plished, relates in the prophetic manner as if it were already 
passed. But he says, His people, not that when He came 
He found them His own, but that by visiting He made 
them so. 


69. And hath raised up an horn of salvation for 
us in the house of his servant David. 


THEOPHYL. God seemed to be asleep, disregarding the 
sins of the multitude, but in these last times coming in the 


VER. 70, 71. ST. LUKE. 5d 


flesh, He hath risen up and trodden down the evil spirits 

who hated us. Hence it is said, And he hath raised up 

an horn Of salvation to us in the house of his szorvant David. 
OrIGEN; Because Christ was born of the seed of David, 
according to the flesh, it is said, 4 horn Qf salvation to us 

in the house of his servant David; as it has also elsewhere 

been said, A vineyard hath been planted in a horn, i. e. in Is. 5, 1. 
Jesus Christ. 

Curys. Now by a horn he means power, glory, and honour, Chrys. 
deriving it metaphorically from the brute creatures, to whom ate 
God has given horns for defence and glory. BEDE; The king- IV- 
dom of our Saviour Christ is called also the horn @f salvation, 
because all our bones are clothed with flesh, but the horn 
alone stretches beyond the flesh; so the kingdom of Christ 
is called the horn of salvation, as reaching beyond the world 
and the delights of the flesh. According to which figure David 
and Solomon were consecrated by the horn of oil to the 
glory of the kingdom. 


70. As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets 
which have been since the world began. 


THEOPHYL. That Christ was born of the house of David, 
Micah relates, saying, And thou, Bethlehem, art not the least Micah 
in the city of Juda, for out of thee shall come a governor ® * 
who shall rule my people Israel. But all the prophets 
spoke of the Incarnation, and therefore it is said, As he 
spake by the mouth of his holy prophets. GREEK EX. Victor 
Whereby he means that God spoke through them, and that f°" 
their speech was not of man. BrEbDE; But he says, Which 
have been since the world began. Because all the Scriptures 
of the Old Testament were a constant prophecy of Christ. 

For both our father Adam himself, and the other fathers, 
by their deeds bore testimony to His dispensation. 


71. That we should be saved from our enemies, 
and from the hand of all that hate us. 


BEDE; Having first briefly said, He hath raised up a horn 
of salvation to us, he goes on to explain his words, adding, @ 
salvation from our enemies. Asif he said, He hath raised up 


Ps. 24, 
8. 


Coloss. 
1, 20. 


56 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


tous a horn, i. e. He hath raised up to us salvation from our 
enemies, and from the hand o& all who hate us. ORIGEN; 
Let us not suppose that this refers to our bodily enemies, but 
our ghostly. For the Lord Jesus came mighty in battle 
to destroy all our enemies, that He might deliver us from 
their snares and temptation. 


72. To perform the mercy promised to our fore- 
fathers, and to remember his holy covenant ; 


73. The oath which he sware to our father 
Abraham, 


74. That he would grant unto us. 


Breve; Having announced that the Lord, according to 
the declaration of the Prophet, would be born of the 
house of David, he now says, that the same Lord to fulfil 
the covenant He made with Abraham will deliver us, because 
chiefly to these patriarchs of Abraham’s seed was promised 
the gathering of the Gentiles, or the incarnation of Christ. 
But David is put first, because to Abraham was promised 
the holy assembly of the Church; whereas to David it was 
told that from him Christ was tobe born. And therefore 
after what was said of David, he adds concerning Abraham 
the words, To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, &c. 
ORIGEN; I think that at the coming of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, both Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were partakers 
of His mercy. For it is not to be believed, that they who had 
before seen His day, and were glad, should afterwards derive 
no advantage from His coming, since it is written, Having 
made peace through the blood of his Cross, whether in earth 
or in heaven. 

THEOPHYL. The grace of Christ extends even to those who 
are dead, because through Him we shall rise again, not only 
we, but they also who have been dead before us. He per- 
formed His mercy also to our forefathers in fulfilling all their 
hopes and desires. Hence it follows, And to remember his 
holy. covenant, that covenant, namely, wherein he said, 


Gen.22, Blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying, I will multiply 


17. 


thee. For Abraham was multiplied in all nations, who became 


VER. 74. ST. LUKE. o7 


his children by adoption, through following the example of 
his faith. But the fathers also, seeing their children enjoy 
these blessings, rejoice together with them, just as if they 
received the mercy in themselves. Hence it follows, The oath 
which he sware to our father Abraham, that he would grant 
unto us. 

BasiL; But let no one, hearing that the Lord had sworn Basil. 
to Abraham, be tempted to swear. For as when the hi hg 
wrath of God is spoken of, it does not signify passion but ¢ in Ps. 

14. App. 
punishment ; so neither does God swear as man, butop. 
His word is in very truth expressed to us in place of an 
oath, confirming by an unchangeable sentence what He 
promised. 


74. That we, being delivered out of the hands of 
our enemies, might serve him without fear. 


Curys. Having said that a horn of salvation had risen 
up to us from the house of David, he shews that through 
it we are partakers of His glory, and escape the assaults of 
the enemy. As he says, That being delivered out of the hands 
Of our enemies, we might serve him without fear. The two 
things above mentioned will not easily be found united. 
For many escape danger, but fail of a glorious life, as 
criminals discharged from prison by the king’s mercy. 
On the other hand, some reap glory, but are compelled for its 
sake to encounter dangers, as soldiers in war embracing a life 
of honour are oftentimes in the greatest peril. But the horn 
brings both safety and glory. Safety indeed as it rescues 
us from the hands of our enemies, not slightly but in a won- 
derful manner, insomuch that we have no more fear, which 
are his very words; that being delivered from the hand of our 
enemtes, we might serve him without fear. ORIGEN; Or in 
another way; Frequently are men delivered from the hands of 
the enemy, but not without fear. For when fear and peml 
have gone before, and a man is then plucked from the enemies’ 
hand, he is delivered indeed, but not without fear. Therefore 
said he, that the coming of Christ caused us to be snatched 
from the enemies’ hands without fear. For we suffered not 


58 GOSPEL ACCORDING to CHAP. I. 


from their evil designs, but He suddenly parting us from them, 
hath led us out to our own allotted resting place. 


75. In holiness and righteousness before him, all 
the days of our life. 


Curys. Zacharias glorifies the Lord, because He hath made 
us to serve Him with full confidence, not in the flesh as 
Judah did with the blood of victims, but in the spirit with 
good works. And this is what he means by in holiness 
and righteousness. For holiness is, a proper observance of 
our duty towards God, righteousness of our duty towards man; 
as, for example, when a man devoutly performs the Divine 
commands, and lives honourably among his fellow men. But 
he does not say “ before men,” as of hypocrites desirous to 


Rom. 2, please men, but “ before God,” as of those whose praise is not 


29. 


of men, but of God; and this not once or for a time; but all 
the days of their life, as it is said, all our days. BEDE; For 
whosoever either departs from God’s service before he dies, or 
by any uncleanness stains either the strictness or purity of his 
faith, or strives to be holy and righteous before men, and not 
before God, does not yet serve the Lord in perfect freedom 
from the hand of his spiritual enemies, but after the example 
of the old Samaritans endeavours to serve equally the Gods of 
the Gentiles, and his Lord. 


76. And thou, child, shalt be called the Prophet of 
the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the 
Lord to prepare his ways. 


AMBROSE; In prophesying of the Lord he rightly addresses 
the prophet, shewing that prophecy also is a gift of the Lord, 
in order that he might not, while enumerating public benefits, 
seem to be so ungrateful as to be silent of his own. Hence it is 
said, And thou, child, shalt be called the Prophet of the Highest. 
OrIGEN; The reason I suppose that Zacharias hastened to speak 
to his son, was because he knew that John was shortly about 
to be a sojourner in the wilderness, and that he himself should 
see him no more. AMBROSE; Now perhaps some may think 
it an absurd extravagance of the mind to address a child of 
eight days old. But if we keep our eyes fixed upon higher 


VER. 77. ST. LUKE. 59 


things, we surely can understand that the son might hear the 
voice of his father, who before he was born heard the salu- 
tation of Mary. The Prophet knew that there were certain 
organs of hearing in a Prophet which were unclosed by the 
Spint of God, not by the growth of the body. He possessed 

the faculty of understanding who was moved by the feeling 

of exultation. BEDE; Unless indeed Zacharias be sup- 
posed to have wished as soon as he was able to speak, to 
proclaim for their instruction who were present, the 
future gifts of his son, which he had long before learnt from 

the Angel. Let the Arians however hear that our Lord Christ, 
whom John went before prophesying of Him, Zacharias calls 

‘‘ the Most High,” as it is said in the Psalms, 4 man was born Ps. 37, 
in her, and the most highest has established her. Curys. > 
But as kings have their companions in arms, who stand nearest 

to them, so John, who was the friend of the Bridegroom, went 
before Him nigh unto Hiscoming. And this is what follows, 

For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his 
ways. For some prophets have preached the mystery of 
Christ at a distance, but he preached it nearer the time, that 

he might both see Christ, and declare Him to others. GREG. Greg. 
But all they who by preaching cleanse the hearts of their \43; 
hearers from the filth of their sins, prepare a way for the coming fee 
of wisdom into the heart. 23. | 


77. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people 
by the remission of their sins. 


THEOPHYL. For the manner in which the forerunner pre- 
pared the way of the Lord he explains, adding, To give know- 
ledge of salvation. The Lord Jesus is salvation, but the 
knowledge of salvation, i. e. of Christ, was given in John, who 
bore witness of Christ. BEDE; For as if desiring to explain 
the name of Jesus, i. e. the Saviour, he frequently makes men- 
tion of salvation, but lest men should think it was a temporal 
salvation which was promised, he adds, for the forgiveness of 
sins. 'THEOPHYL. For in no other way was He known to be 
God, but as having forgiven the sins of His people. For it is of 
God alone to forgive sins. BEDE; But the Jews prefer not to 
receive Christ, but to wait for Antichrist; for they desire to be 


tl 
Hom 


xiv. a 
Matt. 


60 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


delivered not from the dominion of sin within, but from the 
yoke of man’s bondage without. | 


78. Through the tender mercy of our God ; where- 
by the dayspring from on high hath visited us. 


THEOPHYL. Because God hath forgiven our sins not for our 
works’ sake, but through His mercy, it is therefore fitly added, 
Through the tender mercy of our God. Crrys. Which 
mercy we find not indeed by our own seeking, but God from 
on high hath appeared to us, as it follows; Whereby (i. e. 
by His tender mercy) the dayspring from on high (that is, 


Severus. Christ) hath visited us, taking upon Him our flesh. GREEK Ex. 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


Basil. 
sup. 
Esai. 
Cc, li. 


Abiding on high yet present upon the earth, suffering neither 
division nor limitation, which thing neither can our under- 
standing embrace, nor any power of words express. 


79. To give light to them that sit in darkness and 
in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the 
way of peace. 


BEDE; Christ is rightly called the Day-spring, because He 
hath disclosed to us the rising of the true light, as it follows; 
To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow 
of death. Curys. By darkness he means not material dark- 
ness, but error and distance from the faith, or ungodliness. 
BastL; For in thick darkness were the Gentile people sitting, 
who were sunk deep in idolatry, until the rising light dis- 
persed the darkness, and spread abroad the brightness of 


Greg.iv. truth. GReEG. But the shadow of death is taken to mean 


oe 


the forgetfulness of the mind. For as death causes that 


Job3, 5. which it kills to be no longer in life, so whatever oblivion 


Ps, 44, 
19, 


touches ceases to be in the memory. Hence the Jewish 
people who were forgetful of God are said to sit in the 
shadow of death. The shadow of death is taken also for 
the death of the flesh, because as that is the true death, 
by which the soul is separated from God, so that is the 
shadow of death by which the flesh is separated from the 
soul. Hence in the words of the martyrs it is said, the 


SS 


VER. 80. ST. LUKE. 61 


shadow of death has come over us. By the shadow of death 

also is represented the following of the devil, who is called 
Death in the Revelations, because as a shadow is formed Rev. 6, 
according to the quality of the body, so the actions of the - 
wicked are expressed according to the manner of their 
following him. CuHrys. He rightly says sitting, for we Chrys. 
were not walking in darkness, but sitting down as having no“ *"?: 
hope of deliverance. THEoPHYL. But not only does the 
Lord at His rising give light to those who sit in darkness, 

but he says something further as it follows, fo direct our 
Jeet in the way Of peace. The way of peace is the way of 
righteousness, to which He has directed our feet, i.e. the 
affections of our souls. GREG. For we guide our steps Greg. 
in the way of peace, when we walk in that line of conduct a," 
wherein we depart not from the grace of our Maker. Evang. 
AMBROSE; Mark also, in how few words Elisabeth pro- 
phesies, in how many Zacharias, and yet each spoke filled 

with the Holy Spirit; but this discipline is preserved, that 
women may study rather to learn what are the Divine com- 
mands than to teach them. 


80. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, 
and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing 
unto Israel. 


BevE; The future preacher of repentance, that he might 
the more boldly reclaim his hearers from the allurements 
of the world, passes the first part of his life in the de- 
serts. Hence it is said, And the child grew. 'THEOPHYL. 
i. e. in bodily stature, and waxed strong in spirit, for together 
with his body at the same time his spiritual gift in- 
creased, and the workings of the Spirit were more and 
more manifested in him. OricEN; Or he increased in 
spirit, remaining not in the same measure in which he 
had begun, but the Spirit was ever growing in him. His 
will ever tending to better things, was making its own 
advances, and his mind ever contemplating something more 
divine, while his memory was exercising itself, that it might 
lay up more and more things in its treasury, and more 


Matt. 
26, 41. 


62 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. CHAP. I. 


firmly retain them. But he adds, And he waxed strong. 
For human nature is weak, as we learn, the flesh is 
weak, It must therefore be made strong by the Spirit, for 
the Spirit is ready. Many wax strong in the flesh, but the 
wrestler of God must be strengthened by the Spirit that he 
may crush the wisdom of the flesh. He retires therefore to 
escape the noise of cities, and the thronging of the people. 
For it follows, And he was in the deserts. Where the air is 
purer, the sky more clear, and God a closer friend, that as 
the time had not yet arrived for his baptism and preaching, 
he might have leisure for praying, and might hold converse 
with the angels, calling upon God and fearing Him, saying, 
Behold, here am [. Tueoprnyt. Or, he was in the deserts 
that he might be brought up beyond the reach of the malice 
of the multitude, and not be afraid of man. For if he had 
been in the world, perchance he had been corrupted by the 
friendship and conversation of the world. And secondly, 
that he who was to preach Christ might also be esteemed 
trust-worthy. But he was hid in the desert until it pleased 
God to shew him forth to the people of Israel, as it follows, 
till the day Of his shewing forth to Israel. AmBRose; And 
rightly is the time noted during which the prophet was in 
the womb, in order that the presence of Mary might not be 
passed over, while they are silent about the time of his child- 
hood, because being strengthened in the womb by the 
presence of the Mother of the Lord, he knew not the struggles 
of childhood. 


CHAP. II. 


1. And it came to pass in those days, that there 
went out a decree from Cesar Augustus, that all the 
world should be taxed. 

2. (And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius 
was governor of Syria.) 

3. And all went to be taxed, every one into his 
own city. 

4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of 
the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of 
David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was 
of the house and lineage of David:) 

5. To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being 
great with child. 


BEDE; The Son of God, about to be born in the flesh, as 
by His birth of a virgin He shewed that the grace of virginity 
was most pleasing in His sight, is therefore begotten in the 
most peaceful time of the world, because He taught men to 
seek peace, and condescends to visit those who follow it. But 
there could be no greater sign of peace than for the whole 
world to be brought together under one taxing, while its 
ruler Augustus reigned with so great peace for the twelve 
years, about the time of our Lord’s nativity, that war having 
been quelled throughout the whole world, there seemed to 
be a literal fulfilment of the Prophet’s prediction, They 
shall beat their swords into ploughshares, §c. GREEK Ex. 
Christ is born also at a time when the princes of Judah had 
failed, and the kingdom was transferred to Roman governors, 
to whom the Jews paid tribute; and then was fulfilled the 


Is. 2, 4. 


Meta- 
phrastes 
et Alex- 
ander 


ona 
chus. 


64 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


Gen. 49, prophecy, saying, There shall not fail a leader from Judah, 
nor a prince from between his feet, until he shall come who 
ts to be sent. And now when Cesar Augustus was in the 
42d year of his reign, there went forth an edict from him 
that all the world should be taxed for the payment of tnbute, 
the management of which he committed to a certain Cyrinus, 
whom he made governor of Judza and Syria; and so it 
follows, This taxing was first made, &c. 

BEDE; St. Luke points out, that this taxing was either the 
first of those which comprehended the whole world, for 
before this very many parts of the earth are often mentioned 
as having been taxed; or first began at that time when 
Cyrinus was sent into Syria. AmBROsE; He has rightly 
added the name of the governor, to mark the course of time. 
For if the names of the Consuls are affixed to the tables of 
prices, how much more ought the time to be noted down, of 
that event which was the redemption of all men? BEDE; Now 
the registration of property was so appointed by Divine guid- 
ance, that every one was ordered to go into his own country, as 
it follows, And they all went to be taxed, every one to his own 
city. Which so came to pass, in order that the Lord, con- 
ceived in one place, born in another, might the more easily 
escape the fury of the crafty Herod. Hence it follows: Now 

Chrys. Joseph also went up from Galilee. CuHrys. It was the Lord 

z atal, 20 directed Augustus to give this edict, that he might minister 

Christi. unto the coming of the Only-begotten ; for it was this edict 
that brought Christ’s mother into her country as the prophets 
had foretold, namely, to Bethlehem of Judea, according to 
the word, fo a city @f David, which 1s called Bethlehem. 

Irenevus GREEK Ex. Now he added, @ city Qf David, that he might 

Siz, declare that the promise made by God to David, namely, chat 

1.3.0.11. from the frutt of his loins there should go before him a king for 

2Sam. Cver, was already fulfilled. Whence it follows, Because he was 
uf : ee of the house and lineage of David. But since Joseph was 

11. of the family of David, it pleased the Evangelist to make 
known also that the Virgin herself was of the same family, 
because the Divine law enjoined marriages between those 
of the same line; and therefore it follows, With Mary 

Cyril. As espoused wife. Cyrit; It is said that she was espoused, 

non eee to imply that nothing more than espousals preceded the con- 


VER. 1—5. ST. LUKE. 5 


ception; for it was not by man’s seed that the Holy Virgin 
conceived. 

Gree. But the registering of the whole world when Gree. 
our Lord was about to be born was mystical; for He fo" 
appeared in the flesh Who should write down the names of Ev. 
His own elect in eternity. AMBROSE; There is described a 
secular registration, implied a spiritual, to be laid before 
the King not of earth but of Heaven; a registering of faith: 

a census of souls. For the old census of the Synagogue was 
abolished, a new census of the Church was preparing. And 
to decide that the census was not of Augustus, but of Christ, 
the whole world is ordered to be registered. For who could 
demand the registration of the whole world but He who had 
dominion over it, for the earth is not of Augustus, but the earth Ps. 24, 
is the Lord’s? Breve; And He most perfectly fulfilled what" 
the name Augustus signifies, in that He was both desirous 
and able to increase His own. THEOPHYL. Because it was augere. 
fit also that at Christ’s coming the worship of many Gods 
should cease, and one God only be worshipped, one 
king is described as ruling the world. ORIGEN; To those 
who attentively consider it, there seems to be expressed a kind 
of sacrament, in its being necessary that Christ should be put 
down in the registration of the whole world; in order that His 
name being written with all, He might sanctify all, and being 
placed in the census with the whole world, He might impart to 
the world the communion of Himself. BEepe; Asat that time 
in the reign of Augustus and under the governorship of Cyrinus, 
every one went to his own city to make returns of his property; 
so now when Christ reigns through His teachers (the governors 
of the Church) ought we to make returns of righteousness. 
AMBROSE; This was then the first public enrolment 
of souls to the Lord, to Whom all enrol themselves not at 
the voice of the crier, but of the Prophet, who says, OPs. 47, 
clap your hands, all ye people. But in order that men” 
might know that the taxing was just, there came up to it 
Joseph and Mary, the just man and the virgin. He who 
kept the word and she who obeyed it. BrpE; Our city and 
country is the resting-place of the blessed, to which we ought 
to be travelling with daily increasing virtues. But day 
by day does Holy Church wait upon her Teacher, and 

VOL, III. F 


66 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


going up from the course of worldly business (which the name 
of Galilee signifies) to the city of Judah, 1. e. the city of con- 
fession and praise, make returns of her devotion to the 
Eternal King. She, after the example of the blessed Virgin 
Mary, a Virgin has conceived us of the Spirit. Though 
espoused to another, she is made fruitful by Him; and while 
visibly joined to the Pontiff who is placed over her, is 
invisibly filled with the graces of the Spirit. And hence Joseph 
is well interpreted increased, declaring by his very name, 
that the earnestness of the master speaking is of no avail, 
except he receive increasing help from above, that he may 
be heard. 


6. And so it was, that, while they were there, the 
days were accomplished that she should be delivered. 

7. And she brought forth her firstborn son, and 
wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in 
a manger; because there was no room for them in 
the inn. 


AMBROSE; St. Luke has briefly explained the manner, time, 

and also the place in which Christ was born in the flesh ; 

the manner, that is, in which the espoused has conceived, a 

Greg. in virgin has born offspring. Gree. Nyss. Though coming in 
nem the form of man, yet not in every thing is He subject to the 
Christi. Jaws of man’s nature; for while His being born of a woman, 
tells of human nature; virginity becoming capable of childbirth 
betokens something above man. Of Him then His mother’s 
burden was light, the birth immaculate, the delivery with- 

out pain, the nativity without defilement, neither beginning 

from wanton desire, nor brought to pass with sorrow. 

For as she who by her guilt engrafted death into our 
nature, was condemned to bring forth in trouble, it was 

meet that she who brought life into the world should ac- 
complish her delivery with joy. But through a virgin’s 
purity He makes His passage into mortal life at a time 

in which the darkness was beginning to fail, and the vast ex- 

panse of night to fade away before the exceeding brightness 

of the light. For the death of sin had brought an end of wicked- 

ness which from henceforth tends to nothing by reason of the 


VER. 6, 7. ST. LUKE. 67 


presence ofthe true light which has illuminated the whole world 
with the rays of the Gospel. BepE; He condescended to be- 
come incarnate at that time, that after His birth He might be 
enrolled in Czsar’s taxing, and in order to bring liberty to us 
might Himself become subject to slavery. It was well also 
that our Lord was born at Bethlehem, not only as a mark of 
the royal crown, but on account of the sacrament of the 
name. Grec. Bethlehem is by interpretation the house o ne 
bread. For it isthe Lord Himself who says, I'am the bread of |... 
life which came down from heaven. The place therefore a 
where the Lord was born was before called the house of; 53. 
bread, because it was there that He was to appear in His ~ 
fleshly nature who should refresh the souls of the elect 
with spiritual fulness. BEDE; But down to the very end of 
time, the Lord ceases not to be conceived at Nazareth, to be - 
born at Bethlehem, whenever any of His hearers taking of the 
flour of the word makes himself a house of eternal bread. 
Daily in the Virgin’s womb, i. e. in the mind of believers, 
Christ is conceived by faith, born by baptism. It follows, 
and she brought forth her firstborn son. JEROME; From Hier. 
this Helvidius* strives to prove that no one can be called nog td. 
firstborn who has not brothers, as he is called only-begotten 
who is the only son of his parents. But we thus determine 

the matter. Every only-begotten is firstborn, not every first- 
born is only-begotten. We say not that he is first-begotten 
whom others follow, but before whom there is no one; (other- 
wise, supposing there is no firstborn but who has brothers 
following him, there are then no firstlngs due to the 
priests as long as there are no others begotten;) lest per- 
chance when no birth follows afterward, there should be 

an only-begotten and not a firstborn. BEDE; He is also 
only-begotten in the substance of His divinity, firstborn in 
the taking upon Himself humanity, firstborn in grace, only- 
begotten in nature. 

JEROME; Now here was no midwife, no tender anxiety pier, 
of women; she wrapped the Child up in_ swaddling ™i sup. 
clothes, herself both mother and midwife. BEDE; He who 
clothes the whole world with its varied beauty, is wrapped up 

4 Helvidius wrote a book to prove after our Lord’s birth. He flourished 
that the Virgin Mary hadotherchildren at Rome A. D. 380. 

F 2 


Meta- 


68 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. ITI. 


in common linen, that we might be able to receive the best 
robe; He by Whom all things are made, is folded both hands 
and feet, that our hands might be raised up for every good work, 
and our feet directed in the way of peace. GREEK Ex. Oh 


phrastes the wonderful straitening and banishment which He under- 


Chrys. 
non occ. 


went, Who holds the whole world in His hands! From the 
very beginning He seeks for poverty, and ennobles it in His 
own person. Carys. Surely if He had so willed it, He 
might have come moving the heavens, making the earth to 
shake, and shooting forth His thunderbolts ; but such was not 
the way of His going forth; His desire was not to destroy, but 
to save; and to trample upon human pride from its very 
birth, therefore He is not only man, but a poor man, and 
has chosen a poor mother, who had not even a cradle where 
she might lay her new born Child; as it follows, and she laid 
him inthe manger. BEDE; He is confined in the narrow space 


‘of a rude manger, whose seat 1s the heavens, that He may give 


John 
14, 2. 


John 
14, 6. 
Greg. 
ubi sup. 


us ample room in the joys of His heavenly kingdom. He 
Who is the bread of Angels is laid down in a manger, that He 
might feast us, as it were the sacred animals, with the bread 
of His flesh. Cyrit; He finds man in his corrupt affections 
become like the beasts that perish, and therefore He is laid 
in the manger, in the place of food, that we changing the life of 
beasts, might be brought to the knowledge that befits man, 
partaking not of hay, but ofthe heavenly bread, the lifegiving 
body. BEDE; He who sits at His Father’s right hand, finds 
no room in an inn, that He might prepare for us in His 
Father’s house many mansions; He is born not in His Father’s 
house, but in an inn and by the way side, because through 
the mystery of the incarnation He was made the way by which 
to bring us to our country, (where we shall enjoy the truth and 
the life.) Greco. And that He might shew that on account of 
the human form which He took upon Him, He was born as ina 
strange country, not according to His power but according to 
His nature. AMBROSE; On thy account then am I weak, in 
thee am I strong. On thy account am I poor, in thee am I rich. 
Consider not what thou seest, but acknowledge that thou art 
redeemed. I owe more, O Lord Jesus, to ‘Thy sufferings that 
I am redeemed, than to Thy works that I am created. It 
were no advantage to be born, had it not advantaged me to be 
redeemed also. 


VER. 8—12. ST. LUKE. 69 


8. And there were in the same country shepherds 
abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock 
by night. 

9. And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, 
and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: 
and they were sore afraid. 

10. And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, 
behold, | bring you good tidings of great joy, which 
shall be to all people. 

11. For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. 

12. And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall 
find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in 


a manger. 


AMBROSE; Observe with what care God builds up our faith. 
An. Angel teaches Mary; an Angel teaches Joseph; an 
Angel the shepherds also, of whom it is said, And there. 
zcere in the same country shepherds abiding in the field. 
Curys. To Joseph the Angel appeared in a dream, as to 
one who might be easily brought to believe, but to 
the shepherds in visible shape as to men of a ruder nature. 
But the Angel went not to Jerusalem, sought not for Scribes 
and Pharisees, (for they were corrupt and tormented with 
envy.) But these were simple men living in the ancient prac- 
tices of Moses and the Patriarchs. There is a certain road 
which leads by innocence to Philosophy. BrEpbE; No where pede 
in the whole course of the Old Testament do we find that the oe 
Angels who so constantly appear to the Patriarchs, came in Hyem. 
the day time... This privilege was nightly kept for this time ae 
when there arose in the darkness a light to them that werev. 
true of heart. Hence it follows, and the glory of God i val 
shone round about them. He is sent forth from the womb, . 
but He shines from heaven.. He lies in a common inn, but. 
He lives in celestial light. 

GREEK Ex. They were alarmed at the miracle, as it follows, Geome- 
And they were afraid, §c. But the Angel dispels their rising '" 
fears. He not only soothes their terrors, but pours gladness 


Isa. 45. 


Geome- 
ter. 


Maxim. 
in Serm. 
Nativ. 
4. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


70 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


into their hearts; for it follows, For, behold, I bring you good 
tidings of great joy, &c. not to the Jewish people only, but to 
all. The cause of their joy is declared; the new and wonder- 
ful birth is made manifest by the very names. It follows, For 
unto you is born this day in the city of Davida Saviour, which 
ts Christ the Lord. The first of these, i. e. the Saviour, has re- 
ference to the action, the third, i.e. the Lord, to the dignity of 
the person. CyriL; But that which is in the middle, namely, 
Christ, has reference to the adoration, and signifies not the 
nature, but the compound substance of two natures. For on 
Christ our Saviour we confess the anointing to have been per- 
formed, not however figuratively, (as formerly on kings by the 
oil,) and as if by prophetic grace, nor for the accomplishment 
of any work, as it is said in Isaiah, Thus saith the Lord to his 
anointed, to Cyrus; who although he was an idolater was said 
to be anointed, that he might by the decree of Heaven take 
possession of the whole province of Babylon; but the Saviour 
as man in the form of a servant, was anointed by the Holy Spirit, 
as God He Himself by His Holy Spirit anoints those that 
believe on Him. GREEK Ex. He marks the time of our Lord’s 
nativity, when he says, 7o-day, and the place when he adds, 
In the city of David; and the signs thereof when it follows, 
And there shall be a sign, &c. Now the Angels bring tidings 
to the shepherds of the Chief Shepherd, as of a lamb discovered 
and brought up iu a cave. BEDE; The infancy of the Saviour 
was impressed upon us, both by frequent heraldings of 
Angels and testimonies of Evangelists, that we might be the 
more deeply penetrated in our hearts by what has been done for 
us. And we may observe, that the sign given us of the new- 
born Saviour was, that He would be found not clothed in 
Tyrian purple, but wrapped in poor swaddling clothes, not 
laying on gilded couches, but ina manger. Maximus; But 
if perhaps the swaddling clothes are mean in thy eyes, admire 
the Angels singing praises together. If thou despisest the 
manger, raise thy eyes a little, and behold the new star in 
heaven proclaiming to the world the Lord’s nativity. If thou 
believest the mean things, believe also the mighty. If thou 
disputest about those which betoken His lowliness, look with 
reverence on what is high and heavenly. 

GreG. It was in a mystery that the Angel appeared to the 


VER. 18, 14. ST. LUKE. 71 


shepherds while they were watching, and the glory of the Lord 
shone round about them, implying that they are thought worthy 
above the rest to see sublime things who take a watchful 
care of their faithful flocks; and while they themselves are 
piously watching over them, the Divine grace shines widely 
round aboutthem. BeEpDE; For in a mystery, those shepherds, Bede 
and their flocks, signify all teachers and guides of faithful ahi gps 
souls. The night in which they were keeping watch over their 
flocks, indicates the dangerous temptations from which they 
never cease to keep themselves, and those placed under their 
care. Well also at the birth of our Lord do shepherds watch 
over their flocks; for He was born who says, I am the good John 
Shepherd: but the time also was at hand in which the same Ph ne 
Shepherd was to recal His scattered sheep to the pastures 

of life. OrIcEN; But if we would rise to a more hidden 
meaning, I should say, that there were certain shepherd 
angels, who direct the affairs of men, and while each one of 
them was keeping his watch, an angel came at the birth of the 
Lord, and announced to the shepherds that the true Shepherd 
had arisen. For Angels before the coming of the Saviour 
could bring little help to those entrusted to them, for scarcely 
did one single Gentile believe in God. But now whole 


nations come to the faith of Jesus. 


i3. And suddenly there was with the angel a 
multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and 
saying, 

14. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth 
peace, good will toward men. 


e 


BEbE; Lest the authority of a single Ange) should appear 
small, as soon as one had revealed the sacrament of the new 
birth, straightway there was present a multitude of the heavenly 
host. Rightly has the attending Chorus of Angels re- 
ceived the name of heavenly host, seeing they both hum- 
bly bring their aid to that Leader mighty in battle, Who 
has appeared to put down the powers of the air, and also 
themselves by their celestial arms bravely vanquish those 


72 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. I. 


opposing powers lest they should prevail as they wish in 
tempting men. But because He is both God and man, 
rightly do they sing Peace to men and Glory to God. As it fol- 
lows, Praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest. 
As soon as one Angel, one messenger, had brought the good 
tidings that God was born in the flesh, the multitude of the 
heavenly host broke forth in the praise of the Creator, in order. 
both to fix. their devotion on Christ, and to instruct us by 
their example, that as often as any of the brethren shall sound 
forth the word of sacred learning, or we ourselves shall have 
brought these holy things home to our minds, we should with 
our whole heart, our mouths and hands, return praise to 
God. Curys. Of old, indeed, Angels were sent to punish, 
as, for instance to the Israelites, to David, to the men of 
Bochim. Sodom, to the valley of weeping. Now on the other hand 
4 a they sing the song of thanksgiving to God: because He hath 
Greg. revealed to them His coming down to men. Grec. At 
a ie the same time they also give praises because their voices of 
Job gladness accord well with our redemption, and while they 
38,7. behold our acceptance, they rejoice also that their number is 
completed. BEpE; They wish also peace to men, as they add, 
On earth peace to men, because those whom they had 
before despised as weak and abject, now that our Lord 
has come in the flesh they esteem as friends. CyriL; 
4 co This peace has been made through Christ, for He has recon- 
19. _ ciled us by Himself to God and our Father, having taken 
7 a 2, away our guilt, which was the ground of offence also. He has 
Col.1, united two nations in one man, and has joined the 
20. heavenly and the earthly in one flock. Bxpe; For whom 
they ask peace is explained in the words, ar good will, 
For them, namely, who receive the new born Christ. For there 
Isa. 57, is no peace to the ungodly, but much peace to them that love 
De 11g, the name of God. OriceNn; But the attentive reader will 
165. ask, How then does the Saviour say, J came not to send 
peace on the earth, whereas now the Angels’ song of His 
birth is, On earth peace to men? It is answered, that 
peace is said to be to men of goodwill. For. the peace 
which the Lord does not give on the earth is not the peace of 
Aves. good will. Ava. For righteousness belongs to good will. 


Trin. CHRyYS. Behold the wonderful working of God. He first brings 


cap. 13. 


VER. 15—20. ST. LUKE. 73 


Angels down to men, and then brings men up to heaven. The: 
heaven became earth, when it was about to receive earthly 
things. | 

ORIGEN; But in a mystery, the Angels saw that they could 
not accomplish the work committed to them without Him 
Who was truly able to save, and that their healing fell short of 
what the care of men required. And so it was as if there 
should come one who had great knowledge in medicine, 
and those who before were unable to heal, acknowledging now 
the hand of a master, grudge not to see the corruptions of 
wounds ceasing, but break forth into the praises of the 
Physician, and of that God who sent to them and to the sick a 
man of such knowledge; the multitudes of the Angels 
praised God for the coming of Christ. 


15. And it came pass, as the angels were gone 
away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one 
to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and 
see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord 
hath made known unto us. 

16. And they came with haste, and found Mary, 
and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger. 

17. And when they had seen it, they made known 
abroad the saying which was told them concerning 
this child. 

18. And all they that heard it wondered at those 
things which were told them by the shepherds. 

19. But Mary kept all these things, and pondered 
them in her heart. 

20. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and 
praising God for all the things that they had heard 


and seen, as it was told unto them. 


GREEK Ex. The shepherds were filled with astonishment at Geome- 
the things that they saw and heard, and so they left their sheep- '** 
folds, and set out by night to Bethlehem, sceking for the light 
of.the Saviour; and therefore it is said, They spoke one to 


74 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. lH. 


another, §&c. Bepe; As men who were truly watching, they 
said not, Let us see (the child; but) the tcord which has come to 
pass, 1. e. the Word which was from the beginning, let us see 
how it has been made flesh for us, since this very Word is the 
Lord. For it follows, Which the Lord hath made, and has 
shewn tous; i.e. Let us see how the Lord hath made Himself, 
and hath shewn His flesh to us. AMBROSE; How remarkably 
Scripture weighs the import of each word. For when we be- 
hold the flesh of the Lord, we behold the Word, which is the 
Son. Let not this seem to you a slight example of faith, be- 
cause of the humble character of the shepherds. For simplicity 
is sought for, not pride. It follows, And they came in haste. 
For no one indolently seeks after Christ. Oricen; But 
because they came in haste, and not with loitering steps, 
it follows, They found Mary, (i.e. her who had brought 
Jesus into the world,) and Joseph, (i.e. the guardian of our 
Lord’s birth,) and the babe lying in the manger, (i.e. the 
Saviour Himself.) BEDE; It seems to succeed in due order, 
that after having rightly celebrated the incarnation of the 
Word, we should at length come to behold the actual glory of 
that Word. Hence it follows: But when they saw ti, they 
Photius 72ade known the word which had been spoken to them. GREEK 
Ex. Beholding with hidden faith indeed the happy events which 
had been told them, and not content with marvelling at the 
reality of those things which at the very first they saw 
and embraced when the Angel told them, they began to 
relate them not only to Mary and Joseph, but to the others also, 
(and what is more they impressed them on their minds,) as it 
follows, And all who heard it marvelled. For how could it 
be otherwise, at the sight of one of the heavenly host upon 
earth, and earth in peace reconciled to heaven; and that ineffa- 
ble Child binding together in one, by His divinity, heavenly 
things, by His humanity, earthly things, and by this conjunc- 
tion of Himself effecting a wonderful union! Gtoss. Not 
only do they marvel at the mystery of the incarnation, but 
also at so wonderful an attestation of the shepherds, men who 
could not have devised these unheard of things, but were with 
simple eloquence proclaiming the truth. AMBROSE; Esteem 
not the words of the shepherds as mean and despicable. 
For from the shepherds Mary increases her faith, as it follows : 


VER. 15—20. 8ST. LUKE. 75 


Mary kept all these sayings, and pondered them in her 
heart. Let us learn the chastity of the sacred Virgin in all 
things, who no less chaste in her words than in her body, 
gathered up in her heart the materials of faith. BEDE; For Bede 
keeping the laws of virgin modesty, she who had known the Sei aag: 
secrets of Christ would divulge them to no one, but comparing 

what she had read in prophecy with what she now acknow- 
ledged to have taken place, she did not utter them with the 
mouth, but preserved them shut up in her heart. GREEK Ex. Meta- 
Whatever the Angel had said unto her, whatever she had a 
heard from Zacharias, and Elisabeth, and the shepherds, she 
collected them all in her mind, and comparing them together, 
perceived in all one harmony. ‘Truly, He was God who was 

born from her. 

ATHANAS. But every one rejoiced in the nativity of Christ, Athan. 
not with human feelings, as men are wont to rejoice whena™ 
son is born, but at the presence of Christ and the lustre of 
the Divine light. Asit follows: And the shepherds returned, 
glorifying and praising God for every thing they had heard, &c. 
BEvE; That is to say, from the Angels, and had seen, i. e. in 
Bethlehem, as it was told them, i. e. they glory in this, 
that when they came they found it even as it was told them, 
or as it was told them they give praise and glory to God. 

For this they were told by the Angels to do, not in very word 
commanding them, but setting before them the form of devo- 
tion when they sung glory to God in the highest. 

Bebe; To speak in a mystery, let the shepherds of Bede 
spiritual flocks, (nay, all the faithful,) after the example of ahisep: 
these shepherds, go in thought even to Bethlehem, and 
celebrate the incarnation of Christ with due honours. Let 
us go indeed casting aside all fleshly lusts, with the whole 
desire of the mind even to the heavenly Bethlehem, (i. e. the 
house of the living bread,) that He whom they saw crying in 
the manger we may deserve to see reigning on the throne of 
His Father. And such bliss as this is not to be sought for 
with sloth and idleness, but with eagerness must we follow 
the footsteps of Christ. When they saw Him they knew 
Him ; and let us haste to embrace in the fulness of our love 
those things which were spoken of our Saviour, that when 
the time shall come that we shall see with perfect knowledge 


Isa. 3,1. 


Bede 
Hom. 
ubi sup. 


Bede 


in loc. 


Bede 
Hom. 
ubi sup. 


Bede 
ubi sup. 


Is. 9, 6. 
Gal.4,5. 
Epiph. 
lib. P 
Her.30. 


76 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAF. IL. 


we may be able to comprehend them. BEDE; Again, the 
shepherds of the Lord’s flock by contemplating the life of 
the fathers who went before them, (which preserved the bread 
of life,) enter as it were the gates of Bethlehem, and find 
therein none other than the virgin beauty of the Church, 
that is, Mary; the manly company of spiritual doctors, that 
is, Joseph; and the lowly coming of Christ contained in the 
pages of Holy Scripture, that is, the infant child Christ, laid 
in the manger. 

OriGen; That was the manger which Israel knew not, 
according to those words of Isaiah, The ox knoweth his 
owner, and the ass his master’s crib. BrEpr; The shepherds 
did not hide in silence what they knew, because to this end 
have the Shepherds of the Church been ordained, that what 
they have learned in the Scriptures they might explain to 
their hearers. Breve; The masters of the spiritual flocks 
also, while others sleep, at one time by contemplation 
enter into the heavenly places, at another time pass 
around them by seeking the examples of the faithful, at 
another time by teaching return to the public duties of 
the pastoral office. BrpDE; Every one of us, even he who is 
supposed to live as a private person, exercises the office of 
shepherd, if, keeping together a multitude of good actions 
and pure thoughts, he strive to rule them with due 
moderation, to feed them with the food of the Scriptures, and 
to preserve them against the snarcs of the devil. 


21. And when eight days were accomplished for 
the circumcising of the child, his name was called 
JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he 


was conceived in the womb. 


Bene; Having related our Lord’s nativity, the Evangelist 
adds, And after that eight days were accymplished for the 
circumcision Of the child. AmBRrosr; Who is this Child, 
but He of whom it was said, Unio us a child is born, unto us 
a son ts given? For He was made under the law, that He 
might redeem them who were under the law. Epipa. Now 
the followers of Ebion and Cerinthus say*, “ It is enough for a 


¢ The Ebionites and Cerinthians Saviour. They both adhered to the 
agreed in denying the divinity of onr Jewish ceremonies, particularly cir- 


VER. 21. ST. LUKE. ra 


disciple if he be as his Master. But Chimist circumcised 
Himself. Be thou therefore circumcised.” But herein do 
they deceive themselves, destroying their own principles; 
for if Ebion should confess that Christ as God descended 
from heaven and was circumcised on the eighth day, it might 
then afford the ground of an argument for circumcision; but 
since he affirms Him to be mere man, surely as a boy he 
cannot be the cause of Himself being circumcised, as neither 
are infants the authors of their own circumcision. But we 
confess that it is God Himself who has descended from 
heaven, and that inclosed in a virgin’s womb, He abode 
there the whole time necessary for her delivery, until He | 
should perfectly form to Himself of the virgin’s womb a 
human body; and that in this body He was not in appear- 
ance but truly circumcised on the eighth day, in order that 
the figures having come to this spiritual fulfilment, both by 
Himself and His disciples, might now be spread abroad 
no longer the figures but the reality. Origen; As we have 
died with Him at His death, and risen together with Him at 
His resurrection, so with Him have we been circumcised, and 
therefore need not now circumcision in the flesh. EprpHaN. Epiph. 
‘Christ was circumcised for several reasons. First indeed to ubi sup. 
shew the reality of His flesh, in opposition to Manicheus ' 
and those who say that He came forth in appearance only. 
Secondly, that He might prove that His body was not of the 
same substance with the Deity, according to Apollinaris, and 
that it descended not from heaven, as Valentinian said. 
Thirdly, to add a confirmation to circumcision which He had 
of old instituted to wait His coming. Lastly, to leave no 
excuse to the Jews. For had He not been circumcised, 
they might have objected that they could not receive Christ 
uncircumcised. BEDE; He was circumcised also that He might 


cumcision and the sabbath, and con- 
demned St. Paul as an apostate from the 
Law. They taught also the Gnostic 
heresy, that Jesus was the son of Joseph, 
but excelled other men in wisdom and 
holiness, and that Christ descended upon 
Him at Baptism in the shape of a dove, 
but fled away before the crucifixion, so 
that Jesus alone died. Theodoret. Her. 
Fab. |. ii. c. i, iii. 

f For the heresy of the Mani- 


cheans, see St. Augustin's Confessions, 
note a. Apollinarius flourished A.D. 
370. He was Bishop of Laodicea. 
His heresy was condemned either 373, 
or 8377 —388, at Rome. Greg. Naz. Ep. 
101, 102, 202. Valentinus was a 
Gnostic Heretic and native of Egypt, 
who believed that Christ’s body de- 
scended from heaven, and passed 
through the Virgin Mary quasi aqua per 
cenalem. See Tertull. de Preeser. c. 44. 


78 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ' CHAP. IT. 


enjoin upon us by His example the virtue of obedience, and 
might take compassion on them who being placed under the 
law, were unable to bear the burdens of the law, to the end 
that He who came in the likeness of sinful flesh might not re- 
ject the remedy with which sinful flesh was wont to be healed. 
For circumcision brought in the law the same assistance of a 
saving cure to the wound of original sin which Baptism does 
in the time of the grace of revelation, except that as yet the 
circumcised could not enter the gates of the heavenly kingdom, 
but comforted after death with a blessed rest in Abraham’s 
bosom, they waited with a joyful hope for their entrance into 


De Sab-cternal peace. ATHAN. For circumcision expressed nothing 


bato 

et Cir- 
cumci- 
sione. 


Matt. 
98, 19. 


Col. 2, 
1]. 


else, but the stripping off of the old birth, seeing that part 
was circumcised which caused the birth of the body. And 
thus it was done at that time as a sign of the future baptism 
through Christ. Therefore as soon as that of which it was a sign 
came, the figure ceased. For since the whole of the old man 
Adam is taken away by baptism, there remains nothing which 
the cutting of a part prefigures. CyriL; It was the custom on 
the eighth day to perform the circumcision of the flesh. 
For on the eighth day Christ rose from the dead, and con- 
veyed to us a spiritual circumcision, saying, Go and teach 
all nations, baptizing them. BEDE; Now in His resurrec- 
tion was prefigured the resurrection of each of us both in the 
flesh and the Spirit, for Chnst has taught us by being cir- 
cumcised that our nature must both now in itself be purged from 
the stain of vice, and at the last day be restored from the plague 
of death. And as the Lord rose on the eighth day, i. e. the day 
after the seventh, (which is the Sabbath,) so we also after six 
ages of the world and after the seventh, which is the rest of 
souls, and is now carrying on in another life, shall rise 
as on the eighth day. Cyri_; But according to the com- 
mand of the law, on the same day He received the imposi- 
tion of a name, as it follows, His name was called Jesus, 
which is interpreted Saviour. For He was brought forth 
for the salvation of the whole world, which by His circum- 
cision He prefigured, as the Apostle says to the Colossians, 
“Ye are circumcised with a circumcision made without 
hands, in the stripping off of the body of the flesh, to wit, the 
circumcision of Christ.” BEDE; That upon the day of His 


VER, 22—25. ST. LUKE. ; 79 


circumcision He also received the imposition of the name 
was likewise done in imitation of the old observances. For 
Abraham, who received the first sacrament of circumcision, 
was on the day of his circumcision thought worthy to be Gen. 17, 
blessed by the increase of his name. Oricen; But the name ° 
of Jesus, a glorious name and worthy of all honour, a name 
which is above every other, ought not first to be uttered by men, 
nor by them be brought into the world. Therefore significantly 
the Evangelist adds, which was called of the Angel, &c. 
Breve; Of this name the elect also in their spiritual circum- 
cision rejoice to be partakers, that as from Christ they are 
called Christians, so also from the Saviour they may be called 
saved, which title was given them of God not only before 
they were conceived through faith in the womb of the 
Church, but even before the world began. 


22. And when the days of her purification ac- 
cording to the law of Moses were accomplished, they 
brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the 
Lord; : 

23. (As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every 
male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to 
the Lord ;) 

24 And to offer a sacrifice according to that which 
is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtledoves, 
or two young pigeons. 

25. And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, 
whose name was Simeon; and the same man was 
just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel ; 
and the Holy Ghost was upon him. 


Crrit; Next after the circumcision they wait for the time of 
purification, as it is said, And when the days of her purtfication 
according to the law of Moses were come. BEbE; If you 
diligently examine the words of the law, you will find indeed 
that the mother of God as she is free from all connexion 
with man, so is she exempt from any obligation of the law. 
For not every woman who brings forth, but she who has re- 


Ex. 13, 
2. 12. 


80 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IT. 


ceived seed and brought forth, is pronounced unclean, and by 
the ordinances of the law is taught that she must be cleansed, 
in order to distinguish probably from her who though a virgin 
has conceived and brought forth. But that we might be 
loosed from the bonds of the law, as did Christ, so also Mary 
submitted herself of her own will to the law. Titus Bost. 
Therefore the Evangelist has well observed, that the days of 
her purification were come according to the law, who since 
she had conceived of the Holy Spirit, was free from all 
uncleanness. It follows, They brought him to Jerusalem to 
present him to the Lord. *ATHAN. But when was the Lord 
hid from His Father’s eye, that He should not be seen by 
Him, or what place is excepted from His dominion, that by 
remaining there He should be separate from His Father, 
unless brought to Jerusalem and introduced into the temple? 
But for us perhaps these things were written. For as not 
to confer grace on Himself was He made man and circum- 
cised in the flesh, but to make us Gods through grace, and 
that we might be circumcised in the Spirit, so for our sakes 
is He presented to the Lord, that we also might learn to present 
ourselves to the Lord. BeEpeE; On the thirty-third day after 
His circumcision He is presented to the Lord, signifying in a 
mystery that no one but he who is circumcised from his sins 
is worthy to come into the Lord’s sight, that no one who has 
not severed himself from all human ties can perfectly enter 
into the joys of the heavenly city. It follows, As tt is 
writien in the law of the Lord. OricEN; Where are they 
who deny that Christ proclaimed in the Gospel the law to 
be of God, or can it be supposed that the righteous God 
made His own Son under a hostile law which He Him- 
self had not given? It is written in the law of Moses 
as follows, Every male which openeth the womb shall be 
called holy unto the Lord. BErvE; By the words, opening the 
womb, he signifies the first-born both of man and beast, and 
each one of which was, according to the commandment, to be 
called holy to the Lord, and therefore to become the property 
of the priest, that is, so far that he was to receive a price for 


¢ This passage is not among the nasiua, but ia to be found in those pub- 
a Sg of the commentary on St. lished by Montfaucon in his Collectio 
Luke given in the Ben, Fd. of Atha- Patrum, 1707. 


VER. 22—24. ST. LUKE. 8] 


every first-born of man, and oblige every unclean animal to 

be ransomed. Grea. Nyss. Now this commandment of the law Greg. 
seems to have had its fulfilment in the incarnate God, in are Hom. 
very remarkable and peculiar manner. For. He alone,cursu 
ineffably conceived and incomprehensibly brought forth, 2°" 
opened the virgin’s womb, till then unopened by marriage, 

and after this birth miraculously retaining the seal of chastity. 
AmBRosE; For no union with man disclosed the secrets of 

the virgin’s womb, but the Holy Spirit infused the immaculate 
seed into an inviolate womb. He then who sanctified 
another womb in order that a prophet should be born, He 

it is who has opened the womb of His own mother, that the 
Immaculate should come forth. By the words opening the 
womb, he speaks of birth after the usual manner, not that the 
sacred abode of the virgin’s womb, which our Lord in entering 
sanctified, should now be thought by His proceeding forth 
from it to be deprived of its virginity. Grea. Nyss. But Greg. 
the offspring of this birth is alone seen to be spiritually male," *"?: 
as.contracting no guilt from being born of awoman. Hence 

He is truly called holy, and therefore Gabriel, as if announcing 

that this commandment belonged to Him only, said, That Holy 
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of 
God. Now of other first-borns the wisdom of the Gospel 

has declared that they are called holy from their being offered 

to God. But the first-born of every creature, That holy 
thing which is born, &c. the Angel pronounces to be in the 
nature of its very being holy. AMBROSE; For among those 
that are born of a woman, the Lord Jesus alone is in every 
thing holy, who in the newness of His immaculate birth expe- 
rienced not the contagion of earthly defilement, but by His © 
Heavenly Majesty dispelled it. For if we follow the letter, how 

can every male be holy, since it is undoubted that many have 
been most wicked? But He is holy whom in the figure of 

a future mystery the pious ordinances of the divine law 
prefigured, because He alone was to open the hidden womb of 

the holy virgin Church for the begetting of nations. CYRIL; cy;i), 
Oh the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge Hom. 
of God! He offers victims, Who in each victim is honoured Rom. 
equally with the Father. The Truth preserves the figures”” pee 
ofthe law. He whoas God is the Maker of the law, as man hag 


VOL. ITI. G 


Lev. 12, 
8. 


Cyril. 
ubi sup. 


Bede 
ubi sup. 


Athan. 
ubi sup. 


Bede 
ubi sup. 


82 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


kept the law. Hence it follows, And that they should give 
@ victim as it was ordered in the law of the Lord, a patr 
of turtle doves or two young pigeons. BEDE; Now this was 
the victim of the poor. Forthe Lord commanded in the law 
that they who were able should offer a lamb for a son or 
a daughter as well as a turtle dove or pigeon; but they who 
were not able to offer a lamb should give two turtle doves 
or two young pigeons. Therefore the Lord, though he was 
rich, deigned to become poor, that by his poverty He might 
make us partakers of His riches. 

CyriL; But let us see what these offerings mean. The turtle 
dove is the most vocal of birds, and the pigeon the gentlest. 
And such was the Saviour made unto us; He was endowed 
with perfect meekness, and like the turtle dove entranced the 
world, filling * His garden with His own melodies. . There was 
killed then either a turtle dove or a pigeon, that by a figure He 
might be shewn forth unto us as about to suffer in the flesh 
for the life of the world. BrpbE; Or the pigeon denotes 
simplicity, the turtle dove chastity, for the pigeon is a 
lover of simplicity, and the turtle dove of chastity, so that 
if by chance she has lost her mate, she heeds not to find 
another. Rightly then are the pigeon and turtle dove offered 
as victims to the Lord, because the simple and chaste 
conversation of the faithful is a sacrifice of righteousness 
well pleasing to Him. ATHAN. He ordered two things 
to be offered, because as man consists of both body and 


‘soul, the Lord requires a double return from us, chastity and 


meekness, not only of the body, but also of the soul. Other- 
wise, man will be a dissembler and hypocrite, wearing the 
face of innocence to mask his hidden malice. BEDE; But 
while each bird, from its habit of wailing, represents the 
present sorrows of the saints, in this they differ, that the turtle 
is solitary, but the pigeon flies about in flocks, and hence 
the one points to the secret tears of confession, the other to the 
public assembling of the Church. BeEpE; Or the pigeon 
which flies in flocks sets forth the busy intercourse of active 
life. The turtle, which delights in solitariness, tells of the lofty 


* The word in the original is éaas- lieve on Him,” and referring to Cant. 
Awva, ** His vineyard,” which St. Cyril ii, 12, 13. The voice of the turtle is 
explains, adding, “‘ that is, us who be- heard in our land, and the vines &c. 


VER. 25—28. ST. LUKE. 83 


heights of the contemplative life. But because each victim 
is equally accepted by the Creator, St. Luke has purposely 
omitted whether the turtles or young pigeons were offered 
for the Lord, that he might not prefer one mode of life 
before another, but teach that both ought to be followed. 


25. And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, 
whose name was Simeon; and the same man was 
just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel : 
and the Holy Ghost was upon him. 

26. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy 
Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had 
seen the Lord’s Christ. 

27. And he came by the Spirit into the temple: 
and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, 
to do for him after the custom of the law, 

28. Then took he him up in his arms. 


AMBROSE ; Not only did Angels and Prophets, the shep- 
herds and his parents, bear witness to the birth of the Lord, 
but the old men and the righteous. As it is said, And, behold, 
there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon, 
and he was a just man, and one who feared God. For 
scarcely is righteousness preserved without fear, I mean 
not that fear which dreads the loss of worldly goods, (which 
perfect love casteth out,) but that holy fear of the Lord which 1 John 
abideth for ever, by which the righteous man, the more Fs 1: 
ardent his love te God, is so much the more careful not to9- 
offend Him. AMBROSE; Well is he called righteous who 
sought not his own good, but the good of his nation, as it 
follows, Waiting for the consolation of Israel. GREG. NYSS. Greg. 
It was not surely worldly happiness that the prudent Simeon ™ ™P- 
was waiting for as the consolation of Israel, but areal happiness, 
that is, a passing over to the beauty of truth from the shadow 
of the law. For he had learnt from the sacred oracles that 
he would see the Lord’s Christ before he should depart out 
of this present life. Hence it follows, And the Holy Spirit 
was in him, (by which indeed he was justified,) and he 
received an answer from the Holy Spirit. AMBROSE; He 
desired indeed to be loosed from the chains of bodily infirmity, 

G2 


Greg. 
Mor. 7. 
Job 6. 


Greg. 
ubi sup 


Sf GOSFEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


but he waits to see the promise, for he knew, Happy are 
those eyes which shall see it. Grea. Hereby also we learn 
with what desire the holy men of Israel desired to see the 
mystery of His incarnation. BEDE; To see death means 
to undergo it, and happy will he be to see the death of the 
flesh who has first been enabled to see with the eyes of his 
heart the Lord Christ, having his conversation in the heavenly 
Jerusalem, and frequently entering the doors of God’s temple, 
that is, following the examples of the saints in whom God dwells 
as in His temple. By the same grace of the Spirit whereby 
he foreknew Christ would come, he now acknowledges Him 
come, as it follows, And he came bythe Spirit into the temple. 

OriGEN ; If thou wilt touch Jesus and grasp Him in thy 
hands, strive with all thy strength to have the Spirit for thy 
guide, and come to the temple of God. For it follows, And 
when his parents brought in the child Jesus, (i. e. Mary His 
mother, and Joseph His reputed father,) to do for him after 
the custom of the law, then took he him up in his arms. 
Gree. Nyss. How blessed was that holy entrance to holy 
things through which he hastened on to the end of life, 
blessed those hands which handled the word of life, and the 
arms which were held out to receive Him! BErpE; Now the 
righteous man, according to the law, received the Child Jesus 
in his arms, that he might signify that the legal righteousness 
of works under the figure of the hands and arms was to be 
changed for the lowly indeed but saving grace of Gospel faith. 
The old man received the infant Christ, to convey thereby 
that this world, now worn out as it were with old age, should 
return to the childlike innocence of the Chmistian life. 


28. and blessed God, and said, 

29. Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in 
peace, according to thy word: 

30. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, 

31. Which thou hast prepared before the face of 
all people ; 

32. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory 
of thy people Israel. 


ORIGEN; If we marvel to hear that a woman was healed 


VER. 28—32. ST. LUKE. 85 


by touching the hem of a garment, what must we think of 
Simeon, who received an Infant in his arms, and rejoiced 
seeing that the little one he carried was He who had come 

to let loose the captive! Knowing that no one could release 

him from the chains of the body with the hope of future 

life, but He whom he held in his arms. Therefore it is said, 

And he blessed God, saying, Lord, now lettest thow thy 
servant depart. THEOPHYL. When he says Lord, he con- 
fesses that He is the very Lord of both life and death, and 

so acknowledges the Child whom he held in his arms to be 

God. OrIGEN; As if he said, “ As long as I held not Christ, 

I was in prison, and could not escape from my bonds.” 
BasiL; If you examine the words of the righteous, you will Basil. 
find that they all sorrow over this world and its mournful ei 
delay. Alas me! says David, that my habitation is prolonged. Ps. 120, 
AMBROSE; Observe then that this just man, confined as it ~ 
were in the prison house of his earthly frame, is longing to be Phil. 1, 
loosed, that he may again be with Christ. But whoso would 7” 

be cleansed, let him come into the temple ;—into Jerusalem: 

let him wait for the Lord’s Christ, let him receive in his hands 

the word of God, and embrace it as it were with the arms of 

his faith. Then let him depart that he might not see death 

who has seen life. GREEK Ex. Simeon blessed God also, Photius. 
because the promises made to him had received their true 
fulfilment. For He was reckoned worthy to see with his eyes, 

and to carry in his arms the consolation of Israel. And 
therefore he says, According to thy word, 1. e. since I have 
obtained the completion of thy promises. And now that I have 

seen with my eyes what was my desire to see, now lettest 

thou thy servant depart, neither dismayed at the taste of 
death, nor harassed with doubting thoughts: as he adds, 

in peace. GReG. Nyss. For since Christ has destroyed Greg, 
the enemy, which is sin, and has reconciled us to the Father, ®*! sup- 
the removal of saints has been in peace. ORIGEN; But who 
departs from this world in peace, but he who is persuaded 
thatGod was Christ reconciling the world to Himself, who has 2 Cor. 5. 
nothing hostile to God, having derived to himself all peace 

by good works in himself? GREEK Ex. But it had been twice ubi sup. 
promised to him that he should not sce death before he 
should see the Lord’s Christ, and therefore he adds, tn 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


Cyril 
ubi sup. 


Athan. 


non occ, 


Photius. 


Athan. 
non occ. 


Cy ril. 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


86 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


shew that this promise was fulfilled, For mine eyes have 
seen thy salvation. GREG. Nyss. Blessed are the eyes, 
both of thy soul and thy body. For the one visibly 
embrace God, but the others not considering those things 
which are seen, but enlightened by the brightness of the 
Spirit of the Lord, acknowledge the Word made flesh. For 
the salvation which thou hast perceived with thy eyes is 
Jesus Himself, by which name salvation is declared. CYRIL; 
But Christ was the mystery which has been revealed in the 
last times of the world, having been prepared before the 
foundation of the world. Hence it follows, which thou hast 
prepared before the face of all men. ATHAN. That is to 
say, the salvation wrought by Christ for the whole world. 
How then was it said above that he was watching for the 
consolation of Israel, but because he truly perceived in 
the spirit that consolation would be to Israel at that time 
when salvation was prepared for all people. GREEK Ex. 
Mark the wisdom of the good and venerable old man, who 
before that he was thought worthy of the blessed vision, was 
waiting for the consolation of Israel, but when he obtained 
that which he was looking for, exclaims that he saw the 
salvation of all people. So enlightened was he by the 
unspeakable radiance of the Child, that he perceived ata glance 
things that were to happen a long time after. THEOPHYL. 
By these words, Before the face, he signifies that our Lord’s 
incarnation would be visible to all men. And this salvation 
he says is to be the light of the Gentiles and the glory of 
Israel, as it follows, A light to lighten the Gentiles. ATHAN. 
For the Gentiles before the coming of Christ were lying in 
the deepest darkness, being without the knowledge of God. 
Cyrit; But Christ coming was made a light to them that sat 
in darkness, being sore oppressed by the power of the devil, 
but they were called by God the Father to the knowledge 
of His Son, Who is the true light. Gree. Nyss. Israel 
was enlightened though dimly by the law, so he says not 
that light came to them, but his words are, to be the glory 
of thy people Israel. Calling to mind the ancient history, 
that as of old Moses after speaking with God returned with 
his face glorious, so they also coming to the divine light of 
His human nature, casting away their old veil, might be 


VER. 33—35. > ST. LUKE. 7 87 


transformed into the same image from glory to glory. For3 Cor.3, 
although some of them were disobedient, yet a remnant were “’ 
saved and came through Christ to glory, of which the Apostles — 
were first-fruits, whose brightness illumines the whole world. 

For Christ was in a peculiar manner the glory of Israel, 
because according to the flesh He came forth from Israel, 
although as God He was over all blessed for ever. GREG. Greg. 
Nyss. He said therefore, of thy people, signifying that not”! ™- 
only was He adored by them, but moreover of them was 

He born according to the flesh. BEDE; And well is the 
enlightening of the Gentiles put before the glory of Israel, 
because when the fulness of the Gentiles shall have come in, Rom. 
then shall Israel be safe. vee 


33. And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those 
things which were spoken of him. 

34. And Simeon. blessed them, and said unto Mary 
his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and 
rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which 
shall be spoken against; 

35. (Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own 
soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be 
revealed. 


GREEK Ex. The knowledge of supernatural things, as often as Photius. 
it is brought to the recollection, renews the miracle in the 
mind, and hence it is said, His father and mother marvelled 
at those things which were said of him. OricEN; Both by 
the angel and the multitude of the heavenly host, by the 
shepherds also, and Simeon. Bepe; Joseph is called the 
father of the Saviour, not because he was (as the Photinians 
say) His real father, but because from regard to the reputa- 
tion of Mary, all men considered him so. Ave. He Aug. 
however might be called His father in that light in which in Bra 
he is rightly regarded as the husband of Mary, that is, notii.1 
from any carnal connection, but by reason of the very 
bond of wedlock, a far closer relationship than that of 
adoption. For that Joseph was not to be called Christ’s 
father was not, because he had not begotten Him by coha- 
bitation, since in truth he might be a father to one 


88 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, lH. 


whom he had not begotten from his wife, but had adopted 
from another. ORIGEN; But they who look deeper into the 
matter may say, that since the genealogy is deduced from 
David to Joseph, therefore lest Joseph should seem to be men- 
tioned for no purpose, as not being the father of the Saviour, 
he was called His father, that the genealogy might maintain 

ubi sup. its place. GREEK Ex. Having given praise to God, Simeon 
now turns to bless them that brought the Child, as it follows, 
And Simeon blessed them. He gave to each a blessing, 
but his presage of hidden things he imparts only to the 
mother, in order that in the common blessing He might not 
deprive Joseph of the likeness of a father, but in what he 
says to the mother apart from Joseph he might proclaim her 
to be the true mother. AMBROSE; Behold what abundant 
grace is extended to all men by the birth of the Lord, and 
how prophecy is withheld from the unbelievers, not from the 
righteous. Simeon also prophesies that Christ Jesus has 
come for the fall and rising again of many. ORIGEN; They 
who explain this simply, may say that He came for the fall 
of unbelievers, and the rising again of believers. 

Curys. As the light though it may annoy weak eyes, is 
still light; in like manner the Saviour endures, though many 
fall away, for His office is not to destroy; but their way is 
madness. Wherefore not only by the salvation of the good, 
but by the scattering of the wicked, is His power shewn. 
For the sun the brighter it shines, is the more trying to 

Greg. the weak sight. Gree. Nyss. Mark the nice distinction here 
me °° observed. Salvation is said to be prepared before the face of 
all people, but the falling and raising is of many ; for the Divine 
purpose was the salvation and sanctification of every one, 
whereas the falling and lifting up stands in the will of many, 
believers and unbelievers. But that those who were lying in 
unbelief should be raised up again is not unreasonable. 
ORIGEN; The careful interpreter will say, that no one falls 
who was not before standing. Tell me then, who were they 
Greg. who stood, for whose fall Christ came? Grec. Nyss. But by 
non ee this he signifies a fall to the very lowest, as if the punishment 
before the mystery of the incarnation, fell far short of that 
after the giving and preaching of the Gospel dispensation. 
And those spoken of are chiefly of Israel, who must of ne- 


VER. 33—39. ST. LUKE. 89 


cessity forfeit their ancient privileges, and pay a heavier 
penalty than any other nation, because they were so 
unwilling to receive Him Who had long been prophesied 
among them, had been worshipped, and had come forth from 
them. In a most especial manner then he threatens them 
with not only a fall from spiritual freedom, but also the 
destruction of their city, and of those who dwelt among them. 
But a resurrection is promised to believers, partly indeed as 
subject to the law, and about to be delivered from its bondage, 
but partly as buried together with Christ, and rising with Him, 


Gree. Nyss. Now from these words, you may perceive Greg. 


through the agreement of men’s minds on the word of pro- 


a de 


phecy, that one and the same God and lawgiver hath spoken Dom. 


both in the Prophets and the New Testament. For the 


language of prophecy declared that there shall be @ stone Is.8,14. 


of falling, and a rock of offence, that they who believe on Ro 


Him should not be confounded. The fall therefore is to 
them who are offended with the meanness of His coming 
in the flesh; the rising again to those who acknowledge the 
stedfastness of the Divine purpose. OrIcEN; There is 
also a deeper meaning aimed against those who raise their 
voices against their Creator, saying, Behold the God of the Law 


m. 9, 


and the Prophets of what sort He is! He says, J kill, and a 


I make alive. If God then is a bloody judge and a cruel” 
master, it is most plain that Jesus is His Son, since the same 
things here are written of Him, namely, that He comes for the 
fall and rising again of many. AMBROSE; That is, to dis- 
tinguish the merits of the just and the unjust, and according 
to the quality of our deeds, as a true and just Judge, to 
decree punishment or rewards. ORIGEN; But we must take 
care lest by chance the Saviour should not come to some 
equally for the fall and rising again; for when I stood in sin, 
it was first good for me to fall, and die to sin. Lastly, Prophets 
and Saints when they were designing some great thing, used 
to fall on their faces, that by their fall their sins should be 
the more fully blotted out. This it is that the Saviour first 
grants to thee. Thou wert a sinner, let that which is sin 


fall in thee, that thou mayest thence rise again, and say, If we 2 Tim. 
be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him. Curys, 2) 11: 


The resurrection is a new life and conversation. For 


ubi sup. 


Greg. 
non occ. 


Ps. 59, 
7 


90 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


when the sensual man becomes chaste, the covetous 
merciful, the cruel man gentle, a resurrection takes place. 
Sin being dead, righteousness rises again. It follows, And for 
a sign which shall be spoken against. Bast; The sign 


‘which is spoken against is called in Scripture, the cross. 
. For Moses, it says, made a brazen serpent, and placed it for 


a sign. GREG. Nyss. He has joined together honour and 
dishonour. For to us Christians this sign is a token of 
honour, but it is a sign of contradiction, inasmuch by some 
indeed it is received as absurd and monstrous, by others with 
the greatest veneration. Or perhaps Christ Himself is termed 
a sign, as having a supernatural existence, and as the author 
of signs. Basit; For a sign betokens something marvellous 
and mysterious, which is seen indeed by the simple minded. 
OrIGEN; But all the things which history relates of Christ 
are spoken against, not that those who believe on Him speak 
against Him, (for we know that all the things which are 
written of Him are true,) but that every thing which has been 
written of Him is with the unbelievers a sign which is 
spoken against. Grea. Nyss. Though these things are said 
of the Son, yet they have reference also to His mother, 
who takes each thing to herself, whether it be of danger or 
glory. He announces to her not only her prosperity, but her 
sorrows; for it follows, And a sword shall pierce through thy 
own heart. Breve; No history tells us that Mary departed 
this life by being slain with the sword, therefore since not the 
soul but the body is killed with iron, we are left to under- 
stand that sword: which is mentioned, And a sword in their 
lips, that is, grief because of our Lord’s passion passed through 
her soul, who although she saw Christ the very Son of God 
die a voluntary death, and doubted not that He who was 
begotten of her flesh would overcome death, could not without 
grief see Him crucified. AMBROSE; Or it shews the wisdom 
of Mary, that she was not ignorant of the heavenly Majesty. 
For the word of God is living and strong, and sharper than 
the sharpest sword. Ava. Or by this is signified that 


‘Mary also, through whom was performed the mystery of 


the incarnation, looked with doubt and astonishment at the 
death of her Lord, seeing the Son of God so humbled as 
to come down even to death. And as a sword passing close 


VER. 36—40. ST. LUKE. 91 


by a man causes fear, though it does not strike him; so 
doubtalso causes sorrow, yet doesnot kill; forit-is not fastened 
to the mind, but passes through it as through a shadow. - 

Gree. Nyss. But it is not meant that she alone was con- Greg. 
cerned in that passion, for it is added, that the thoughts of a 
many hearts may be revealed. The word that marks the non oce. 
event; it is not used causatively; for when all these events took 
place, there followed the discovery of many men’s intentions. 
For some confessed God on the cross, others even then 
ceased not from their blasphemies and revilings. Or this 
was said, meaning that at the time of the passion the 
thoughts of men’s hearts should be laid open, and be cor- 
rected by the resurrection. For doubts are quickly superseded 
by certainty. Or perhaps by revealing may be meant, the en- 
lightening of the thoughts, as it is often used in Scripture. 
BEDE; But now even down to the close of the present time, 
the sword of the severest tribulation ceases not to go through 
the soul of the Church, when with bitter sorrow she expe- 
riences the evil speaking against the sign of faith, when 
hearing the word of God that many are raised with Christ, 
she finds still more falling from the faith, when at the re- 
vealing of the thoughts of many hearts, in which the good seed 
of the Gospel has been sown, she beholds the tares of vice 
overshooting it, spreading beyond it, or growing alone. 
OrIGEN; But the evil thoughts of men were revealed, that 
He Who died for us might slay them; for while they were 
hidden, it was impossible to utterly destroy them. Hence 
also when we have sinned we ought to say, Mine iniquity Ps. 32, 
have I not hid. For if we make known our sins not only to” 
God, but to whoever can heal our wounds, our sins will be 
blotted out. 


36. And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the 
daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was 
of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven 
years from her virginity ; 

37. And she was a widow of about fourscore and 
four years, which departed not from the temple, but 
served God with fastings and prayers night and day. 


92 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Il. 


38. And she coming in that instant gave thanks 


likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all them 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. 


AMBROSE; Simeon had prophesied, a woman united in 
marriage had prophesied, a virgin had prophesied, it was 
meet also that a widow should prophesy, that there might 
lack no sex or condition of life, and therefore it is said, 
And there was one Anna a prophetess. THEOPHYL. The 
Evangelist dwells some time on thé account of Anna, 
mentioning both her father’s tribe, and adding, as it were, 
many witnesses who knew her father and her tribe. 
Grec. Nyss. Or because at that time there were several 
others who were called by the same name, that there 
might be a plain way of distinguishing her, he mentions 
her father, and describes the quality of her parents. 
AMBROSE; Now Anna, both from the duties of her widow- 
hood and her manner of life, is found to be such that 
she is thought worthy to announce the Redeemer of the 
world. As it follows, She was of a great age, and had lived 
with her husband, §c. Onicen; For the Holy Spirit dwelt 
not by chance in her. For the highest blessing, if any can 
possess it, is the grace of virginity, but if this cannot be, 
and it chance to a woman to lose her husband, let her 
remain a widow, which indeed not only after the death of 
her husband, but even while he is living, she ought to have 
in her mind, that supposing it should not happen, her will 
and determination might be crowned by the Lord, and her 
words should be, “ This I vow, and promise, that if a certain 
condition of this life be mine, (which yet I wish not,) I will 
do nothing else but remain inviolate and a widow.” Most 
justly then was this holy woman thought worthy to receive 
the gift of prophecy, because by long chastity and long 
fastings she had ascended to this height of virtue, as it 
follows, Who departed not from the temple with fastings 
and prayers, §c. ORIGEN; From which it is plain that 
she possessed a multitude of other virtues; and mark how 
she resembles Simeon in his goodness, for they were both 
in the temple together, and both counted worthy of prophetic 


VER. 39—41. ST. LUKE. 93 


grace, as it follows, And she coming in at this very instant, 
gave thanks to the Lord. THEoPHYL. Thatis, returned thanks 
for seeing in Israel the Saviour of the world, and she con- 
fessed of Jesus that He was the Redeemer and the Saviour. 
Hence it follows, And she spoke of him to all, &c. ORIGEN; 
But because Anna’s words were nothing remarkable, and of no 
great note respecting Christ, the Gospel does not give the 
particulars of what she said, and perhaps for this reason 
one may suppose that Simeon anticipated her, since 
he indeed bore the character of the law, (for his name 
signifies obedience,) but she the character of grace, (which 
her name is by interpretation,) and Christ came between 
them. Therefore He let Simeon depart dying with the 
law, but Anna he sustains living beyond through grace. 

BEvE; According to the mystical meaning, Anna signifies 
the Church, who at present is indeed a widow by the death 
of her Husband ; the number also of the years of her widow- 
hood marks the time of the Church, at which established in 
the body, she is separated from the Lord. For seven times 
twelve make eighty-four, seven indeed referring to the course 
of this world, which revolves in seven days; but twelve had 
reference to the perfection of Apostolic teaching, and there- 
fore the Universal Church, or any faithful soul which strives 
to devote the whole period of its life to the following of Apo- 
stolic practice, is said to serve the Lord for eighty-four years. 
The term also of seven years, during which she lived with 
her husband, coincides. For through the prerogative of our 
Lord’s greatness, whereby abiding in the flesh, He taught, 
the simple number of seven years was taken to express 
the sign of perfection. Anna also favours the mysteries 
of the Church, being by interpretation its “ grace,” and 
being both the daughter of Phanuel, who is called “ the face 
of God,” and descended from the tribe of Aser, i. e. the 
blessed. 


39. And when they had performed all things 
according to the law of the Lord, they returned into 
Galilee, to their own city Nazareth. 

40. And the child grew, and waxed strong in 


Aug. 


de Con. 


Evan. 
ii. 9. 


94 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP» II. 


spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God 
was upon him. 

41. Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year 
at the feast of the Passover. 


BEDE; Luke has omitted in this place what he knew to have 
been sufficiently set forth by Matthew, that the Lord after this, for 
fear that He should be discovered and put to death by Herod, 
was carried by His parents into Egypt, and at Herod’s death, 
having at length returned to Galilee, came to dwell in His own 
city Nazareth. For the Evangelists individually are wont 
to omit certain things which they either know to have 
been, or in the Spirit foresee will be, related by others, so 
that in the connected chain of their narrative, they seem as 
it were to have omitted nothing, whereas by examining the 
writings of another Evangelist, the careful reader may discover 
the places where the omissions have been. Thus after omitting 
many things, Luke says, And when they had accomplished all 
things, Sc. THeorHy.. Bethlehem was indeed their city, 
their paternal city, Nazareth the place of their abode. Aue. 
Perhaps it may strike you as strange that Matthew should 
say that His parents went with the young Child into Galilee 
because they were unwilling to go to Judza for fear of 
Archelaus, when they seem to have gone into Galilee rather 
because their city was Nazareth in Galilee, as Luke in this 


place explains it. But we must consider, that when the Angel 


Mati. 2, said in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, Rise, and take the 


young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, 
it was at first understood by Joseph as a command to go into 
Judea, for so at first sight the land of Israel might have 
been taken to mean. But when afterwards he finds that 
Herod’s son Archelaus was king, he was unwilling to be 
exposed to that danger, seeing the land of Israel might also 
be. understood to include Galilee also as a part of it, for there 
also the people of Israel dwelt. GREEK Ex. Or again, Luke 
is here describing the time before the descent to Egypt, for 
before her purification Joseph had not taken Mary there. 
But before they went down into Egypt, they were not told 
by God to go to Nazareth, but as living more freely in their 


VER. 39—A4l. ST. LUKE. 95 


own country, thither of their own accord they went; for since 
the going up to Bethlehem was for no other reason but the 
taxing, when that was accomplished they go down to Nazareth. 
THEOPHYL. Now our Lord might have come forth from the 
womb in the stature of mature age, but this would seem hikesome- 
thing imaginary; therefore His growth is gradual, as it follows, 
And the child grew, and waxed strong. BEDE; We must 
observe the distinction of words, that the Lord Jesus Christ in 
that He was a child, that is, had put on the condition of human 
weakness, was daily growing and being strengthened. ATHAN. Athan. 
But if as some say the flesh was changed into a Divine nature, oe 
how did it derive growth? for to attribute growth to an rioale 
uncreated substance is impious. CyriL; Rightly with the 4 Apollin. 
growth in age, St. Luke has united increase in wisdom, ashe says, 

And he was strengthened, (i. e. in spirit.) For in proportion to 

the measure of bodily growth, the Divine nature developed 

its own wisdom. THEOPHYL. For if while yet a little child, 

He had displayed His wisdom, He would have seemed a 
miracle, but together with the advance of age He gradually 
shewed Himself, so as to fill the whole world. For not as 
receiving wisdom is He said to be strengthened in spirit. 

For that which is most perfect in the beginning, how can 

that become any more perfect. Hence it follows, Filled with 
wisdom, and the grace of God was in him. Brpr; Wisdom 

truly, for in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead oe 2, 
bodily, but grace, because it was in great grace given to’? 

the man Christ Jesus, that from the time He began to be 

man He should be perfect man and perfect God. But much 
rather because He was the word of God, and God needed 

not to be strengthened, nor was in a state of growth. But 

while He was yet a little child He had the grace of God, 

that as in Him all things were wonderful, His child- 

hood also might be wonderful, so as to be filled with the 
wisdom of God. It follows, And his parents went every 

year to Jerusalem, at the feast of the Passover. Curys. Chrys. 
At the feast of the Hebrews the law commanded men not 14. 
only to observe the time, but the place, and so the Lord’s Judzos. 
parents wished to celebrate the feast of the Passover only 
at Jerusalem. Ave. But it may be asked, how did His Aug. 
parents go up all the years of Christ’s childhood toJ erusalem, Ev. 


on. 
ii. 


96 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Il. 


if they were prevented from going there by fear of Archelaus? 
This question might be easily answered, even had some one 
of the Evangelists mentioned how long Archelaus reigned. 
For it were possible that on the feast day amid so great a 
crowd they might secretly come, and soon return again, at the 
same time that they feared to remain there on other days, so 
as neither to be wanting in religious duties by neglecting the 
feast, nor leave themselves open to detection by a constant 
abode there. But now since all have been silent as to the 
length of Archelaus’ reign, it is plain that when Luke says, 
They were accustomed to go up every year to Jerusalem, 
we are to understand that to have been when Archelaus was 
no longer feared. 


42. And when he was twelve years old, they went 
up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast. 

43. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they 
returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jeru- 
salem; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it. 

44. But they, supposing him to have been in the 
company, went a day’s journey; and they sought 
him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. 

45. And when they found him not, they turned 
back again to Jerusalem, seeking him. 

46. And it came to pass, that after three days 
they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of 
the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them 
questions. 

47. And all that heard him were astonished at his 
understanding and answers. 

48. And when they saw him, they were amazed : 
and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou 
thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have 
sought thee sorrowing. 

49. And he said unto them, How is it that ye 
sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my 
Father’s business ? 


VER. 42—850. ST. LUKE. 97 


50. And they understood not the saying which he 
spake unto them. 


CyriL; The Evangelist having said before that the Child 
grew and waxed strong, verifies his own words when he 
relates, that Jesus with the holy Virgin went up to Jerusalem; 
as itis said, dnd when he was twelve years old, §c. GREEK Geome- 
Ex. His indication of wisdom did not exceed the measure of ** 
His age, but at the time that with us the powers of discern- 
ment are generally perfected, the wisdom of Christ shews 
itself. AMBROSE; Or the twelfth year was the commence- 
ment of our Lord’s disputation with the doctors, for this was 
the number of the Evangelists necessary to preach the faith. 
BEDE; We may also say, that as by the seventh number, so 
also by the twelfth, (which consists of the parts of seven mul- 
tiplied alternately by one another,) the universality and perfec- 
tion of either things or times is signified, and therefore rightly 
from the number twelve, the glory of Christ takes its beginning, 
being that by which all places and times are to be filled. 
Bebe; Now that the Lord came up every year to Jerusalem pede in 
at the Passover, betokens His humility as a man, for it is # 
man’s duty to meet together to offer sacrifices to God, . 
and conciliate Him with prayers. Accordingly the Lord 
as man, did among men what God by angels commanded Gal. 3, 
men to do. Hence it is said, According to the custom j Judges 
of the feast day. Let us follow then the journey of a 18. 
His mortal life, if we delight to behold the glory of His 
divine nature. GREEK Ex. The feast having been celebrated, Meta- 
while the rest returned, Jesus secretly tarried behind. As it ab 
follows, And when they had fulfilled the days, as they meter. 
returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem ; and 
his parents knew not of it. Itis said, When the days were 
accomplished, because the feast lasted seven days. But the 
reason of His tarrying behind in secret was, that His parents 
might not be a hindrance to His carrying on the discussion 
with the lawyers; or perhaps to avoid appearing to 
despise his parents by not obeying their commands. He 
remains therefore secretly, that he might neither be kept away 
nor be disobedient. OricEN ; But we must not wonder that 
they are called His parents, seeing the one from her childbirth, 

VOL. III. | H 


98 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II, 


the other from his knowledge of it, deserved the names of father 
and mother. Berber; But some one will ask, how was it that 
the Son of God, brought up by His parents with such care, 
could be left behind from forgetfulness? To which itis answered, 
that the custom of the children of Israel while assembling at 
Jerusalem on the feast days, or returning to their homes, was 
for the women and men to go separately, and the infants or 
children to go with either parent indiscriminately. And so both 
Mary and Joseph each thought in turn that the Child Jesus, 
whom they saw not with them, was returning with the 
other parent. Hence it follows, But they, supposing him to 
have been in the company, §c. ORIGEN; But as when the 


oe »Jews plotted against Him He escaped from the midst of 


Gloss. 
ordin. 


them, and was not seen; so now it seems that the Child 
Jesus remained, and His parents knew not where He was. 
As it follows, And not finding him, they returned to Jerusa- 
lem, seeking for him. Goss. They were on their way home, 
one day’s journey from Jerusalem; on the second day they 
seek for Him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance, and 
when they found Him not, they returned on the third day 
to Jerusalem, and there they found Him. As it follows, 
And it came to pass, after three days they found him. 
Oricen; He is not found as soon as sought for, for 
Jesus was not among His kinsfolk and relations, among 
those who are joined to Him in the flesh, nor in the com- 
pany of the multitude can He be found. Learn where 
those who seek Him find Him, not every where, but in the 
temple. And do thou then seek Jesus in the temple of God. 
Seek Him in the Church, and seek Him among the masters 
who are in the temple. For if thou wilt so seek Him, thou 
shalt find Him. They found Him not among His kinsfolk, 
for human relations could not comprehend the Son of God; 
not among His acquaintance, for He passes far beyond 
all human knowledge and understanding. Where then 
do they find Him? In the temple! If at any time thou 
seek the Son of God, seek Him first in the temple, thither go 
up, and verily shalt thou find Christ, the Word, and the 
Wisdom, (i.e. the Son of God.) AmBRosE; After three days 
He is found in the temple, that it might be for a sign, that 
after three days of victorious suffering, He who was believed 


VER. 42—50. ST. LUKE. 99 


to be dead should rise again, and manifest Himself to our 
faith, seated in heaven with divine glory. GLoss. Or because Gloss. 
the advent of Christ, which was looked for by the Patriarchs ""! %P- 
before the Law, was not found, nor again, that which was 
sought for by prophets and just men under the Law, but that 

alone is found which is sought for by Gentiles under grace. 
ORIGEN ; Because moreover He was the Son of God, He is 
found in the midst of the doctors, enlightening and instructing 

them. But because He was a little child, He is found among 

them not teaching but asking questions, as it is said, Sitting 

in the midst of the doctors, hearing them, and asking them 
questions. And this He did as a duty of reverence, that He 
might set us an example of the proper behaviour of children, 
though they be wise and learned, rather to hear their masters than 

teach them, and not to vaunt themselves with empty boasting. 

But He asked not that He might learn, but that asking He might 
instruct. For from the same source of learning is derived both 

the power of asking and answering wisely, as it follows, Al/ who 
heard him were astonished at his wisdom. BEDE; To shew 

that He was a man, He humbly listened to the masters; but 

to prove that He was God, He divinely answered those who 
spake. GREEK Ex. He asks questions with reason, He listens Meta- 
with wisdom, and answers with more wisdom, so as to cause septate 
astonishment. As it follows, And they who saw it were meter. 
astonished. Curys. The Lord truly did no miracle in His Chrys. 
childhood, yet this one fact St. Luke mentions, which made cae a 
men look with wonder upon Him. Bebe; For from His 
tongue there went forth divine wisdom, while His age exhi- 

bited man’s helplessness, and hence the Jews, amid the high 
things they hear and the lowly things they see, are perplexed 

with doubts and astonishment. But we can in no wise won- 

der, knowing the words of the Prophet, that thus unto us als. 9, 6. 
Child is born, that He abideth the mighty God. Grrrx Ex. ubi sup. 
But the ever-wonderful mother of God, moved by a mother’s 
feelings, as it were with weeping makes her mournful 
enquiry, in every thing like a mother, with confidence, humi- 

lity, and affection. As it follows, And his mother said 

unto him, Son, what hast thou done? Oricen; ‘The holy 
Virgin knew that He was not the Son of Joseph, and yet calls 

her husband His father according to the belief of the Jews, 

H 2 


Gloss. 
ordin. 


Meta- 
phrastes 
et Geo- 
meter. 


Epiph. 
cont. 
Her. 1. 
ii. her. 
31. 


100 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


who thought that He was conceived in the common way. 
Now to speak generally we may say, that the Holy Spirit 
honoured Joseph by the name of father, because he brought up 
the Child Jesus; but more technically, that it might not seem 
superfluous in St. Luke, bringing down the genealogy 
from David to Joseph. But why sought they Him sorrowing? 
Was it that he might have perished or been lost? It could 
not be. For what should cause them to dread the loss of Him 
whom they knew to be the Lord? But as whenever you 
read the Scriptures you search out their meaning with pains, 
not that you suppose them to have erred or to contain any 
thing incorrect, but that the truth which they have inherent 
in them you are anxious to find out; so they sought Jesus, lest 
perchance leaving them he should have returned to heaven, 
thither to descend when He would. He then who seeks 
Jesus must go about it not carelessly and idly, as many seek 
Him who never find Him, but with labour and sorrow. GLoss. 
Or they feared lest Herod who sought Him in His infancy, 
now that He was advanced to boyhood might find an oppor- 
tunity of putting Him to death. GREEK Ex. But the Lord 
Himself sets every thing at rest, and correcting as it were 
her saying concerning him who was His reputed father, 
manifests His true Father, teaching us not to walk on the 
ground, but to raise ourselves on high, as it follows, And he 
says unio them, What is tt that you ask Qf me? Bene; He 
blames them not that they seek Him as their son, but compels 
them to raise the eyes of their mind to what was rather due 
to Him whose eternal Son He was. Hence it follows, Knew 
ye not? §c. AMBROSE; There are two generations in Christ, 
one from His Father, the other from His mother; the Father’s 
more divine, the mother’s that which has come down for our 
use and advantage. Cyrit; He says this then by way of shew- 
ing that He surpasses all human standards, and hinting that the 
Holy Virgin was made the handmaid of the work in bringing 
His flesh unto the world, but that He Himself was by nature 
and in truth God, and the Son of the Father most high. 
Now from this let the followers of Valentinus, hearing that the 
temple was of God, be ashamed to say that the Creator, and 
the God of the law and of the temple, is not also the 
Father of Christ. Epipo. Let Ebion know that at 


VER. 51, 52. ST. LUKE. 101 


twelve years old, not thirty, Christ is found the astonishment of 
all men, wonderful and mighty in the words of grace. Wecan 
nottherefore say,that after that the Spint came to Him in Baptism 
He was made the Christ, that is, anointed with divinity, but from 
His very childhood He acknowledged both the temple and His 
Father. GREEK Ex. This is the first demonstration of the Geo- 
wisdom and power of the Child Jesus. For as to what are ™°" 
called the* acts of His childhvod,we can not but suppose them 
to be the work not only of a childish but even of a devilish 
mind and perverse will, attempting to revile those things 
which are contained in the Gospel and the sacred prophecies. 
But should one desire to receive only such things as are 
generally believed, and are not contrary to our other declara- 
tions, but accord also with the words of prophecy, let it suffice 
that Jesus was distinguished in form above the sons of men; 
obedient to His mother, gentle in disposition; in appear- 
ance full of grace and dignity; eloquent in words, kind 
and thoughtful of the wants of others, known among all 
for a power and energy, as of one who was filled with all 
wisdom; and as in other things, so also in all human con- 
versation, though above man, Himself the rule and measure. 
But that which most distinguished Him was His meek- 
ness, and that a razor had never come upon His head, 
nor any human hand except His mother’s. But from these 
words we may derive a lesson; for when the Lord re- 
proves Mary seeking Him among His relations, He most aptly 
points to the giving up of all fleshly ties, shewing that it is not 
for him to attain the goal of perfection who isstill encompassed 
by and walks among the things of the body, and that men fall 
from perfection through love of their relations. BEDE; It 
follows, And they understood him not, that is, the word which He 
spoke to them of His divinity. Oric. Or they knew not whether 
when He said about my Father's business, He referred to the 
temple, or something higher and more edifying; for every one of 
us who doeth good, is the seat of God the Father; but whoso is 
the seat of God the Father, has Christ in the midst of him. 


51. And he went down with them, and came to 


+ There was a spurious ‘‘ Gospel of Gnostics at the beginning of the 2d 
our Saviour’s infancy” received by the century. Ireneus adv. Her. i.c. 17. 


ubi sup. 


ubi sup. 


John10, 


11. 


102 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


Nazareth, and was subject untothem: but his mother 
kept all these sayings in her heart. 

52. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, 
and in favour with God and man. 


Grertk Ex. All that time of the life of Christ which He 
passed between His manifestation in the temple and His bap- 
tism, being devoid of any great public miracles or teaching, the 
Evangelist sums up in one word, saying, And he went down 
with them. OrtcEN; Jesus frequently went down with His 
disciples, for He is not always dwelling on the mount, for 
they who were troubled with various diseases were not able 
to ascend the mount. For this reason now also He went 
down to them who were below. It follows: And he was 
subject to them, &ce. Greek Ex. Sometimes by His word 
He first institutes laws, and He afterwards confirms them 
by His work, as when He says, The good shepherd layeth 
doun his life for his sheep. For shortly after seeking 
our salvation He poured out His own life. But some- 
times He first sets forth in Llimself an example, and after- 
wards, as far as words can go, draws therefrom rules of life, 
as He does here, shewing forth by His work these three things 
above the rest, the love of God, honour to parents, but the 
preferring God also to our parents. For when He was 
blamed by His parents, Ile counts all other things of less 
moment than those which belong to God; again, He gives 
His obedience also to His parents. Berber; For what is the 
teacher of virtue, unless he fulfil his duty to his parents? 
What else did He do among us, than what He wished should 
be done by us? Origen; Let us then also ourselves be 
subject to our parents. But if our fathers are not, let us be 
subject to those who are our fathers. Jesus the Son of God 
is subject to Joseph and Mary. But I must be subject to 
the Bishop who. has been constituted my father. It seems 
that Joseph knew that Jesus was greater than he, and there- 
fore in awe moderated his authority. But let every one 
sec, that oftentimes he who is subject is the greater. Which 
if they who are higher in dignity understand, they will not be 
elated with pridc, knowing that their superior is subject 


VER. 51, 52. ST. LUKE. 103 


to them. Grec. Nyss. Further, since the young have Greg. 
not yet perfect understanding, and have nced to be led; on.” 
forward by those who have advanced to a more per- 15, 28. 
fect state; therefore when He arrived at twelve years, He is 
obedient to His parents, to shew that whatever is made per- 

fect by moving forward, before that it arrives at the end 
profitably embraces obedience, (as leading to _ good.) 
BasiL; But from His very first years being obedient to Basil. 
His parents, He endured all bodily labours, humbly and recta 
reverently. For since His parents were honest and just, yet 

at the same time poor, and ill supplied with the necessaries 

of life, (as the stable which administered to the holy birth bears 
witness,) itis plain that they continually underwent bodily 
fatigue in providing for their daily wants. But Jesus being 
obedient to them, as the Scriptures testify, even in sus- 
taining labours, submitted Himself to a complete subjection. 
AMBROSE; And can you wonder if He who is subject to 

His mother, also submits to His Father? Surely that sub- 
jection is a mark not of weakness but of filial duty. Let 
then the heretic so raise his head as to assert that He who 

is sent has need of other help; yet why should He need 
human help, in obeying His mother’s authority? He was 
obedient to a handmaid, He was obedient to His pretended 
father, and do you wonder whether He obeyed God? Or is 

it a mark of duty to obey man, of weakness to obey God? 
BEDE; The Virgin, whether she understood or whether she 
could not yet understand, equally laid up all things in her heart 

for reflection and diligent examination. Hence it follows, 
And his mother laid up all these things, Sc. Mark the 
wisest of mothers, Mary the mother of true wisdom, becomes 

the scholar or disciple of the Child. For she yielded 

to Him not as to a boy, nor as to a man, but as unto 
God. Further, she pondered upon both His divine words and 
works, so that nothing that was said or done by Him was lost 
upon her, but as the Word itself was before in her womb, so 

now she conceived the ways,and words of the same, and in 

a manner nursed them in her heart. And while indeed she 
thought upon one thing at the time, another she wanted to be 
more clearly revealed to her; and this was her constant 

rule and law through her whole life. It follows, dnd Jesus 


Cyril. 
Thes. 
l.x.0.7. 


104 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. II. 


increased in wisdom. 'THEOPHYL. Not that He became wise 
by making progress, but that by degrees He revealed His 
wisdom. Asit was when He disputed with the Scribes, asking 
them questions of their law to the astonishment of all who heard 
Him. You see then how He increased in wisdom, in that 
He became known to many, and caused them to wonder, for 
the shewing forth of His wisdom is His increase. But 
mark how the Evangelist, having interpreted what it 
is to increase in wisdom, adds, and in stature, declaring 
thereby that an increase or growth in age is an increase 
in wisdom. CyriL; But the Eunomian Heretics say, “ How 
can He be equal to the Father in substance, who is said to 
increase, as if before imperfect.” But not because He is the 
Word, but because He is made man, He is said to receive 
increase. For if He really increased after that He was made 
flesh, as having before existed imperfect, why then do we give 
Him thanks as having thence become incarnate for us? 
But how if He is the true wisdom can He be increased, or 
how can He who gives grace to others be Himself advanced 
in grace. Again, if hearing that the Word humbled Him- 
self, no one is offended (thinking slightingly of the true 
God,) but rather marvels at His compassion, how is it 
not absurd to be offended at hearing that He increases? 
For as He was humbled for us, so for us He increased, that 
we who have fallen through sin might increase in Him. For 
whatever concerns us, Christ Himself has truly under- 
taken for us, that He might restore us to a betterstate. And 
mark what He says, not that the Word, but Jesus, increases, that 
you should not suppose that the pure Word increases, but the 
Word made flesh; and as we confess that the Word suffered in 
the flesh, although the flesh only suffered, because of the Word 
the flesh was which suffered, so He is said to increase, because 
the human nature of the Word increasedin Him. But He is 
said to increase in His human nature, not as if that nature 
which was perfect from the beginning received increase, but 
that by degrees it was manifested. For the law of nature brooks 


bh Eunomius was the disciple of Ae- substance’ but ‘‘ of like substance’’ 
tius and flourished 360 A.D. He was with the Father. See St. Athanasius 
the principal apologist of Arianism in against Arianism. Lib. of the Fathers, 
its pure Anomeean form,i.e. Hedenied Part 1. note p. 136, et passim, 
not only that the Son was ‘ of one 


VER. 51, 52. ST. LUKE. 105 


not that man should have higher faculties than the age 

of his body permits. The Word then (made man) was 
perfect, as being the power and wisdom of the Father, but 
because something was to be yielded to the habits of our 
nature, lest He should be counted strange by those who 

saw Him, He manifested Himself as man with a body, Ampti- 
gradually advancing in growth, and was daily thought wiser !°ch!vs. 
by those who saw and heard Him. GreEEK Ex. He 
increased then iz age, His body growing to the stature 

of man; but in wisdom through those who were taught 
divine truths by Him; zn. grace, that is, whereby we are 
advanced with joy, trusting at last to obtain the promises; 

and this indeed before God, because having put on the 
flesh, He performed His Father’s work, but before men by 

their conversion from the worship of idols to the knowledge 

of the Most High Trinity. THEopny.. He says before God 

and men, because we must first please God, then man. 
Grec. Nyss. The word also increases in different degrees in Hom. 3. 
those who receiveit; and according to the measure of itsincrease " ©" 
aman appears either an infant, grown up, or a perfect man. 


Greg. 
Hom. 
20. in 
Ev. 


Meta- 


phrastes 


Is, 1, 1. 


CHAP. ITI. 


1. Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of 
Tiberius Cesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of 
Juda, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his 
brother Philip tetrarch of Iturgza and of the region 
of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene, 

2. Annas and Caiaphas being the High Priests, 
the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias 
in the wilderness. 


GreG. The time at which the forerunner of the Saviour 
received the word of preaching, is marked by the names of 
the Roman sovereign and of the princes of Judza, as it 
follows: Now in the fifteenth year Of the reign of Tiberius 
Cesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod 
being tetrarch Of Galilee, §c. For because John came to 
preach Him who was to redeem some from among the Jews, 
and many among the Gentiles, therefore the time of his 
preaching is marked out by making mention of the king of 
the Gentiles and the rulers of the Jews. But because all 
nations were to be gathered together in one, one man is 
described as ruling over the Roman state, as it is said, The 
reign of Tiberius Cesar. GREEK Ex. For the emperor 
Augustus being dead, from whom the Roman sovercigns 
obtained the name of “ Augustus,” Tiberius being his 
successor in the monarchy, was now in the 15th year of his 
receiving the reins of government. OnriGEN; In the word 
of prophecy, spoken to the Jews alone, the Jewish kingdom 
only is mentioned, as, The vision of Esatas,in the days of 
Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. But 


VER. 1, 2. GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 107 


in the Gospel which was to be proclaimed to the whole 
world, the empire of Tiberius Czsar is mentioned, who 
seemed the lord of the whole world. But if the Gentiles 
only were to be saved, it were sufficient to make mention 
only of Tiberius, but because the Jews also must believe, 

the Jewish kingdom therefore, or Tetrarchies, are also in- 
troduced, as it follows, Pontius Pilate being governor of 
Judea, and Herod tetrarch, &c. Grec. Because the Jews Greg. 
were to be scattered for their crime of treachery, the %! s4P- 
Jewish kingdom was shut up into parts under several go- 
vernors. According to that saying, Kvery kingdom divided 1,011, 
against itself is brought to desolation. BEDE; Pilate was !?. 
sent in the twelfth year of Tiberius to take the government of 

the Jewish nation, and remained there for ten successive years, 
almost until the death of Tiberius. But Herod, and Philip, 
and Lysanias, were the sons of that Herod in whose reign 

our Lord was born. Between these and Herod himself 
Archelaus their brother reigned ten years. He was accused 

by the Jews before Augustus, and perished in exile at Vienne. 

But in order to reduce the Jewish kingdom to greater 
weakness, Augustus divided it into Tetrarchies. GRreEc. Be- Greg. 
cause John preached Him who was to be at the same time %! s¥P- 
both King and Priest, Luke the Evangelist has marked the 
time of that preaching by the mention not only of Kings, 

but also of Priests. As it follows, Under the High Priests 
Annas and Caiaphas. Bepde; Both Annas and Caia- 
phas, when John began his preaching, were the High 
Priests, but Annas held the office that year, Caiaphas 
the same year in which our Lord suffered on the cross. 
Three others had held the office in the intervening time, but 
these two, as having particular reference to our Lord’s Passion, 

are mentioned by the Evangelist. For at that time of violence 

and intrigue, the commands of the Law being no longer in 
force, the honour of the High Priest’s office was never given 

to merit or high birth, but the whole affairs of the Priesthood 
were managed by the Roman power. For Josephus relates, 
that Valcrius Gratus, when Annas was thrust out of the 
Priesthood, appointed Ismael High Priest, the son of Baphas ; 

but not long after casting him off, he put in his place Eleazar 

the son of the High Priest Ananias. After the space of onc 


108 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Ill. 


year, he expelled him also from the office, and delivered the 
government of the High Priesthood toa certain Simon, son of 
Caiaphas, who holding it not longer than a year, had Joseph, 
whose name also was Caiaphas, for his successor; so that the 
whole time during which our Lord is related to have taught 
is included in the space of four years. 

AMBROSE; TheSonofGod being about to gather together the 
Church, commences His work in His servant. And so it is 
well said, The word of the Lord came to John, that the 
Church should begin not from man, but from the Word. But 
Luke, in order to declare that John was a prophet, rightly used 
these few words, The word of the Lord came to him. He 
adds nothing else, for they need not their own judgment 
who are filled with the Word of God. By saying this 
one thing, he has therefore declared all. But Matthew 
and Mark desired to shew him to be a prophet, by his 


Chrys. raiment, his girdle, and his food. Curys. The word 


Hom. 


10. 


‘of God here mentioned was a commandment, for the son 


of Zacharias came not of himself, but God moved him. 
THEOPHYL. Through the whole of the time until his 
shewing himself he was hid in the wilderness, that no sus- 
picion might arise in men’s minds, that from his relation 
to Christ, and from his intercourse with Him from a child, 


John 1, he would testify such things of Him; and hence he said, £ 
Grog. de knew him not. GrRec. Nyss. Who also entered this life 


Virg. 
c. 6, 


at once in the spirit and power of Elias, removed from 
the society of men, in uninterrupted contemplation of 
invisible things, that he might not, by becoming accus- 
tomed to the false notions forced upon us by our senses, 
fall into mistakes and errors in the discernment of good 
men. And to such a height of divine grace was he 
raised, that more favour was bestowed upon him than 
the Prophets, for from the beginning even to the end, 
he ever presented his heart before God pure and 
free from every natural passion. AMBROSE; Again, the 
wilderness is the Church itself, for the barren has more 
children than she who has an husband. The word of the 
Lord came, that the earth which was before barren might 
bring forth fruit unto us. 


VER. 3—6. ST. LUKE. 109 


3. And he came into all the country about Jordan, 
preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission 
of sins; 

4. As it is written in the book of the words of 
Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of one crying 
in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, 
make his paths straight. 

5. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain 
and hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall 
be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made 
smooth ; 

6. And all flesh shall see the salvation of God. 


AMBROSE; The Word came, and the voice followed. For the 
Word first works inward, then follows the office of the voice, 
as itis said, And he went into all the country about Jordan. 
ORIGEN ; Jordan is the same as descending, for there descends 
from God a river of healing water. But what parts would 
John be traversing but the country lying about Jordan, that 
the penitent sinner might soon arrive at the flowing stream, 
humbling himself to receive the baptism of repentance. For 
it is added, preaching the baptism of repentance for the 
remission of sins. GREG. It is plain to every reader that 
John not only preached the baptism of repentance, but to 
some also he gave it, yet his own baptism he could not give 
for the remission of sins. CHrys. For as the sacrifice had not 
yet been offered up, nor had the holy Spirit descended, how 
could remission of sins be given? What isit then that St. Luke 
means by the words, for the remission of sins, seeing the Jews 
were ignorant, and knew not the weight of their sins? Because 
this was the cause of their evils, in order that they might 
be convinced of their sins and seek a Redeemer, John came 
exhorting them to repentance, that being thereby made better 
and sorrowful for their sins, they might be ready to receive 
pardon. Rightly then after saying, that he came preaching the 
baptism of repentance, he adds, for the remission of sins. As 
if he should say, The reason by which he persuaded them to 
repent was, that thereby they would the more easily obtam 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
Orat.39. 


Is. 40,3. 


Greg. 
7, 20. 
in Ev. 


110 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, HI. 


subsequent pardon, believing on Christ. For if they were not 
led by repentance, m vain could they ask for grace, other than 
as a preparation for faith in Christ. Greco. Or John is said to 
preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, 
because the baptism which was to take away sin, as he could 
not give, he preached; just as the Incarnate Word of the 
Father preceded the word of preaching, so the baptism of 
repentance, which was able to take away sin, preceded John’s 
baptism, which could not take away sin. AMBROSE; And 
therefore many say that St. John is atype of the Law, because 
the Law could denounce sin, but could not pardon it. GREG. 
Naz. To speak now of the difference of baptisms. Moses 
indecd baptized, but in the water, the cloud, and the sea, but 
this was done figuratively. John also baptized, not indeed 
according to the Jewish rite, (for he baptized not only with 
water,) but also for the remission of sims, yet not altogether 
spiritually, (for he adds not, in the Spirit.) Jesus baptizes 
but with the Spirit, and this is perfect baptism. There is also 
a fourth baptism, namely by martyrdom and blood, by which 
also Christ Himself was baptized, and which is so far more 
glorious than the others, as it is not sullied by repeated acts 
of defilement. There is also a fifth, the most painful, ac- 
cording to which David every night washed his bed and his 
couch with tears. It follows, As it is written in the book of 
Esaias the Prophet, The voice of one crying in the wilderness. 
AMBROSE ; John the forerunner of the Word is rightly called 
the voice, because the voice being inferior precedes, the Word, 
which is more excellent, follows. Grkrc. John cries in the 
desert because he brings the glad tidings of redemption to 
deserted and forsaken Judzea, but what he cries is explained 
in the words, Prepare ye the way of the Lord. For they 
who preach true faith and good works, what else do they 
than prepare the way for the Lord’s coming into the hearts 
of the hearers, that they might make the paths of God 
straight, forming pure thoughts in the mind by the word of 
good preaching. Origen; Or, a way must be prepared in 
our heart for the Lord, for the heart of man is large and 
spacious if it has become clean. For imagine not that in the 
size of the body, but in the virtue of the understanding, consists 
that greatness which must receive the knowledge of the truth. 


VER. 3—G. ST. LUKE. lll 


Prepare then in thy heart by good conversation a way for 

the Lord, and by perfect works pursue the path of life, 

that so the word of God may have free course in _ thee. 
BasiL. And because a path is a way trodden down by those Basil. 
that have gone before, and which former men have worn" °° 
away, the word bids those who depart from the zeal 

of their predecessors repeatedly pursue it. CHurys. But to Chrys. 
cry, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, was not the office of a 
the king, but of the forerunner. And so they called John 

the voice, because he was the forerunner of the Word. 

CyriL; But suppose some one should answer, saying, How Cyril. 
shall we prepare the way of the Lord, or how shall we make fates. 
His paths straight? since so many are the hindrances to those 
who wish to lead an honest life. To this the word of prophecy 
replies, There are some ways and paths by no means easy to 
travel, being in some places hilly and rugged, in others steep 
and precipitous; to remove which it says, Every valley shall be 

filled, every mountain and hill shall be brought low. Some 
roads are most unequally constructed, and while in one part 
rising, in another sloping downwards, are very difficult to pass. 
And here he adds, And the crooked ways shall be made 
straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth. But 
this was in a spiritual manner brought to pass by the power 

of our Saviour. For formerly to pursue an Evangelical course 

of life was a difficult task, for men’s minds were so immersed 

in worldly pleasures. But now that God being made Man, 

has condemned sin in the flesh, all things are made plain, 
and the way of going has become easy, and neither 

hill nor valley is an obstacle to those who wish to advance. 
OrIGEN; For when Jesus had come and sent His Spirit, 
every valley was filled with good works, and the fruits of the 
Holy Spirit, which if thou hast, thou wilt not only cease to 
become a valley, but will begin also to be a mountain of God. 
Gree. Nyss. Or by the valleys he means a quiet habitual Greg. 
practice of virtue, as in the Psalms, The valleys shall be filled oe 65, 
with corn. Curys. He denounces the haughty and arrogant 13. 
by the name of mountains, whom Christ has brought low. abe. 
But by the hills He implies the wreckless, not only because of 

the pride of their hearts, but because of the barrenness of 


112 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


despair. For the hill produces no fruit. ORIGEN; Or you 

may understand the mountains and hills to be the hostile 
powers, which have been overthrown by the coming of 
Basil. Christ. Basti; But as the hills differ from mountains in. 
non oe respect of height, in other things are the same, so also the 
adverse powers agree indeed in purpose, but are distinguished 

Greg. from one another in the enormity of their offences. GREG. 
oe Or, the valley when filled increases, but the mountains and 
hills when brought low decrease, because the Gentiles by 
faith in Christ receive fulness of grace, but the Jews by 
their sin of treachery have lost that wherein they boasted. 
For the humble receive a gift because the hearts of the proud 
act. they keep afar off. CHrys. Or by these words he declares 
Hom. the difficulties of the law to be turned into the easiness of 
faith; as if he said, No more toils and labours await us, but 

grace and remission of sins make an easy way to salvation. 

Greg. GREG. Nyss. Or, He orders the valleys to be filled, the 
ubl sup: Fountains and hills to be cast down, to shew that the rule 
of virtue neither fails from want of good, nor transgresses 

Greg. from excess. GREG. But the crooked places are become 
ubi sup: straight, when the hearts of the wicked, perverted by a course 
of injustice, are directed to the rule of justice. But the 
rough ways are changed to smooth, when fierce and 
savage dispositions by the influence of Divine grace return 

Chrys. to gentleness and meekness. CuHrys. He then adds the 
ubi SUP: cause of these things, saying, And all flesh shall see, &c. 
shewing that the virtue and knowledge of the Gospel shall be 
extended even to the end of the world, turning mankind 

from savage manners and perverse wills to meekness and 
gentleness. Not only Jewish converts but all mankind 

Cyril, shall see the salvation of God. Cyrizt; That is, of the 
ubi sup. Father, who sent His Son as our Saviour. But the flesh is 
Greg. here taken for the whole man. GREG. Or else, All flesh, 
iia ee Every man can not see the salvation of God in Christ 
in this life. The Prophet therefore stretches his eye beyond to 

the last day of judgment, when all men both the elect and 

the reprobate shall equally see Him. a 


os 


7. Then said he to the multitude that came forth 


VER. 7—9. “ST. LUKE, 113 


to be baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who 
hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come ? 

8. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repent- 
ance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We 
have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, 
That God is able of these stones to raise up children 
unto Abraham. 

9. And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the 
trees: every tree therefore which bringeth not forth 
good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 


OrIGEN; No one that remains in his old state, and forsakes 
not his old habits and practices, can rightly come to be 
baptized; whoever then wishes to be baptized, let him go 
forth. Hence are those words significantly spoken, And he 
said unto the multitude that went forth to be baptized of him. 

To the multitudes then who are going forth to the laver 

of baptism, He speaks the following words, for if they 

had already gone forth, He would not have said, O genera- 

tion of vipers. Curys. The dweller in the wilderness, Chrys. 
when he saw all the people of Palestine standing round Matt. 
him and wondering, bent not beneath the weight of such !?- 
respect, but rose up against them and reproved them. Hom. in 
The holy Scripture often gives the names of wild beasts to eevee 
men, according to the passions which excite them, calling 

them sometimes dogs because of their impudence, horses on 
account of their lust, asses for their folly, lions and panthers 

for their ravening and wantonness, asps for their guile, 
serpents and vipers for their poison’ and cunning; and 

so in this place John calls the Jews a generation of vipers. 

BasiLt; Now it may be observed, that the following words Basil. 
natus and filius are spoken of animals, but genimen may be? 
said of the foetus before it is formed in the womb; the fruit of lib. 2. 
the palm trees is also called genimina, but that word is 
very seldom used with respect to animals, and when it is, 
always in a bad sense. CuHrys. Now they say that the chrys. 
female viper kills the male in copulation, and the foetus as it a 
increases in the womb kills the mother, and so comes1l. 
forth into life, bursting open the womb in revenge as it were 

VOL. III. I 


Greg. 


in Hom. 


20, in 
Ev. 


Matt. 
10, 16. 


Greg. 


ubi sup. 


Chrys. 


ubi sup. 


114 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


of its father’s death; the viper progeny therefore are parricides. 
Such also were the Jews, who killed their spiritual fathers 
and teachers. But what if he found them not sinning, but 
beginning to be converted? He ought not surely to rebuke 
them, but to comfort them. We answer, that he gave not 
heed to those things which are outward, for he knew the 
secrets of their hearts, the Lord revealing them to him; 
for they vaunted themselves too much in their forefathers. 
Cutting therefore at this root, he calls them a generation of 
vipers, not indeed that he blamed the Patriarchs, or called them 
vipers. GreG. Because the Jews hated good men, and 
persecuted them, following the steps of their carnal parents, 
they are by birth the poisonous sons, as it were, of poisonous 
or sorcerous parents. But because the preceding verse de- 
claresthat at the last judgment Christ shall be seen by all flesh, 
it is rightly added, Who hath warned you to flee from the 
wrath tocome? The wrath to come being the awarding of 
final punishment. AMBROSE; We see these men through the 
compassion of God, inspired with prudence to seek repent- 
ance of their crimes, dreading with wise devotion the terror of 
the judgment to come. Or perhaps, according to the precept, 
Be ye wise as serpents, they are shewn to have a natural 
prudence, who perceive what is coming, and earnestly desire 
help, though they still forsake not what is hurtful. GREc. 
But because he cannot then flee from the wrath of God, 
who now has not recourse to the sorrows of repentance, it is 
added, Bring forth therefore fruits. Curys. For it is not 
sufficient for the penitent to leave off his sins, he must also 
bring forth the fruits of repentance, as itis in the Psalms, depart 


7 34, from evil and do good, just as in order to heal, it will not do to 


Greg. 


ubi sup. 


pluck out the arrow only, but we must also apply a salve to 
the wound. But he says not fruit, but fruits, signifying 
abundance. GRreEG. He warns them that they must bring forth 
not only the fruits of repentance, but fruits worthy of repent- 
ance. For he that has violated no law, to him it is permitted 
to use what is lawful, but if a man has fallen into sin, he ought 
so to cut himself off from what is lawful, as he remembers to 
have committed what is unlawful. For the fruit of good 
works ought not to be equal in the man who has sinned 
less, and the man who has sinned more, nor in him who has 


VER. 7—9. ST. LUKE. 115 


fallen into no crimes, and him who has fallen into some. 

In this way it is adapted to the conscience of each man, 

that they should seek for so much the greater blessing on 

good works through repentance, as they have by guilt brought 

on themselves the heavier penalties. Maximus; The fruit of Max. 
repentance isan equanimity ofsoul, which we donot fully obtain, ae i 
as long as we are at times affected by our passions, for not as yet 

have we performed the fruits worthy of repentance. Let usthen 
repent truly, that being delivered from our passions we may 
obtain the pardon of their sins. Gree. But the Jews glorying Greg. 
in their noble birth were unwilling to acknowledge themselves ">! *P- 
sinners, because they were descended from the stock of 
Abraham. So thenitis rightly said, And begin not to say within 
yourselves, we have Abraham for our father. Curys. Not Chrys. 
meaning thereby that they had not descended in their natural ° *P- 
course from Abraham, but that it avails them nothing to have 
Abraham for their father, unless they observed the relationship 

in respect of virtue. For Scripture is accustomed to entitle 

laws of relationship, such as do not exist by nature, but 

are derived from virtue or vice. To whichsoever of these 

two a man conforms himself, he is called its son or brother. 
CyriL; For what profits the nobleness we inherit through 

the flesh, unless it be supported by kindred feelings in us? 

It is folly then to boast of our worthy ancestors, and fall 
away from their virtues. Basit; For neither does the speed Basil. 
of its sire make the horse swift; but as the goodness of 2" °° 
other animals is looked for in individuals, so also that is 
reckoned to be man’s legitimate praise which is decided by the 

test of his present worth. For it is a disgraceful thing for 
aman to be adorned with the honours of another, when he 

has no virtue of his own to commend him. GRreG. Nyss. So Greg. 
then having foretold the casting away of the Jews, He" °° 
goes on to allude to the calling of the Gentiles, whom 

He calls stones. Hence it follows, For I say unto you, 

&c. Curys. As if He said, Think not that if you perish Chrys. 
the Patriarch will be deprived of sons, for God even ®P- 
from stones can produce men unto him, and prolong 

the line of his descendants. For so has it been from 

the beginning, seeing that for men to be made from stones 

unto Abraham is but equivalent to the coming forth of 

12 


116 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


a son from the dead womb of Sarah. AMBROSE; But 
although God can alter and change the most diverse natures, 
yet in my mind a mystery is of more avail than a miracle. 
For what else than stones were they who bowed down to 
stones, like indeed to them who made them. It is pro- 
phesied therefore that faith shall be poured into the stony 
hearts of the Gentiles, and through faith the oracles promise 
that Abraham shall have sons. But that you may know 
who are the men compared to stones, he has also com- 
pared men to trees, adding, For now the axe is laid to 
the root of the tree. This change of figure was made, 
that by means of comparison might be understood to 
have now commenced a more kindly growth of manhood. 
ORIGEN; If the completion of all things had been then 
already begun, and the end of time close at hand, I should 
have no question but that the prophecy was given, because 
at that time it was to be fulfilled. But now that many ages 
‘have elapsed since the Spirit spoke this, I think it was 
prophesied to the people of Israel, because their cutting off 
was approaching. For to those that went out to him that 
they should be baptized, he gave this warning among others. 
CyriL; By the axe then he declares the deadly wrath of 
God, which fell upon the Jews on account of the impieties 
they practised against Christ; he does not pronounce the axe 
to be yet fixed to the root, but that it was laid (ad radicem), 
1. e. near the root. For though the branches were cut down, 
the tree itself was not yet entirely destroyed. For a remnant 
Greg. of Israel shall be saved. GREG. Or we may take it in this way ; 
ubl sup. The tree represents the whole human race in this world, 
but the axe is our redeemer, who by the handle and iron, as 
it were, is held indeed in the hand of man, but strikes by the 
power of God. Which axe indeed is now laid at the root of 
the tree; for although it waits patiently, yet it is plain 
what it is about to do. And we must observe that the said 
axe is to be laid not at the branches, but at the root. For 
when the children of the wicked are taken away, what is this 
but the cutting off of the branches of an unfruitful tree. 
But when the whole family together with the parent is 
removed, the unfruitful tree is cut off from the very root. 
But every hardened sinner finds the fire of hell the quicker 


VER. 10—14. ST. LUKE. 117 


prepared for him, as he disdains to bring forth the 
fruits of good works. Hence it follows, Every one then. 
Curys. It is elegantly said, that beareth not fruit, and it 
is added, good. For God created man an animal fond of 
employment, and constant activity is natural to him, but 
idleness is unnatural. For idleness is hurtful to every member 
of the body, but much more to the soul. For the soul being 
by nature in constant motion does not admit of being slothful. 
But as idleness is an evil, so also is an unworthy activity. 
But having before spoken of repentance, he now declares 
that the axe lies near, not indeed actually cutting, but only 
striking terror. AMBROSE; Let him then that is able bring 
forth fruit unto grace, him who ought, unto repentance. The 
Lord is at hand seeking for His fruit, who shall cherish the 
fruitful, but rebuke the barren. 


10. And the people asked him, saying, What shall 
we do then? , 

11. He answereth and saith unto them, He that 
hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; 
and he that hath meat, let him do likewise. 

12. Then came also Publicans to be baptized, and 
said unto him, Master, what shall we do ? 

13. And he said unto them, Exact no more than 
that which is appointed you. 

14 And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, 
saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto 
them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any 
falsely ; and be content with your wages. 


Gree. In the preceding words of John, it is plain that Sree 
the hearts of his hearers were troubled, and sought for 
advice from him. As it is added, And they asked him, 
saying, §c. ORIGEN; Three classes of men are introduced 
as enquiring of John concerning their salvation, one which 
the Scripture calls the multitude, another to which it gives 
the name of Publicans, and a third which is noticed by the 
appellation of soldiers. THropuyL. Now to the Publicans 


Greg. 


ubi sup. 


Greg. 


ubi sup. 


118 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


and soldiers he gives a commandment to abstain from evil, 
but the multitudes, as not living in an evil condition, he com- 
mands to perform some good work, as it follows, He that hath 
two coats, let him give one. GREG. Because a coat is more 
necessary for our use than a cloak, it belongs to the bringing 
forth of fruits worthy of repentance, that we should divide 
with our neighbours not only our superfluities but those 
which are absolutely necessary to us, as our coat, or the meat 
with which we support our bodies; and hence it follows, 
And he who haus meat, let him do likewise. Basi; But we 
are hereby taught, that every thing we have over and above 
what is necessary to our daily support, we are bound to give 
to him who hath nothing for God’s eens who hath given us 
liberally whatever we possess. 

GreG. For because it was written in the law, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself, he is proved to love his 
neighbour less than himself, who does not share with him 
in his distress, those things which are even necessary to 
himself. Therefore that precept is given of dividing with 
one’s neighbour the two coats, since if one is divided no one 
is clothed. But we must remark in this, of how much value 
are works of mercy, since of the works worthy of repentance 
these are enjoined before all others. AMBROSE; For other com- 
mands of duty have reference only to individuals, mercy has a 
common application. It is therefore a common commandment 
to all, to contribute to him that has not. Mercy is the fulness 
of virtues, yet in mercy itself a proportion is observed to meet 
the capacities of man’s condition, in that each individual is 
not to deprive himself of all, but what he has to share it with 
the poor. 

ORIGEN; But this place admits of a decper meaning, for as 
we ought not to serve two masters, so neither to have two 
coats, lest one should be the clothing of the old man, the 
other of the new, but we ought to cast off the old man, and 
give to him who is naked. For one man has one coat, 
another has none at all, the strength therefore of the two is 
exactly contrary, and as it has been written that we should 
cast all our crimes to the bottom of the sea, so ought we to 
throw from us our vices and errors, and lay them upon him 
who has been the cause of them. THEOPHYL. But some one 


VER. 1O—14. ST. LUKE. 119 


has observed that the two coats are the spirit and letter of 
Scripture, but John advises him that hath these two to 
instruct the ignorant, and give him at least the letter. 

Bebe; What great virtue there was in the discourse of the 
Baptist is manifested by this, that the Publicans, nay even 
the soldiers, he compelled to seek counsel of him concerning 
their salvation, as it follows, But the publicans came. 
Curys. Great is the force of virtue that makes the rich seek Chrys. 
the way of salvation from the poor, from him that hath %o"'™ 
nothing. BrpE; He commands them therefore that they 24- 
exact no more than what was presented to them, as it 
follows, And he said unto them, Do no more than what is 
appointed to you. But they are called publicans who 
collect the public taxes, or who are the farmers of the pub- 
lic revenue or public property? ‘Those also who pursue 
the gain of this world by traffic are denoted by the same 
titles, all of whom, each in his own sphere, he equally 
forbids to practise deceit, that so by first keeping them- 
selves from desiring other men’s goods, they might at 
length come to share their own with their neighbours. 
It follows, But the soldiers also asked him. In the justest 
manner he advises them not to seek gain by falsely ac- 
cusing those whom they ought to benefit by their pro- 
tection. Hence it follows, And he says unto them, Strike no 
one, (i. e. violently,) nor accuse any falsely, (i. e. by unjustly 
using arms,) and be content with your wages. AMBROSE; 
Teaching thereby that wages were affixed to military duty, 
lest men seeking for gain should go about as robbers. 
Gree. Naz. For by wages he refers to the imperial pay, and Gre. 
the rewards assigned to distinguished actions. Ava. For he 4 rete si 
knew that soldiers, when they use their arms, are not homi- cae 
cides, but the ministers of the law; not the avengers of lib. xii. 
their own injuries, but the defenders of the public safety.% + 
Otherwise he might have answered, “ Put away your arms, 
abandon warfare, strike no one, wound no one, destroy no 
one.” For what is it that is blamed in war? Is it that 
men die, who some time or other must die, that the con- 
querors might rule in peace? To blame this is the 
part of timid not religious men. The desire of injury, 
the cruelty of revenge, a savage and pitiless disposi- 


120 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


tion, the fierceness of rebellion, the lust of power, and such 
like things are the evils which are justly blamed in wars, 
which generally for the sake of thereby bringing punish- 
ment upon the violence of those who resist, are undertaken 
and carried on by good men either by command of God or 
some lawful authority, when they find themselves in that 
order of things in which their very condition justly obliges 
them either to command such a thing themselves, or to obey 

Chrys. when others command it. Curys. But John’s desire when he 

sare '" spoke to the Publicans and soldiers, was to bring them over 

11. to a higher wisdom, for which as they were not fitted, he 
reveals to them commoner truths, lest if he put forward the 
higher they should pay no attention thereto, and be deprived 
of the others also. 


15. And as the people were in expectation, and all 
men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were 
the Christ, or not ; 

16. John answered, saying unto them all, I indeed 
baptize you with water; but one mightier than I 
cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy 
to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost 
and with fire. 

17. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly 
purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his 
garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire un- 
quenchable. 


ORIGEN ; It was meet that more deference should be paid 
to John than to other men, for he lived such as no other 
' man. Wherefore indeed most rightly did they regard him 
with affection, only they kept not within due bounds; hence 
it is said, But while the people were expecting whether 
he were the Christ. AMBROosE; Now what could be more 
absurd than that he who was fancied to be in another should 
not be believed in his own person? He whom they thought 
to have come by a woman, is not believed to have come 
by a virgin; while in fact the sign of the Divine coming was 
placed in the childbearing ofa virgin, notofawoman. ORIGEN; 


VER. 15—17. ST. LUKE. 121 


But love is dangerous when it is uncontrolled. For he who 

loves any one ought to consider the nature and causes of loving, 

and not to love more than the object deserves. For if he 

pass the due measure and bounds of love, both he who loves, 

and he who is loved, will be in sin. GREEK Ex. And hence Meta- 

John gloried not in the estimation in which all held him, nor she 

in any way seemed to desire the deference of others, but em- 

braced the lowest humility. Hence it follows, John answered. 

BevDE; But how could he answer them who in secret thought 

that he was Christ, except it was that they not only thought, 

but also (as another Evangelist declares) sending Priests and 

Levites to him asked him whether he was the Christ or not? 
AMBROSE; Or: John saw into the secrets of the heart; 

but let us remember by whose grace, for it is of the gift of God 

to reveal things to man, not of the virtue of man, which is as- 

sisted by the Divine blessing, ratherthan capable of perceiving 

by any natural power of its own. But quickly answering them, 

he proved that he was not the Christ, for his works were 

by visible operations. For as man is compounded of two 

natures, ji. e. soul and body, the visible mystery is made 

holy by the visible, the invisible by the invisible; for by water 

the body is washed, by the Spirit the soul is cleansed of its 

stains. It is permitted to us also in the very water to have the 

sanctifying influence of the Deity breathed upon us. And 

therefore there was one baptism of repentance, another of grace. 

The latter was by both water and Spirit, the former by one 

only; the work of man is to bring forth repentance for his sin, 

it is the gift of God to pour in the grace of His mystery. 

Devoid therefore of all envy of Christ’s greatness, he declared 

not by word but by work that he was not the Christ. Hence 

it follows, There cometh after me one mightier than I. In 

those words, mightier than I, he makes no comparison, for 

there can be none between the Son of God and man, but 

because there are many mighty, no one is mightier but 

Christ. So far indeed was he from making comparison, that 

he adds, Whose shoes latchet Iam not worthy to unloose. 

Auc. Matthew says, Whose shoes Iam not worthy to bear. Aug. de 

If therefore it is worth while to understand any difference in a 

these expressions, we can only suppose that John said one lib. ii.12. 

at one time, another at another, or both together, To bear 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


122 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, III. 


his shoes, and to loose the latchet of his shoes,so that though one 
Evangelist may have related this, the others that, yet all have 
related the truth. But if John intended no more when he 
spoke of the shoes of our Lord but His excellence and his 
own humility, whether he said loosing the latchet of the 
shoes, or bearing them, they have still kept the same sense 
who by the mention of shoes have in their own words 
expressed the same signification of humility. AMBROSE; By 
the words, Whose shoes Tam not worthy to bear, he shews 
that the grace of preaching the Gospel was conferred upon 
the Apostles, who were shod for the Gospel. He seems 
however to say it, because John frequently represented the 
Jewish people. Grete. But John denounces himself as 


”- unworthy to loose the latchet of Christ’s shoes: as if he 


openly said, I am not able to disclose the footsteps of my 
Redeemer, who do not presume unworthily to take unto myself 
the name of bridegroom, for it was an ancient custom that* 
when a man refused to take to wife her whom he ought, 
whoever should come to her betrothed by right of kin, 
was to loose his shoe. Or because shoes are made from 
the skins of dead animals, our Lord being made flesh 
appeared as it were with shoes, as taking upon Himself the 
carcase of our corruption. The latchet of the shoe is the 
connexion of the mystery. John therefore can not loose the 
latchet of the shoe, because neither is he able to fathom the 
mystery of the Incarnation, though he acknowledged it by the 
Spirit of prophecy. 

Curys. And having said that his own baptism was only 
with water, he next shews the excellence of that baptism 
which was brought by Christ, adding, He shall baptize you 
with the Holy Spirit, and fire, signifying by the very 
metaphor which he uses the abundance of grace. For he 
says not, “ He shall give you the Holy Spirit,” but He shall 
baptize you. And again, by the addition of fire, he shews 
the power of grace. And as Christ calls the grace of the 
Spirit, water, meaning by water the purity resulting from it, 

4 St. Gregory seems to refer here bride is the bridegroom, but the friend 
to Ruth 4, 8. Vulg. ‘* Dixit proximo &c. see the same allegory in Aug. de 
suo Booz. Tolle calceamentum quod Nat. S. Joann. Bap. Hom. iv. Ambrose 


statim solvit de pede suo.”” He quotes in loc. Cyprian ii. adv. Jud. 19. 
also John 3, 29. He that hath the 


VER. 15—17. ST. LUKE. 123 


and the abundant consolation which is brought to minds 
which are capable of receiving Him; so also John, by the 
word fire, expresses the fervour and uprightness of grace, as 
well as the consuming of sins. 

BEDE; The Holy Spirit also may be understood by the 
word fire, for He kindles with love and enlightens with 
wisdom the hearts which He fills. Hence also the Apostles 
received the baptism of the Spirit in the appearance of fire. 
There are some who explain it, that now we are baptized 
with the Spirit, hereafter we shall be with fire, that as 
in truth we are now born again to the remission of our 
sins by water and the Spirit, so then we shall be cleansed 
from certain lighter sins by the baptism of purifying fire. 
OricEN; And as John was waiting by the river Jordan for 
those who came to his baptism, and some he drove away, 
saying, Generation of vipers, but those who confessed their 
sins he received, so shall the Lord Jesus stand in the fiery 
stream with the flaming sword, that whoever after the close 
of this life desires to pass over to Paradise and needs purifi- 
cation, He may baptize him with this laver, and pass him over 
to paradise, but whoso has not the seal of the former 
baptisms, him He shall not baptize with the laver of fire. 

BasiL; But because he says, He shall baptize you with Bagi. 
the Holy Spirit, let no one admit that baptism to be valid eee 
in which the name of His Spirit only has been invoked, for Sanct. 
we must ever keep undiminished that tradition which has % !*- 
been sealed to us in quickening grace. To add or take 
away ought thereof excludes from eternal life. GREEK Ex. ubi sup. 
By these words then, He shall baptize with the Holy Spirit, 

He signifies the abundance of His grace, the plenteousness 

of His mercy; but lest any should suppose that while to 
bestow abundantly is both in the power and will of the 
Creator, He will have no occasion to punish the disobedient, 

he adds, whose fun is in his hand, shewing that He is not 
only the rewarder of the righteous, but the avenger of them 

that speak lies. But the fan expresses the promptitude of His 
judgment. For not with the process of passing sentence on 
trial, but in an instant and without any interval he separates those 

that are to be condemned from the company of those that are Chrys. 
to be saved. Cyrit; By the following words, And he shall i ‘4°" 
thoroughly purge his floor, the Baptist signifies that the Church ¢- 4. 


John 12, 


24. 


Basil. 
non occ. 


Greg. 
non occ. 


124 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


belongs to Christ as her Lord. BEpeE; For by the floor is 
represented the present Church, in which many are called 
but few are chosen. The purging of which floor is even now 
carried on individually, when every perverse offender is either 
cast out of the Church for his open sins, (by the hands 
of the Priesthood,) or for his secret sins is after death 
condemned by Divine judgment. And at the end of the 
world it will be accomplished universally, when the Son of 
Man shall send His angels, and they shall gather out of His 
kingdom every thing that has offended. AMBROSE; By the 
sign of a fan then the Lord is declared to possess the power 
of discerning merits, since when the corn is winnowed 
in the threshing floor, the full ears are separated from the 
empty by the trial of the wind blowing them. Hence it 
follows, And he shall gather the wheat into his barn. By 
this comparison, the Lord shews that on the day of judgment 
He will discern the solid merits and fruits of virtue from the 
unfruitful lightness of empty boasting and vain deeds, 
about to place the men of more perfect righteousness in His 
heavenly mansion. For that is indeed the more perfect 
fruit which was thought worthy to be like to Him who fell 
as a grain of wheat, that He might bring forth fruit in 
abundance. 

CyriL; But the chaff signifies the trifling and empty, 
blown about and liable to be carried away by every 
blast of sim. BastL; But they are mixed up with those who 
are worthy of the kingdom of heaven, as the chaff with the 
wheat. This is not however from consideration of their love 
of God and their neighbour, nor from their spiritual gifts or 
temporal blessings. 

ORIGEN; Or, because without the wind the wheat and 
chaff cannot be separated, therefore He has the fan in His 
hand, which shews some to be chaff, some wheat; for when 
you were as the light chaff, (i. e. unbelieving,) temptation 
shewed you to be what you knew not; but when you shall 
bravely endure temptation, the temptation will not make you 
faithful and enduring, but it will bring to light the virtue 
which was hid in you. 

GreG. Nyss. But it is well to know, that the treasures, 
which according to the promises are laid up for those who 
live honestly, are such as the words of man cannot express, 


VER. 18—20. ST. LUKE. 125 


as eye hath not seen, nor the ear heard, nor hath it entered 

into the heart of man to conceive. And the punishments 
which await sinners bear no proportion to any of those 
things which now affect the senses. And although some of 
those punishments are called by our names, yet their differ- 
ence is very great. For when you hear of fire, you are 
taught to understand something else from the expression 
which follows, that is not quenched, beyond what comes into 

the idea of other fire. Grec. The fire of hell is here wonder- Greg. 
fully expressed, for our earthly fire is kept up by heaping ea fo 
wood upon it, and cannot live unless supplied with fuel, 20. 
but on the contrary the fire of hell, though a bodily fire, 
and burning bodily the wicked who are put into it, is not 
kept up by wood, but once made remains unquenchable. 


18. And many other things in his exhortation 
preached he unto the people. 

19. But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by 
him for Herodias his brother Philip’s wife, and for 
all the evils which Herod had done, 

20. Added yet this above all, that he shut up John 
in prison. 


OrIcEN ; John having announced the coming of Christ, 
was preaching the baptism of the Holy Spirit, and the other 
things which the Gospel history has handed down to us. 
But besides these he is declared to have announced others 
in the following words, And many other things in his ex- 
hortation preached he unto the people. 'THEOPHYL. For his 
exhortation was the telling of good things, and therefore is 
fitly called the Gospel. Origen; And as in the Gospel ac- 
cording to St. John itis related of Christ that He spoke many 
other things, so also in this place we must understand Luke 
to say the same of John the Baptist, since certain things are 
announced by John too great to be entrusted to writing. 
But we marvel at John, because among them that are 
born of women there was not a greater than he, for by 
his good deeds he had been exalted to so high a fame for 
virtue, that by many he was supposed to be Christ. But 
what is much more marvellous he feared not Herod, 


126 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


nor dreaded death, as it follows, But Herod the tetrarch 
Euseb. being reproved by him. Evusrs. He is called the tetrarch, 
see eto distinguish him from the other Herod, in whose reign 
Christ was born, and who was king, but this Herod was 
tetrarch. Now his wife was the daughter of Aretas, king of 
Arabia, but he had sacrilegiously married his brother Philip’s 
wife, though she had offspring by his brother. For those 
only were allowed to do this whose brothers died without 
issue. For this the Baptist had censured Herod. First indeed 
he heard him attentively, for he knew that his words were 
weighty and full of consolation, but the desire of Herodias 
compelled him to despise the words of John, and he then 
thrust him into prison. And so it follows, And he added this 
above all, that he shut up John in prison. BEDE; But John 
was not imprisoned in those days. According to St. John’s 
Gospel it was not till after some miracles had been performed 
by our Lord, and after His baptism had been noised abroad ; 
but according to Luke he had been seized beforehand by 
the redoubled malice of Herod, who, when he saw so many 
flock to the preaching of John, and the soldiers believing, the 
publicans repenting, and whole multitudes receiving baptism, 
on the contrary not only despised John, but having put 
Gloss. him in prison, slew him. Gtoss. For before that Luke 
ordin. 
relates any of the acts of Jesus, he says that John was taken 
by Herod, to shew that he alone was in an especial manner 
going to describe those of our Lord’s acts, which were 
performed since the year in which John was taken or put to 
death. 


21. Now when all the people were baptized, it 
came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized, and 
praying, the heaven was opened, 

22. And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily 
shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from 
heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in 
thee I am well pleased. 


AMBROSE; In a matter which has been related by others, Luke 
has rightly given us only a summary, and has left more to be 
understood than expressed in the fact, that our Lord was bap- 


VER. 18—22. ST. LUKE. 127 


tized by John. As itis said, Now when all were baptized, it 
came to pass. Our Lord was baptized not that He might be 
cleansed by the waters but to cleanse them, that being purified 
by the flesh of Christ who knew no sin, they might possess the 
power of baptism. Gree. Naz. Christ comes also to baptism Greg. 
perhaps to sanctify baptism, but doubtless to bury the old," 
Adam in water. AMBROSE; But the cause of our Lord’s 
baptism He Himself declares when He says, Thus it becomes 
us to fulfil all righteousness. But what is righteousness, 
except that what you would have another do to you, you should 
first begin yourself, and so by your example encourage others ? 
Let none then avoid the laver of grace, since Christ avoided 
not the laver of repentance. CHrys. Now there was a Jewish 
baptism which removed the pollutions of the flesh, not the 
guilt of the conscience; but our baptism parts us from sin, 
washes the soul, and gives us largely the outpouring of the 
Spirit. But John’s baptism was more excellent than the 
Jewish; for it did not bring men to the observance of 
bodily purifications, but taught them to turn from sin to virtue. 
But it was inferior to our baptism, in that it conveyed not the 
Holy Spirit, nor shewed forth the remission which is by grace, 
for there was a certain end as it were of each baptism. But 
neither by the Jewish nor our own baptism was Christ 
baptized, for He needed not the pardon of sins, nor was that 
flesh destitute of the Holy Spirit which from the very begin- 
ning was conceived by the Holy Spirit; He was baptized 
by the baptism of John, that from the very nature of the 
baptism, you might know that He was not baptized because 
He needed the gift of the Spirit. But he says, being 
baptized and praying, that you might consider how fitting 
to one who has received baptism is constant prayer. BEDE; 
Because though all sins are forgiven in baptism, not as yet 
is the weakness of this fleshly substance made strong. For we 
rejoice at the overwhelming of the Egyptians having now 
crossed the Red sea, but in the wilderness of worldly living 
there meet us other foes, who, the grace of Christ direct- 
ing us, may by our exertions be subdued until we come 
to our own country. Currys. But he says, The heavens 
opened, as if till then they had been shut. But now the 
higher and the lower sheep-fold being brought into one, and 


Luke 1, 
15. 


128 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


there being one Shepherd of the sheep, the heavens opened, 
and man was incorporated a fellow citizen with the Angels. 
BeEvE; For not then were the heavens opened to Him whose 
eyes scanned the innermost parts of the heaven, but therein 
is shewn the virtue of baptism, that when a man comes forth 
from it the gates of the heavenly kingdom are opened to him, 
and while his flesh is bathed unharmed in the cold waters, 
which formerly dreaded their hurtful touch, the flaming sword 
is extinguished. CHrRys. The Holy Spirit descended also 
upon Christ as upon the Founder of our race, that He might 
be in Christ first of all who received Him not for Himself, but 
rather for us. Hence it follows: And the Holy Spirit 
descended. Let not any one imagine that He received Him 
because He had Him not. For He as God sent Him from 
above, and as man received Him below. Therefore from 
Him the Spirit fled down to Hin, i. e. from His deity to His 
humanity. Aug. But it is most strange that He should 
receive the Spirit when He was thirty years old. But as 
without sin He came to baptism, so not without the Holy 
Spint. For if it was written of John, He shall be filled with 
the Spirit from his mother’s womb, what must we believe of 
the man Christ, the very conception of whose flesh was not 
carnal but spiritual. Therefore He condescended now to 
prefigure His body, i. e. the Church, in which the baptized 
especially receive the Holy Spirit. CuHrys. That baptism 
savoured partly of antiquity, partly of novelty. For that 
He should receive baptism from a Prophet shewed an- 
tiquity, but the Spirit’s descent denoted something new. 
AMBROSE; Now the Spirit rightly shewed Himself in the form 
of a dove, for He is not seen in His divine substance. Let us 
consider the mystery why like a dove? Because the grace of 
baptism requires innocence, that we should be innocent as 
doves. The grace of baptism requires peace, which under the 
emblem of an olive branch the dove once brought to that ark 
which alone escaped the deluge. Curys. Or to shew the 
meekness of the Lord, the Spirit now appears in the form of 
a dove, but at Pentecost like fire, to signify punishment. 
For when He was about to pardon offences, gentleness was 
necessary; but having obtained grace, there remaineth for us 
the time of trial and judgment. 


VER. 21, 22. ST. LUKE. 129 


CyprRIAN; Now the dove is a harmless and pleasant Cyprian 
creature, with no bitterness of gall, no fierceness of bite, maa 
no violence of rending talons; they love the abodes of men, 
consort within one home, when they have young narturing 
them together, when they fly abroad, hanging side by side 
upon the- wing, leading their life in mutual intercourse, 
giving with their bills a sign of their peaceful harmony, and 
fulfilling a law of unanimity in every way. 

Curys. Christ indeed had -already manifested Himself at 
His birth by many oracles, but because men would not con- 
sult them, He who had in the mean time remained secret, 
again more clearly revealed Himself in a second birth. For 
formerly a star in the heavens, now the Father at the waves 
of Jordan declared Him, and as the Spirit descended upon 
Iiim, pouring forth that voice over the head of Him who was 
baptized, as it follows, And a voice came from heaven, Thow 
art my beloved Son. AMBROSE; We have seen the Spirit, but 
in a bodily shape, and the Father whom we cannot see we 
may hear. He is invisible because He is the Father, the Son 
also is invisible in His divinity, but He wished to manifest 
Himself in the body. And because the Father did not take 
the body, He wished therefore to prove to us that He was 
present in the Son, by saying, Thou art my Son. ATHAN. Athan. 
The holy Scriptures by the name of Son set forth two we 
meanings; one similar to that spoken of in the Gospel, He Sy. 
gave to them power that they should become the sons of God; 
another according to which Isaac is the son of Abraham. 
Christ is not then simply called a Son of God, but the 
article is prefixed, that we should understand that He 
alone is really and by nature the Son; and hence He is 
said to be the Only begotten. For if according to the mad- 
ness of Arius He is called Son, as they are called who obtain 
the name through grace, He will seem in no way to differ 
from us. It remains therefore that in another respect we 
must confess Christ to be the Son of God, even as Isaae 
is acknowledged to be the son of Abraham. For that 
which is naturally begotten of another, and takes not 
its origin from any thing besides nature, accounts a son. 
But it is said, Was then the birth of the Son with suffering 
as ofa man? By no means. God since He cannot be divided is 

VOL. III. K 


Greg. 
sup. 
Ezech. 
Hom. 8. 


Gen. 6, 
7. 


Aug. 

de Con. 
Ev. lib. 
ii. c, 14, 


130 GOSPEL ACCORDING T@ CHAP. IIi. 


without suffering the Father of theSon. Hence Heis called | 
the Word of the Father, because neither is the word of man 
evcn produced with suffering, and since God is by nature 
one, He is the Father of one only Son, and therefore it is 
added, Beloved. For when a man has only one son, he loves 
him very much, but if he becomes father of many, his 
affection is divided by being distributed. ATHAN. But as 
the prophet had before announced the promise of God, 
saying, I wll send Christ my son, that promise being now as 
it were accomplished at Jordan, He rightly adds, In thee I 
am well pleased. BEDE; As if He said, In Thee have I 
appointed My good pleasure, i. e. to carry on by Thee 
what seems good to Me. Grea. Or else, Every one who 
by repentance corrects any of his actions, by that very 
repentance shews that he has displeased himself, seeing 
he amends what he has done. And since the Omni- 
potent Father spoke of sinners after the manner of men, 
saying, It repents me that I have made man, He (so to speak) 
displeased Himself in the sinners whom He had created. 
But in Christ alone He pleased Himself, for in Him alone He 
found no fault that He should blame Himself, as it were, by 
repentance. 

Ava. But the words of Matthew, This is my beloved Son, 
and those of Luke, Zhou art my beloved Son, convey 
the same meaning; for the heavenly voice spoke one of 
these. But Matthew wished to shew that by the words, 
This is my beloved Son, it was meant rather to declare to 
the hearers, that He was the Son of God. For that was 
not revealed to Christ which He knew, but they heard it who 
were present, and for whom the voice came. 


23. And Jesus himself began to be about thirty 
years of age, being (as was supposed) the son of 
Joseph, which was the son of Heli, 

24. Which was the son of Matthat, which was the 
son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was 
the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph, 

25. Which was the son of Mattathias, which was 


VER. 23—38. ST. LUKE. 131 


the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which 
was the son of Esh, which was the son of Nagge, 

26. Which was the son of Maath, which was the 
son of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, 
which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of 
Juda, 

27. Which was the son of Joanna, which was the 
son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, 
- which was the son of Salathiel, which was the son of 
Neri, 

28. Which was the son of Melchi, which was the 
son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was 
the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er, 

29. Which was the son of Jose, which was the son 
of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the 
son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, 

30. Which was the son of Simeon, which was the 
son of Juda, which was the son of Joseph, which was 
the son of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim, 

31. Which was the son of Melea, which was the 
son of Menan, which was the son of Mattatha, which 
was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David, 

32. Which was the son of Jesse, which was the 
son of Obed, which was the son of Booz, which was 
the son of Salmon, which was the son of Naasson, 

33. Which was the son of Aminadab, which was 
the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom, which 
was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda, 

34. Which was the son of Jacob, which was the 
son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham, which 
was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor, 

35. Which was the son of Saruch, which was the 
son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which 
was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala, 

36. Which was the son of Cainan, which was the 

K 2 


132 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which 
was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech, 

37. Which was the son of Mathusala, which was 
the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which 
was the son of Maleleel, which was the son of Cainan, 

38. Which was the son of Enos, which was the 
son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was 
the son of God. 


OrIGEN; Having related our Lord’s baptism, he next enters 
upon the generation of the Lord, not bringing it down from the 
higher to the lower, but beginning with Christ, he carries it 
up to God Himself. Hence he says, And Jesus Himself 
began. For when He was baptized, and had Himself 
undergone the mystery of the second birth, then He is said 
to have begun, that thou also mightest destroy this first birth 

Greg. and be born in the second. Gree. Naz. We must therefore 
Orat.39- consider who He was who was baptized, and by whom and 
when: seeing He was pure, baptized by John, and at a time 
when His miracles had begun, that we might thence derive 
the lesson of purifying ourselves beforehand, and of embracing 
humility, and of not beginning to preach until the maturity of 
our spiritual and natural life. ‘The first of these was said for 
their sakes who are receiving baptism; for although the gift of 
baptism brings remission, yet we must fear lest we return again 
to our vomit. The second is pointed at those who exalt 
themselves against the stewards of the mysteries, whom 
they may excelin rank. The third was uttered for those who 
trust in their youth, and imagine that any age is fit for promotion 
and teaching. Jesus is cleansed, and dost thou despise purifi- 
cation? By John, and dost thou say ought against thy teacher. 
At thirty years old, but dost thou in teaching precede thy 
elders? But the example of Daniel and the like are ready in 
thy mouth, for every guilty person is ready with an answer. 
But that is not the law of the Church which seldom hap- 
pens, as neither does a single swallow make the spring. 
Curys. Or, He waited accomplishing the whole law until 
that age which takes in every sin, that none might say that He 
abrogated the law because He was not able to fulfil it. 


VER. 23—38. ST. LUKE. 1383 


GREEK Ex. For this reason also He came at thirty years to Severus. 
be baptized, to shew that spiritual regeneration makes men 
perfect as far as regards their spiritual life. BrpE; The thrice 

ten years also which our Saviour had passed when He was 
baptized might intimate also the mystery of our baptism, 
because of the faith in the Trinity, and the obedience to the 
Decalogue. Grec. Naz. Still must a child be baptized if Greg. 
necessity demands it. For it is better to be insensibly sanc- 49. 
tified, than to pass from this life unsealed. But you will say, 
Christ is baptized at thirty years old, and He was God, but 
thou biddest us to hasten our baptism. In that thou saidst 
God, the objection was done away: He needed nocleansing, nor 

was any danger hanging over Him while He put off His baptism. 

But with thee it extends to no slight calamity, if thou passest 
from this life born in corruption, but not if thou hast put on 

the robe of incorruption. And truly it is a blessed thing to 
keep unsullied the clean robe of baptism, but it is better 

at times to be slightly stained, than to be altogether devoid 

of grace. Cyrit; Although in truth Christ had no father Cy:il. 
according to the flesh, yet some fancied he had a father. os 
Hence it follows, As was supposed the son of Joseph. \ib. 1. 
AMBROSE; Rightly as was supposed, since in reality He was 

not, but was supposed to be so, because Mary who was 
espoused to Joseph was His mother. But we might doubt 
why the descent of Joseph is described rather than that of 
Mary, (seeing that Mary brought forth Christ of the Holy Spirit, 
while Joseph seemed to be out of the line of our Lord’s descent,) 
were we not informed of the custom of the Holy Scripture, 
which always seeks the origin of the husband, and especially 

in this case, since in Joseph’s descent we also find that of Mary. 

For Joseph being a just man took a wife really from his 
own tribe and country, and so at the time of the taxing Joseph 
went up from the family and country of David to be taxed with 
Mary his wife. She who gives in the returns from the same family 

and country, shews herself to be of that family and country. 
Hence He goes on inthe descent of Joseph, and adds, Who was 

the son of Eli. But let us consider the fact, that St. Matthew 
makes Jacob, who was the father of Joscph, to be son of 
Nathan, but Luke says that Joseph (to whom Mary was 


Greg. 
Carm. 
18. 


Jer. 22, 
30. 


Gen. 15, 


134 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. 111. 


espoused) was the son of Eli. How then could there be two 
fathers, (namely, Eli and Jacob,) to one man. Greg. Naz. 
But some say that there is one succession from David to 
Joseph, which each Evangelist relates under different names. 
But this is absurd, since at the beginning of this genealogy, 
two brothers come in Nathan and Salomon, from whom the 
lines are carried in different ways. Evsres. Let us then 
more carefully explain the meaning of the words themselves. 
For if when Matthew affirmed Joseph to be the son of Jacob, 
Luke had in like manner affirmed that Joseph was the son of 
Eli, there would be some dispute. But seeing the case 
is that Matthew gives his opinion, Luke repeats the com- 
mon opinion of many, not his own, saying, as was supposed, 
I do not think that there is any room for doubt. For since 
there were among the Jews different opinions of the genealogy 
of Christ, and yet all traced Him up to David because to 
him the promises were made, while many affirmed that Christ 
would come through Solomon and the other kings, some 
shunned this opinion because of the many crimes related 
of their kings, and because Jeremiah said of Jechonias 
that “a man should not rise of his seed to sit on the 
throne of David.” This last view Luke takes, though 
conscious that Matthew gives the real truth of the genealogy. 
This is the first reason. The next is a deeper one. For 
Matthew when he began to write of the things before the 
conception of Mary and the birth of Jesus in the flesh, 
very fitly as in a history commences with the ancestry in the 
flesh, and descending from thence deduces His generation from 
those who went before. For when the Word of God became 
flesh, He descended. But Luke hastens forward to the 
regeneration which takes place in baptism, and then gives 
another succession of families, and rising up from the 
lowest to the highest, keeps out of sight those sinners of 
whom Matthew makes mention, (because that he who is bor 
again in God is separated from his guilty parents, being made 
the son of God,) and relates those who have led a virtuous | 
life in the sight of God. For thus it was said to Abraham, 
Thou shalt set out to thy fathers, not fathers in the flesh, but 
in God, on account of their likeness in virtue. To him there- 


VER. 23—838. ST. LUKE. 135 


fore who is born in God he ascribes parents who aye according 
to God on account of this resemblance in character. 

Aue. Or in another way; Matthew descends from David Aug. 
through Salomon to Joseph: but Luke beginning from Eli, who R."*", 
was in the line of our Saviour, ascends through the line of Vet. 
Nathan the son of David, and joins the tribes of Eli and Joseph, eee 
shewing that they are both of the same family, and thereby 
that the Saviour was not only the Son of Joseph, but also 
of Eli. For by the same reason by which the Saviour is 
called the son of Joseph, he is also the son of Eli, and of all 
the rest who are of the same tribe. Hence that which the 
Apostle says, Of whom are the fathers, and from whom Rom.9, 
Christ came according to the flesh. Ava. Or there occur three we a 
reasons, by one of which the Evangelist was led. For either Quest. 
one Evangelist has mentioned the father by whom Joseph was ee 
begotten, but the other his maternal grandfather, or some one 
of his ancestors. Or one of the fathers mentioned was the 
natural father of Joseph, the other his father who had adopted 
him. Or after the manner of the Jews, when a man has died 
without children, the next of kin taking his wife ascribes to 
his dead kinsman the son whom he has himself begotten. 
AMBROSE; For it is related that Matthas, who was descended 
from Salomon, begat Jacob as his son, and died leaving his wife 
living, whom Melchi took unto him as wife, and from her Eli 
was born. Again, Eli, when his brother Jacob died without 
children, was joined to his brother’s wife, and begot a son 
Joseph, who according to law is called the son of Jacob, since 
Eli raised up seed to his deceased brother, according to the Deut. 
orderof the ancientlaw. BrpE; Or else, Jacob, taking the wife 2” * 
of his brother Eli who had died without children according to 
the command of the law, begot Joseph, by natural parentage 
his own son, but by the ordinance of the law the son of Eli. Au. Aug. 
It is most probable that Luke took the origin by adoption, % tr" 
as not being willing to say that Joseph, was begotten by himii- c. 3. 
whose son he related him to be. For more easily is a man said 
to be his son by whom he was adopted, than to be begotten 
by him from whose flesh he was not born. But Matthew 
saying, “ Abraham begatIsaac, and Isaac begat Jacob,” and con- 
tinuing in the word “ begat,” until at last he says, but “ Jacob 
begat Joseph,” has sufficiently expressed that he has carried 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
31, in 
Ep. ad 
Rom. 


Gloss. 
ipterlin. 


136 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


through the succession of the fathers, to that father by whom 
Joseph was not adopted, but begotten. Although even sup- 
posing that Luke should say that Joseph was begotten by Eh, 
neither ought that word to perplex us. For it is not absurd 
to say that a man has begotten not in the flesh but im love 
the Son whom he has adopted. But rightly has Luke taken the 
origin by adoption, for by adoption are we made the sons of 
God, by believing on the Son of God, but by His birth in the 
flesh, the Son of God has rather for our sakes become the 
Son of man. CuHrys. But because this part of the Gospel 
consists of a series of names, men think there is nothing 
valuable to be derived therefrom. Lest then we should feel 
this, let us try to examine every step. For from the mere 
name we may extract an abundant treasure, for names are 
indicative of many things. For they savour of the Divine 
mercy and the offerings of thanks by women, who when they 
obtained sons gave a name significant of the gift. Gtoss. 
By interpretation then Eli means, “‘ My God,” or “ climbing,” 
Who was the son of Matthat,1. e.“‘ forgiving sins.” Who was 
the son of Levi, i.e. “ being added.” AmBRosE; Luke rightly 
thought, seeing that he could not embrace more of the sons of 
Jacob, lest he should seem to be wandering from the line of 
descent in a superfluous course, that the ancient names of 
the Patriarchs though occurring in others far later, Joseph, 
Judah, Simeon, and Levi, should not be omitted. For 
we recognise in these four kinds of virtue; in Judah, the 
mystery of our Lord’s Passion prophesied by figure; in 
Joseph, an example of chastity going before; in Simeon, 
the punishment of injured modesty; in Levi, the priestly 
office. Hence it follows, Who was the son of Melchi, i. e. 
“my King.” Who was the son of Janna, i. e. “a right 
hand.” Who was the son of Joseph, i. e. “ growing up;” 
but this was a different Joseph. Who was the son of Matta- 
thias, 1. e. “ the gift of God,” or “ sometimes.” Who was the 
son of Amos,1.e. “ loading, or he loaded.” Who was the son 
of Naum,i.e. “ help me.” Who was the son of Matthat, 
i,e. “desire.” Who was the sun of Mattathias, as above. Who 
was the son of Simei, 1. e. “ obedient.” IWVho was the son of 
Joseph, i.e.“ increase.” Who was the son of Judah, i. e. “ con- 
fessing.” Joanna, “ the Lord, his grace,” or “ the gracious 


VER. 23-—38. ST. LUKE, 137 


Lord.” Resa, “ merciful.” Zorobabel, “ chief or master of 
Babylon.”  Salathiel, “God my petition.” Neri, “ my 
lanthern.” Melchi, “my kingdom.” Addi, “ strong or 
violent.” Cosam, “divining.” Her, “watching, or watch, or 
of skins.” Who was the son of Jesus,i.e.“ Saviour.” Eliezer, 
1. e. “ God my helper.” Joarim, i. e. “ God exalting, or, is 
exalting.” Matthat, as above. Levi,asabove. Simeon,i.e. 
‘* He has heard the sadness, or the sign.” Juda, as above. 
Joseph, as above. Jonah, a dove, or wailing. Eliachim, i.e. 
‘¢ the resurrection of God.” Melchi,i.e. “his king.” Menan, 
i. e. “my bowels.” Mattathias, i. e. “ gift.” Nathan, 
i.e. “ He gave, or, of giving.” AMBROSE; But by Nathan 
we perceive expressed the dignity of Prophecy, that as 
Christ Jesus alone fulfilled all things, in each of His ancestors 
different kinds of virtue might precede Him. It follows, Who 
was the son of David. OricEN; The Lord descending into 
the world took upon Him the person of all sinners, and was 
willing to be born of the stock of Solomon, (as Matthew 
relates,) whose sins have been written down, and of the rest, 
many of whom did evil in the sight of God. But when He 
ascended, and is described as being born a second time in 
baptism, (as Luke relates,) He is not born through Salomon, 
but Nathan, who reproves the father for the death of Uriah, 
and the birth of Solomon. AvG. But it must be confessed that Aug. 
a prophet of this same name reproves David, that he might; aeoa 
be thought to be the same man, whereas he was different. 

Gree. Naz. From David upwards according to each Evan- Greg. 
gelist there is an unbroken line of descent; as it follows, Who" 
was the son of Jesse. Gtoss. David is interpreted, * with Gloss. 
a mighty arm, strong in fight.” Obzth,i. e. “slavery.” Booz, an au: 
i. e. “strong.” Salmon, i. e. “ capable of feeling, or peace- 
making.” Naasson, i. e. “‘ augury, or belonging to serpents.” 
Aminadab, “the people being willing.” Aram, i. e. 

*‘ upright, or lofty.” Hsrom, i. e. “an arrow.” Phares, 
i. e. “ division.” Judah, i. e. “ confessing.” Who was the 
son of Jacob, i. e. “ supplanted.” Tsaac, i. e. “ laughing 
or joy.” Abraham, i. e. “ the father of many nations, or 
the people.” 
Curys. Matthew, who wrote as for the Jews, had no chy 


Hom. in 


further object than to shew that Christ proceeded from Mate 1. 


138 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. ILI. 


Abraham and David, for this was most grateful to the 
Jews. Luke however, as speaking to all men in common, 
carried his account beyond as far even as Adam. Hence 
Gloss. it follows, Who was the son of Thara. Gtoss. Which 
ubi sup. i interpreted, “finding out,” or “ wickedness.” Nachor, 
i. e. “ the light rested.” Sarug, i. e. “ correction,” or 
“ holding the reins,” or “ perfection.” Ragan, i.e. “ sick,”’ 
or “ feeding.” Phares, i. e. “ dividing,” or “ divided.” 
Heber, i. e. “ passing over.” Sala, i. e. “ taking away.” 
Canaan, i. e. “ lamentation,” or “ their possession.” 
BEDE; The name and generation of Cainan, according to 
dieram the Hebrew reading, is found neither in Genesis, nor in the 
verliz, Chronicles, but Arphaxad is stated to have begot Sala 
his son, without any one intervening. Know then that 
Luke borrowed this generation from the Septuagint, where it 
is written, that Arphaxad at a hundred and thirty-five years 
old begot Cainan, but he at a hundred and thirty years 
begot Sala. It follows, Who was the son of Arphaxad. 
Gloss, GLoss. i. e. “healing the laying waste.” Sem, i. e. “a 
ubi suP- name,” or being “ named.” Who was the son of Noe, i. e. 
“ rest.” 

AMBROSE; The mention of just Noah ought not to be 
omitted among our Lord’s generations, that as our Lord 
was born the builder of His Church, He might seem to have 
sent Noah beforehand, the author of His race, who had before 
founded the Church under the type of an ark. Who was the 

Gloss, son of Lamech. Goss. i.e. “ humility, or striking, or struck, 
ubi SUP- or humble.” Who was the son of Mathusalem, i. e. “ the 
sending forth of death,” or “ he died,” also “he asked.” 

AMBROSE; His years are numbered beyond the deluge, 
that since Christ is the only one whose life experiences no 
age, in His ancestors also He might seem to have felt not 
the deluge. Who was the son of Enoch. And here is a 
manifest declaration of our Lord’s piety and divinity, since 
our Lord neither experienced death, and returned to heaven, 
the founder of whose race was taken up into heaven. Whence 
it is plain that Christ could not die, but was willing that His 
death should profit us. And Enoch indeed was taken, that 
his heart might not change by wickedness, but the Lord, 
whom the wickedness of the world could not change, returned 


VER. 23—38. ST. LUKE. 139 


to that place whence He had come by the greatness of His own 
nature. BEpDE; But rightly rising up from the baptized Son 
of God to God the Father, he places Enoch in the seventy- 
seventh step, who, having put off death, was translated 
unto Paradise, that he might signify that those, who by the 
grace of adoption of sons are born again of water and the 
Holy Spirit, are in the mean time (after the dissolution of the 
body) to be received into eternal rest, for the number seventy, 
because of the seventh of the sabbath, signifies the rest of those 
who, the grace of God assisting them, have fulfilled the deca- 
logue of the law. GLoss; Enoch is interpreted “ dedication.” 
Jared, 1. e. descending or “ holding together.” Malaleleel, 
1. e. “the praised of God,” or “ praising God.” Cainan,as 
above. Enos, i.e. “ man,” or “ despairing,” or“ violent.” Seth, 
1. e. “ placing,” “ settling,” “he hath placed.” Seth, the last 
son of Adam, is not omitted, that as there were two gene- 
rations of people, it might be signified under a figure that 
Christ was to be reckoned rather in the last than the first. 

It follows, Who was the son of Adam. Gtoss. Which is Gloss. 
“ man,” or “of the earth,” or “needy.” Who was the son™! *?- 
of God. AMBROosE; What could better agree than that 
the holy generation should commence from the Son of 
God, and be carried up even to the Son of God; and 
that he who was created should precede in a figure, in order 
that he who was born might follow in substance, so that he 
who was made after the image of God might go before, for 
whose sake the image of God was to descend. For Luke 
thought that the origin of Christ should be referred to God, 
because God is the true progenitor of Christ, or the Father 
according to the true birth, or the Author of the mystical 
gift according to baptism and regeneration, and therefore he 
did not from the first begin to describe His generation, but not 
till after he had unfolded His baptism, that both by nature 
and by grace he might declare Him to be the Son of God. 
But what more evident sign of His divine generation than 
that when about to speak of it St. Luke introduces first the 
Father, saying, Thou art my beloved Son ? 

Avuc. He sufficiently declared by this that he called Aug. 


; Con. 
not Joseph the son of Eli because he was begolten by Ev. lib. 
li, c. 3, 


140 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. III. 


him, but rather because he was adopted by him, for he has 
called also Adam himself son, since though made by God, 
yet by grace (which he forfeited by sin) he was placed asa 
son in paradise. THEOPHYL. For this reason he closes the 
generations in God, that we may learn that those fathers who 
intervene, Christ will raise up to God, and make them sons 
of God, and that it might be believed also that the birth 
of Christ was without seed; as if he said, If thou believest 
not that the second Adam was made without seed, you must 
come to the first Adam, and you will find that he was made 
Aug- by God without seed. Auc. Matthew indeed wished to 
ap 4. set forth God descending to our mortality; accordingly at 
the beginning of the Gospel he recounted the generations 
from Abraham to the birth of Christ in a descending scale. 
But Luke, not at the beginning, but after the baptism of 
Christ, relates the generation not descending but ascending, 
as if marking out rather the high priest in the expiation of 
sins, of whom John bore testimony, saying, Behold, who taketh 
away the sins of the world. But by ascending he comes to 
God, to whom we are reconciled, being cleansed and ex- 
piated. AMBROSE; Nor do the Evangelists seem so to differ 
who have followed the old order, nor can you wonder if 
from Abraham down to Christ there are more successions 
according to Luke, fewer according to Matthew, since you 
must admit the line to have been traced through different 
persons. But it might be that some men have passed a very 
long life, but the men of the next generation have died at 
an early age, since we see how many old men live to see 
their grandchildren, while others depart as soon as they 
Aug. have sons born to them. Aue. But most fitly with regard 
Ev. “it, to our baptized Lord does Luke reckon the generations 
ii. qu.6. through seventy-seven persons. For both the ascent to God 
is expressed, to whom we are reconciled by the abolition of 
sins, and by baptism is brought to man the remission of all 
his sins, which are signified by that number. For eleven 
times seven are seventy-seven. But by the tenth number is 
meant perfect happiness. Hence it is plain that the going 
beyond the tenth marks the sin of one through pride covet- 
ing to have more. But this is said to be seven times to 


™. 


VER. 23—38. ST. LUKE. 141 


signify that the transgression was caused by the moving of 
man. For by the third number the immortal part of man is 
represented, but by the fourth the body. But motion is not 
expressed in numbers, as when we say, one, two, three; but 
when we say, once, twice, thrice. And so by seven times 
eleven, is signified a transgression wrought by man’s action. 


Gen. 6, 
3. Vulg. 


CHAP. IV. 


1. And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned 
from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the 
wilderness, 

2. Being forty days tempted of the devil. And in 
those days he did eat nothing: and when they were 
ended, he afterward hungered. 

3. And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son 
of God, command this stone that it be made bread. 

4. And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, 
That man shall not live by bread alone, but by every 
word of God. 


THEOPHYL. Christ is tempted after His baptism, shewing 
us that after we are baptized, temptations await us. Hence 
itis said, But Jesus being full of the Holy Spirit, &c. Cyr. 
God said in times past, My Spirit shall not always abide 
in men, for that they are flesh. But now that we have 
been enriched with the gift of regeneration by water and the 
Spirit, we are become partakers of the Divine nature by par- 
ticipation of the Holy Spirit. But the first-bom among 
many brethren first received the Spirit, who Himself also is 
the giver of the Spirit, that we through Him wight also 
receive the grace of the Holy Spirit. Orraen; When there- 
fore you read that Jesus was full of the Holy Spirit, and 
it is written in the Acts concerning the Apostles, that they 
were filled with the Holy Spirit, you must not suppose that 
the Apostles were equal to the Saviour. For as if you 
should say, These vessels are full of wine or oil, you would 
not thereby affirm them to be equally full, so Jesus 


7 


o. 


Se 


VER, 1—4. GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 143 


and Paul were full of the Holy Spirit, but Paul’s vessel. 
was far less than that of Jesus, and yet each was filled ac- 
cording to its own measure. Having then received baptism, 
the Saviour, being full of the Holy Spirit, which came upon 
Him from heaven in the form of a dove, was led by the 
Spirit, because, as many as are led by the Spirit, they are Rom. 8, 
the sons of God, but He was above all, especially the Son of * 
God. BerEpr; That there might be no doubt by what Spirit 
He was led, while the other Evangelists say, into the wilder- 
mess, Luke has purposely added, And he was led by the 
Spirtt into the wilderness for forty days. That no unclean 
spirit should be thought to have prevailed against Him, who 
being full of the Holy Spirit did whatever He wished. 
GREEK Ex. But if we order our lives according to our own Severus. 
will, how was He led about unwillingly: Those words 
then, He was led by the Spirit, have some meaning of this 
kind: He led of His own accord that kind of life, that He 
might present an opportunity to the tempter. Basi_; For 
not by word provoking the enemy, but by His actions rousing 
him, He seeks the wilderness. For the devil delights in 
the wilderness, he is not wont to go into the cities, the 
harmony of the citizens troubles him. 

AMBROSE; He was led therefore into the wilderness, to the 
intent that He might provoke the devil, for if the one had 
not contended, the other it seems had not conquered. Ina 
mystery, it was to deliver that Adam from exile who was cast 
out of Paradise into the wilderness. By way of example, it 
was to shew us that the devil envies us, whenever we strive 
after better things; and that then we must use caution, 
lest the weakness of our minds should lose us the grace of 
the mystery. Hence it follows: And he was tempted of the 
devil. . CyriL; Behold, He is among the wrestlers, who as 
God awards the prizes. He is among the crowned, who 
crowns the heads of the saints. GREe. Our enemy was Greg, 
however unable to shake the purpose of the Mediator between ,, ae 
God and men. For He condescended to be tempted out- J°> 2. 
wardly, yet so that His soul inwardly, resting in its divinity, 
remained unshaken. ORrIGEN; But Jesus is tempted by the 
devil forty days, and what the temptations were we know not. 
They were perhaps omitted, as being greater than could be 


Greg. 
Orat.40. 


Aug. 

de Con. 
Ev. lib. 
ii, ec. 4. 


144 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


committed to writing. BasiL; Or, the Lord remained for 
forty days untempted, for the devil knew that He fasted, 
yet hungered not, and dared not therefore approach Him. 
Hence it follows: And he eat nothing in those days. He 
fasted indeed, to shew that He who would gird Himself for 
struggles against temptation must be temperate and 
sober. AMBROSE; There are three things which united 
together conduce to the salvation of man; The Sacrament, 
The Wilderness, Fasting. No one who has not rightly con- 
tended receives a crown, but no one is admitted to the 
contest of virtue, except first being washed from the stains of 
all his sins, he is consecrated with the gift of heavenly grace. 
Grec. Naz. He fasted in truth forty days, eating nothing. 
(For He was God.) But we regulate our fasting according 
to our strength, although the zeal of some persuades them to 
fast beyond what they are able. BasiL; But we must not how- 


__ ever so use the flesh, that through want of food our strength 


should waste away, nor that by excess of mortification our 
understandings wax dull and heavy. Our Lord therefore once 
performed this work, but during this whole succeeding time 
He governed His body with due order, and so in like manner 


. did Moses and Elias. Curys. But very wisely, He exceeded 


not their number of days, lest indeed He should be thought 
to have come in appearance only, and not to have really 
received the flesh, or lest the flesh should seem to be some- 
thing beyond human nature. 

AMBROSE ; But mark the mystical number of days. For 
you remember that for forty days the waters of the deep 
were poured forth, and by sanctifying a fast of that 
number of days, He brings before us the returning mercies of 
a calmer sky. By a fast of so many days also, Moses earned 
for himself the understanding of the law. Our fathers being 
for so many days settled in the wilderness, obtained the food 
of Angels. Aue. Now that number is a sacrament of our time 
and labour, in which under Christ’s discipline we contend 
against the devil, for it signifies our temporal life. For 
the periods of years run in courses of four, but forty con- 
tains four tens. Again, those ten are completed by the 
number one successively advancing on to four more. This 
plainly shews that the fast of forty days, i. e. the humiliation 


VER. 1—4. ST. LUKE. 145 


of the soul, the Law and the Prophets have consecrated 
by Moses and Elias, the Gospel by the fast of our Lord 
Himself. 


Basit; But because not to suffer hunger is above the Basil. 


nature of man, our Lord took upon Himself the feeling of 
hunger, and submitted Himself as it pleased Him to human 
nature, both to do and to suffer those things which were His 
own. Hence it follows: And those days being ended, he was 
a hungered. Not forced to that necessity which overpowers 
nature, but as if provoking the devil to the conflict. For 
the devil, knowing that wherever hunger is there is 
weakness, sets about to tempt Him, and as the deviser 
or inventer of temptations, Christ permitting him tries 
to persuade Him to satisfy His appetite with the stones. 
As it follows; But the devil said unto him, If thou art 
the Son of God, command these stones that they be made 
bread. AMBROSE; There are three especial weapons 
which we are taught the devil is wont to arm himself 
with, that he may wound the soul of man. One is of the 
appetite, another of boasting, the third ambition. He began 
with that wherewith he had already conquered, namely, 
Adam. Let us then beware of the appetite, let us beware of 
luxury, for it is a weapon of the devil. But what mean his 
words, If thou art the Son of God, unless he had known 
that the Son would come, but supposed Him not to have come 
from the weakness of His body. He first endeavours to find 
Him out, then to tempt Him. He professes to trust Him as 
God, then tries to deceive Him as man. ORIGEN; When 
a father is asked by his son for bread, he does not give 
him a stone for bread, but the devil like a crafty and deceitful 


ubi sup. 


foe gives stones for bread. Basit; He tried to persuade Basil. 
Christ to satisfy His appetite with stones, i.e. to shift his ¥>! sup. 


desire from the natural food to that which was beyond nature 
or unnatural. ORIGEN; | suppose also that even now at this 
very time the devil shews a stone to men that he may tempt 
them to speak, saying to them, Command this stone to be made 
bread. If thou seest the heretics devouring their lying 
doctrines as if they were bread, know that their teaching is 
a stone which the devil shews them. 


BasiL; But Christ while He vanquishes temptation, ba- Basil. 


VOL. III. L 


ubi sup. 


146 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


nishes not hunger from our nature, as though that were the 
cause of evils, (which is rather the preservative of life, but con- 
fining nature within its proper bounds, shews of what kind its 
nourishment is, as follows; And Jesus answered him, saying, 
It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone. THEOPHYL. 
As if He said, Not by bread alone is human nature sustained, 
but the word of God is sufficient to support the whole nature 
of man. Such was the food of the Israelites when they 
Exod. gathered manna during the space of forty years, and when 
Numb, they delighted in the taking of quails. By the Divine counsel 
1 Kings Elias had the crows to entertain him; Elisha fed his com- 
17,6. panions on the herbs of the field. Cyrit; Or, our earthly 
ara body is nourished by earthly food, but the reasonable soul 
is strengthened by the Divine Word, to the right ordering 
Greg. of the spirit. Grec. Naz. For the body nourishes not 
Mor. x,OUr immaterial nature. Grec. Nyss. Virtue then is not 
Greg z sustained by bread, nor by flesh does the soul keep itself in 
Eccles. health and vigour, but by other banquets than these is the 
Hom. 6. heavenly life fostered, and increased. The nourishment of 
the good man is chastity, his bread, wisdom, his herbs, justice, 
sbggeeim his drink, freedom from passion, his delight, to be rightly wise. 
aoc °* AMBROSE; You sec then what kind of arms He uses to defend 
supeorsss : es 2 
man against the assaults of spiritual wickedness, and the 
allurements of the appetite. He does not exert His power 
as God, (for how had that profited me,) but as man He 
summons to Himself a common aid, that while intent upon 
the food of divine reading He may neglect the hunger of 
the body, and gain the nourishment of the word. For he who 
seeks after the word cannot feel the want of earthly bread; 
for divine things doubtless make up for the loss of human. 
At the same time by saying, Man lives not by bread alone, 
He shews that man was tempted, that is, our flesh which He 
assumed, not His own divinity. 


5. And the devil, taking him up into a high moun- 
tain, shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world 
in a moment of time. 

6. And the devil said unto him, All this power 
will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that is 


VER. 5—8. ST. LUKE. | 147 


delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give — 
it. 
7. If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be 
thine. | 

8. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get 
thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt 
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou 
serve. 


THEOPHYL. The enemy had first assailed Christ by the 
temptation of the appetite, as also he did Adam. He next 
tempts Him with the desire of gain or covetousness, shewing 
Him all the kingdoms of the world. Hence it follows, And 
the devil taking him up. Grec. What marvel that He permitted Greg. 
Himself to be led by the devil into the mountains, who even aes 
endured to be crucified in His own body? THEoPHYL. But 
how did the devil shew Him all the kingdoms of the world? 

Some say that he presented them to Him in imagination, 

but I hold that he brought them before Him in visible form 

and appearance. Tutus Bos. Or, the devil described the 
world in language, and as he thought brought it vividly before 

our Lord’s mind as though it were acertain house. AMBROSE; 

Truly in a moment of time, the kingdoms of this world are 
described. For here itis not so much the rapid glance of sight 
which is signified as is declared the frailty of mortal power. 

For in a moment all this passes by, and oftentimes the 

glory of this world has vanished before it has arrived. It follows, 

And he said unto him, I will give thee all this power. 
Titus; He lied in two respects. For he neither had to give, Titus. 
nor could he give that which he had not; he gains possession °™ °°° 
of nothing, but is an enemy reduced to fight. AMBROSE; For Rom. 
it is elsewhere said, that all power is from God. Therefore !* !- 
from God’s hands comes the disposal of power, the lust of ° 
power is from the evil one; power is not itself evil, but he 
who evilly uses it. What then; is it good to exercise 
power, to desire honour? Good if it is bestowed upon us, 
not if it is seized. We must distinguish however in this 
good itself. There is one good use of the world, another of 

L2 


148 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. 1¥V 


perfect virtue. It is good to seek God; it is a good thing 
that the desire of becoming acquainted with God should be 
hindered by no worldly business. But if he who seeks God, is 
from the weakness of the flesh, and the narrowness of his mind, 
often tempted, how much more is he exposed who seeks the 
world? Weare taught then to despise ambition, because it is 
subject to the power of the devil. But honourabroad is followed 
by danger at home, and in order to rule others a man is first 
their servant, and prostrates himself in obedience that he may 
be rewarded with honours, and the higher he aspires the lower 
he bends with feigned humility; whence he adds, If thou wilt 
Jall down and worship me. Cyrit; And dost thou, whose lot 
is the unquenchable fire, promise to the Lord of all that 
which is His own? Didst thou think to have Him for thy 
worshipper, from dread of whom the whole creation trembles? 
ORIGEN ; Or, to view the whole in another light. Two kings 
are earnestly contending for a kingdom; The king of sin who 
reigneth over sinners, that is, the devil; The king of righte- 
ousness who ruleth the righteous, that is, Christ. The devil, 
knowing that Christ had come to take away his kingdom, shews 
Him all the kingdoms of the world; not the kingdoms of the 
Persians and of the Medes, but his own kingdom whereby- 
he reigned in the world, whereby some are under the dominion 
of fornication, others of covetousness. And he shews Him 
them in a moment of time, that is, in the present course 
of time, which is but a moment in comparison of eternity. 
For the Saviour needed not to be shewn for any longer 
time the affairs of this world, but as soon as He turned His 
eyes to look, He beheld sins reigning, and men made 
slaves to vice. The devil therefore says unto Him, Camest 
Thou to contend with me for dominion? Worship me, and 
behold I give Thee the kingdom I hold. Now the Lord 
would indeed reign, but being Righteousness itself, would 
reign without sin; and would have all nations subject to Him, 
that they might obey the truth, but would not so reign over 
others as that He Himself should be subject to the devil. 
Hence it follows, And Jesus answering said unto him, It is 
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God. BrprE; The 
devil saying to our Saviour, Jf thou wilt fall down and wor- 
ship me, receives answer that he himself ought rather to 


VER. 9—18. ST. LUKE. 149 


worship Christ as his Lord and God. CyriL; But how comes Cyril. 
it that the Son (if as the heretics say a created being) eos 
is worshipped? What charge can be brought against those 
who served the creature and not the Creator, if the Son (ac- 
cording to them a created being) we are to worship as God? 
ORIGEN; Or else, All these, he says, 1 would have subject 
to me, that they might worship the Lord God, and serve Him 
alone. But dost thou wish sin to begin from Me, which I came 
hither to destroy? Cyrit; This command touched him to 
the quick; for before Christ’s coming he was every where 
worshipped. But the law of God casting him down from his 
usurped dominion, establishes the worship of Him alone who is 
really God. Brpre; But some one may ask how this in- 
junction agrees with the word of the Apostle, which 
says, Beloved, serve one another. In the Greek, dovAsia Gal. 5, 
signifies a common service, (i.e. given either to God or '® 
iman,) according to which we are bid to serve one another ; 

but Aatgsla is the service due to the worship of the Deity, 

with which we are bid to serve God alone. 


9. And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him 
on a pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, If 
thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from 
hence: 

10. For it is written, He shall give his angels 
charge over thee, to keep thee: 

11. And in their hands they shall bear thee up, 
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. 

12. And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, 
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. 

13. And when the devil had ended all the tempt- 
ation, he departed from him for a season. 


AMBROSE; The next weapon he uses is that of boasting, 
which always causes the offender to fall down; for they who 
love to boast of the glory of their virtue descend from the 


Athan. 
non oce. 


150 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV 


stand and vantage ground of their good deeds. Hence it is 
said, And he led him to Jerusalem. 

OrIcEN; He followed evidently as a wrestler, pladly 
setting out to meet the temptation, and saying, as it were, 
Lead me where you will, and you will find me the stronger 
in every thing. AMBROSE; It is the fate of boasting, that 
while a man thinks he is climbing higher, he is by his pre- 
tension to lofty deeds brought low. Hence it follows, And 
he said unto him, If thou art the Son of God, throw thyself 
down. ATHAN. The devil entered not into a contest with 
God, (for he durst not, and therefore said, If thou art the 
Son of God,) but he contended with man whom once he had 


power to deceive. AMBROSE; That is truly the devil’s 


language, which seeks to cast down the soul of man from the 
high ground of its good deeds, while he shews at the same 
time both his weakness and malice, for he can injure no one 
that does not first cast himself down. For he who forsaking 
heavenly things pursues earthly, rushes as it were wilfully 
down the self-sought precipice of a falling life. As soon 
then as the devil perceived his dart blunted, he who had 
subdued all men to his own power, began to think he had 
to deal with more than man. But Satan transforms himself 
into an angel of light, and often from the Holy Scriptures 
weaves his mesh for the faithful: hence it follows, Jt is 
writien, He shall give, gc. ORicEN; Whence knowest 
thou, Satan, that those things are written? Hast thou read the 
Prophets, or the oracles of God? Thou hast read them 
indeed, but not that thyself mightest be the better for the 
reading, but that from the mere letter thou mightest slay them 
who are friends to the letter. Thou knowest that if thou wert 
to speak from His other books, thou wouldest not deceive. 
AMBROSE; Let not the heretic entrap thee by bringing ex- 
amples from the Scriptures. The devil makes use of the testi- 
mony of the Scriptures not to teach but to deceive. ORIGEN; 
But mark how wily he is even in this testimony. For he would 
fain throw a slur upon the glory of the Saviour, as though He 
needed the assistance of angels, and would stumble were He not 
supported by their hands. But this was said not of Christ, 
but of the saints generally ; He needs not the aid of angels, 
Who is greater than angels. But let this teach thee, Satan, 


VER. 9—13. ST. LUKE. 151 


that the angels would stumble did not God sustain them ; 
and thou stumblest, because thou refusest to believe in Jesus 
Christ the Son of God. But why art thou silent as to what 
follows, Thou shalt walk upon the asp and the basilisk, Be 91, 
except that thou art the basilisk, thou art the dragon and — 
the lion? AmBRosE; But the Lord, to prevent the thought 
that those things which had been prophesied of Him were 
fulfilled according to the devil’s will, and not by the 
authority of His own divine power, again so foils his 
cunning, that he who had alleged the testimony of Scripture, 
should by Scripture himself be overthrown. Hence it follows, 
And Jesus answering said, It is said, Thou shalt not tempt 

the Lord thy God. Curys. For it is of the devil to cast 
one’s self into dangers, and try whether God will rescue us. 
CyriL; God gives not help to those who tempt Him, but to 
those who believe on Him. Christ therefore did not shew 

His miracles to them that tempted Him, but said to them, 

An evil generation seeketh a sign, and no sign shall be given Mat. 12, 
to them. Curys. But mark how the Lord, instead of being *” 
troubled, condescends to dispute from the Scriptures with the 
wicked one, that thou, as far as thou art able, mightest be- 
come hke Christ. The devil knew the arms of Christ, 
beneath which he sunk. Christ took him captive by meekness, 

He overcame him by humility. Do thou also, when thou seest 

a man who has become a devil coming to meet thee, subdue 
him in like manner. Teach thy soul to conform its words to 
those of Christ. For as a Roman judge, who on the bench 
refuses to hear the reply of one who knows not how to speak 

as he does; so also Christ, except thou speakest after His 
manner, will neither hear thee nor protect thee. Greg. Nyss. Greg. 
In lawful contests the battle is terminated either when the”” ‘"" 
adversary surrenders of his own accord to the conqueror, or 

is defeated in three falls, according to the rules of the art of 
fighting. Hence it follows, And all the tempiation being 
completed, §c. AMBROSE; He would not have said that all 

the temptation was ended, had there not been in the three 
temptations which have been described the materials for 
every crime ; for the causes of temptations are the causes of 
desire, namely, the delight of the flesh, the pomp of vain-glory, 


P ; Athan. 
greediness of power. ATHAN. The enemy came to Him as jon oce. 


Max. 
lib. ad. 
piet. ex. 
12, 


Aug. de 
con. Ev. 
lib. ii. 

c. 6. 


Max. 
ut sup. 


152 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


man, but not finding in Him the marks of his ancient seed, 
he departed. AMBROSE; You see then that the devil is not 
obstinate on the field, is wont to give way to true virtue ; 
and if he ceases not to hate, he yet dreads to advance, for so he 
escapes a more frequent defeat. As soon then as he heard 
the name of God, he retired (it is said) for a season, for after- 
wards he comes not to tempt, but to fight openly. THEOPHYL. 
Or, having tempted Him in the desert with pleasure, he 
retires from Him until the crucifixion, when he was about 
to tempt Him with sorrow. Maximus; Or the devil had 
prompted Christ in the desert to prefer the things of the 
world to the love of God. The Lord commanded him 
to leave Him, (which itself was a mark of Divine love.) It 
was afterwards then enough to make Christ appear the false 
advocate of love to His neighbours, and therefore while He 
was teaching the paths of life, the devil stirred up the Gentiles 
and Pharisees to lay traps for Him that He might be brought to 
hate them. But the Lord, from the feeling of love which He 
had towards them, exhorted, reproved, ceased not to bestow 
mercy upon them. 

AuG. The whole of this narrative Matthew relates in a 
similar manner, but not in the same order. It is uncertain 
therefore which took place first, whether the kingdoms of 
the earth were first shewn unto Him, and He was afterwards 
taken up to the pinnacle of the temple; or whether this came 
first, and the other afterwards. It matters little however 
which, as long as it is clear that they all took place. 

Maximus; But the reason why one Evangelist places 
this event first, and another that, is because vain-glory and 
covetousness give birth in turn to one another. ORIGEN; 
But John, who had commenced his Gospel from God, saying, 
In the beginning was the Word, did not describe the tempt- 
ation of the Lord, because God can not be tempted, of whom 
he wrote. But because in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke 
the human generations are given, and in Mark it is man who 
is tempted, therefore Matthew, Luke, and Mark have de- 
scribed the temptation of the Lord. 


14. And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit 


VER. 14—-21. ST. LUKE. 153 


into Galilee: and there went out a fame of him 
through all the region round about. 

15. And he taught in their synagogues, being 
glorified of all. 

16. And he came to Nazareth, where he had been 
brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into 
the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for 
to read. 

17. And there was delivered unto him the book 
of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened 
the book, he found the place where it was written, 

18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he 
hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor: 
he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to 
preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering 
of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are 
bruised, 

19. To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. 

20. And he closed the book, and he gave it again 
to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all 
them that were in the synagogue were fastened on 
him. 

21. And he began to say unto them, This day is 
this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. 


OriGEN; The Lord having overcome the tempter, power 
was added to Him, i. e. as far as regards the manifestation of 
it. Hence it is said, And Jesus returned in the power of 
the Spirit. BrepE; By the power of the Spirit he means 
shewing forth of miracles. Cyrit; Now He performed 
miracles not from any external power, and from having as it 
were the acquired grace of the Holy Spirit, as other saints, 
but rather as being by nature the Son of God, and partaking of 
all things which are the Father’s, He exercises as by His own 
power and operation that grace which is of the Holy Spirit. 
But it was right that from that time He should become 
known, and thatthe mystery of His humanity should shine forth 


134 GO8PEL ACCORDING TO ' CHAP. IV. 


among those who were of the seed of Israel. It therefore 
follows, And his fame went out. BEDE; And because 
wisdom belongs to teaching, but power to works, both are 
joined here, as it follows, And he taught tn the synagogue. 
Synagogue, which is a Greek word, is rendered in Latin 
congregatio. By this name then the Jews were accustomed 
to call not only the gathering together of people, but also 
the house where they met together to hear the word of 
God; as we call by the name of Church, both the place and 
the company of the faithful. But there is this difference 
between the synagogue which is called congregation, and the 
Church which is interpreted convocution, that flocks and 
cattle, and any thing else can be gathered together in one, 
but only rational beings can be called together. Accordingly 
the Apostolical doctors thought right to call a people 
which was distinguished by the superior dignity of a 
new grace rather by the name of Church, than Synagogue. 
But rightly also was the fact of His being magnified by 
those present proved, by actual evidence of word and deed, 
as it follows, And he was magnified by all. Oricen; But 
you must not think that they only were happy, and that 
you are deprived of Christ’s teaching. For now also 
throughout the world He teaches through His instruments, 
and is now more glorified by all men, than at that time | 
when those only in one province were gathered together. 
CyriL; He communicates the knowledge of Himself to 
those among whom He was brought up according to the 
flesh. As it follows, And he came to Nazareth. THEOPHYL. 
That He might teach us to benefit and instruct first our 
brethren, then to extend our kindness to the rest of our friends. 
Bene; They flocked together on the Sabbath day in the 
synagogues, that, resting from all worldly occupations, they 
might set themselves down with a quiet mind to meditate on 
the precepts of the Law. Hence it follows, And he entered 
as was his custom on the Sabbath day into the synagogue. 
AMBROSE; The Lord in every thing so humbled Himself to 
obedience, that He did not despise even the office of a reader, 
as it follows, And he rose up to read, and there was delivered 
unto him the book, §c. He received the book indced, that He 
might shew Himself to be the same who spoke in the Prophets, 


VER. 14—2]. ST. LUKE. 155 


and that He might stop the blasphemies of the wicked, who 
say that there is one God of the Old Testament, another of 
the New; or who say that Christ had His beginning from a 
virgin. For how did He begin from a virgin, who spoke 
before that virgin was? 

ORIGEN; He opens not the book by chance, and finds 
a chapter containing a prophecy of Himself, but by the 
providence of God. Hence it follows, And when he had 1s. 61, 
opened the book, he found the place, &§c. ATHAN. He ee 
says this to explain to us the cause of the revelation made oes 2. 
to the world, and of His taking upon Him the human nature. eae 
For as the Son, though He is the giver of the Spirit, does 
not refuse to confess as man that by the Spirit He casts 
out devils, so, inasmuch as He was made man, He does not 
refuse to say, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me. 

CyriL; In like manner we confess Him to have been 
anointed, inasmuch as He took upon Him our flesh, as it 
follows, Because he hath anointed me. For the Divine 
nature is not anointed, but that which is cognate to us. So 
also when He says that He was sent, we must suppose Him 
speaking of His human nature. For it follows, He hath 
sent me to preach the gospel to the poor. AMBROSE; You 
see the Trinity coeternal and perfect. The Scripture speaks 
of Jesus as perfect God and perfect man. It speaks of the 
Father, and the Holy Spirit, who was shewn to be a cooperator, 
when in a bodily form as a dove He descended upon Christ. 
ORIGEN; By the poor He means the Gentile nations, for they 
were poor, possessing nothing at all, having neither God, 
nor Law, nor Prophets, nor justice, and the other virtues. 
AMBROSE; Or, He is anointed all over with spiritual oil, and 
heavenly virtue, that He might enrich the poverty of man’s 
condition with the everlasting treasure of His resurrection. 
BEDE; He is sent also to preach the Gospel to the poor, 
saying, Blessed are the poor, for yours is the kingdom of 
heaven. Cyrit; For perhaps to the poor in spirit He declares 
in these words, that among all the gifts which are obtained 
through Christ, upon them was bestowed a free gift. It 
follows, To heal the broken hearted. He calls those broken 
hearted, who are weak, of an infirm mind, and unable to 
resist the assaults of the passions, and to them He promises 


156 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. lV. 


Basil. a healing remedy. Basix; Or, He came to heal the broken 
non ee: hearted, i. e. to afford a remedy to those that have their 


heart broken by Satan through sin, because beyond all other 
things sin lays prostrate the human heart. BEDE; Or, because 


Ps. 51, it is written, 4 broken and a contrite heart God will not 


despise. He says therefore, that He is sent to heal the broken 


Ps. 147, hearted, as it is written, Who heals the broken hearted. 


Chrys 
in Ps. 


125. 


2 Cor. 
10, 5. 


2 Tim. 


3, 6. 


l 
5 


It follows, And to preach deliverance to the capiiwves. 


- Currys. The word captivity has many meanings. There is 


a good captivity, which St. Paul speaks of when he says, 
Bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of 
Christ. ‘There is a bad captivity also, of which it is said, 
Leading captive silly women laden with sins. There is a 
captivity present to the senses, that is by our bodily enemies. 
But the worst captivity is that of the mind, of which he here 
speaks. For sin exercises the worst of all tyrannies, command- 
ing to do evil, and destroying them that obey it. From this 
prison of the soul Christ lets us free. THEOPHYL. But these 
things may be understood also of the dead, who being taken 
captive have been loosed from the dominion of hell by the 
resurrection of Christ. It follows, And recovering of sight to 
the blind. CyxiL; For the darkness which the Devil has spread 
over the human heart, Christ the Sun of Righteousness has 


Thess. removed, making men, as the Apostle says, children not of 


,» 5. 


night and darkness, but of lightandthe day. For they who one 
time wandered have discovered the path of the righteous. It 
follows, To set at liberty them that are bruised. ORIGEN ; 
For what had been so shattered and dashed about as man, who 
was set at liberty by Jesus and healed? BEDE; Or, éo set at 
liberty them that are bruised; i. e. to relieve those who had. 
been heavy laden with the intolerable burden of the Law. 
ORIGEN; But all these things were mentioned first, in order 
that after the recovery of sight from blindness, after deliverance 
from captivity, after being healed of divers wounds, we might 
come to the acceptable year of the Lord. As it follows, To 
preach the acceptable year of the Lord. Some say that, accord- 
ing to the simple meaning of the word, the Saviour preached 
the Gospel throughout Judza in one year, and that this is what 
is meant by preaching the acceptable year of the Lord. Or, the 
acceptable year of the Lord is the whole time of the Church, 


VER. 14—21. ST. LUKE. 157 


during which while present in the body, it is absent from 
the Lord. BeEprE; For not only was that year acceptable 
in which our Lord preached, but that also in which the 
Apostle preaches, saying, Behold, now is the accepted time. 2 Cor. 
After the acceptable year of the Lord, he adds, And the ae 
day of retribution’; that is, the final retribution, when the 
Lord shall give to every one according to his work. AMBROSE; 
Or, by the acceptable year of the Lord, he means this 
day extended through endless ages, which knows of no return 
to a world of labour, and grants to men everlasting reward 
and rest. It follows, And he closed the book, and he gave it 
again. Beve; He read the book to those who were present 
to hear Him, but having read it, He returned it to the minister; 
for while He was in the world He spoke openly, teaching in the 
synagogues and in the temple; but about to return to heaven, 
He committed the office of preaching the Gospel to those who 
from the beginning were eye-witnesses and ministers of the 
word. He read standing, because while explaining those Scrip- 
tures which were written of Him, He condescended to work in 
the flesh; but having returned the book, He sits down, because 
Herestored Himselfto the throne of heavenly rest. For standing 
is the part of the workman, but sitting of one who is resting 
or judging. So also let the preacher of the word rise up and 
read and work and preach, and sit down, i. e. wait for the 
reward of rest. But He opens the book and reads, because 
sending the Spirit, He tanght His Church all truth; having 
shut the book, He returned it to the minister, because all 
things were not to be said unto all, but He committed the word 
to the teacher to be dispensed according to the capacity of the 
hearers. It follows, And the eyes of all in the synagogue were 
Jastened on him. ORicEN; And now also if we will, our eyes 
can look upon the Saviour. For when you direct your whole 
heart to wisdom, truth, and the contemplation of the only-be- 
gotten Son of God, your eyes behold Jesus. Cyrit; But then 
He turned the eyes of all men upon Him, wondering how He 
knew the writing which He had never learnt. But since it was 
the custom of the Jews to say that the prophecies spoken of 
Christ are completed either in certain of their chiefs, 1. e. their 


® These words are quoted from the the N.T. versions. 229°°. Arm. Ar. rom. 
LX X, and are to be found in several of Sax. Vulg. Ital. (exc. Cant.) Griesb. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
48. in 
Matt. 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


158 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


kings, or in some of their holy prophets, the Lord made this an- 
nouncement; as it follows, But he began to say unto them that 
this Scripture is fulfilled. Brpr; Because, in fact, as that 
Scripture had foretold, the Lord was both doing great things, 
and preaching greater. 


22. And all bare him witness, and wondered at 
the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. 
And they said, Is not this Joseph’s son ? 

23. And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto 
me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever 
we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in 
thy country. 

24. And he said, Verily I say unto you, No pro- 
phet is accepted in his own country. 

25. But I tell you of a truth, many widows were 
in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was 
shut up three years and six months, when great fa- 
mine was throughout all the land; 

26. But unto none of them was Elias sent, save 
unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was 
a widow. 

27. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of 
Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, 
saving Naaman the Syrian. 


Curys. When our Lord came to Nazareth, He refrains 
from miracles, lest He should provoke the people to 
greater malice. But He sets before them His teaching no 
less wonderful than His miracles. For there was a certain 
ineffable grace in our Saviour’s words which softened the 
hearts of the hearers. Hence it is said, And they all bare 
him witness. BrpE; They bare Him witness that it was 
truly He, as He had said, of whom the prophet had spoken. 
Curys. But foolish men though wondering at the power of 
His words little esteemed Him because of His reputed father. 
Hence it follows, And they said, Is not this the son of Joseph ? 


VER, 22—27. ST. LUKE. 159 


CrriL; But what prevents Him from filling men with awe, 
though He were the Son as was supposed of Joseph? Do 

you not see the divine miracles, Satan already prostrate, men 
released from their sickness? Crys. For though after along Chrys. 
time and when He had begun to shew forth His miracles, He"! ™?- 
came to them; they did not receive Him, but again were 
inflamed with envy. Hence it follows, And he said unto them, 

Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal 
thyself. CyriL; It wasacommon proverb among the Hebrews, 
invented as a reproach, for men used to cry out against in- 

firm physicians, Physician, heal thyself. Goss. It was as Gloss. 
if they said, We have heard that you performed many cures in %™™- 
Capernaum; cure also thyself, i.e. Do likewise in your own 
city, where you were nourished and brought up. Ave. But Ang. 
since St. Luke mentions that great things had been already done ah ib. 
by Him, which he knows he had not yet related, what is more ii. 42. 
evident than that he knowingly anticipated the relation of them. 

For he had not proceeded so far beyond our Lord’s baptism 

as that he should be supposed to have forgotten that he had 

not yet related any of those things which were done in Caper- ~ 
naum. AMBROSE; But the Saviour purposely excuses Him- 

self for not working miracles in His own country, that no one 
might suppose that love of country is a thing to be lightly 
esteemed by us. For it follows, But he says, Verily I say 

unto you, thatno prophetis acceptedinhisown country. CYRIL; 

Asif Hesays, You wish me to work many miracles among you, in 
whose country I have been brought up, but I am aware of a very 
common failing in the minds of many. Toa certain extent it 
always happens, that even the very best things are despised 
when they fall to a man’s lot, not scantily, but ever at 

his will. So it happens also with respect to men. For a 
friend who is ever at hand, does not meet with the respect 

due to him. BEpDE; Now that Christ is called a Prophet in 

the Scriptures, Moses bears witness, saying, God shall raise Deut. 
up a Prophet unto you from among your brethren. AMBROSE; ee 
But this is given for an example, that in vain can you expect 

the aid of Divine mercy, if you grudge to others the fruits of 
their virtue. The Lord despises the envious, and withdraws 

the miracles of His power from them that are jealous of 

His divine blessings in others. For our Lord’s Incarnation 


160 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


is an evidence of His divinity, and His invisible things are 
proved to us by those which are visible. See then what evils 
envy produces. For envy a country is deemed unworthy of 
the works of its citizen, which was worthy of the concep- 
tion of the Son of God. 

OriGEN; As far as Luke’s narrative is concerned, our Lord 
is not yet said to have worked any miracle in Capernaum. 
For before Ile came to Capernaum, He is said to have lived 
at Nazareth. I cannot but think therefore that in these words, 
“‘ whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum,” there lies 
a mystery concealed, and that Nazareth is a type of the Jews, 
Capernaum of the Gentiles. For the time will come when 
the people of Israel shall say, “ The things which thou hast 
shewn to the whole world, shew also to us.” Preach thy 
word to the people of Israel, that then at least, when the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles has entered, all Israel may be saved. 
Our Saviour seems to me to have well answered, No prophet 
ts accepted in his own country, but rather according to the 
type than the letter; though neither was Jeremiah accepted 
in Anathoth his country, nor the rest of the Prophets. But it 
seems rather to be meant that we should say, that the people 
of the circumcision were the countrymen of all the Prophets. 
And the Gentiles indeed accepted the prophecy of Jesus Christ, 
esteeming Moses and the Prophets who preached of Christ, far 
higher than they who would not from these receive Jesus. 

AMBROSE; By a very apt comparison the arrogance of 
envious citizens is put to shame, and our Lord’s conduct shewn 
to agree with the ancient Scriptures. For it follows, But I 
tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days 
of Elias: not that the days were his, but that he performed 
his works in them. Curys. He himself, an earthly angel, 
a heavenly man, who had neither house, nor food, nor 
clothing lke others, carries the keys of the heavens on 
his tongue. And this is what follows, When the heaven 
was Shut. But as soon as he had closed the heavens and 
and made the earth barren, hunger reigned and bodies wasted 
away, as it follows, when there was a famine through the land. 

Hom, 1, Bast; For when he beheld the great disgrace that arose 
i from universal plenty, he brought a famine that the people 


poe de might fast, by which he checked their sin which was exceed- 
ame 


VER. 22—27. ST. LUKE. 161 


ing great. But crows were made the ministers of food to the 
righteous, which are wont to steal the food of others. 

Curys. But when the stream was dried up by which the Chrys. 
cup of the righteous man was filled, God said, Go to Sarepta, Pett 
a city of Sidon; there I will command a widow woman to feed "'- 
you. Asit follows, But to none Qf them was Elias sent, save 
unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. 

And this was brought to pass by a particular appointment of 
God. For God made him go a long journey, as far as Sidon, 
in order that having seen the famine of the country he should 
ask for rain from the Lord. But there were many rich men 
at that time, but none of them did any thing like the widow. 
For in the respect shewn by the woman toward the prophet, 
consisted her riches not of lands, but of good will. AMBROSE; 
But he says in a mystery, “ In the days of Elias,” because 
Elias brought the day to them who saw in his works the 
light of spiritual grace, and so the heaven was opened to them 
that beheld the divine mystery, but was shut when there was 
famine, because there was no fruitfulness in acknowledging 
God. But in that widow to whom Elias was sent was pre- 
figured a type of the Church. OnriGEN; For when a famine 
came upon the people of Israel, 1. e. of hearing the word of 
God, a prophet came to a widow, of whom it is said, For the Isa. 54, 
desolate hath many more children than she which hath an a. 4, 
husband; and when he had come, he multiplies her bread and 27. 
her nourishment. BEDE; Sidonia signifies a vain pursuit, 
Sarepta fire, or scarcity of bread. By all which things the 
Gentiles are signified, who, given up to vain pursuits, (follow- 
ing gain and worldly business,) were suffering from the flames 
of fleshly lusts, and the want of spiritual bread, until Elias, 
(i.e. the word of prophecy,) now that the interpretation of the 
Scriptures had ceased because of the faithlessness of the 
Jews, came to the Church, that being received into the 
hearts of believers he might feed and refresh them. 

BasiL; Every widowed soul, bereft of virtue and Basil. 
divine knowledge, as soon as she receives the divine | a a 
word, knowing her own failings, learns to nourish it with 
the bread of virtue, and to water the teaching of virtue 
from the fountain of life. Oricen; He cites also another 
similar example, adding, And there were many lepers in 

VOL. III. M 


162 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


Israel at the time of Eliseus the Prophet, and none of them 
were cleansed but Naaman the Syrian, who indeed was not 
of Israel. AMBROSE ; Now in a mystery the people pollute the 
Church, that another people might succeed, gathered together 
from foreigners, leprous indeed at first before it is baptized 
in the mystical stream, but which after the sacrament of 
baptism, washed from the stains of body and soul, begins to 
be a virgin without spot or wrinkle. Bepre; For Naaman, 
which means beautiful, represents the Gentile people, who is 
ordered to be washed seven times, because that baptism 
saves which the seven-fold Spirit renews. His flesh after 
washing began to appear as a child’s, because grace like 
a mother begets all to one childhood, or because he is con- 

Isa.9,6.formed to Christ, of whom it is said, Unto us a Child is 
born. 


28. And all they in the synagogue, when they 
heard these things, were filled with wrath, 

29. And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, 
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their 
city was built, that they might cast him down head- 
long. 

30. But he passing through the midst of them 
went his way. 


CyriL; He convicted them of their evil intentions, and 
therefore they are enraged, and hence what follows, And all 
they in the synagogue when they heard these things were 
filled with wrath. Because He had said, This day is this 
prophecy fulfilled, they thought that He compared Himself 
to the prophets, and are therefore enraged, and expel Him 
out of their city, as it follows, And they rose up, and cast 
him out. 

AMBROSE; It can not be wondered at that they lost their 
salvation who cast the Saviour out of their city. But the 
Lord who taught His Apostles by the example of Himself 
to be all things to all men, neither repels the willing, nor 
chooses the unwilling; neither struggles against those who 
cast Him out, nor refuses to hear those who supplicate Him. 
But that conduct was the result of no slight enmity, which, 


VER. 81—37. ST. LUKE. 163 


forgetful of the feelings of fellow citizens, converts the causes 
of love into the bitterest hatred. For when the Lord Himself 
was extending His blessings among the people, they began 
to inflict injuries upon Him, as it follows, And they led him 
unto the brow Of the hill, that they might cast him down. 
BEDE; Worse are the Jewish disciples than their master the 
Devil. For he says, Cast thyself down; they actually at- 
tempt to cast Him down. But Jesus having suddenly changed 
His mind, or seized with astonishment, went away, since 
He still reserves for them a place of repentance. Hence it 
follows, He passing through the midst of them went his way. 
Curys. Herein He shews both His human nature and His Chrys. 
divine. To stand in the midst of those who were plotting jee 
against Him, and not be seized, betokened the loftiness of 
His divinity; but His departure declared the mystery of the 
dispensation, i. e. His incarnation. AMBROSE; At the same 
time we must understand that this bodily endurance was not 
necessary, but voluntary. When He wills, He is taken, when 
He wills, He escapes. For how could He be held by a few 
who was not held by a whole people? But He would have the 
impiety to be the deed of the many, in order that by a few 
indeed He might be afflicted, but might die for the whole 
world. Moreover, He had still rather heal the Jews than 
destroy them, that by the fruitless issue of their rage they 
might be dissuaded from wishing what they could not accom- 
plish. Berne; The hour of His Passion had not yet come, 
which was to be on the preparation of the Passover, nor had 
He yet come to the place of His Passion, which not at 
Nazareth, but at Jerusalem, was prefigured by the blood of 
the victims; nor had He chosen this kind of death, of whom 
it was prophesied that He should be crucified by the world. 


31. And came down to Capernaum, a city of 
Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days. 

32. And they were astonished at his doctrine: for 
his word was with power. 

33. And in the synagogue there was a man, which 
had a spirit of an unclean devil, and cried out with 


a loud voice, 
M 2 


164 GOSFEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV 


34. Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do 
with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to 
destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy 
One of God. 

35. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy 
peace, and come out of him. And when the devil 
had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him, 
and hurt him not. 

36. And they were all amazed, and spake among 
themselves, saying, What a word is this! for with 
authority and power he commandeth the unclean 
spirits, and they come out. 

37. And the fame of him went out into every 
place of the country round about. 


AMBROSE; Neither indignation at their treatment, nor 
displeasure at their wickedness, caused our Lord to aban- 
don Judea, but unmindful of His injuries, and remembering 
mercy, at one time by teaching, at another by healing, He 
softens the hearts of this unbelieving people, as it is said, 
And he went down to Capernaum. CynriL; For although 
He knew that they were disobedient and hard of heart, He 
nevertheless visits them, as a good Physician tries tu heal 

, those who are suffering from a mortal disease. But He 
Isa, 45, taught them boldly in the synagogues, as Esaias saith, { have 
not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth. On the 
sabbath day also He disputed with them, because they were 

at leisure. They wondered therefore at the mightiness of 

His teaching, His virtue, and His power, as it follows, And 

they were astonished at his doctrine, for his word was with 
power. Thatis, not soothing, but urging and exciting them to 

seek salvation. Now the Jews supposed Christ to be one 

of the saints or prophets. But in order that they might 
esteem Him higher, He passes beyond the prophetic 
limits. For he said not, “ Thus saith the Lord,” but being 

the Master of the Law, He uttered things which were 
above the Law, changing the letter to the truth, and the 
figures to the spiritual meaning. BEDE; The word of the 


VER. 31—S37. ST. LUKE. 165 


teacher is with power, when he performs that which he 
teaches. But he who by his actions belies what he preaches 
is despised. Cyri_L; But He generally intermingles with 
His teaching the performance of mighty works. For those 
whose reason does not incline to knowledge, are roused 
by the manifestation of miracles. Hence it follows, And 
there was in the synagogue a man which had a devil. 
AMBROSE; The work of divine healing commenced on the 
sabbath, signifying thereby that he began anew where the 
old creation ceased, in order that He might declare at the 
very beginning that the Son of God was not under the Law, 
but above the Law. Rightly also He began on the sabbath, 
that He might shew Himself the Creator, who interweaves 
His works one within another, and follows up that which 
He had before begun; just as a builder determining to 
reconstruct a house, begins to pull down the old one, not 
from the foundation, but from the top, so as to apply his 
hand first to that part, where he had before left off. Holy 
men may through the word of God deliver from evil spirits, 
but to bid the dead rise again, is the work of Divine power 
alone. 

Crrit; But the Jews spoke falsely of the glory of 
Christ, saying, He casteth out devils by Beelzebub the 
prince Of the devils. To remove this charge, when the 
devils came beneath His invincible power, and endured not 
the Divine Presence, they sent forth a savage cry, as it 
follows: And he cried with a loud vince, saying, Let us 
alone; what have we to do with thee, §c. Bene; Asif he 
said, Abstain a while from troubling me, thou who hast no 
fellowship with our designs. AMBROSE; It ought not to shock 
any one that the devil is mentioned in this book as the first 
to have spoken the name of Jesus of Nazareth. For Christ 
received not from him that name which an Angel brought down 
from heaven to the Virgin. The devil is of such effrontery, that 
he is the first to use a thing among men and bring it as some- 
thing new to them, that he may strike people with terror 
at his power. Hence it follows: For I know thee who thou 
art, the Holy One of God. AtHAN. He spoke of Him not Athan. 
as a Holy One of God, as if He were like to the other saints, ‘cee 
but as being in a remarkable manner the Holy One, with th® Lib. 


et Tit. 
Bost. 


Athan. 
ut sup. 


166 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


addition of the article. For He is by nature holy by par- 
taking of whom all others are called holy. Nor again did 
He speak this as if He knew it, but He pretended to know it. 
CyriL; For the devils thought by praises of this sort to 
make Him a lover of vainglory, that He might be induced 
to abstain from opposing or destroying them by way of grate- 
ful return. 

Curys. The devil wished also to disturb the order of 
things, and to deprive the Apostles of their dignity, and to 
incline the many to obey Him. ATHAN. Although he con- 
fessed the truth he controlled his tongue, lest with the truth 
he should also publish his own disgrace, which should teach 
us not to care for such, although they speak the truth, for we 
who know the divine Scripture, must not be taught by the 
devil, as it follows: And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be 
silent, §&c. BEDE; But by the permission of God, the man 
who was to be delivered from the devil is thrown into the 
midst, that the power of the Saviour being manifested might 
bring over many to the way of salvation. As it follows: 
And when he had thrown him in the midst. But this seems 
to be opposed to Mark, who says, And the unclean spirit 
tearing him, and crying with a loud voice, went out of him, 
unless we understand that Mark meant by tearing him the 
same as Luke by these words, And when he had thrown him. 
in the midst, so that what follows, and hurt him not, might be 
understood to mean, that that twisting of limbs, and sore 
troubling, did not weaken him, as is often the case when 
devils depart from a man, leaving him with hmbs cut and 
torn off. Well then do they wonder at such complete 
restoration of health. For it follows: And fear came upon 
all, THEoPHYL. As if they said, What is this word by which | 
he commands, Go out, and he went out? BEpE; Holy 
men were able by the word of God to cast out devils, but 
the Word Himself does mighty works by His own power. 
AMBROSE; In a mystery, the man in the synagogue with the 
unclean spirit is the Jewish people, which being fast bound 
in the wiles of the devil, defiled its vaunted cleanliness of 
body by the pollution of the heart. And truly it had an 
unclean spirit, because it had lost the Holy Spirit. For the 


devil entered whence Christ had gone out. THEOPHYL. 


VER. 38, 39. ST. LUKE. 167 


We must know also that many now have devils, namely, such as 

fulfil the desires of devils, as the furious have the demon of 
anger; and so of the rest. But the Lord came into the 
synagogue when the thoughts of the man were collected, and 

then says to the demon that dwelt there, Hold thy peace, and 

immediately throwing him into the middle he departs out 

of him. For it becomes not a man always to be angry, 

(that is, like the brutes,) nor always to be without anger, (for 

that is want of feeling.) but he must take the middle path, 

and have anger against what is evil; and so the man is 

thrown into the midst when the unclean spirit departs from 

him. 


38. And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered 
into Simon’s house. And Simon’s wife’s mother was 
taken with a great fever: and they besought him for 
her. 

39. And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever: 
and it left her: and immediately she arose and 
ministered unto them. 


AMBROSE; Luke having first introduced a man delivered 
from an evil spirit, goes on to relate the healing of a 
woman. For our Lord had come to heal each sex, and 
he ought first to be healed who was first created. Hence 
it is said, And he arose out Of the synagogue, and entered 
into Simon’s house. Curys. For He honoured His disciples Chrys, 
by dwelling among them, andso making them the more zealous. a 
Cyrit; Now see how Christ abides in the house of a poor Matt. 
man, suffering poverty of His own will for our sakes, that we 
might learn to visit the poor, and despise not the destitute and 
needy. It follows: And Simon’s wife’s mother was taken 
with a great fever: and they besought him for her. BrEvE; 

At one time at the request of others, at another of his own 
accord, our Saviour cures the sick, shewing that He is far 
aloof from the passions of sinners, and ever grants the prayer 
of the faithful, and what they in themselves little under- 
stand He either makes intelligible, or forgives their not under- 
standing it. As, Who understands his errors ? Lord, cleanse me Pe. 19, 


168 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


gts Jrom my secret faulis, Curys. Because Matthew is silent on 


Chrys. 
ut sup. 


the point of asking Him, he does uot differ from Luke, or it 
matters not, for one Gospel had brevity in view, the other 
accurate research. It follows: And he stood over her, &§c. 
OrIGEN; Here Luke speaks figuratively, as of a command 
given to a sensible being, saying, that the fever was com- 
manded, and neglected not the work of Him who commanded it. 
Hence it follows: And she arose, and ministered unto them. 
Curys. For since the disease was curable, He shewed His 
power by the manner of the cure, doing what art could never 
do. For after the allaying of the fever, the patient needs 
much time ere he be restored to his former health, but at this 
time all took place at once. AMBROSE; But if we weigh 
these things with deeper thoughts, we shall consider the 
health of the mind as well as the body; that the mind which 
was assailed by the wiles of the devil may be released first. 
Eve was not a hungered before the serpent beguiied 
her, and therefore against the author of evil himself ought 
the medicine of salvation first to operate. Perhaps also 
in that woman as in a type our flesh languished under the 
various fevers of crimes, nor should I say that the fever 
of love was less than that of bodily heat. BrpbrE; For if we 
say that a man released from the devil represents morally 
the mind cleansed from unclean thoughts, consequently a 
woman vexed by fever, but cured at our Lord’s command, 
represents the flesh controlled by the rules of continence 
in the fury of its own lust. Cyri_; Let us therefore receive 
Jesus. For when He has visited us, we carry Him in our 
heart and mind; He will then extinguish the flames of our 
unlicensed pleasures, and will make us whole, so that we 
minister unto Him, that is, do things well-pleasing to Him. 


40. Now when the sun was setting, all they that 
had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto 
him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, 
and healed them. | 

41. And devils also came out of many, crying out, 
and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God. And 


VER. 40, 41. ST. LUKE. 169 


he rebuking them suffered them not to speak: for 
they knew that he was Christ. 


TaErorHyL. We must observe the zeal of the multitude, 
who after the sun had set bring their sick unto Him, not 
deterred by the lateness of the day; as it is said, Now when 
the sun was setting, they brought their sick. Oricen; It 
was ordered about sun-set, that is, when the day was gone, 
that they should bring them out, either because during the day 
they were employed about other things, or because they 
thought that it was not lawful to heal on the sabbath. But 
He healed them, as it follows, But he laid his hands upon 
every one of them. CyRIL; But although as God He was able 
to drive away diseases by His word, He nevertheless touches 
them, shewing that His flesh was powerful to apply remedies, 
since it was the flesh of God; for as fire, when applied to a 
brazen vessel, imprints on it the effect of its own heat, so the 
omnipotent Word of God, when He united to Himself in real 
assumption a living virgin temple, endued with understanding, 
implanted in it a participation of His own power. May 
He also touch us, nay rather may we touch Him, that He may 
deliver us from the infirmities of our souls as well as the 
assaults of the evil spirit and pride! For it follows, And 
devils also came out. BrprE; The devils confess the Son of 
God, and as it is afterwards said, they knew him to be Christ; 
for when the devil saw Him distressed by fasting, he perceived 
Him to be truly man, but when he prevailed not in his trial he 
doubted whether or not He were the Son of God, but now by 
the power of Christ’s miracles he either perceived or suspected 
Him to be the Son of God. He did not then persuade the Jews 
to crucify Him because he thought Him not to be Chnist 
or the Son of God, but because he did not foresee that by this 
death he himself would be condemned. Of this mystery hid- 
den from the world the Apostle says, that none of the princes of 1 Cor.2, 
this world knew, for if they had known they would never have . 
crucified the Lord of Glory. Curys. But in what follows, 
And he rebuking them suffered them not to speak, mark the 
humility of Christ, who would not let the unclean spirits make 
Him manifest. For it was not fit that they should usurp 


Victor 
Antio- 


chenus. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
25. in 
Matt. 


ut sup. 


170 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IV. 


the glory of the Apostolical office, nor did it become the mys- 
teries of Christ to be made public by impure tongues. THE- 
OPHYL. Because, “‘ praiseis not seemly in the mouth of asinner.” 
Or, because He did not wish to inflame the envy of the Jews 
by being praised of all. Brpr; Butthe Apostles themselves 
are commanded to be silent concerning Him, lest by proclaim- 
ing His divine Majesty, the dispensation of His Passion 
should be delayed. 


42. And when it was day, he departed and went 
into a desert place: and the people sought him, and 
came unto him, and stayed him, that he should not 
depart from them. 

43. And he said unto them, I must preach the 
kingdom of God to other cities also: for therefore 
am I sent. 

44. And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee. 


Curys. When he had bestowed sufficient favour upon the 
people by miracles, it was necessary for Him to depart. For 
miracles are always thought greater when the worker is gone, 
since they themselves are then the more heeded, and have in 
their turn a voice; as it is said, But when it was day, he de- 
parted,and went. GREEK Ex. He wentalso into the desert, as 
Mark says, and prayed; not that he needed prayer, but as an 
example to us of good works. CuHrys. The Pharisees indeed, 
seeing how that the miracles themselves published His fame, 
were offended at His power. But the people hearing His 
words, assented and followed; as it is said, And the multi- 
tudes sought him, not indeed any of the chief priests, or 
scribes, but all those who had not been blackened with the 
dark stain of malice, and preserved their consciences unhurt. 
GREEK Ex. Now when Mark says that the Apostles came to 
him, saying, All seek thee, but Luke, that the people came, 
there is no difference between them, for the people came to 
Him following in the footsteps of the Apostles. But the Lord 
rejoiced in being held back, yet bid them let Him go, that 
others also might partake of His teaching, as the time of His 


VER, 42—44. ST. LUKE. 171 


presence would not last long; as it follows, And he said unto 
them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also, &c. 
Mark says, Unto this I came, shewing the loftiness of His 
divine nature, and His voluntary emptying Himself ofit. But 
Luke says, Unto this am I sent, shewing His incarnation, and 
calling also the decree of the Father, a sending Him forth ; and 

one simply says, Jo preach, the other added, the kingdom of 
God, which is Christ Himself. Curys. Observe also, that He Chrys. 
might, by abiding in the same place, have drawn all men over to 43. in 
Himself. He did not however do so, giving us an example to go Matt. 
about and seek those who are perishing, as the shepherd his 

lost sheep, and as the physician the sick. For by recover- 

ing one soul, we may be able to blot out a thousand sins. 
Hence also it follows, And he was preaching in the synagogues 

of Galilee. He frequently indeed went to the synagogues, 

to shew them that He was no deceiver. For if He were con- 
stantly to dwell in the desolate places, they would spread 
abroad that He was concealing Himself. Berne; But if the 
sun-setting mystically expresses the death of our Lord, the 
returning day denotes His resurrection, (the light of which 
being made manifest, He is sought for by the multitudes of 
believers, and being found in the desert of the Gentiles He 

is held back by them, lest He should depart ;) especially as 

this took place on the first day of the week, on which day the 
Resurrection was celebrated. 


CHAP. V. 


1. And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed 
upon him to hear the word of God, he stood by the 
lake of Gennesaret, 

2. And saw two ships standing by the lake: but 
the fishermen were gone out of them, and were wash- 
ing their nets. 

3. And he entered into one of the ships, which was 


_ Simon’s, and prayed him that he would thrust out 


a little from the land. And he sat down, and taught 
the people out of the ship. 


AMBROSE; When the Lord had performed many and 
various kinds of cures, the multitude began to heed neither 
time nor place in their desire to be healed. The evening 
came, they followed; a lake is before them, they still 
press on; as it is said, And it came to pass, as the people 


Chrys. pressed upon him. Curys. For they clung to Him with 


Hom. 
25. in 
Matt. 


love and admiration, and longed to keep Him with them. 
For who would depart while He performed such miracles? 
who would not be content to see only His face, and the 
mouth that uttered such things? Nor as performing miracles 
only was He an object of admiration, but His whole appear- 
ance was overflowing with grace. Therefore when He speaks, 
they listen to Him in silence, interrupting not the chain of 
His discourse ; for it is said, that they might hear the word 
o& God, Fc. It follows, And he stood near the lake of 
Gennesaret. BEDE; The lake of Gennesaret is said to 
be the same as the sea of Galilee or the sea of Tiberias; but 
it is called the sea of Galilee from the adjacent province, 


VER. 1—3. ST. LUKE. 178 


the sea of Tiberias from a neighbouring city. Gennesaret, 
however, is the name given it from the nature of the lake 
itself, (which is thought from its crossing waves to raise a 
breeze upon itself,) being the Greek expression for ‘‘ making quasi a 
a breeze to itself.” For the water is not steady like that of at die. 
a lake, but constantly agitated by the breezes blowing over it. 

It is sweet to the taste, and wholesome to drink. In the 
Hebrew tongue, any extent of water, whether it be sweet 

or salt, is called a sea. THEOPHYL. But the Lord seeks to 
avoid glory the more it followed Him, and therefore sepa- 
rating Himself from the multitude, He entered into a ship, 

as itis said, And he saw two ships standing near the lake: 

but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing 
their nets. Curys. This was a sign of leisure, but according 

to Matthew He finds them mending their nets. For so great 
was their poverty, that they patched up their old nets, not 
being able to buy new ones. But our Lord was very desirous 

to collect the multitudes, that none might remain behind, but 
they mightall behold Him face to face; He therefore enters into 

a ship, as it is said, And he entered into a ship, which was 
Simon’s, and prayed him. Turoruyt. Behold the gentleness 

of Christ; He asks Peter; and the willingness of Peter, who 

was obedient in all things. Curys. After having performed 
many miracles, He again commences His teaching, and 
being on the sea, He fishes for those who were on the shore. 
Hence it follows, And he sat down and taught the people out 

of the ship. Gree. Naz. Condescending to all, in order that He Greg. 
might draw forth a fish from the deep, i. e. man swimming in 2"? 
the everchanging scenes and bitter storms of this life. BEDE; 
Now mystically, the two ships represent circumcision and un- 
circumcision. The Lord sees these, because in each people He 
knows who are His, and by seeing, i. e. by a merciful visita- 
tion, He brings them nearer the tranquillity of the life to 
come. The fishermen are the doctors of the Church, because 

by the net of faith they catch us, and bring us as it were 
ashore to the land of the living. But these nets are at one 
time spread out for catching fish, at another washed and 
folded up. For every time is not fitted for teaching, but at 

one time the teacher must speak with the tongue, and at 
another time we must discipline ourselves. The ship of Simon 1s 


174 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


Gal.2, the primitive Church, of which St. Paul says, He that wrought 
effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of circumcision. The 

Acts 4, ship is well called one, for in the multitude of believers there 

ve de Was one heart and one soul. Ave. From which ship He. 

Quest. taught the multitude, for by the authority of the Church He 

er teaches the Gentiles. But the Lord entering the ship, and 
asking Peter to put off a little from the land, signifies that we 
must be moderate in our words to the multitude, that they 
may be neither taught earthly things, nor from earthly things 
rush into the depths of the sacraments. Or, the Gospel must 
first be preached to the neighbouring countries of the Gen- 
tiles, that (as He afterwards says, Launch out into the deep,) 
He might command it to be preached afterwards to the more 
distant nations. 


4, Now when he had left speaking, he said unto 
Simon, Launch out into the deep, and let down your 
nets for a draught. 

5. And Simon answering said unto him, Master, 
we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing : 
nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net. 

6. And when they had this done, they inclosed a 
great multitude of fishes: and their net brake. 

7. And they beckoned unto their partners, which 
were in the other ship, that they should come and 
help them. And they came, and filled both the ships, 
so that they began to sink. 


CyrIL; Having sufficiently taught the people, He returns 
again to His mighty works, and by the employment of fishing 
fishes for His disciples. Hence it follows, When he had left 
off speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep, 

Chrys. and let down your nets for a draught. Curys. For in His 
ante condescension to men, He called the wise men by a star, 
the fishermen by their art of fishing. THEopHyL. Peter 
did not refuse to comply, as it follows, And Simon answering 
said unto him, Master, we have toiled all night and have 
taken nothing. He did not go on to say, “I will not hearken 


VER. 4—7. ST. LUKE. 1735 


to thee, nor expose myself to additional labour,” but rather 
adds, Nevertheless, at thy word Iwill let down the net. But 
our Lord, since he had taught the people out of the ship, 
left not the master of the ship without reward, but conferred 
on him a double kindness, giving him first a multitude of 
fishes, and next making him His disciple: as it follows, 4nd 
when they had done this, they inclosed a great multitude of 
Jishes. They took so many fishes that they could not pull 
them out, but sought the assistance of their companions; as 
it follows, But their net brake, and they beckoned to their 
partners who were in the other ship to come, &c. Peter sum- 
mons them by a sign, being unable to speak from astonishment 
at the draught of fishes. We next hear of their assistance, 
And they came and filled both the ships. Ava. John seems Gag. da 
indeed to speak of a similar miracle, but this is very differen brea, 
from the one he mentions. That took place after our Lord’ go g 
resurrection at the lake of Tiberias, and not only the time, 
but the miracle itself is very different. For in the latter the 
nets being let down on the right side took one hundred and 
fifty-three fishes, and these of large size, which it was neces- 
sary for the Evangelist to mention, because though so large 
the nets were not broken, and this would seem to have refer- 
ence to the event which Luke relates, when from the multi- 
tude of the fishes the nets were broken. 

AMBROSE; Now in a mystery, the ship of Peter, according 
to Matthew, is beaten about by the waves, according to Luke, {ratt. 8, 
is filled with fishes, in order that you might understand the24 _/ 
Church at first wavering, at last abounding. The ship is not 
shaken which holds Peter; that is which holds Judas. In 
each was Peter; but he who trusts in his own merits is dis- 
quieted by another’s. Let us beware then of a traitor, lest 
through one we should many of us be tossed about. Trouble 
is found there where faith is weak, safety here where love is 
perfect. Lastly, though to others it is commanded, Let down 
your nets, to Peter alone it is said, Launch out into the deep, 
i.e. into deep researches. What is so deep, as the knowledge 
of the Son of God! But what are the nets of the Apostles which 
are ordered to be let down, but the interweaving of words and 
certain folds, as it were, of speech, and intricacies of argument, 


176 GOSFEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


which never let those escape whom they have once caught. 
And rightly are nets the Apostolical instruments for fishing, 
which kill not the fish that are caught, but keep them safe, and 
bring up those that are tossing about in the waves from the 
depths below to the regions above. But he says, Master, we 
have toiled the whole night and have caught nothing ; for this is 
not the work of human eloquence but the gift of divine 
calling. But they who had before caught nothing, at the 
word of the Lord inclosed a great multitude of fishes. 
CyriL; Now this was a figure of the future. For they 
will not labour in vain who let down the net of evangelical 
doctrine, but will gather together the shoals of the Gentiles. 
ee: ut Aug. Now the circumstance of the nets breaking, and the ships 
fe being filled with the multitude of fishes so that they began 
to sink, signifies that there will be in the Church so great 
a multitude of carnal men, that unity will be broken up, and 
it will be split into heresies and schisms. BEDE; The net 
is broken, but the fish escape not, for the Lord preserves His 
own amid the violence of persecutors. AMBROSE; But the other 
ship is Judea, out of which James and John are chosen. 
These then came from the synagogue to the ship of Peter 
in the Church, that they might fill both ships. For at the 
name of Jesus every knee shall bow, whether Jew or Greek. 
BEDE; Or the other ship is the Church of the Gentiles, 
which itself also (one ship being not sufficient) is filled with 
chosen fishes. For the Lord knows who are His, and with 
Him the number of His elect is sure. And when He finds 
not in Judea so many believers as He knows are destined to 
eternal life, He seeks as it were another ship to receive His 
fishes, and fills the hearts of the Gentiles also with the grace 
of faith. And well when the net brake did they call to their 
assistance the ship of their companions, since the traitor 
Judas, Simon Magus, Ananias and Sapphira, and many of 
the disciples, went back. And then Barnabas and Paul were 
separated for the Apostleship of the Gentiles. AMBROSE; 
We may understand also by the other ship another Church, 
since from one Church several are derived. Cyrizt; But 
Peter beckons to his companions to helpthem. For many 
follow the labours of the Apostles, and first those who 


VER. 8—11. 8ST. LUKE. 177 


brought out the writings of the Gospels, next to whom are the 
other heads and shepherds of the Gospel, and those skilled 

in the teaching of the truth. Berpr; But the filling of these 
ships goes on until the end of the world. But the fact that the 
ships, when filled, begin to sink,i. e. become weighed low down 

in the water; (for they are not sunk, but are in great danger,) 
the Apostle explains when he says, In the last days perilous 2Tin.3, 
times shall come; men shall be lovers of their own selves, * ~ 
ge. For the sinking of the ships is when men, by vicious 
habits, fall back into that world from which they have been 
elected by faith. 


8. When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at 
Jesus’ knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a 
sinful man, O Lord. 

9. For he was astonished, and all that were with 
him, at the draught of the fishes which they had 
taken : 

10. And so was also James, and John, the sons 
of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And 
Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth 
thou shalt catch men. 

11. And when they had brought their ships to 
land, they forsook all, and followed him. 


BEDE; Peter was astonished at the divine gift, and the 
more he feared, the less did he now presume; as it is said, 
When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, 
saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. 
CyriL; For calling back to his consciousness the crimes 
he had committed, he is alarmed and trembles, and as being 
unclean, he believes it impossible he can receive Him who 
is clean, for he had learnt from the law to distinguish 
between what is defiled and holy. Grea. Nyss. When Christ 
commanded to let down the nets, the multitude of the fishes 
taken was just as great as the Lord of the sea and land 
willed. For the voice of the Word is the voice of power, 
at whose bidding at the beginning of the world light and 

VOL. III. N 


178 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VY. 


the other creatures came forth. At these things Peter 
wonders, for he was astonished, and all that were with him, 


Aug. de §c. Avuc. He does not mention Andrew by name, who 


con. 


lib. ii. 17. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
}4. in 
Matt. 


Aug. 


ubi sup. 


‘however is thought to have been in that ship, according to the 
accounts of Matthew and Mark. It follows, And Jesus said 
unto Simon, Fear not. AmBRost; Say thou also, Depart 
Srom me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord, that God may 
answer, Fear not. Confess thy sin, and the Lord will pardon 
thee. See how good the Lord is, who gives so much to men, 
that they have the power of making alive. As it follows, 
From henceforth thou shalt catch men. Breve; This espe- 
cially belongs to Peter himself, for the Lord explains to him 
what this taking of fish means; that in fact as now he takes 
fishes by the net, so hereafter he will catch men by words. 
And the whole order of this event shews what is daily going 
on in the Church, of which Peter is the type. Curys. But mark 
their faith and obedience. For though they were eagerly 
engaged in the employment of fishing, yet when they heard 
the command of Jesus, they delayed not, but forsook all and 
followed Him. Such is the obedience which Christ demands 
of us; we must not forego it, even though some great necessity 
urges us. Hence it follows, And having brought their ships 
to land. Aue. Matthew and Mark here briefly state the 
matter, and how it was done. Luke explains it more at 
large. There seems however to be this difference, that he 
makes our Lord to have said to Peter only, From hence- 
Sorth thou shalt catch men, whereas they related it as 
having been spoken to both the others. But surely it 
might have been said at first to Peter, when he marvelled at 
the immense draught of fishes, as Luke suggests, and after- 
wards to both, as the other two have related it. Or we must 
understand the event to have taken place as Luke relates, and 
that the others were not then called by the Lord, but only it was 
foretold to Peter that he should catch men, not that he should 
no more be employed in fishing; and hence there is room for 
supposing that they returned to their fishing, so that after- 
wards that might happen which Matthew and Mark speak 


ae 4,of. For then the ships were not brought to land, as if 


Mark 1, 
18, 


with the intention of returning, but they followed Him as 
"calling or commanding them to come. But if according to 


- 


VER. 12—16. ST. LUKE. 179 


John, Peter and Andrew followed Him close by Jordan, how 
do the other Evangelists say that He found them fishing in 
Galilee, and called them to the discipleship? Except we 
understand that they did not see the Lord near Jordan so 
as to join Him inseparably, but knew only who He was, 
and marvelling at Him returned to their own. 

AMBROSE; But mystically, those whom Peter takes by his 
word, he claims not as his own booty or his own gift. 
Depart, he says,from me, O Lord. Fear not then also to 
ascribe what is thy own to the Lord, for what was His He has 


given to us. AucG. Or, Peter speaks in the character of Aug. de 
the Church full of carnal men, Depart from me, for I am a Q#s- 
sinful man. As if the Church, crowded with carnal men, ii.c. 2. 


and almost sunk by their vices, throws off from it, as it 
were, the rule in spiritual things, wherein the character of 
- Christ chiefly shines forth. For not with the tongue do men 
tell the good servants of God that they should depart from 
them, but with the utterance of their deeds and actions they 
persuade them to go away, that they may not be governed 
by the good. And yetall the more anxiously do they hasten 
to pay honours to them, just as Peter testified his respect by 
falling at the feet of our Lord, but his conduct in saying, 
Depart from me. BEDE; But the Lord allays the fears of 
carnal men, that no one trembling at the consciousness 
of his guilt, or astonished at the innocence of others, might 
be afraid to undertake the journey of holiness. 


Aus. But the Lord did not depart from them, shewing Aug. 
thereby that good and spiritual men, when they are™! SUP 


troubled by the wickedness of the many, ought not to wish 
to abandon their ecclesiastical duties, that they might 
live as it were a more secure and tranquil life. But the 
bringing their ships to land, and forsaking all to follow 
Jesus, may represent the end of time, when those who 
have clung to- Christ shall altogether depart from the storms 
of this world. 


12. And it came to pass, when he was in a certain 
city, behold a man full of leprosy: who seeing Jesus 
fell on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if 


thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 
N 2 


~ 


180 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


13. And he put forth his hand, and touched him, 
saying, I will: be thou clean. And immediately the 
leprosy departed from him. 

14. And he charged him to tell no man: but go, 
and shew thyself to the Priest, and offer for thy 
cleansing, according as Moses commanded, for a tes- 
timony unto them. 

15. But so much the more went there a fame 
abroad of him: and great multitudes came together 
to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities. 

16. And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, 
and prayed. 


AMBROSE; Thefourth miracleafter Jesus came toCapernaum ° 


was the healing of a leprous man. But since He illumined the 
fourth day with the sun, and made it more glorious than the 
rest, we ought to think this work more glorious than those 
that went before; of which it is said, And it came to pass, 
when he was in a certain city, behold a man full of leprosy. 
Rightly no definite place is mentioned where the leprous 
man was healed, to signify that not one people of any par- 


. ticular city, but all nations were healed. ATHan. Now the 
_leper worshipped the Lord God in His bodily form, and 


thought not the Word of God to be a creature because of His 
flesh, nor because He was the Word did he think lightly of 
the flesh which He put on; nay rather in a created temple he 
adored the Creator of all things, falling down on his face, as 
it follows, And when he saw Jesus he fell on his face, and 
besought him. AMBROSE; In falling upon his face he marked 
his humility and modesty, for every one should blush at the 
stains of his life, but his reverence kept not back his confes- 
sion, he shews his wound, and asks for a remedy, saying, 
If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. Of the will of the 
Lord he doubted, not from distrust of His mercy, but 
checked by the consciousness of his own unworthiness. But 
the confession is one full of devotion and faith, placing all 
power in the will of the Lord. Cyri; For he knew that 
leprosy yields not to the skill of physicians, but he saw 


on 


VER. 12—16. ST. LUKE. 18] 


the devils cast out by the Divine authority, and multitudes 
cured of divers diseases, all which he conceived was the work 

of the Divine arm. Titus Bost. Let us learn from the words 

of the leper not to go about seeking the cure of our bodily 
infirmities, but to commit the whole to the will of God, 
Who knows what is best for us, and disposes.all things as He 

will, AMBROSE; He heals in the same manner in which He 

had been entreated to heal, as it follows, And Jesus put forth 

his hand, and touched him, §&c. The law forbids to touch the 
leprous man, but He who is the Lord of the law submits 

not to the law, but makes the law; He did not touch 
because without touching He was unable to make him 
clean, but to shew that he was neither subject to the law, 

nor feared the contagion as man; for He could not 

be contaminated Who delivered others from the pollu- 

tion. On the other hand, He touched also, that the leprosy 
might be expelled by the touch of the Lord, which was 
wont to contaminate him that touched. THEoPHyYL. For 

His sacred flesh has a healing, and life-giving power, as being 
indeed the flesh of the Word of God. AmsBrosE; In the 
words which follow, L will, be thou clean, you have the 

will, you have also the result of His mercy. Cyrit; From Cyril. 
majesty alone proceeds the royal command, how then is the ae 7 
Only-begotten counted among the servants, who by His 
mere will can do all things? We read of God the Father, ! Ps. a; 
that He hath done all things whatsoever He pleased. Buts. 

He who exercises the power of His Father, how can He differ 
from Him in nature? Besides, whatsoever things are of the 
same power, are wont to be of the same substance. Again; 

jet us then admire in these things Christ working both 
divinely and bodily. For it is of God so to will that all things 

are done accordingly, but of man to stretch forth the hand. 
From two natures therefore is perfected one Christ, for that 

the Word was made flesh. GREG. Nyss. And because the Greg. 
Deity is united with each portion of man, i. e. both soul and 4 an 
body, in each are evident the signs of a heavenly nature. Resur. 
For the body declared the Deity hidden in it, when by touch- = 
ing it afforded a remedy, but the soul, by the mighty power 

of its will, marked the Divine strength. For as the sense of 
touch is the property of the body, so the motion of the will 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
26. in 
Matt. 


Aug. 

de Qu. 
Ev. 1. ii. 
qu. 3. 


182 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


of the soul. The soul wills, the body touches. AMBROSE ; 
He says then, J acill, for Photinus, He commands, for 
Arius, He touches, for Manicheus. But there is nothing 
intervening between God’s work and His command, that we 
may sce in the inclination of the healer the power of 
the work. Hence it follows, And tmmediaiely the leprosy 
departed from him. But lest leprosy should become rife 
among us, let each avoid boasting after the example of 
our Lord’s humility. For it follows, And he commanded him 
that he should tell it to no one, that in truth he might teach 
us that our good deeds are not to he made public, but to be 
rather concealed, that we should abstain not only from gaining 
money,but evenfavour. Orperhapsthe cause of Hiscommand- 
ing silence was that He thought those to be preferred, who 
had rather believed of their own accord than from the hope 
of benefit. Cyri_L; Though the leper was silent, the voice 
of the transaction itself was sufficient to publish it to all who 
acknowledged through him the power of the Curer. 

Currys. And since frequently men, when they are 
sick, remember God, but when they recover, wax dull, He 
bids him to always keep God before his eyes, giving glory 
to God. Hence it follows, But go and shew thyself to the 
Priest, in order that the leprous man being cleansed might 
submit himself to the inspection of the Priest, and so by his 
sanction be counted as healed. AMBROSE; And that the 
Priest also should know that not by the order of the law, 
but by the grace of God above the law, he was cured. And 
since a sacrifice is commanded by the regulation of Moses, 
the Lord shews that He does not abrogate the law, but fulfil 
it. As it follows, And offer for thy cleansing according 
as Moses commanded. Avuc. He scems here to approve of 
the sacrifice which had been commanded through Moses, 
though the Church does not require it. It may therefore 
be understood to have been commanded, because not as yet 
had commenced that most holy sacrifice which is His body. 
For it was not fitting that typical sacrifices should be 
taken away before that which was typified should be con- 
firmed by the witness of the Apostles’ preaching, and 
the faith of believers. AMBROsE; Or because the law 
is spiritual He scems to have commanded a spiritual 


VER. 12—16. ST. LUKE. 183 


sacrifice. Hence he said, 4s Moses commanded. Lastly, 
he adds, for a testimony unto them. The heretics under- 
stand this erroneously, saying, that it was meant as a reproach 
to the law. But how would he order an offering for 
cleansing, according to Moses’ commandments, if he meant 
this against the law? CyriL; He says then, for a testimony 
unto them, because this deed makes manifest that Christ in 
His incomparable excellence is far above Moses. For when 
Moses could not rid his sister of the leprosy, he prayed the 
Lord to deliver her. But the Saviour, in His divine power, Numb. 
declared, I will, be thou clean. 3 12, 13. 
Curys. Or, for a testimony against them, i. e. as a reproof Chrys. 
of them, and a testimony that I respect the law. For now >! &P- 
too that I have cured thee, I send thee for the examination 
of the priests, that thou shouldest bear me witness that I 
have not played false to the law. And although the Lord 
in giving out remedies advised telling them to no one, in- 
structing us to avoid pride; yet His fame flew about every 
where, instilling the miracle into the ears of every one, as 
it follows, But so much the more went there a fame abroad 
of him. BEDE; Now the perfect healing of one brings many 
multitudes to the Lord, as it follows, And great multitudes 
came together that they should be healed. For the leprous 
man that he might shew both his outward and inward cure, 
even though forbid ceases not, as Mark says, to tell of the 
benefit he had received. Gree. Our Redeemer performs Greg. 
His miracles by day, and passes the night in prayer, as it yyy; 
follows, And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and .\3. 
_ prayed, hinting, as it were, to perfect preachers, that as 
neither they should entirely desert the active life from 
love of contemplation, so neither should they despise the 
joys of contemplation from an excess of activity, but in 
silent thought imbibe that which they might afterwards give 
back in words to their neighbours. BrpE; Now that He 
retired to pray, you would not ascribe to that nature which 
says, I will, be thou clean, but to that which putting forth the 
hand touched the leprous man, not that according to Nestorius 
there is a double person of the Son, but of the same person, 
as there are two natures, so are there two operations. GREG. Greg. 
Naz. And His works He indeed performed among the people, - 


184 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


but He prayed for the most part in the wilderness, sanctioning the 
liberty of resting a while from labour to hold converse with God 
with a pure heart. For He needed no change or retirement, 
since there was nothing which could be relaxed in Him, nor 
any place in which He might confine Himself, for He was God, 
but it was that we might clearly know that there is a time for 
action, a time for each higher occupation. BEDE; How 
typically the leprous man represents the whole race of man, 


Rom. 3, languishing with sins full of leprosy, for all have sinned and 


23. 


fall short of the glory of God; that so by the hand put forth, 
i. e. the word of God partaking of human nature, they might 
be cleansed from the vanity of their old errors, and offer for 
cleansing their bodies as a living sacrifice. AMBROSE; But 
if the word is the healing of leprosy, the contempt of the word 
is the leprosy of the mind. THEOPHYL. But mark, that after 
a man has been cleansed_he is then worthy to offer this gift, 
namely, the body and blood of the Lord, which is united 
to the Divine nature. 


17. And it came to pass on a certain day, as he 
was teaching, that there were Pharisees and doctors 
of the law sitting by, which were come out of every 
town of Galilee, and Judza, and Jerusalem: and the 
power of the Lord was present to heal them. 

18. And, behold, men brought in a bed a man 
which was taken with a palsy: and they sought 
means to bring him in, and to lay him before him. 

19. And when they could not find by what way © 
they might bring him in because of the multitude, 
they went upon the housetop, and let him down 
through the tiling with his couch into the midst before 
Jesus. 

20. And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, 
Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. 

21. And the Scribes and the Pharisees began to 
reason, saying, Who is this which speaketh blas- 
phemies ? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? 


VER. 17—26. ST. LUKE. 185 


22. But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he 
answering said unto them, What reason ye in your 
hearts ? 

23. Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven 
thee; or to say, Rise up and walk? 

24. But that ye may know that the Son of man 
hath power upon earth to forgive sins, (he said unto 
the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and 
take up thy couch, and go unto thine house. 

25. And immediately he rose up before them, 
and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to 
his own house, glorifying God. 

26. And they were all amazed, and they glorified 
God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have seen 
strange things to day. 


CyriL; The Scribes and Pharisees who had become spec- 
tators of Christ’s miracles, heard Him also teaching. Hence 
it is said, And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was 
teaching, that there were Pharisees sitting by, &c. And the 
power Of the Lord was present to heal them. Not as though 
He borrowed the power of another, but as God and the 
Lord He healed by His own inherent power. Now men often 
become worthy of spiritual gifts, but generally depart 
from the rule which the giver of the gifts knew. It was 
not so with Christ, for the divine power went on abounding in 
giving remedies. But because it was necessary where so 
. great a number of Scribes and Pharisees had come toge- 
ther, that something should be. done to attest His power 
before those men who slighted Him, He performed the 
miracle on the man with the palsy, who since medical 
art seemed to fail, was carried by his kinsfolk to a higher 
and heavenly Physician. As it follows, And behold men 
brought him. Curys. But they are to be admired who 
brought in the paralytic, since on finding that they could not 
enter in at the door, they attempted a new and untried way. 
As it follows, And when they could not find by what way 
they might bring him in, they went upon the housetop, &c. 


186 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


But unroofing the house they let down the couch, and place 
the paralytic in the midst, as it follows, And they let him 
down through the tilings. Some one may say, that the place 
was let down, from which they lowered the couch of the 
palsied man through the tilings. Brepr; The Lord about 
to cure the man of his palsy, first loosens the chains 
of his sins, that He may shew him, that on account of 
the bonds of his sins, he is punished with the loosening 
of his joints, and that unless the former are set free, he 
cannot be healed to the recovery of his limbs. Hence it 
follows, And when he saw their faith, Sc. AMBROSE; 
Mighty is the Lord who pardons one man for the good deed 
of another, and while he approves of the one, forgives the 
other his sins. Why, O man, with thee does not thy fellowman 
prevail, when with God a servant has both the liberty to inter- 
cede in thy behalf, and the power of obtaining what he asks? If 
thou despairest of the pardon of heavy sins, bring the prayers of 
others, bring the Church to pray for thee, and at sight of this 
the Lord may pardon what man denies to thee. 
Chrys. Curys. But there was combined in this the faith also of 
29.in the sufferer himself. For he would not have submitted to 
Matt. be let down, had he not believed. 
Aug. de AvuG. Butour Lord’s saying, Man, thysins are forgiven, con- 
ae a veys the meaning that the man had his sins forgiven him, because 
c.25. inthat he was man, he could not say, “1 have not sinned,” but at 
the same time also, that He who forgave sins might be known 
Chrys. to be God. Curys. Now if we suffer bodily, we are enough 
ub! §4P- Concerned to get rid of the hurtful thing; but when there 
has harm happened to the soul, we delay, and so are neither 
cured of our bodily ailments. Let us then remove the 
fountain of evil, and the waters of sickness will cease to 
flow. But from fear of the multitude, the Pharisees durst not 
openly expose their designs, but only meditated them in 
their hearts Hence it follows, And they began to reason, 
saying, Who ts this which speaketh blasphemies? 
CyrRIL; By this they hasten the sentence of death, for it 
Lev. 24, was commanded in the law, that whoever blasphemed God 
should be punished with death. AMBROSE; From His very 
works therefore the Son of God receives testimony. For it 
is both more powerful evidence when men confess unwillingly, 


VER. 17—26. ST. LUKE. 187 


and a more fatal error when they who deny are left to the 
consequence of their own assertions. Hence it follows, Who 
can forgive sins, but God only? Great is the madness of an 
unbelieving people, who though they have confessed that it 
is of God alone to forgive sins, believe not God when He 
forgives sins. BEpE; For they say true, that no one can 
forgive sins but God, who yet forgives through those to 
whom He gives the power of forgiving. And therefore Christ 
is proved to be truly God, for He is able to forgive sins 
as God. AMmBRosE; The Lord wishing to save sinners shews 
Himself to be God, by His knowledge of the secret thoughts ; 
as it follows, But that ye may know. Cyrit; As if to say, 
O Pharisees, since ye say, Who can forgive sins, but God 
alone? T answer you, Who can search the secrets of the heart, 
but God alone, Who says by His prophet, I am the Lord, Jer. 17, 
that searcheth the hearts, and trieth the reins. Cunrys. If Chrys. 
then you disbelieve the first, (i. e. the forgiveness of sins,) ubi sup. 
behold, I add another, seeing that I lay open your inmost 
thoughts. Again, another that I make whole the body of the 
palsied man. Hence He adds, Whether ts tt easier? It is 
very plain that it is easier to restore the body to health. 
For as the soul is far nobler than the body, so is the forgive- 
ness of sins more excellent than the healing of the body. 
But since you believe not the former, because it is hid; I 
will add that which is inferior, yet mare open, in order that 
thereby that which is secret may be made manifest. And 
indeed in addressing the sick man, He said not, I forgive thee 
thy sins, expressing His own power, but, Zhy sins are forgiven 
thee. But they compelled Him to declare more plainly His 
own power to them, when He said, But that you may know. 
THEOPHYL. Observe that on earth He forgives sins. For 
while we are on earth we can blot out our sins. But after 
that we are taken away from the earth, we shall not be 
able to confess, for the gate is shut. Curys. He shews Chrys. 
the pardon of sins by the healing of the body. Hence ie 
follows, He says unto the sick of the palsy, I say unto 
thee, Rise. But He manifests the healing of the body by 
the carrying of the bed, that so that which took place might 
be accounted no shadow. Hence it follows, Take up thy 
bed. As if He said, “I was willing through thy suffering 


188 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Vi 


to cure those who think that they are in health, while their 

souls are sick, but since they are unwilling, go and correct 

thy household.” AmBrosE; Nor is there any delay, health 

is present; there is but one moment both of words, and healing. 

Hence it follows, And immediately he rose. From this fact 

it is evident, that the Son of man has power on earth to 

forgive sins; He said this both for Himself and us. For He 

as God made man, as the Lord of the law, forgives sins; we 

also have been chosen to receive from Him the same marvellous 

John 20,grace. For it was said to the disciples, Whose sins ye remit, 

23. they are remitted unto them. But how does He not Himself 

forgive sins, Who has given to others the power of doing so? 

But the kings and princes of the earth when they acquit 

homicides, release them from their present punishment, but 
cannot expiate their crimes. 

AMBROSE; They behold him rising up, still disbelieving, and 

marvel at his departing; as it follows, And they were all 

Chrys. amazed. Curys. The Jews creep on by degrees, glorifying 

ubi sup» God, yet thinking Him not God, for His flesh stood in their 

way. But still it was no slight thing to consider Him 

the chief of mortal men, and to have proceeded from God. 

AMBROsE; But they had rather fear the miracles of divine 

working, than believe them. As it follows, And they were 

filled with fear. But if they had believed they had not 

surely feared, but loved; for perfect love casteth out fear. 

But this was no careless or trifling cure of the paralytic, since 

our Lord is said to have prayed first, not for the petition’s 

Aug. sake, but foran example. Ava. With respect to the sick of 

Lil.qu4s the palsy, we may understand that the soul relaxed in its limbs, 

i. e. its operations, seeks Christ,i. e. the meaning of God’s word; 

but is hindered by the crowds, that is to say, unless it dis- 

covers the secrets of the thoughts, i. e. the dark parts of the 

Scriptures, and thereby arrives at the knowledge of Christ. 

BEDE; And the house where Jesus was is well described 

as covered with tiles, since beneath the beggarly covering of 

letters is found the spiritual power of grace. AMBROSE; Now 

let every sick person have those that will pray for his 

salvation, by whom the loosened joints of our life and 

halting steps may be renewed by the remedy of the heavenly 

word. Let there be then certain monitors of the soul, 


VER, 27—32. ST. LUKE. 189 


to raise the mind of man, though grown dull through the 
weakness of the external body, to higher things, by the aid 

of which being able again easily to raise and humble itself, 

it may be placed before Jesus worthy to be presented 

in the Lord’s sight. For the Lord beholdeth the humble. 
Aua. The men then by whom he is let down may signify the Aug. 
doctors of the Church. But that he is let down with the >! sup- 
couch, signifies that Christ ought to be known by man, while 

yet abiding in his flesh. AmBRosE; But the Lord, pointing 
out the full hope of resurrection, pardons the sins of the 
soul, sets aside the weakness of the flesh. For this is the 
curing of the whole man. Although then it is a great thing 

to forgive the sins of men, it is yet much more divine to give 
resurrection to the bodies, since indeed God is the resurrec- 
tion. But the bed which is ordered to be taken up is 
nothing else but the human body. Ave. That the infirm 4,, 
soul may no more rest in carnal joys, as in a bed, but ubi sup. 
rather itself restrain the carnal affections, and tend toward 

its own home, i. e. the resting-place of the secrets of its 
heart. AMBROSE; Orit may reseek its own home, i. e. return to 
Paradise, for that is its true home, which first received man, 
and was lost not fairly, but by treachery. Rightly then is 
the soul restored thither, smce He has come Who will undo 

the treacherous knot, and reestablish righteousness. 


27. And after these things he went forth, and saw 
a Publican, named Levi, sitting at the receipt of 
custom: and he said unto him, Follow me. 

28. And he left all, rose up, and followed him. 

29. And Levi made him a great feast in his own 
house: and there was a great company of Publicans 
and of others that sat down with them. 

30. But their Scribes and Pharisees murmured 
against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and 
drink with Publicans and sinners ? 

31. And Jesus answering said unto them, They 
that are whole need not a physician; but they that 
are sick. 


190 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


32. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners 
to repentance. 


Aug. de Aug. After the healing of the sick of the palsy, St. Luke goes 
Lii_e.2¢, 00 to mention the conversion of a publican, saying, And after 
these things, he went forth, and saw a publican of the name 
of Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom. This is Matthew, 
also called Levi. BEDE; Now Luke and Mark, for the honour 
of the Evangelist, are silent as to his common name, but 
Matthew is the first to accuse himself, and gives the name 
of Matthew and publican, that no one might despair of 
salvation because of the enormity of his sins, when he himself 
was changed from a publican to an Apostle. CyriL; For 
Levi had been a publican, a rapacious man, of unbridled 
desires after vain things, a lover of other men’s goods, for this 
is the character of the publican, but snatched from the very 
worship of malice by Christ’s call. Hence it follows, And 
he said unto him, Follow me. He bids him follow Him, 
not with bodily step, but with the soul’s affections. Matthew 
therefore, being called by the Word, left his own, who 
was wont to seize the things of others, as it follows, 
Chrys. And having left all, he rose, and followed him. CuHRys. 
Ma Here mark both the power of the caller, and the obedience 
of him that was called. For he neither resisted nor wavered, 
but forthwith obeyed ; and like the fishermen, he did not even 
wish to go into his own house that he might tell it to his 
friends. 
Basil. BasiL; He not only gave up the profits of the customs, 
Reg.fas byt also despised the dangers which might occur to himself 
and his family from leaving the accounts of the receipts un- 
completed. THrorHyL. And so from him that received toll 
from the passers by, Christ received toll, not money, but 
Chrys. entire devotion to His company. Curys. But the Lord 
ub! SYP* Honoured Levi, whom He had called, by immediately going 
to his feast. For this testified the greater confidence in him. 
Hence it follows, And Levi made hima great feastin his own 
house. Nor did He sit down to meat with him alone, but 
with many, as it follows, And there was a great company of 
Publicans and others that sat down with them. For the 
publicans came to Levi as to their colleague, and a man in 


VER. 27—32. ST. LUKE. 191 


the same line with themselves, and he too glorying in the 
presence of Christ, called them all together. For Christ 
displayed every sort of remedy, and not only by discoursing 

and displaying cures, or even by rebuking the envious, but also 

by eating with them, He corrected the faults of some, thereby 
giving us a lesson, that every time and occasion brings with it its 

own profit. But He shunned not the company of Publicans, 

for the sake of the advantage that might ensue, like a physician, 

who unless he touch the afflicted part cannot cure the disease. 
AMBROSE; For by His eating with sinners, He prevents not us 

also from going to a banquet with the Gentiles. Curys. But Chrys. 
nevertheless the Lord was blamed by the Pharisees, who ™! ™P- 
were envious, and wished to separate Christ and His dis- 
ciples, as it follows, And the Pharisees murmured, saying, 

Why do you eat with Publicans, &c. AMBROSE; This was 

the voice of the Devil. This was the first word the Serpent 
uttered to Eve, Yea hath God said, Ye shall not eat. So Gen. 3, 
they diffuse the poison of their father. Auc. Now St. Luke ae an 
seems to have related this somewhat different from the other con. Ev. 
Evangelists. For he does not say that to our Lord alone it was ..97. 
objected that He eat and drank with publicans and sinners, 

but to the disciples also, that the charge might be under- 
stood both of Him and them. But the reason that Matthew 

and Mark related the objection as made concerning Christ to 

His disciples, was, that seeing the disciples ate with publicans 

and sinners, it was the rather objected to their Master as Him 
whom they followed and imitated; the meaning therefore is the 

same, yetso much the better conveyed, as while still keeping to 

the truth, it differs in certain words. Curys. But our Lord Chrys. 
refutes all their charges, shewing, that so far from its being a! P- 
fault to mix with sinners, it is but a part of His merciful 
design, as it follows, And Jesus answering said unto them, 

They that are whole need not a physician; in which He 
reminds them of their common infirmities, and shews them 

that they are of the number of the sick, but adds, He is the 
Physician. It follows, J came not to call the righteous, but 
sinners to repentance. As if He should say, So far am I 

from hating sinners, that for their sakes only I came, not 

that they should remain sinners, but be converted and 
become righteous. Auc. Hence He adds, to repentance, aueee 


192 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


which serves well to explain the passage, that no one should 
suppose that sinners, because they are sinners, are loved by 
Christ, since that similitude of the sick plainly suggests what 
our Lord meant by calling sinners, as a Physician, the sick, 
in order that from iniquity as from sickness they should be 


Ps.11,7.saved. AMBROSE; But how does God love righteousness, 
3<° 37, and David has never seen the righteous man forsaken, if the 


righteous are excluded, the sinner called ; unless you under- 
stand that He meant by the righteous those who boast of the law, 
and seek not the grace of the Gospel. Now no one is justi- 
fied by the law, but redeemed by grace. He therefore calls not 
those who call themselves righteous, for the claimers to righ- 
teousness are not called to grace. For if grace is from 
repentance, surely he who despises repentance renounces 
grace. AMBROSE; But He calls those sinners, who con- 
sidering their guilt, and feeling that they cannot be justified 
by the law, submit themselves by repentance to the grace of 
Christ. Currys. Now He speaks of the righteous ironically, 


Gen. 3, as when He says, Behold Adam is become as one of us. But 


22. 


23. 


that there was none righteous upon the earth St. Paul shews, 


Rom. 3, saying, All have sinned, and need the grace of God. GREG. 


Nyss. Or, He means that the sound and righteous need no 
physician, i. e. the angels, but the corrupt and sinners, i. e. 
ourselves do; since we catch the disease of sin, which is not in 
heaven. BEDE; Now by the election of Matthew is signified 
the faith of the Gentiles, who formerly gasped after worldly plea- 
sures, but now refresh the body of Christ with zealous devotion. 
THEOPHYL. Or the publican is he who serves the prince of 
this world, and is debtor to the flesh, to which the glutton 
gives his food, the adulterer his pleasure, and another some- 
thing else. But when the Lord saw him sitting at the 
receipt of custom, and not stirring himself to greater wicked- 
ness, He calls him that he might be snatched from the 
evil, and follow Jesus, and receive the Lord into the house 
of his soul. 

AMBROSE; But he who receives Christ into his inner 
chamber, is fed with the greatest delights of overflowing plea- 
sures. The Lord therefore willingly enters, and reposes in his 
affection; but again the envy of the treacherous is kindled, 
and the form of their future punishment is prefigured; for 


VER. 83—39. ST. LUKE. 193 


while all the faithful are feasting in the kingdom of heaven, 
the faithless will be cast out hungry. Or, by this is denoted 
the envy of the Jews, who are afflicted at the salvation of 
the Gentiles. AMBROSE; At the same time also is shewn 
the difference between those who are zealous for the law and 
those who are for grace, that they who follow the law shall 
suffer eternal hunger of soul, while they who have received 
the word into the inmost soul, refreshed with abundance of 
heavenly meat and drink, can neither hunger nor thirst. And 
so they who fasted in soul murmured. 


33. And they said unto him, Why do the disciples 
of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise 
the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine eat and 
drink ? 

34. And he said unto them, Can ye make the 
children of the bridechamber fast, while the bride- 
groom is with them ? 

35. But the days will come, when the bridegroom 
shall be taken away from them, and then shall they 
fast in those days. 

36. And he spake also a parable unto them; No 
man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old; 
if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent, and 
the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not 
with the old. 

37. And no man putteth new wine into old bottles ; 
else the new wine will burst the bottles, and be spilled, 
and the bottles shall perish. 

38. But new wine must be put into new bottles ; 
and both are preserved. 

39. No man also having drunk old wine straight- 
way desireth new: for he saith, The old is better. 


CyriL; As soon as they have received the first answer from 
Christ, they proceed from one thing to another, with the 
intent to shew that the holy disciples, and Jesus Himself 

VOL. III. Oo 


194 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V. 


with them, cared very little for the law. Hence it follows, 
Why do the disciples of John fast, but thine eat, §c. As 
if they said, Ye eat with publicans and sinners, whereas the 
Lev.15,law forbids to have any fellowship with the unclean, but 
Penis, COMPassion comes in as an excuse for your transgression; 
why then do ye not fast, as they are wont to do who 
wish to live according to the law? But holy men indeed 
fast, that by the mortification of their body they may quell 
its passions. Christ needed not fasting for the perfecting of 
virtue, since as God He was free from every yoke of passion. 
Nor again did His companions need fasting, but bemg made 
partakers of His grace without fasting they were strengthened 
in all holy and godly living. For when Christ fasted for forty 
days, it was not to mortify His passions, but to manifest to 
Aug. carnal men the rule of abstinence. Auc. Now Luke evidently 
re relates that this was spoken not by men of themselves, 
e.27. but by others concerning them. How then does Matthew 
say, Then came unto him the disciples of John, saying, Why 
do we and the Pharisees fast; unless that they themselves 
also came, and were all eager, as far as they were able, to put 
Aug. the question to Him? Avge. Now there are two fasts, one is 
de Qu. - , ‘ es ; of up 
Ey. 1. ji. tribulation, to propitiate God for our sins; another in joy, 
q-18. when as carnal things delight us less, we feed the more 
on things spintual. The Lord therefore being asked why 
His disciples did not fast, answered as to each fast. And 
first of the fast of tribulation; for it follows, And he said unto 
them, Can ye make the children of the bridegroom fast when 
a the bridegroom is with them? Currys. As if He should say, 
30.in ‘Lhe present time is one of joy and gladness, sorrow must not 
Matt. then be mixed up with it. Cyrit; For the shewing forth 
of our Saviour in this world was nothing else but a great 
wamyv- festival, spiritually uniting our nature to Him as His bride, 
that she who was formerly barren might become fruitful. 
The children of the Bridegroom then are found to be those who 
have been called by Him through a new and evangelical 
discipline, but not the Scribes and Pharisees, who observe 
Aug. only the shadow of the law. Auc. Now this which Luke 
ag alone mentions, Ye cannot make the children of the bride- 
c.27. groom fast, is understood to refer to those very men who said 
that they would make the children of the Bridegroom mourn 


VER. 33—39. ST. LUKE. 193 


and fast, since they were about to kill the Bridegroom. 
CyriL; Having granted to the children of the Bridegroom 
that it was not fitting that they should be troubled, as they were 
keeping a spiritual feast, but that fasting should be abolished 
among them, He adds as a direction, But the days shall 
come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and 
then shall they fast in those days. AvuG. Asif He said, Then Aug. de 
shall they be desolate, and in sorrow and lamentation, aaa. 
until the joy of consolation shall be restored to them by the 
Holy Spirit. Ambrose; Or, That fast is not given up 
whereby the flesh is mortified, and the desires of the body 
chastened. (For this fast commends us to God.) But we 
cannot fast who have Christ, and banquet on the flesh and 
blood of Christ. Basit; The children of the Bridegroom 
also cannot fast, i. e. refuse nourishment to the soul, but 
live on every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of 
God. AMBROSE; But when are those days, in which Christ 
shall be taken away from us, since He has said, I ell be 
with you alway, even unto the end of the world? But no 
one can take Christ away from you, unless you take yourself 
away from Him. BEDE; For as long as the Bridegroom is 
with us we both rejoice, and can neither fast nor mourn. But 
when He has gone away through our sins, then a fast must 
be declared and mourning be enjoined. AMBROSE; Lastly, 
it is spoken of the fast of the soul, as the context shews, for 
it follows, But he said, No man putteth a piece of a new 
garment upon an old. He calleth fasting an old garment, 
which the Apostle thought should be taken off, saying, Put Col. 3, 
off the old man with his deeds. Yn the same manner we 
have a series of precepts not to mix up the actions of the 
old and new man. Ava. Or else, The gift of the Holy Aug. 
Spirit being received, there is a kind of fast, which is of joy, "! "P- 
which they who are already renewed to a spiritual life most 
seasonably celebrate. Before they receive this gift, He says 
they are as old garments, to which a new piece of cloth is 
most unsuitably sewed on, i.e. any part of the doctrine which 
relates to the soberness of the new life; for if this takes place, 
the very doctrine itself also is in a measure divided, for it 
teaches a general fast not from pleasant food only, but from all 
delight in temporal pleasures, the part of which that apper- 

02 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


196 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 8ST. LUKE. CHAP. V. 


tains to food He said ought not to be given to men still 
devoted to their old habits, for therein seems to be a 
rent, and it agreeth not with the old. He says also, that 
they are like to old skins, as it follows, And no one putteth 
wine into old skins. AMBROSE; The weakness of man’s 
condition is exposed when our bodies are compared to the 
skins of dead animals. Auc. But the Apostles are com- 
pared to old skins, who are more easily burst with new 
wine, i. e. with spiritual precepts, than contain them. Hence 
it follows, Else the new wine will burst the skins, and 
the wine will be spilled. But they were new skins at that 
time, when after the ascension of the Lord they received the 
Holy Spirit, when from desire of His consolation they were 
renewed by prayer and hope. Hence it follows, But the 


new wine must be put into new bottles, and both are pre- 


Greg. 

Orat. de 

Deit. 

Filii et 
SS. 


Sap. 1, 
4. 


served. BEDE; Inasmuch as wine refreshes us within, but 
garments cover us without, the garments are the good 
works which we do abroad, by which we shine before men; 
wine, the fervour of faith, hope, and charity. Or, The 
old skins are the Scribes and Pharisees, the new piece 
and the new wine the precepts of the Gospel. GRrEc. 
Nyss. For wine newly drawn forth, evaporates on account 
of the natural heat in the liquor, throwing off from itself 
the scum by natural action. Such wine is the new covenant, 
which the old skins because of their unbelief contain not, 
and are therefore burst by the excellence of the doctrine, and 
cause the grace of the Spirit to flow in vain; because into 
an evil soul wisdom will not enter. BEDE; But to every soul 
which is not yet renewed, but goes on still in the old way of 
wickedness, the sacraments of new mysteries ought not to 
be given. They also who wish to mix the precepts of 
the Law with the Gospel, as the Galatians did, put new 
wine into old bottles. It follows, No man also having drank 
old wine straightway desireth new, for he saith, the old 
as better. For the Jews, imbued with the taste of their 
old life, despised the precepts of the new grace, and being 
defiled with the traditions of their ancestors, were not able to 
perceive the sweetness of spiritual words. 


CHAP. VI. 


1. And it came to pass on the second sabbath after 
the first, that he went through the corn fields; and 
his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, 
rubbing them in their hands. 

2. And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, 
Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the 
sabbath days ? 

3. And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not 
read so much as this, what David did, when himself 
was an hungred, and they which were with him ; 

4. How he went into the house of God, and did 
take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them 
that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but 
for the Priests alone ? 

5. And he said unto them, That the Son of man 
is Lord also of the sabbath. 


AMBROSE; Not only in the form of expression, but in His 
very practice and mode of action, did the Lord begin to ab- 
solve man from the observance of the old law. Hence it is 
said, And it came to pass that he went through the corn fields, 
$c. Bepe; For His disciples having no opportunity for 
eating because the multitudes thronged so, were naturally 
hungry, but by plucking the ears of corn they relieved their 
hunger, which is a mark of a strict habit of life, not seeking 
for prepared meats, but mere simple food. THEOPHYL. 
Now He says, on the second sabbath after the first, be- 


198 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


cause the Jews called every feast a sabbath. For sabbath 

means rest. Frequently therefore was there feasting at 

the preparation, and they called the preparation a sabbath 

because of the feast, and hence they gave to the principal 

sabbath the name of the second-first, as being the 

second in consequence of the festival of the day preceding. 
Chrys. Curys. For there was a double feast; one on the principal 
39.;, Sabbath, another on the next solemn day succeeding, which was 
Matt. alsocalled asabbath. IsipoRE; He says, On the second-first, 
li. Ep. because it was the second day of the Passover, but the first 
of unleavened bread. Having killed the passover, on the 
very next day they kept the feast of unleavened bread. And 
it is plain that this was so from the fact, that the Apostles 
plucked ears of corn and ate them, for at that time the ears 
Epiph. are weighed down by the fruit. EpipH. On the sabbath day 
cont. then they were seen passing through the corn fields, and eat- 
i, Her. ing the corn, shewing that the bonds of the sabbath were 
‘loosened, when the great Sabbath was come in Christ, Who 
made us to rest from the working of our iniquities. CYRIL; 
But the Pharisees and Scribes not knowing the Holy Scrip- 
tures agreed together to find fault with Christ’s disciples, as 
it follows, And certain Of the Pharisees said unto them, Why 
do ye, §c. Tell me now, when a table is set before you on 
the sabbath day; do you not break bread? Why then do 
you blame others? Berpe; But some say that these things 
were objected to our Lord Himself; they might indeed have 
been objected by different persons, both to our Lord Himself 
and His disciples, but to whomsoever the objection is made, 
it chiefly refers to Him. 

AMBRosE; But the Lord proves the defenders of the law to 
be ignorant of what belongs to the law, bringing the example 
of David; as it follows, And Jesus answering said to them, 
Have ye not read so much as this, §&c. Cyrit; Asif He said, 

Deut. 1, Whereas the law of Moses expressly says, Give a righteous 
16.17. sudgment, and ye shall not respect persons in judgment, how 
now do ye blame My disciples, who even to this day extol 
David as a saint and prophet, though he kept not the com- 
Chrys. mandment of Moses? Curys. And mark, that whenever the 
uf sup: Lord speaks for His servants, (i. e. His disciples,) He brings 
forward servants, as for example David and the Priests; but 


VER. 1—5. ST. LUKE. 199 


when for Himself, He introduces His Father; as in that John 5, 
place, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work. oe 
THEOPHYL. But he reproves them in another way, as it is 

added, And he said unto them, that the Son of man is Lord 

also of the sabbath. As if he said, I am the Lord of the sab- 
bath, as being He who ordained it, and as the Legislator I 
have power to loose the sabbath ; for Christ was called the 

Son of man, who being the Son of God yet condescended in a 
miraculous manner to be made and called for man’s sake the 

Son of man. Curys. But Mark declares that He uttered this Chrys. 
of our common nature, for He said, The sabbath was made for a i 
man, not man for the sabbath. It is therefore more fitting 

that the sabbath should be subject to man, than that man 
should bow his neck to the sabbath. 

AMBROSE; But herein is a great mystery. For the field 
is the whole world, the corn is the abundant harvest of the 
saints in the seed of the human race, the ears of corn are the 
fruits of the Church, which the Apostles shaking off by their 
works fed upon, nourishing themselves with our increase, and 
by their mighty miracles, as it were out of the bodily husks, 
plucking forth the fruits of the mind to the light of faith. 

BEDE; For they bruise the ears in their hands, because, when 
they wish to bring others over into the body of Christ, they 
mortify their old man with its acts drawing them away from 
worldly thoughts. AmBrosE; Now the Jews thought this un- 
lawful on the Sabbath, but Christ by the gift of new grace 
represented hereby the rest of the law, the work of grace. 
Wonderfully has He called it the second-first sabbath, not the 
first-second, because that was loosed from the law which was 
first, and this is made first which was ordained second. Itis 
therefore called the second sabbath according to number, the 
first according to the grace of the work. [or that sabbath 
is better where there is no penalty, than that where there is a 
penalty prescribed. Or this perhaps was first in the foreknow- 
ledge of wisdom, and second in the sanction of the ordinance. 
Now in David escaping with his companions, there was 
a foreshadowing of Christ in the law, who with His Apostles 
escaped the prince of the world. But how was it that the 
Observer and Defender of the law Himself both eat the bread, 
and gave it to those that were with Him, which no one was 


200 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI 


allowed to eat but the priests, except that He might shew by 
that fignre that the priests’ bread was to come over to the use 
of the people, or that we ought to imitate the priests’ life, or 
that all the children of the Church are priests, for we are 
ae 2, anointed into a holy priesthood, offering ourselves a spiritual 
sacrifice to God. But if the sabbath was made for men, and 
the benefit of men required that a man when hungry (having 
been long without the fruits of the earth) should forsake the 


abstinence of the old fast, the law is surely not broken but 
fulfilled. 


6. And it came to pass also on another sabbath, 
that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and 
there was a man whose right hand was withered. 

7. And the Scribes and Pharisees watched him, 
whether he would heal on the sabbath day ; that they 
might find an accusation against him. 

8. But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man 
which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand 
forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth. 

9. Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one 
thing; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, 
or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it? 

10. And looking round about upon them all, he 
said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he 
did so: and his hand was restored whole as the 
other. 

11. And they were filled with madness; and com- 
muned one with another what they might do to Jesus. 


AMBROSE ; The Lord now proceeds to another work. For 
He who had determined to make the whole man safe, was 
able to cure each member. Hence it is said, And zt came to 
pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the syna- 
gogue and taught. Brpr; He chiefly heals and teaches on 
the sabbaths, not only to convey the meaning of a spiritual 
sabbath, but because of the more numerous assembly of 
the people. Cyrit; But He taught things far beyond 


VER. 6—11. ST. LUKE. 201 


their comprehension, and opened to his hearers the way to 
future salvation by Him; and then after having first taught 
them, He suddenly shewed His divine power, as it follows, 
and there was a man there whose right hand was withered. 

BEDE; But since the Master had excused by an undenia- 
ble example the breach of the sabbath, with which they 
charged His disciples, their object is now by watching to 
bring a false accusation against the Master Himself. As it 
follows, And the Scribes and Pharisees watched him, ¢f he 
would heal on the sabbath, that if He did not, they might 
accuse Him of cruelty or impotence; if He did, of violation 
of thesabbath. Henceit follows, thatthey might findan accusa- 
tion against him. Cyrii; For this is the way of the envious 
man, he feeds in himself his pang of grief with the praises of 
others. But the Lord knew all things, and searches the hearts ; 
as it follows, But he knew their thoughis, and said to the man 
who had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand. And he 
arose, and stood forth, that perchance he might stir up 
the cruel Pharisees to pity, and allay the flames of their 
passion. 

BEDE; But the Lord anticipating the false charge which 
they were preparing against Him, reproves those who by 
wrongly interpreting the law thought that they must rest on 
the sabbath-day even from good works; whereas the law com- 
mands us to abstain from servile works, i. e. from evil, on the 
sabbath. Hence it follows, Then said Jesus unio them, I 
ask you, Is tt lawful to do good on the sabbath, §&c. CyRIL; 
This isa very useful question, for if itis lawful to do good on the 
sabbath, and there is no reason why those who work should 
not obtain mercy from God, cease to gather up accusation 
against Christ. But if it be not lawful to do good on the 
sabbath, and the law prohibits the safety of life, thou art be- 
come the accuser of the law. For if we examine the very 
institution of the sabbath, we shall find it was introduced 
for an object of mercy, for God commanded to keep holy the 
sabbath, that may rest thy man servant and thy maid Exod. 
servant, and all thy cattle. But he who has mercy on his?” 7% 
ox, and the rest of his cattle, how much rather will he not 
have mercy on man troubled with a severe disease? AMBROSE; 
But the law by things present prefigured the form of things 


202 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


future, among which surely the days of rest to come are to 
be not from good works but from evil. For although secular 
works may be given up, yet itis no idle act of a good work to 
oak rest in thepraiseof God. Aug. But nous our Lord was heal- 
1. iii.qu.ing the body, He asked this question, “ is it lawful to save the 
soul or to lose it?” either because He performed His miracles 
on account of faith in which is the salvation of the soul; or, 
because the cure of the right hand signified the salvation of the 
soul, which ceasing to do guod works, seemed in some measure 
to have a withered right hand, i. e. He placed the soul for the 
man, as men are wont to say, “ So many souls were there.” 
See Ava. But it may be questioned how Matthew came to say, 
Ey. |. ii. that they asked the Lord, whether it was lawful to heal on 
¢. 35. the sabbath, when Luke in this place states that they rather 
were asked of the Lord. We must therefore believe that they 
first asked the Lord, and that then He understanding by their 
thoughts that they sought an opportunity to accuse Him, placed 
the man in the midst whom He was going to heal, and asked the 
question which Mark and Luke relate Him to have asked. It 
follows, And looking round about upon them all. Titus Bos. 
When the eyes of all were, as it were, riveted together, and 
their minds also fixed upon the consideration of the matter, 
he said to the man, Stretch forth thy hand; I command thee, 
Who created man. But he who had the withered hand hears, 
and is made whole, as it follows, And he stretched it, and it was 
restored. But they who should have been astonished at the 
miracle, increased in malice; as it follows, But they were 
filled with madness; and communed one with another what 
chris: they should do to Jesus. Curys. And as Matthew relates, 
in Matt, “hey go out to take counsel, that they should kill him. Cyri1; 
40. Thou perceivest, O Pharisee, a divine Worker, and Him Who 
delivers the sick by His heavenly power, and out of 
envy thou breathest forth death. Brpe; The man repre- 
sents the human race, withered by the unfruitfulness of 
good works, because of the hand in our first parent stretched 
forth to take the apple, which was healed by the innocent 
hand stretched forth on the cross. And rightly was the wi- 
thered hand inthe synagogue, because where there is the greater 
gift of knowledge, there the transgressor lies under the greater 
blame. AmBRosE; You have heard then the words of Him 


VER. 12—16. -ST. LUKE. 203 


who says, Stretch forth thy hand. That is a frequent and 
common cure, and thou that thinkest thy hand is whule, be- 
ware lest it be contracted by avarice or sacrilege. Stretch it 
forth oftener to help thy neighbour, to protect the widow, to 
save from injury him whom you see the victim of unjust attack; 
stretch it forth to the poor man who beseeches thee; stretch 
it forth to the Lord, to ask pardon of thy sins; as the hand isi Kings 
stretched forth so is it healed. a 


12 And it came to pass in those days, that he went 


out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night 
in prayer to God. 


13. And when it was day, he called unto him his 
disciples: and of them he chose twelve, whom also he 
named apostles ; 

_ 14. Simon, (whom he also named Peter,) and 
Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and 
Bartholomew, 

15. Matthew and Thomas, James the son of 
Alpheus, and Simon called Zelotes, 

16. And Judas the brother of James, and Judas 
Iscariot, which also was the traitor. 


Gioss. When adversaries rose up against the miracles Gloss. 
and teaching of Christ, He chose Apostles as defenders and °° °°* 
witnesses of the truth, and prefaces their election with prayer; 
as itis said, And it came to pass, Se. AMBROSE; Let not thy 
ears be open to deceit, that thou shouldest think that the Son 
of God prays from want of strength, that He may obtain 
what He could not perform; for being Himself the Author of 
power, the Master of obedience, He leads us by His own ex- 
ample to the precepts of virtue. 

CyriLt; Let us examine then im the actions which Jesus 
did, how He teaches us to be instant in prayer to God, 
going apart by ourselves, and in secret, no one seeing us; put- 
ting aside also our worldly cares, that the mind may be raised 
up to the height of divine contemplation; and this we have 
marked in the fact, that Jesus went intoamountain apart to pray. 


204 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Vi. 


Ambrose; Every where also He prays alone, for human wishes 
comprehend not the wisdom of God; and no one can be 
a partaker of the secrets of Christ. But not every one who 
prays ascends a mountain, he only who prays advancing 
from earthly things to higher, who is not anxious for 
the riches or honours of the world. All whose minds are 
raised above the world ascend the mountain. In the Gospel 
therefore you will find, that the disciples alone ascend tlie 
mountain with the Lord. But thou, O Christian, hast now 
the character given, the form prescribed which thou shouldest 
imitate; as it follows, And he continued all night in 
prayer to God. For what oughtest thou to do for thy 
salvation, when Christ continues all night in prayer for thee ? 
Chrys. Curys. Rise then thou also at night time. The soul is then 
a Pap: purer, the very darkness and great silence are in themselves 
Ant. 42. enough to lead us to sorrow for our sins. But if thou lookest 
ey upon the heaven itself studded with stars as with unnumbered 
Lat. eyes, if thou thinkest that they who wanton and do unjustly 
in day time are then nothing different from the dead, thou wilt 
loathe all human undertakings. All these things serve to 
raise the mind. Vain-glory then disquiets not, no tumult 
of passion has the mastery; fire does not so destroy the 
rust of iron as nightly prayer the blight of sin. He whom the 
heat of the sun has fevered by day is refreshed by the dew; 
nightly tears are betterthan any dew, and are proof against desire 
and fear. Butifa man isnot cherished by the dew we speak of, 
he withers in the day. Wherefore although thou prayest not 
much at night, pray once with watching, and itis enough; shew 

that the night belongs not only to the body, but to the soul. 
AMBROSE ; But what does it become thee to do when thou 
wouldest commence any work of piety, when Christ, about 
to send out His disciples, first prayed? for it follows, And 
when tt was day, he called his disciples, §c. whom truly 
He destined to be the means of spreading the salvation of 
man through the world. Turn thy eyes also to the heavenly 
‘ council. Not the wise men, not the rich, not the noble, but 
He chose to send out fishermen and publicans, that they might 
not seem to turn men to their grace by riches or by 
the influence of power and rank, and that the force of truth, 
oe not the graces of oratory, might prevail. Cyr; But 


VER. 12—16. ST. LUKE. 205 


mark the great carefulness of the Evangelist. He not only says 
that the holy Apostles were chosen, but he enumerates them 
by name, that no one should dare to insert any others in the 
catalogue ; Simon, whom he also called Peter, and Andrew 
his brother. BepE; Henot onlysurnamed Peter first, but long 
before this, when he was brought by Andrew, it is said, Zhou John 1, 
shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a stone. oe 
But Luke, wishing to mention the names of the disciples, 
since it was necessary to call him Peter, wished shortly to 
imply that this was not his name before, but the Lord had 
given it to him. Evuses. The two next are James and 
John, as it follows, James and John, both indeed sons of 
Zebedee, who were also fishermen. After them he mentions 
Philip and Bartholomew. John says Philip was of Bethsaida, 
of the city of Andrew and Peter. Bartholomew was a 
simple man, devoid of all worldly knowledge and guile. But 
Matthew was called from those who used to collect taxes; 
concerning whom he adds Matthew and Thomas. BEvE; 
Matthew places himself after his fellow-disciple Thomas, from 
humility, whereas by the other Evangelists he is put before 
him. It follows, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon who 
ts called Zelotes. Goss. Because in truth he was of Cana in 
Galilee, which is interpreted zeal; and this is added to distin- 
guish him from Simon Peter. It follows, Judas the brother of 
James, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. 

Auc. With respect to the name of Judas the brother of Aug. 
James, Luke seems to differ from Matthew, who calls himpy 
Thaddeus. But what prevented a man from being called *. i. 
by two or three names? Judas the traitor is chosen, not 
unwittingly but knowingly, for Christ had indeed taken to 
Himself the weakness of man, and therefore refused not even 
this share of human infirmity. He was willing to be betrayed 
by His own Apostle, that thou when betrayed by thy friend 
mayest bear calmly thy mistaken judgment, thy kindness 
thrown away. 

BEDE; Butinamystical sense the mountain on which our Lord 
chose His disciples represents the loftiness of justice in which 
they were to be instructed, and which they were to preach to 
others; so also the law was given ona mountain. CyRIL; Butif 
we may learn the interpretation of the Apostles’ names, know 


r 


206 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


that Peter means, “ loosening or knowing;”’ Andrew, “ glorious 
power,” or “‘answering;” but James, “ apostle of grief;” John, 
“the grace of the Lord;” Matthew, “ given;” Philip, “large 
mouth,” or the “ orifice of a torch;” Bartholomew, “ the son of 
him who lets down water ;” ‘Thomas, “deep or twin ;” James 
the son of Alphzus, “ supplanter of the step of life;” Judas, 
‘“‘ confession ;” Simon, “ obedience.” 


17. And he came down with them, and stood in 
the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a 
great multitude of people out of all Judea, and 
Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, 
which came to hear him, and to be healed of their 
diseases ; 

18. And they that were vexed with unclean spirits : 
and they were healed. 

19. And the whole multitude sought to touch him < 
for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all. 


Cyrit; When the ordination of the Apostles was accom- 
plished, and great numbers were collected together from the 
country of Judza, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, 
(who were idolaters,) he gave the Apostles their commission 
to be the teachers of the whole world, that they might recal 
the Jews from the bondage of the law, but the worshippers of 
devils from their Gentile errors to the knowledge of the truth. 
Hence it is said, And he came down with them, and stood in 
the plain, and a great multitude from Judea, and the sea 
coast, &c. BrpeE; By the sea coast he does not refer to the 
neighbouring sea of Galilee, because this would not be 
accounted wonderful, but it is so called from the great sea, and 
therein also Tyre and Sidon may be comprehended, of which it 
follows, Both of Tyre and Sidon. And these states being 
Gentile, are purposely named here, to indicate how great was 
the fame and power of the Saviour which had brought even 
the citizens of the coast to receive His healing and teaching. 
Hence it follows, Which came to hear him. THEOPHYL. 
That is, for the cure of their souls; and that they might be 
healed of their diseases, that is, for the cure of their bodies. 


VER. 20—23. ST. LUKE. 207 


CyRIL; But after that the High Priest had made publicly known 
His choice of Apostles, He did many and great miracles, that 
the-Jews and Gentiles who had assembled might know that 
these were invested by Christ with the dignity of the Apostle- 
ship, and that He Himself was not as another man, but rather 
was God, as being the Incarnate Word. Hence it follows, 
And the whole multitude sought to touch him, for there went 
virtue out of him. For Christ did not receive virtue from 
others, but since He was by nature God, sending out His own 
virtue upon the sick, He healed them all. 

AMBROSE; But observe all things carefully, how He both 
ascends with His Apostles and descends to the multitude; for 
how could the multitude see Christ but in a lowly place. It 
follows him not to the lofty places, it ascends not the heights. 
Lastly, when He descends, He finds the sick, for in the high 
places there can be no sick. BEDE; You will scarcely find 
any where that the multitudes follow our Lord to the higher 
places, or that a sick person is healed on a mountain; but 
having quenched the fever of lust and lit the torch of know- 
ledge, each man approaches by degrees to the height of the 
virtues. But the multitudes which were able to touch the 
Lord are healed by the virtue of that touch, as formerly the 
leper is cleansed when our Lord touched him. The touch 
of the Saviour then is the work of salvation, whom to touch 
is to believe on Him, to be touched is to be healed by His 
precious gifts. 


20. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and 
said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom 
of God. | 

21. Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall 
be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye 
shall laugh. 

22. Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and 
when they shall separate you from their company, 
and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as 
evil, for the Son of man’s sake. 

23. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, 


208 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. V1. 


behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the 
like manner did their fathers unto the prophets. 


CyriL; After the ordination of the Apostles, the Saviour 
directed His disciples to the newness of the evangelical life. 
AMBROSE; But being about to utter His divine oracles, 
He begins to rise higher; although He stood in a low 
place, yet as it is said, He lifted up his eyes. What is 
lifting up the eyes, but to disclose a more hidden light? 
Bepe; And although He speaks in a general way to all, 
yet more especially He lifts up His eyes on His disciples ; 
for it follows, on his disciples, that to those who receive 
the word listening attentively with the heart, He might 
reveal more fully the light of its deep meaning. AMBROSE; 
Now Luke mentions only four blessings, but Matthew eight ; 
but in those eight are contained these four, and in these four 
those eight. For the one has embraced as it were the four 
cardinal virtues, the other has revealed in those eight the 

'Forthe mystical number. For as the eighth’ is the accomplishment of 

ne ber OUT hope, so is the eighth also the completion of the virtues. 

see But each Evangelist has placed the blessings of poverty first, 

ne for it is the first in order, and the purest, as it were, of the 
virtues; for he who has despised the world shall reap an 
eternal reward. Now can any one obtain the reward of the 
heavenly kingdom who, overcome by the desires of the world, 
has no power of escape from them? Hence it follows, He 
said, Blessed are the poor. 

CyriL; In the Gospel according to St. Matthew it is said, 
Blessed are the poor in spirit, that we should understand the 
poor in spirit to be one of a modest and somewhat depressed 
mind. Hence our Saviour says, Learn from me, for I am 
meek and lowly of heart. But Luke says, Blessed are the 
poor, without the addition of spirit, calling those poor who 
despise riches. For it became those who were to preach the 
doctrines of the saving Gospel to have no covetousness, but 
their affections set upon higher things. 

Basil.in BasiL; But not every one oppressed with poverty is blessed, 
Ps. 33. but he who has preferred the commandment of Christ to 
worldly riches. For many are poor in their possessions, yet 
most covetous in their disposition ; these poverty does not save, 


VER. 20-—23. ST. LUKE. 209 


but their affections condemn. For nothing involuntary 
deserves a blessing, because all virtue is characterized by the 
freedom of the will. Blessed then is the poor man as being 
the disciple of Christ, Who endured poverty for us. For the 
Lord Himself has fulfilled every work which leads to happiness, 
leaving Himself an example for us to follow. Eusrs. But 
when the celestial kingdom is considered in the many 
gradations of its blessings, the first step in the scale belongs 
to those who by divine instinct embrace poverty. Such did 
He make those who first became His disciples; therefore 
He says in their person, For yours 1s the kingdom of heaven, 
as pointedly addressing Himself to those present, upon whom 
also He lifted up His eyes. 

CyrriL; After having commanded them to embrace poverty, 
_ He then crowns with honour taose things which follow from 
poverty. 1t is the lot of those who embrace poverty to be in 
want of the necessaries of life, and scarcely to be able to get 
food. He does not then permit His disciples to be faint- 
hearted on this account, but says, Blessed are ye who hunger 
now. BrprE; That is, blessed are ye who chasten your body 
and subject it to bondage, who in hunger and thirst give heed 
to the word, for then shall ye receive the fulness of heavenly 
joys. Gree. Naz. But in a deeper sense, as they who Greg. 
partake of bodily food vary their appetites according to the see rail 
nature of the things to be eaten; so also im the food of the | 
soul, by some indeed that is desired which depends upon the 
opinion of men, by others, that which is essentially and of its 
own nature good. Hence, according to Matthew, men are 
blessed who account righteousness in the place of food and 
drink; by righteousness I mean not a particular butan universal 
virtue, which he who hungers after is said to be blessed. BEDE; 
Plainly instructing us, that we ought never to account our- 
selves sufficiently righteous, but always desire a daily increase 
in righteousness, to the perfect fulness of which the Psalmist 
shews us that we can not arrive in this world, but in the 
world to come. I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall be Ps. 17, 
made manifest. Hence it follows, For ye shall be filled. 

Grea. Nyss. For to those who hunger and thirst after Greg. 
righteousness He promises abundance of the things they ¥>! sup. 
desire. For none of the pleasures which are sought in this 

VOL. III. P 


210 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


life can satisfy those who pursue them. But the pursuit of 
virtue alone is followed by that reward, which implants a joy 
in the soul that never faileth, CyriL; But poverty is 
followed not only by a want of those things which bring 
delight, but also by a dejected look, because of sorrow. 
Hence it follows, Blessed are ye that weep. He blesses 
those who weep, not those who merely drop tears from their 
eyes, (for this is common to the believing and unbelieving, 
when sorrow befals them,) but rather He calls those blessed, 
who shun a careless life, mixed up with sin, and devoted to 
carnal pleasures, and refuse enjoyments almost weeping from 
their hatred of all worldly things. 

Curys. But godly sorrow is a great thing, and it worketh 
repentance to salvation. Hence St. Paul when he had no 
failings of his own to weep for, mourned for those of others. 
Such grief is the source of gladness, as it follows, For ye 
shall laugh. Yor if we do no good to those for whom we 
weep, we do good to ourselves. For he who thus weeps for 
the sins of others, will not let his own go unwept for; but 
the rather he will not easily fall into sin. Let us not be 
ever relaxing ourselves in this short life, lest we sigh in 
that which is eternal. Let us not seek delights from which 
flow lamentation, and much sorrow, but let us be saddened 
with sorrow which brings forth pardon. We often find 
the Lord sorrowing, never laughing. Basti; Bat He pro- 


: “¢ inises laughing to those who weep; not indeed the noise of 


laughter from the mouth, but a gladness pure and unmixed 
with aught of sorrow. BrprE; He then who on account of 
the riches of the inheritance of Christ, for the bread of eternal 
life, for the hope of heavenly joys, desires to suffer weeping, 
hunger, and poverty, is blessed. But much more blessed is he 
who does not shrink to maintain these virtues in adversity. 
Hence it follows, Blessed are ye when men shall hate you. 
For although men hate, with their wicked hearts they can not 
injure the heart that is beloved by Christ, It follows, And 
when they shall separate you. Let them separate and expel 
you from the synagogue. Christ finds you out, and strengthens 
you. Itfollows; And shall reproach you. Let them reproach 
the name of the Crucified, He Himself raises together with 
Him those that have died with Him, and makes them sit in 


VER, 20—23. ST. LUKE. 231 


heavenly places. It follows, And cust out your name as evil. 

Here he means the name of Christian, which by Jews and 
Gentiles as far as they were able was frequently erased from 

the memory, and cast out by men, when there was no 
cause for hatred, but the Son of man; for in truth they 

who believed on the name of Christ, wished to be called 

after His name. Therefore He teaches that they are to be 
persecuted by men, but are to be blessed beyond men. As 

it follows, Rejoice ye in that day, and weep for joy, for 
behold your reward ts great in heaven. CuHrys. Great and 
littleare measured by the dignity of the speaker. Let us enquire 

then who promised the great reward. If indeed a prophet 

or an apostle, little had been in his estimation great; but now 

it is the Lord in whose hands are eternal treasures and riches 
surpassing man’s conception, who has promised great reward. 
Basi_; Again, great has sometimes a positive signification, Basil. 
as the heaven is great, and the earth is great; but sometimes one 
it has relation to something else, as a great ox or great horse, 

on comparing two things of like nature. I think then that 

great reward will be laid up for those who suffer reproach for 
Christ’s sake, not as in comparison with those things in our 
power, but as being in itself great because given by God. 
Damasc. Those things which may be measured or numbered Damas. 
are used definitely, but that which from a certain excellence Laie 
surpasses all measure and number we call great and much 49. 
indefinitely; as when we say that great is the longsuffering 

of God. 

EvsEB. He then fortifies His disciples against the attacks 
of their adversaries, which they were about to suffer as they 
preached through the whole world; adding, For in like manner 
did their fathers to the prophets. AMBROSE; For the Jews 
persecuted the prophets even to death. Brpe; They 
who speak the truth commonly suffer persecution, yet the 
ancient prophets did not therefore from fear of persecution 
turn away from preaching the truth. 

AMBROSE; In that He says, Blessed are the poor, thou 
hast temperance; which abstains from sin, tramples upon 
the world, seeks not vain delights. In Blessed are they that 
hunger, thou hast righteousness; for he who hungers suffers 
together with the hungry, and by suffering together with him 

P22 


212 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


gives to him, by giving becomes righteous, and his righteous- 

= 112,ness abideth for ever. In Blessed are they that weep now, 
thou hast prudence; which isto weep for the things of time, and 
to seek those which are eternal. In Blessed are ye when men 
hate you, thou hast fortitude; not that which deserves hatred 
for crime, but which suffers persecution for faith. For so thou 
wilt attain to the crown of suffering, if thou slightest the favour 
of men, and seekest that which is from God. 

Temperance therefore brings with it a pure heart; righ- 
teousness, mercy; prudence, peace; fortitude, meekness. The 
virtues are so joined and linked to one another, that he who 
has one seems to have many; and the Saints have each one 
especial virtue, but the more abundant virtue has the richer 
reward. What hospitality in Abraham, what humility, 
but because he excelled in faith, he gained the pre- 
eminence above all others. To every one there are many 
rewards because many incentives to virtue, but that which 
is most abundant in a good action, has the most exceeding 
reward. 


24. But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have 
received your consolation. 

25. Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall 
hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye 
shall mourn and weep. 

26. Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well 
of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets. 


Cyrit; Having said before that poverty for God’s sake is 
the cause of every good thing, and that hunger and weeping 
will not be without the reward of the saints, he goes on to 
denounce the opposite to these as the source of condemnation 
and punishment. But woe unto you rich, for ye have your 
consolation. CurRys. For this expression, woe, is always 
said in the Scriptures to those who cannot escape from 
future punishment. AMBROsE; But although in the abun- 
dance of wealth many are the allurements to crime, yet many 
also are the incitements to virtue. Although virtue requires 
no support, and the offering of the poor man is more com- 
mendable than the liberality of the rich, still it is not those 


VER. 24—26. ST. LUKE. 213 


who possess riches, but those who know not how to use 
them, that are condemned by the authority of the heavenly 
sentence. For as that poor man is more praiseworthy who 
gives without grudging, so is the rich man more guilty, 
who ought to return thanks for what he has received, 
and not to hide without using it the sum which was 
given him for the common good. It is not therefore the 
money, but the heart of the possessor which is in fault. 
And though there be no heavier punishment than to be pre- 
serving with anxious fear what is to serve for the advantage 
of successors, yet since the covetous desires are fed by a 
certain pleasure of amassing, they who have had their 
consolation in the present life, have lost an eternal reward. 
We may here however understand by the rich man the 
Jewish people, or the heretics, or at least the Pharisees, who, 
rejoicing in an abundance of words, and a kind of hereditary 
pride of eloquence, have overstepped the simplicity of true 
faith, and gained to themselves useless treasures. 

BEDE; Woe to you that are full, for ye shall be hungry. 
That rich man clothed in purple was full, feasting sumptu- 
ously every day, but endured in hunger that dreadful “ woe,” 
when from the finger of Lazarus, whom he had despised, he 
begged a drop of water. Basti; Now itis plain that the rule Basil. 
of abstinence is necessary, because the Apostle mentions it pis nue: 
among the fruits of the Spirit. For the subjection of the body 16—19. 
is by nothing so obtained as by abstinence, whereby, as it were olga 5, 
a bridle, it becomes us to keep in check the fervour of youth. 
Abstinence then is the putting to death of sin, the extirpation 
of passions, the beginning of the spiritual life, blunting in 
itself the sting of temptations. But lest there should be any 
agreement with the enemies of God, we must accept every 
thing as the occasion requires, to shew, that to the pure all Tit. 1, 
things ure pure, by coming indeed to the necessaries of life, ‘> 
but abstaining altogether from those which conduce to 
pleasure. But since it is not possible that all should keep 
the same hours, or the same manner, or the same proportion, 
still let there be one purpose, never to wait to be filled, 
for fulness of stomach makes the body itself also unfit for 
its proper functions, sleepy, and inclined to what is hurtful. 
Bepe; In another way. If those are happy who always hunger 


Basil. 
ut sup. 


Chrys. 


Hom. 6. 
in Matt. 


ge 5, 


214 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VI. 


after the works of righteousness, they on the other hand are 
counted to be unhappy, who, pleasing themselves in their 
own desires, suffer no hunger after the true good. It follows, 
Woe to you who laugh, &c. Basit; Whereas the Lord 
reproves those who laugh now, it is plain that there will 
never be a house of laughter to the faithful, especially since 
there is so great a multitude of those who die in sin for whom 
we must mourn. Excessive laughter is a sign of want 
of moderation, and the motion of an unrestrained spirit; but 
ever to express the feelings of our heart with a pleasant- 
ness of countenance is not unseemly. CuHurys. But tell me, 
why art thou distracting and wasting thyself away with 
pleasures, who must stand before the awful judgment, and 
give account of all things done here? BEDE; But because 
flattery being the very nurse of sin, like oil to the flames, 
is wont to minister fuel to those who are on fire with 
sin, he adds, Woe unto you when all men shall speak 
well of you. CuHRys. What is said here is not opposed 
to what our Lord says elsewhere, Let your light shine before 
men; that is, that we should be eager to do good for the 
glory of God, not our own. For vain-glory is a baneful 
thing, and from hence springs iniquity, and despair, and 
avarice, the mother of evil. But if thou seekest to turn 
away from this, ever raise thy eyes to God, and be content 
with that glory which is from Him. For if in all things we 
must choose the more learned for judges, how dost thou trust 
to the many the decision of virtue, and not rather to Him, 
who before all others knoweth it, and can give and reward it, 
whose glory therefore if thou desirest, avoid the praise of 
men. Forno one more excites our admiration than he who 
rejects glory. And if we do this, much more does the God 
of all. Be mindful then, that the glory of men quickly 
faileth, seeing in the course of time it is past into oblivion. 
It follows, For so did their fathers to the false prophets. 
BEDE; By the false prophets are meant those, who to 
gain the favour of the multitude attempt to predict future 
events. The Lord on the mountain pronounces only the 
blessings of the good, but on the plain he describes also 
the “woe” of the wicked, because the yet uninstructed 
hearers must first be brought by terrors to good works, but 


VER. 27—S31. ST. LUKE. 215 


the perfect need but be invited by rewards. AMBROSE; And 
mark, that Matthew by rewards called the people to virtue 
and faith, but Luke also frightened them from their sins and 
iniquities by the denunciation of future punishment. 


27. But I say unto you which hear, Love your 
enemies, do good to them which hate you, 

28. Bless them that curse you, and pray for them 
which despitefully use you. 

29. And unto him that smiteth thee on the one 
cheek offer also the other; and him that taketh away 
thy cloke forbid not to take thy coat also. 

30. Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of 
him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again. 

31. And as ye would that men should do to you, 
do ye also to them likewise. 


Brpr; Having spoken above of what they might suffer 
from their enemies, He now points out how they ought to 
conduct themselves towards their enemies, saying, But J say 
to you who hear. AMBROSE; Having proceeded in the enu- 
meration of many heavenly actions, He not unwisely comes to 
this place last, that He might teach the people confirmed by 
the divine miracles to march onward in the footsteps of 
virtue beyond the path of the law. Lastly, among the three 
greatest, (hope, faith, and charity,) the greatest is charity, 
which is commanded in these words, Love your enemies. 
BasiL; It is indeed the part of an enemy to injure and be Basil. 
treacherous. Every one then who does harm in any way tObrey 
any one is called his enemy. CyriL; But this way of life was 176 
well adapted to the holy teachers who were about to preach 
throughout the earth the word of salvation, and if it had been 
their will to take vengeance upon their persecutors, had 
failed to call them to the knowledge of salvation. CHRys. Chrys. 
But He says not, Do not hate, but Jove; nor did He merely ae 
command to love, but also to do good, as it follows, Do Matt. 
good to them which hate you. Basit; But because man Basil. 
consists of body and soul, to the soul indeed we shall do °! ™P- 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
18, in 
Matt. 


216 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


this good, by reproving and admonishing such men, and 
leading them by the hand to conversion; but to the body, 
by profiting them in the necessaries of life. 

It follows, Bless them that curse you. Curys. For they who 
pierce their own souls deserve tears and weeping, not curses. 
For nothing is more hateful than a cursing heart, or more foul 
than a tongue which utters curses. O man, spit not forth 
the poison of asps, nor be turned into a beast. Thy mouth 
was given thee not to bite with, but to heal the wounds of 
others. But he commands us to count our enemies in the 
rank of our friends, not only in a general way, but as our 
particular friends for whom we are accustomed to pray; as it 
follows, Pray for them which persecute you. But many on 
the contrary falling down, and striking their faces upon the 
ground, and stretching forth their hands, pray God not for 
their sins, but against their enemies, which is nothing else but 
piercing their own selves. When thou prayest to Him that 
He would hear thee cursing thy enemies, who has forbidden 
thee to pray against thy enemies, how is it possible for thee 
to be heard, since thou art calling Him to hear thee by stnking 
an enemy in the king’s presence, not with the hand indeed, but 
with thy words. What art thou doing, O man? thou standest 
to obtain pardon of your sins, and thou fillest thy mouth with 
bitterness. It is a time of forgiveness, prayer, and mourning, 
not of rage. BEDE; But the question is fairly raised, how 
it is that in the prophets are to be found many curses against 
their enemies. Upon which we must observe, that the pro- 
phets in the imprecations they uttered foretold the future, and 
that not with the feelings of one who wishes, but in the 
spirit of one who foresees. CyriL; Now the old law com- 
manded us not to injure one another; or if we are first 
injured, not to extend our wrath beyond the measure of the 
injurer, but the fulfilling of the law is in Christ and in His 
commands. Hence it follows, And unto him that smiteth 
thee on the one cheek, offer also the other. 

Curys. For physicians also, when they are attacked by mad- 
men, have then most compassion on them, and exert themselves 
to restore them. Have thou also a like consideration towards 
thy persecutors; for it is they who are under the greatest 
infirmity. And let us not cease until they have exhausted 


VER. 27—$81. ST. LUKE. | 217 


all their bitterness, they will then overpower thee with thanks, 
and God Himself will give thee a crown, because thou hast 
delivered thy brother from the worst disease. BasiIL; But we Basil. 
almost all of us offend against this command, and especially ir ee 
the powerful and rulers, not only if they have suffered insult, in App. 
but if respect is not paid them, accounting all those their 
enemies who treat them with less consideration than they 
think they deserve. But it is a great dishonour in a prince 
to be ready to take revenge. For how shall he teach another, 
to return to no man evil for evil, if he is eager to retaliate on Rom. 
him who injures him. | ine 
CyriL; But the Lord would moreover have us to be de- 
spisersof property. Asit follows, Andhim that takethaway thy 
cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also. For this is the soul’s 
virtue, which is altogether alien from feeling the pleasure of 
wealth. For it becomes him who is merciful even to forget his 
misfortunes, that we may confer the same benefits upon our 
persecutors, whereby we assist our dear friends. CHRys. Chrys. 
Now He said not, Bear humbly the rule of thy persecutor, Eph es 
but, Go on wisely, and prepare thyself to suffer what he desires 
thee to do; overcoming his insolence by thy great prudence, 
that he may depart with shame at thy excellent endurance. 
But some one will say, How can this be? When thou hast 
seen God made man, and suffering so many things for thee, 
dost thou still ask and doubt how it is possible to pardon 
the iniquities of thy fellow servants? Who has suffered what 
thy God has, when He was bound, scourged, enduring to be 
spat upon, suffering death? Here it follows, But to every 
one who seeks, give. Auc. He says not, To him that seeketh Aug. 

. : deSerm. 
give all things, but give what you justly and honestly can, pom, 
that is, what as far as man can know or believe, neither !>- 7 
hurts you, nor another: and if thou hast justly refused any : 
one, the justice must be declared to him, (so as not to send 
him away empty,) sometimes thou wilt confer even a greater 
boon when thou hast corrected him who seeks what he ought 
not. Curys. Herein however we do not lightly err, when not 
only we give not to those who seek, but also blame them? Why 
(you say) does he not work, why is the idle man fed? Tell 
me, dost thou then possess by labour? but still if thou workest, 
dost thou work for this, that thou shouldest blame another? For 


218 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


a single loaf and coat dost thou call a man covetous? Thou 
givest nothing, make then no reproaches. Why dost thou neither 
take pity thyself, and dissuadest those who would? If we spend 
upon all indifferently, we shall always have compassion: for be- 
cause Abraham entertains all, he also entertains angels. For if 
a man is a homicide and a robber, does he not, thinkest thou, 
deserve to have bread? Let us not then be severe censors of 
others, lest we too be strictly judged. 
It follows, And of him that taketh away thy goods, ask 
Chrys. them not again. Curys. Every thing we have we receive 
io.in from God. But when we speak of “ mine and thine,” they 
1 Cor. are only bare words. For if you assert a house to be yours, 
you have uttered an expression which wants the substance of 
reality. For both the air, the soil, and the moisture, are the 
Creator’s. ‘Thou again art he who has built the house; but 
although the use is thine, it is doubtful, not only because of 
death, but also on account of the issues of things. Thy soul 
is not thy own possession, and will be reckoned to thee in like 
manner as all thy goods. God wishes those things to be 
thine which are entrusted to thee for thy brethren, and they 
will be thine if thou hast dispensed them for others. But if 
thou hast spent richly upon thyself what things are thine, 
they are now become another's. But through a wicked 
desire of wealth men strive together in a state contrary to 
Christ’s words, And of him that taketh away thy goods, 
Aug. ask them not again. Avuc. He says this of garments, 
ane houses, farms, beasts of burdens, and generally of all property. 
lib. 1. But a Christian ought not to possess a slave as he does a 
° horse or money. If a slave is more honourakly governed 
by thee than by him who desires to take him from thee, I 
know not whether any one would dare to say, that he ought 
ut vesti-to be despised, as a garment. 
pei Curys. Now we have a natural law implanted in us, by 
Hoo. which we distinguish between what is virtue, and what is 
Pon vice. Hence it follows, And as ye would that men should 
Ant. dounto you, do ye also to them. WHe does not say, What- 
ever ye would not that men should do unto you, do not ye. 
For since there are two ways which lead to virtue, namely, 
abstaining from evil, and doing good, he names one, signifying 
by it the other also. And if indeed He had said, That ye may 


VER. 32—S86. ST. LUKE. 219 


be men, love the beasts, the command would be a difficult 
one. But if they are commanded to love men, which is a 
natural admonition, wherein lies the difficulty, since even 
the wolves and lions observe it, whom a natural relation 
compels to love one another. It is manifest then that 
Christ has ordained nothing surpassing our nature, but what 
He had long before implanted in our conscience, so that thy 
own will is the law to thee. And if thou wilt have good 
done unto thee, thou must do good to others; if thou wilt that 
another should shew mercy to thee, thou must shew mercy to 
thy neighbour. 


32. For if ye love them which love you, what 
thank have ye? for sinners also love those that love 
them. 

33. And if ye do good to them which do good to 
you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even 
the same. 

34. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to 
receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to 
sinners, to receive as much again. 

35. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and 
lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall 
be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest : 
for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil. 

36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also 
is merciful. 


Curys. The Lord had said that we must love our enemies, Chrys. 
but that you might not think this an exaggerated expression, 19m.) 
regarding it solely as spoken to alarm them, he adds the reason, 
saying, For if you love them which love you, what thank 
have ye? There are indeed several causes which produce 
love; but spiritual love exceeds them all. For nothing 
earthly engenders it, neither gain, nor kindness, nor nature, 
nor time, but it descends from heaven. But why wonder 
that it needs not kindness to excite it, when it is not even 


overcome of malice? A father indeed sufferimg wrong 


220 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


bursts the bands of love. A wife after a quarrel leaves her 
husband. A son, if he sees his father come to a great age, 


Acts 14,18 troubled. But Paul went to those who stoned him to do 


Exod. 
17, 40. 


Chrys, 
Hom. 
58. in 
Gen. 


Greg. 
Orat. 
cont. 
usurar. 


them good. Moses is stoned by the Jews, and prays for them. 
Let us then reverence spiritual love, for it is indissoluble. 
Reproving therefore those who were inclined to wax cold, 
he adds, For sinners even love those which love them. As 
if he said, Because I wish you to possess more than these, 
I do not advise you only to love your friends, but also 
your enemies. It is common to all to do good to those who 
do good to them. But he shews that he seeks something 
more than is the custom of sinners, who do good to their 
friends. Hence it follows, And if you do good to those who 
do good to you, what thank have ye? 

BEDE; But he not only condemns as unprofitable the love 
and kindness of sinners, but also the lending. Asit follows, And 
if ye lend to those from whom ye hope to receive, what thank 
have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much 
again. AMBROSE; Now philosophy seems to divide justice 
into three parts; one towards God, which is called piety; 
another towards our parents, or the rest of mankind; a third 
to the dead, that the proper rites may be performed. But 
the Lord Jesus passing beyond the oracle of the law, and the 
heights of prophecy, extended the duties of piety to those 
also who have injured us, adding, But love your enemies. 
Currys. Whereby thou wilt confer more upon thyself than 
him. For heis beloved by a fellow servant, but thou art made 
like unto God. But it is a mark of the greatest virtue when 
we embrace with kindness those who wish to do us harm. 
Hence it follows, And do good. For as water, when cast upon 
a lighted furnace, extinguishes it, so also reason joined with 
gentleness. But what water is to fire, such is lowliness and 
meekness to wrath; and as fire is not extinguished by fire, 
so neither is anger soothed by anger. 

GrecG. Nyss. But man ought to shun that baneful anxiety 
with which he seeks from the poor man increase of his money 
and gold, exacting a profit of barren metals. Hence he adds, 
And lend, hoping for nothing again, &c. If a man should 
call the harsh calculation of interest, theft, or homicide, he 
will not crr. For what is the difference, whether a man by 


VER. 32—36. ST. LUKE. 22 1 


digging under a wall become possessed of property, or 
possess it unlawfully by the compulsory rate of interest? 
BasiL; Now this mode of avarice is rightly called in the Basi. 
Greek téxoc, from producing, because of the fruitfulness of a 
the evil. Animals in course of time grow up and produce, 
but interest as soon as it is born begins to bring forth. 
Animals which bring forth most rapidly cease soonest from 
breeding, but the money of the avaricious goes on increasing 

with time. Animals when they transfer their bringing forth 

to their own young, themselves cease to breed, but the 
money of the covetous both produces an increase, and renews 

the capital. Touch not then the destructive monster. For 
what advantage that the poverty of to-day is escaped, if it 

falls upon us repeatedly, and is increased? Reflect then how 
canst thou restore thyself? Whence shall thy money be so 
multiplied as that it will partly relieve thy want, partly refresh 

thy capital, and besides bring forth interest? But thou sayest, 

How shall I get my living? I answer, work, serve, last of all, 

beg; any thing is more tolerable than borrowing upon interest. 

But thou sayest, what is that lending to which the hope of 
repayment is not attached? Consider the excellence of the 
words, and thou wilt admire the mercifulness of the author. 
When thou art about to give to a poor man from regard to 
divine charity, itis both a lending and a gift; a gift indeed, 
because no return is hoped for; lending, because of the 
beneficence of God, who restores it in its turn. Hence 

it follows, And great shall be your reward. Dost thou not 

wish the Almighty to be bound to restore to thee? Or, should 

He make some rich citizen thy security, dost thou accept 

him, but reject God standing as security for the poor? 
Curys. Observe the wonderful nature of lending, one receives Chrys. 
and another binds himself for his debts, giving a hundred ane 
fold at the present time, and in the future eternal life. 
AMBROSE; How great the reward of mercy which is received 

into the privilege of divine adoption! For it follows, And Ps. 82, 
ye shall be the sons of the Highest. ¥ollow then mercy, that e 

ye may obtain grace. Widely spread is the mercy of God; 

He pours His rain upon the unthankful, the fruitful earth 
refuses not its increase to the evil. Hence it follows, For 

he is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil. BEDE; Either 


Athan. 
Orat. 3. 
cont. 
Arian. 


222 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


by giving them temporal gifts, or by inspiring His heavenly 
gifts with a wonderful grace. 

CyriL; Great then isthe praise of mercy. For this virtue 
makes us like unto God, and imprints upon our souls certain 
signs as it were of a heavenly nature. Hence it follows, Be 
ye then merciful, as your heavenly Father also is merciful. 
ATHAN. That isto say, that we beholding His mercies, what good 
things we do should do them not with regard to men, but to 
Him, that we may obtain our rewards from God, not from men. 


37. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: con- 
demn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, 
and ye shall be forgiven : 

38. Give, and it shall be given unto you: good 
measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and 
running over, shall men give into your bosom. For 
with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall 
be measured to you again. 


AMBROSE; The Lord added, that we must not readily judge 
others, lest when conscious of guilt thyself, thou shouldest be 
compelled to pass sentence upon another. Curys. Judge 
not thy superior, that is, thou a disciple must not judge thy 
master, nor a sinner the innocent. Thou must not blame 
them, but advise and correct with love; neither must we pass 
judgment in doubtful and indifferent matters, which bear no 
resemblance to sin, or which are not serious or forbidden. 
Cyrit; He here expresses that worst inclination of our 
thoughts or hearts, which is the first beginning and origin 
of a proud disdain. For although it becomes men to look 
into themselves and walk after God, this they do not, but 
look into the things of others, and while they forget their 
own passions, behold the infirmities of some, and make 
them a subject of reproach. Curys. You will not easily 
find any one, whether a father of a family or an inhabitant of 
the cloister, free from this error. But these are the wiles of 
the tempter. For he who severely sifts the fault of others, 
will never obtain acquittal for his own. Hence it follows, 
And ye shall not be judged. For as the merciful and meek 


VER. 37, 38. ST. LUKE. 223 


man dispels the rage of sinners, so the harsh and cruel adds 

to his own crimes. Grea. Nyss. Be not then rash to judge 

harshly of your servants, lest ye suffer the like. For passing 

judgment calls down a heavier condemnation; as it follows, 

Condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned. For he does 

not forbid judgment with pardon. BrpE; Now in a short 

sentence he concisely sums up all that he had enjoined with 

respect to our conduct towards our enemies, saying, Forgive, 

and ye shall be forgiven, wherein he bids us forgive injuries, 

and shew kindness, and our sins shall be forgiven us, and we 

shall receive eternal life. CyriL; But that we shall receive 

more abundant recompense from God, who gives bountifully 

to those who love him, he explains as follows, Good measure, 

pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall 

they give into your bosom. THEOoPHYL. As if he says, As 

when you wish to measure meal without sparing, you press it 

down, shake it together, and let it pour over abundantly ; so 

the Lord will give a large and overflowing measure into your 

bosom. Aue. But he says, shall they give, because through aS e 

the merits of those to whom they have given even a cup of cold "i, q. 8 

water in the name of a disciple, shall they be thought worthy a 10, 

to receive a heavenly reward. It follows, For with the same 

measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you 

again. Basi; For according to the same measure with Basil. 
Hom.in 

which each one of you metes, that is, in doing good works or p,, ¢j. 

sinning, will he receive reward or punishment. THEOPHYL. 

But some one will put the subtle question, “ If the return is 

made overabundantly, how is it the same measure?” to which 

we answer, that He said not, “ In just as great a measure shall 

it be measured to you again, but in the same measure.” For 

he who has shewn mercy, shall have mercy shewn unto him, 

and this is measuring again with the same measure; but our 

Lord spoke of the measure running over, because to such 

a one He will shew mercy a thousand times. So also in 

judging ; for he that judges and afterwards is judged receives 

the same measure. But as far as he was judged the more 

severely that he judged one like unto himself, was the measure 

running over. CyRIL; But the Apostle explains this when 

he says, He who sows sparingly, (that is, scantily, and with 3 rg 

a niggardly hand,) shall also reap sparingly, (that is, not © 


Q24 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


abundantly,) and he who sows blessings, shall reap also 
blessings, that is, bountifully. But if a man has not, and 
performs not, he is not guilty. For a man is accepted in 
that which he has, not in that which he has not. 


39. And he spake a parable unto them, Can the 
blind lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the 
ditch ? 

40. The disciple is not above his master: but every 
one that is perfect shall be as his master. 

41. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in 
thy brother’s eye, but perceivest not the beam that is 
in thine own eye? 

42. Either how canst thou say to thy brother, 
Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, 
when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in 
thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the 
beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou 
see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy 
brother's eye. 


CyriL; The Lord added to what had gone before a very 
necessary parable, as it is said, And he spake a parable to 
them, for His disciples were the future teachers of the world, 
and it therefore became them to know the way of a virtuous 
life, having their minds illuminated as it were by a divine 
brightness, that they should not be blind leaders of the blind. 
And then he adds, Can the blind lead the blind? But if any 
should chance to attain unto an equal degree of virtue with 
their teachers, let them stand in the measure of their 
teachers, and follow their footsteps. Hence it follows, 
The disciple is not above his master. Hence also Paul says, 

1 ear, 1, Be ye also followers of me, as [ am of Christ. Since Christ 
therefore judged not, why judgest thou? for He came not 
to judge the world, but to shew mercy. THEOPHYL. Or else, 
If thou judgest another, and in the very same way sinnest 
thyself, art not thou like to the blind leading the blind? For 
how canst thou lead him to good when thou also thyself com- 
mittest sin? For the disciple is not above his master. If 


VER. 389—A42. ST. LUKE. 225 


therefore thou sinnest, who thinkest thyself a master and guide, 
where will he be who is tanght and led by thee? For he 
will be the perfect disciple who is as his master. BrEpDr; 
Or the sense of this sentence depends upon the former, in 
which we are enjoined to give alms, and forgive injuries. 
If, says He, anger has blinded thee against the violent, and 
avarice against the grasping, how canst thou with thy corrupt 
heart cure his corruption? If even thy Master Christ, 
who as God might revenge His injuries, chose rather by 
patience to render His persecutors more merciful, it is 
surely binding on His disciples, who are but men, to follow 
the same rule of perfection. Aue. Or, He has added the Aug. de 
words, Can the blind, lead the blind, in order that they “ai . 
might not expect to receive from the Levites that measure of 
which He says, They shall give into thy bosom, because 
they gave tithes to them. And these He calls blind, because 
they received not the Gospel, that the people might the 
rather now begin to hope for that reward through the dis- 
ciples of the Lord, whom wishing to point out as His imi- 
tators, He added, The disciple is not abeve his master. 
THEOPHYL. But the Lord introduces another parable taken 
from the same figure, as follows, But why seest thou the 
mote (that is, the slight fault) which is in thy brother's eye, 
but the beam which is in thine own eye (that is, thy 
great sin) thou regardest nut? BrEpE; Now this has refer- 
ence to the previous parable, in which He forewarned 
them that the blind cannot be led by the blind, that 
is, the sinner corrected by the sinner. Hence it is said, Or, 
how canst thou say to thy brother, Brother let me cast out 
the mote that is in thine eye, if thou seest not the beam that is 
in thine own eye? Cyrit; As if He said, How can he who 
is guilty of grievous sins, (which He calls the beam,) condemn 
him who has sinned only slightly, or even in some cases not 
atall? For this the mote signifies. THEOPHYL. But these words 
are applicable to all, and especially to teachers, who while 
they punish the least sins of those who are put under them, 
leave their own unpunished. Wherefore the Lord calls them 
hypocrites, because to this end judge they the sins of others, 
that they themselves might seem just. Hence it follows, 
Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye, §c. 
VOL. III. Q 


296 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


CyriL; That is to say, first shew thyself clean from great 
sins, and then afterwards shalt thou give counsel to thy 
Basil. neighbour, who is guilty only of slight sins. Basit; In truth, 
Hom) self knowledge seems the most important of all. For not 
ameron. only the eye, looking at outward things, fails to exercise 
its sight upon itself, but our understanding also, though 
very quick in apprehending the sin of another, is slow to 
perceive its own defects. 


43. For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt 
fruit; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth good 
fruit. 


44, For every tree is known by his own fruit. For 
of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble 
bush gather they grapes. 

45. A good man out of the good treasure of his 
heart bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil 
man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth 
that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart 
his mouth speaketh. 


BevE; Our Lord continues the words which He had begun 
against the hypocrites, saying, For a good tree bringeth not 
forth corrupt fruit; i.e. as if He says, If thou wouldest have 
a true and unfeigned righteousness, what thou settest forth in 
words make up also in works, for the hypocrite though he pre- 
tends to be good is not good, who doeth evil works; and 
the innocent though he be blamed, is not therefore evil, who 
doeth good works. Titus Bos. But take not these words to 
thyself as an encouragement to idleness, for the tree is moved 
conformably to its nature, but thou hast the exercise of free 
will; and every barren tree has been ordained for some good, 
but thou wert created unto the good work of virtue. IstDoRE 

Is, Pel. PELEUS; He does not then exclude repentance, but a con- 
7 3], tinuance in evil, which as long as it is evil cannot bring forth 
good fruit, but being converted to virtue, will yield abun- 
dance. But what nature is to the tree, our affections are to 


us. If then a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit, 
how shall a corrupt heart? 


VER. 43— 45. ST. LUKE. 227 


Curys. But although the fruit is caused by the tree, yet Chrys. 
it brings to us the knowledge of the tree, because the dis- ome 
tinctive nature of the tree is made evident by the fruit, as it Matt. 
follows, For every tree is known by its fruit. Cyrit; 
Each man’s life also will be a criterion of his character. For 
not by extrinsic ornaments and pretended humility is the 
beauty of true happiness discovered, but by those things 
which a man does; of which he gives an illustration, adding, 

For of thorns men do not gather figs. 

AMBROSE; On the thorns of this world the fig cannot be 
found, which as being better in its second fruit, is well fitted 
to be a similitude of the resurrection. Either because, as 
you read, The fig trees have put forth their green figs, Cant. 2, 
that is, the unripe and worthless fruit came first in the!* 
Synagogue. Or because our life is imperfect in the flesh, 
perfect in the resurrection, and therefore we ought to cast far 
from us worldly cares, which eat into the mind and scorch up 
the soul, that by diligent culture we may obtain the perfect 
fruits. ‘This therefore has reference to the world and the 
resurrection, the next to the soul and the body, as it follows, 
Nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes. Either because 
no one living in sin obtains fruit to his soul, which like the 
grape nearest the ground is rotten, on the higher branches 
becomes ripe. Or because no one can escape the con- 
demnations of the flesh, but he whom Christ has redeemed, 
Who as a grape hung on the tree. 

BEDE; Or, I think the thorns and bramble are the cares 
of the world and the prickings of sin, but the figs and the 
grapes are the sweetness of a new life and the warmth of 
love, but the fig is not gathered from the thorns nor the grape 
from the bramble, because the mind still debased by the 
habits of the old man may pretend to, but cannot bring forth 
the fruits of the new man. But we must know, that as the 
fruitful palm tree is inclosed and supported by a hedge, and 
the thorn bearing fruit not its own, preserves it for the use 
of man, so the words and acts of the wicked wherein they 
serve the good are not done by the wicked themselves, but by 
the wisdom of God working upon them. 

Cyrit; But having shewn that the good and the bad man 
may be discerned by their works as a tree by its fruits, he 

Q2 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
42. in 
Matt. 


228 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ’ CHAP, VIc 


now sets forth the same thing by another figure, saying, .4 
good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth’ 
that which is good, and the evil man out of the evil treasure 
bringeth forth that which ts evil. Brpe; The treasure of the 
heart is the same as the root of the tree. He therefore who 
has in his heart the treasure of patience and perfect love, 
brings forth the best fruits, loving his enemy, and doing the 
other things which have been taught above. But he who 
keeps a bad treasure in his heart does the contrary to this. 
BasiL; The quality of the words shews the heart from which 
they proceed, plainly manifesting the inclination of our 
thoughts. Hence it follows, For out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speaketh. Curys. For it is a natural 
consequence when wickedness abounds within, that wicked 
words are breathed as far as the mouth; and therefore when 
you hear of a man uttering abominable things, do not sup- 
pose that there lies only so much wickedness in him as is ex- 
pressed in his words, but believe the fountain to be more 
copious than the stream. BEDE; By the speaking of the 
mouth the Lord signifies all things, which by word, or deed, 
or thought, we bring forth from the heart. For it is the manner 
of the Scripture to put words for deeds. 


46. And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not 
the things which I say? 

47. Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my 
sayings, and doeth them, I will shew you to whom 
he is like: 

48. He is like a man which built an house, and 
digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock: and 
when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently 
upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was 
founded upon a rock. 

49. But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a 
man that without a foundation built an house upon 
the earth: against which the stream did beat vehe- 
mently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that 
house was great. 


VER. 46—49. ST. LUKE. 229 


Bebe; Lest any one should vainly flatter himself with the 
words, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, 
as if words only and not rather works were required of a 
Christian, our Lord adds the following, But why call ye 
me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? As if 
He said, Why do ye boast of sending forth the leaves of a 
right confession, and shew forth no fruit of good works. CyRIL; 

But Lordship both in name and reality belongs only to 

the Highest Nature. ATHAN. This is not then the word of Athan. 
man, but the Word of God, manifesting His own birth from peta 
the Father, for He is the Lord Who is born of the Lord bell. 
alone. But fear not the duality of Persons, for they are not 
separate in nature. 

CyriL; But the advantage which arises from the keeping of 

the commandments, or the loss from disobedience, he shews 
as follows; Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, 
he is like to a man who built his house upon a rock, &c. 
BEDE; The rock is Christ. He digs deep; by the precepts 
of humility He plucks out all earthly things from the hearts 
of the faithful, lest they should serve God from regard to 
their temporal good. Basi; But lay your foundations upon Basil. 
a rock, that is, lean upon the faith of Christ, so as to per- BE 
severe immoveable in adversity, whether it cOme from man 
or God. BeEpeE; Or the foundation of the house is the 
resolution to live a good life, which the perfect hearer firmly 
lays in fulfilling the commandments of God. AMBROSE; Or, 
He teaches that the obedience to heavenly precepts is the 
foundation of all virtue, by means of which this our house 
can be moved neither by the torrent of pleasures, nor by the 
violence of spiritual wickedness, neither by the storms of this 
world, nor by the cloudy disputations of heretics; hence it fol- 
lows, But the flood came, §c. BEDE; A flood comes in three 
ways, either by unclean spirits, or wicked men, or the very 
restlessness of mind or body; and as far as men trust in their 
own strength they fall away, but as long as they cling to the 
immoveable rock they cannot even be shaken. 

Curys. The Lord also shews us that faith profiteth a man Chrys, 
nothing, if his manner of life be corrupt. Hence it follows, rage 
But he that heareth and doeth not, ts like a man, that with- Matt. 
out a foundation, built an house upon the earth, &c. BEDE; 


1 John 
5d, LY. 


230 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VI. 


The house of the devil is the world which lieth in wickedness, 
which he builds upon the earth, because those who obey him 
he drags down from heaven to earth; he builds without 
foundation, for sin has no foundation, standing not by its 
own nature, for evil is without substance, which yet whatever it 
is, grows up in the nature of good. But because the found- 
ation is called so from fundus, we may not unfitly understand 
that fundamentum is placed here for fundus. As then he who 
is fallen into a well is kept at the bottom of the well, so the 
soul falling away remains stationary, as it were, at the very 
bottom, as long as it continues in any measure of sin. But 
not content with the sin into which it is fallen, while daily 
sinking into worse, it can find no bottom, as it were, in the 
well to which it may fix itself. But every kind of tempt- 
ation increasing, both the really bad and the feignedly good 
become worse, until at last they come to everlasting punish- 
ment. Hence it follows, Against which the stream did beat 
vehemently. By the force of the stream may be understood 
the trial of the last judgment, when both houses being finished, 


riled the wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, but the 


Aug. de 
Con. Ev 


li. 19, 


righteous into life eternal. Cyrit; Or they build upon the 
earth without foundation, who upon the quicksand of doubt, 
which relates to opinion, lay the foundation of their spiritual 
building, which a few drops of temptation wash away. 

Ava. Now this long discourse of our Lord, Luke begins 


"in the same way as Matthew; for each says, Blessed are the 


poor. Then many things. which follow in the narration of 
each are like, and finally the conclusion of the discourse 1s 
found to be altogether the same, I mean with respect to the 
men who build upon the rock and the sand. It might 
then easily be supposed that Luke has inserted the same 
discourse of our Lord, and yet has left out some sentences 
which Matthew has kept, and likewise put in others which 
Matthew has not; were it not that Matthew says the dis- 
course was spoken by our Lord on the mountain, but Luke 
on the plain by our Lord standing. It is not however thought 
likely from this that these two discourses are separated by a 
long course of time, because both before and after both have 
related some things like, or the same. It may however have 
happened that our Lord was at first on a higher part of the 


VER. 46—49. ST. LUKE. 231 


mountain with His disciples alone, and that then he descended 
with them from the mount, that is, from the summit of the 
mountain to the flat place, that is, to some level ground, which 
was on the side of the mountain, and was able to hold large 
multitudes, and that there He stood until the crowds were 
gathered together to Him, and afterwards when He sat down 
His disciples came nearer, and to them, and the rest of the 
multitude who were present, He held the same discourse. 


CHAP. VII. 


1. Now when he had ended all his sayings in the 
audience of the people, he entered into Capernaum. 

2. And a certain centurion’s servant, who was dear 
unto him, was sick, and ready to die. 

3. And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him 
the elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would 
come and heal his servant. 

4. And when they came to Jesus, they besought 
him instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom 
he should do this: 

5. For he loveth our nation, and he hath built us 
a synagogue. 

6. Then Jesus went with them. And when he 
was now not far from the house, the centurion sent 
friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not 
thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest 
come under my roof: 

7. Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to 
come unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant 
shall be healed. 

8. For I also am a man set under authority, 
having under me soldiers, and I say unto one, Go, 
and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; 
and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. 

9. When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled 
at him, and turned him about, and said unto the 


VER. 1—10. : ST. LUKE. 233 


people that followed him, I say unto you, I have not 
found so great faith, no, not in Israel. 

10. And they that were sent, returning to the house, 
found the servant whole that had been sick. 


Titus Bost. When He had strengthened His disciples by 
more perfect teaching, He goes to Capernaum to work 
miracles there; as it is said, When he had ended all his 
sayings, he entered into Capernaum. Avuc. Here we must Aug. de 
understand that He did not enter before He had ended these ae ne 
sayings, but it is not mentioned what space of time intervened 
between the termination of His discourse, and His entering 
into Capernaum. For in that interval the leper was cleansed 
whom Matthew introduced in his proper place. AMBROSE; 

But having finished His teaching, He rightly instructs them 

to follow the example of His precepts. For straightway the 
servant of a Gentile centurion is presented to the Lord to be 
healed. Now the Evangelist, when he said that the servant 
was about to die, did not err, because he would have died 
had he not been healed by Christ. Evuses. Although that 
centurion was strong in battle, and the prefect of the Roman 
soldiers, yet because his particular attendant lay sick at his 
house, considering what wonderful things the Saviour had 
done in healing the sick, and judging that these miracles 
were performed by no human power, he sends to Him, as unto 
God, not looking to the visible instrument by which He 
had intercourse with men; as it follows, And when he heard 

of Jesus, he sent unto him, §&c. Auc. How then will that Aug. 
be true which Matthew relates, A certain centurion came to °™' ™?- 
him, seeing that he himself did not come? unless upon 
careful consideration we suppose that Matthew made use of 

a general mode of expression. For if the actual arrival is 
frequently said to be through the means of others, much 
more may the coming be by others. Not then without reason, 
(the centurion having gained access to our Lord through 
others,) did Matthew, wishing to speak briefly, say that 
this man himself came to Christ, rather than those by whom 

he sent his message, for the more he believed the nearer he 
came. Curys. How again does Matthew tell us that the ole 


centurion said, J am not worthy that thou shouldest enter 26. in 
att. 


234 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP VII. 


under my roof, while Luke says here, that he beseeches Him 
that He would come. Now it seems to me that Luke sets 
before us the flatteries of the Jews. For we may believe 
that when the centurion wished to depart, the Jews drew 
him back, enticing him, saying, We will go and bring him. 
Hence also their prayers are full of flattery, for it follows, 
But when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, 
saying that he was worthy. Although it became them to have 
said, He himself was willing to come and supplicate Thee, but 
we detained him, seeing the affliction, and the body which 
was lying in the house, and so to have drawn out the greatness 
of his faith; but they would not for envy reveal the faith of 
the man, lest He should seem some great one to whom the 
prayers were addressed. But wherein Matthew represents 
the centurion to be not an Israelite, while Luke says, he has 
built us a synagogue, there is no contradiction, for he might 
not have been a Jew, and yet built a synagogue. Bens; 
But herein they shew, that as by a church, so also by a 
synagogue, they were wont to mean not only the assembly 
of the faithful, but also the place where they assembled. 
Euses. And the elders of the Jews indeed demand favours 
for a sma]l sum spent in the service of the synagogue, but 
the Lord not for this, but a higher reason, manifested Him- 
self, wishing in truth to beget a belief in all men by His own 
power, as it follows, Then Jesus went with them. AMBROSE; 
Which certainly He did not do, because He was unable to 
heal when absent, but that He might set them an example of 
imitating His humility. He would not go to the son of the 
nobleman, lest He should seem thereby to have respected 
his riches; He went immediately here, that He might not 
seem to have despised the low estate of a centurion’s 
servant. But the centurion laying aside his military pride 
puts on humility, being both willing to believe and eager 
to honour; as it follows, And when he was not far off, 
he sent unto him, saying, Trouble not thyself: for I am 
not worthy, &c. For by the power not of man, but of God, 
he supposed that health was given to man. The Jews indeed 
alleged his worthiness; but he confessed himself unwortby 
not only of the benefit, but even of receiving the Lord under 
his roof, For [ am not worthy that thou shouldest enter 


ver. 1—10. ST. LUKE. 235 


under my roof. CHRys. For as soon as he was freed from Chrys. 
the annoyance of the Jews, he then sends, saying, Think upEsup: 
not that it was from negligence I came not unto Thee, but 

I counted myself unworthy to receive Thee in my house. 
AMBROSE; But Luke well says, that friends were sent by the 
centurion to meet our Lord, lest by his own coming he 
might seem both to embarrass our Lord, and to have called 

for a requital of good offices. Hence it follows, Wherefore 
neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee, but say 

in a word, and my servant shall be healed. 

Curys. Here observe that the centurion held a right opi- Chrys. 
nion concerning the Lord; he said not, pray, but, command ; * a 
and in doubt lest He should from humility refuse him, he adds, 

For I also am aman set under authority, §c. BEDE; He says 

that he though a man subject to the power of the tribune or 
governor, yet has command over his inferiors, that it might 

be implied that much more is He who is God, able not only 

by the presence of His body, but by the services of His 
angels, to fulfil whatever He wishes. For the weakness of the 
flesh or the hostile powers were to be subdued both by the 
word of the Lord and the ministry of the angels. And to my 
servant, Do this, &c. Currys. We must here remark, that this Chrys. 
word, Fac, signifies a command given to a servant. So God ae 
when He wished to create man, said not to the Only-begotten, a 
““ Make man,” but, Let us make man, that by the form of 7 
unity in the words he might make manifest the equality of the 
agents. Because then the centurion considered in Christ the 
greatness of His dominion, therefore saith He, say tn a word. 
For I also say to my servant. But Christ blames him not, 

but confirmed his wishes, as it follows, When Jesus heard 
these things, he marvelled. - BEDE; But who had wrought 
this very faith in him, save He who marvelled? But sup- 
posing another had done it, why should He marvel who 
foreknew it? Because then the Lord marvels, it signifies 
that we must marvel. For all such feelings when they are 
spoken of God, are the tokens not of a wonder-struck mind, 

but of a teaching master. 

Curyvs. But that you might see plainly that the Lord said Chrys. 
this for the instruction of others, the Evangelist wisely sa 
explains it, adding, Verily I say unto you, I have not Matt. 
found so great faith, no, not. in Israel. AmBRoskE; And 


236 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


indeed if you read it thus, “ In none in Israel have I found 
so great faith,” the meaning is simple and easy. But if 
according to the Greek, “ Not even in Israel have I found 
so great faith,” faith of this kind is preferred even to that of 
the more elect, and those that see God. BEDE; But he 
speaks not of Patriarchs and Prophets in times far back, 
but of the men of the present age to whom the faith of 
the centurion is preferred, because they were instructed in the 
precepts of the Law and the Prophets, but he with no one 
to teach him of his own accord believed. AMBROSE; The 
faith of the master is proved, and the health of the ser- 
vant established, as it follows, And they that were sent 
returning to the house, found the servant whole that had 
been sick. It is possible then that the good deed of a 
master may advantage his servants, not only through the 
merit of faith, but the practice of discipline. BEDE; Mat- 
thew explains these things more fully, saying, that when 
our Lord said to the centurion, Go thy way, and as thou 
hast believed, sc be it done unto thee, the servant was 
healed in the self-same hour. But it is the manner of the 
blessed Luke, to abridge or even purposely to pass by 
whatever he sees plainly set forth by the other Evangelists, 
but what he knows to be omitted by them, or briefly touched 
upon, to more carefully explain. 

AMBROSE; Mystically, by the centurion’s servant is sig- 
nified that the Gentile people who were enthralled by the 
chain of heavenly bondage, and diseased with deadly passions, 
are to be healed by the mercy of the Lord. Brpre; But 
the centurion, whose faith is preferred to Israel, represents 
the elect from the Gentiles, who as it were attended by their 
hundred soldiers, are exalted by their perfection of spiritual 
virtues. For the number hundred, which is transferred from 
the left to the right’, is frequently put to signify the celestial 
life. ‘These then must pray to the Lord for those who are still 
oppressed with fear, in the spirit of bondage. But we of 
the Gentiles who believe can not ourselves come to the 
Lord, whom we are unable to see in the flesh, but ought 
to approach by faith; we must send the elders of the 
Jews, that is, we must by our suppliant entreaties gain as 


* The ancients used to count up to to the right. Bede de Indigit. Jerom. 
100 on the left hand and thento change cont. Jovin. lib. }. 


VER. 11—17. ST. LUKE. 237 


patrons the greatest men of the Church, who have gone before 
us to the Lord, who bearing us witness that we have a care 
to build up the Church, may intercede for our sins. It 
is well said that Jesus was not far from the house, for his 
salvation is nigh unto them that fear him, and he who 
rightly uses the law of nature, in that he does the things 
which he knows to be good, approaches nigh unto Him 
who is good. AMBROSE; But the centurion wished not to 
trouble Jesus, for Whom the Jewish people crucified, the 
Gentiles desire to keep inviolate from injury, and (as ~ 
touching a mystery) he saw that Christ was not yet able 
to pierce the hearts of the Gentiles. Brpr; The soldiers 
and servants who obey the centurion, are the natural virtues 
which many who come to the Lord will bring with them 
in great numbers. 

THEOPHYL; Or in another way. The centurion must be 
understood as one who stood foremost among many in wicked- 
ness, as long as he possesses many things in this life, i. e. 
is occupied with many affairs or concerns. But he has a 
servant, the irrational part of the soul, that is, the irascible 
and concupiscent part. And he speaks to Jesus, the Jews 
acting as mediators, that is, the thoughts and words of con- 
fession, and immediately he received his servant whole. 


11. And it came to pass the day after, that he 
went into a city called Nain; and many of his. 
disciples went with him, and much people. 

12. Now when he came nigh to the gate of the 
city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the 
only son of his mother, and she was a widow: and 
much people of the city was with her. 

18. And when the Lord saw her, he had com- 
passion on her, and said unto her, Weep not. 

14. And he came and touched the bier: and they 
that bare him stood still. And he said, Young man, 
I say unto thee, Arise. 

15. And he that was dead sat up, and began to 
speak. And he delivered him to his mother. 


288 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


16. And there came a fear on all: and they 
glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up 
among us; and, That God hath visited his people. 

17. And this rumour of him went forth throughout 
all Judwa, and throughout all the region round 
about. 


CyriL; The Lord joins one miracle upon another. In the 

former instance He came indeed when called for, but in this 

He came self-invited; as it is said, And zt came to pass the 

day after that he went into a city called Nain. BEDE; 

Nain is a city of Galilee, within two miles of mount Tabor. 

But by the divine counsel there were large multitudes ac- 
companying the Lord, that there might be many witnesses 

of so great a miracle. Hence it follows, And his disciples 

Greg. went with him, and much people. Gree. Nyss. Now the 
Bb aes proof of the resurrection we learn not so much from the 
maet words as from the works of our Saviour, who, beginning 
cet His miracles with the less wonderful, reconciled our faith to 
far greater. First indeed in the grievous sickness of the 
centurion’s servant, He verged upon the power of resurrec- 

tion; afterwards with a higher power he led men to the 
belief in a resurrection, when He raised the widow’s son, 

who was carried out to be buried; as it is said, Now when he 

came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead 

man carried out, the only son of his mother. ‘Titus Bost. 

But some one will say of the centurion’s servant, that he was 

not going to die. That such an one might restrain his rash 
tongue, the Evangelist explains that the young man whom 
Christ came upon was already dead, the only son of a widow. 

For it follows, And she wus a widow, and much people of 

Greg. the city was with her. Gree. Nyss. He has told us the 
Onine. sum of misery in a few words. The mother was a widow, 
and had no further hope of having children, she had no one 

upon whom she might look in the place of him that was 

dead. To him alone she had given suck, he alone made 

her home cheerful. All that is sweet and precious to a 
mother, was he alone to her. Cyrit; These were sufferings 

to excite compassion, and which might well affect to mourning 

and tears, as it follows, And when the Lord saw her, he had 


VER. LlI—17. ST. LUKE. 239 


compassion on her, saying, Weep not. BEDE; As if He 
said, Cease to weep for one as dead, whom you shall soon see 
rise again alive. Curys. But when He bids us cease from Tit. 
weeping Who consoles the sorrowful, He tells us to receive 2 
consolation from those who are now dead, hoping for their 
resurrection. But life meeting death stops the bier, as it 
follows, And he came. Cyrit; He performs the miracle 
not only in word, but also touches the bier, to the end that 
you might know that the sacred body of Christ is powerful 
to the saving of man. For itis the body of Life and the flesh 
of the Omnipotent Word, whose power it possesses. For as 
iron applied to fire does the work of fire, so the flesh, when itis 
united to the Word, which quickens all things, becomes 
itself also quickening, and the banisher of death. Titus Bost. non oce. 
But the Saviour is not like to Elias mourning over the son 
of the widow of Sarepta, nor as Elisha who laid his own) Kings 
body upon the body of the dead, nor as Peter who prayed for an 35 
Tabitha, but is none other than He who calls those things 4. 
which be not, as though they were, who can speak to the dead rie %, 
as to the living, as it follows, And he said, Young man. Rom. 4, 
Grec. Nyss. When He said, Young man, He signified that Greg. 
he was in the flower of his age, just ripening into manhood, "*! ™?P- 
who but a little while before was the sight of his mother’s 
eyes, just entering upon the time of marriage, the scion of 
her race, the branch of succession, the staff of her old age. 

Titus Bost. But straightway he arose to whom the com- 
mand was made. For the Divine power is irresistible ; there 
is no delay, no urgency of prayer, as it follows, And he 
that was dead sat up, and began to speak, and he gave him to 
his mother. These are the signs of a true resurrection, for 
the lifeless body cannot speak, nor would the mother have 
carried back to her house her dead and lifeless son. BEDE; 
But well does the Evangelist testify that the Lord is first 
moved with compassion for the mother, and then raises her 
son, that in the one case He might set before us for our 
imitation an example of piety, in the other He might build 
up our belief in His wonderful power. Hence it follows, 
And there came a fear upon all, and they glorified God, &c. 
CyriL; This was a great thing in an insensible and ungrate- 
ful people. For in a short time afterward they would neither 
esteem Him as a prophet, nor allow that He did aught for the 


non occ. 


1 Kings 
17 


2 Kings 
4. 
2 Kings 
13 


Mark 5. 
Joholl. 
Mat. 27. 


240 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VII. 


public good. But none of those that dwelt in Judaa were 
ignorant of this miracle, as it follows, And this rumour of 
him went forth throughout all Judea. 

Maxim. But it is worthy of remark, that seven resurrections 
are related before our Lord’s, of which the first was that of 
the son of the widow of Sarepta, the second of the Shunam- 
ite’s son, the third which was caused by the remains of 
Elisha, the fourth which took place at Nain, as is here 
related, the fifth of the ruler of the Synagogue’s daughter, 
the sixth of Lazarus, the seventh at Christ’s passion, for many 
bodies of the saints arose. The eighth is that of Christ, who 
being free from death remained beyond for a sign that the 
general resurrection which is to come in the eighth age shall 
not be dissolved by death, but shall abide never to 
pass away. 

BEDE; But the dead man who was carried without the 
gate of the city in the sight of many, signifies a man rendered 
senseless by the deadening power of mortal sin, and no 
longer concealing his soul’s death within the folds of his 
heart, but proclaiming it to the knowledge of the world, 
through the evidence of words or deeds as through the 
gate of the city. For the gate of the city, I suppose, is some 
one of the bodily senses. And he is well said to be the only 
son of his mother, for there is one mother composed of many 
individuals, the Church, but every soul that remembers that 
it is redeemed by the death of the Lord, knows the Church 
to be a widow. AmMBROSE; For this widow surrounded by 
a great multitude of people seems to be more than the woman 
who was thought worthy by her tears to obtain the resurrection 
of her only son, because the Church recalls the younger people 
from the funeral procession to life by the contemplation of her 
tears, who is forbid to weep for him to whom resurrection 
was promised. BEDE; Or the dogma of Novatus is crushed, 
who endeavouring to do away with the purifying of the 
penitent, denies that the mother Church, weeping for the 
spiritual extinction of her sons, ought to be consoled by the 
hope of their restoration to life. 

AMBROSE; This dead man was borne on the bier by the 
four material elements to the grave, but there was a hope 


» For the heresy of Novatus, see Catena on S. Mark, p. 66, note m. 


VER. 18—23. ST. LUKE. 241 


of his rising again because he was borne on wood, which 
though before it did not benefit us, yet after Christ had 
touched it, began to profit unto life, that it might be a sign 
that salvation was to be extended to the people by the wood 
of the cross. For we lie lifeless on the bier when either the 
fire of immoderate desire bursts forth, or the cold moisture 
breaks out, and through the sluggish state of our earthly 
body the vigour of our minds waxes dull. BeprE; Or the 
coffin on which the dead is carried is the ill at ease con- 
science of a desperate sinner. But they who carry him to 
be buried are either unclean desires, or the allurements of 
companions, who stood when our Lord touched the bier, 
because the conscience, when touched by dread of the judg- 
ment from on high, often checking its carnal lusts, and 
those who unjustly praise, returns to itself, and answers its 
Saviour’s call to life. AmsBrosE; If then thy sin is so heavy 
that by thy penitential tears thou canst not thyself wash it 
out, let the mother Church weep for thee, the multitude 
standing by; soon shalt thou rise from the dead and begin 
to speak the words of life; they all shall fear, (for by the 
example of one all are corrected;) they shall also praise 
God who has given us such great remedies for escaping 
death. BEpE; But God has visited His people not only by the 
one incarnation of His Word, but by ever sending It into our 
hearts. .THEOPHYL. By the widow also you may understand 
a soul that has lost her husband in the divine word. Her 
son is the understanding, which is carried out beyond the 
city of the living. Its coffin is the body, which some indeed 
have called the tomb. But the Lord touching him raises 
him up, causing him to become young, and rising from sin 
he begins to speak and teach others. For before he would 
not have been believed. 


18. And the disciples of John shewed him of all 
these things. 

19. And John calling unto him two of his disciples 
sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should 
come? or look we for another ? 

20. When the men were come unto him, they said, 

VOL, III. R 


242 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


John Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou 
he that should come? or look we for another ? 

21. And in the same hour he cured many of their 
infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto 
many that were blind he gave sight. 

22. Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your 
way, and tell John what things ye have seen and 
heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the 
lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, 
to the poor the Gospel is preached. 

23. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be 
offended in me. 


CyriL; Certain of His disciples relate to the holy Baptist 
the miracle which was known to all the inhabitants of 
Judza and Galilee, as it follows, And they told John, &c. 
BEDE; Not, as it seems to me, in simpleness of heart, but 
provoked by envy. For in another place also they complain, 

John 3, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, behold the 

26. ; : 
same baptizeth, and all men come unto him. Cnyrys. But 
we are then most raised up to Him when we are fallen into 
straits. John therefore, being cast into prison, takes the 
opportunity, when his disciples were most in need of Jesus, to 
send them to Christ. For it follows, And John calling two 
of his disciples sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou he that 
should come, §&c. BEDE; He says not, Art thou He that 
hast come, but, Art thou he that should come. The sense is, 
Tell me who am to be slain by Herod, and about to 

~ infer- descend into hell, whether I should announce Thee to the souls 
below as I have announced Thee to those above? or is this net 
befitting the Son of God, and Thou art going to send another 
for these sacraments? CyriLt; But we must altogether dis- 
allow such an opinion. For no where do we find the Holy 
Scriptures stating that John the Baptist foretold to those 
souls in hell the coming of our Saviour. It is also true to 
say, that the Baptist was not ignorant of the wonderful mys- 
tery of the incarnation of the Only-Begotten, and so also along 
with the other things had known this, that our Lord was about 


VER. 18—238. ST, LUKE. 243 


to preach the Gospel to those who were in hell, after He had 
tasted death for all living as well as dead. But since the 
word of holy Scripture indeed declared that Christ would 
come as the Lord and Chief, but the others were sent as ser- 
vants before Him, therefore was the Lord and Saviour of all 
called by the prophets, He who cometh, or Who is to come; 
according to that, Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the re 118, 
Lord; and, A little while, and he who is to come shall come, ak 2, 
and will not tarry. The blessed Baptist therefore, receiving 3- 

as it were this name from Holy Scripture, sent certain of 

his disciples to seek whether it was indeed He who cometh, 

or, Who is to come. 

AMBROSE; But how could it come to pass, that Him of 
whom he said, Behold him who taketh away the sins of the 
world, he should still not believe to be the Son of God? For 
either it is presumption to attribute to Christ a divine action 
ignorantly, or it is unbelief to have doubted concerning the 
Son of God. But some suppose of John himself that he was 
indeed so great a prophet as to acknowledge Christ, but still 
as not a doubting, but pious, prophet disbelieved that He 
would die, whom he believed was about to come. Not 
therefore in his faith but in his piety, he doubted; as 
Peter also, when he said, Be it far from thee, Lord; late 
this shall not be unto thee. Cyrit; Or he asks the¢ ae 
question by economy. For as the forerunner he knew the Thes. 
mystery of Christ’s passion, but that his disciples mighte.4. 
be convinced how great was the excellence of the Saviour, 
he sent the more understanding of them, instructing them to 
enquire and learn from the very words ofthe Saviour, whether 
it was He who was expected; as it is added, But when the 
men were come unto him, they said, John the Baptist hath 
sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou He, Gc. But He know- 
ing as God with what intention John had sent them, and 
the cause of their coming, was at the time performing many 
miracles, as it follows; And in the same hour he healed 
many Of their infirmities, Gc. He said not positively to them 
Lam he, but rather leads them to the certainty of the fact, 
in order that receiving their faith in Him, with their reason 
agreeing thereto, they might return to him who sent them. 
Hence He made not answer to the words, but to the intention of 

R 2 


Q44 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


him who sent them; as it follows, And Jesus answering said 
unto them, Go your way, and tell John what things you 
have seen and heard: as if He said, Go and tell John 
the things which ye have heard indeed through the Prophets, 
but have seen accomplished by Me. For He was then per- 
forming those things which the Prophets prophesied 
He would do; that is of which it is added, For the blind 
see, the lame walk. AMBROSE; An ample testimony surely 
that the Prophcts acknowledged the Lord. For of the 
Ps. 146, Lord Himsclf it was prophesied, that the Lord giveth food 
7—10. 40 the hungry, raiseth up them that are bowed down, looseth 
the prisoners, openeth the eyes of the blind, and that he who 
doeth these things shall reign for ever. Such then are not 
the tokens of human, but divine power. But these are found 
Tob, 11.Seldom or not at all before the Gospel. Tobias alone received 
1 Kings Sight, and this was the cure of an Angel, not of a man. Elias 
17. raised the dead, but he prayed and wept, and then com- 
2 Kings manded. Elisha caused the cleansing of a leper: yet then 
o: the cause was not so much in the authority of the command 
as in the figure of the mystery. THEOPHYL. These are also the 
Isa. 35, Words of Elias, saying, The Lord himself shall come and 
4-6. save us. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the 
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame 

man leap as an hart. 
Beve; And what is not less than these, the poor have the 
Gospel preached to them, that is, the poor are enlightened by 
the Spirit, or hidden treasures, that there might be no differ- 
ence between the rich and the poor. These things prove the 
faith of the Master, when all who can be saved by Him are 
equal. AmBRosE; But still these are but slight examples 
of the testimony to the Lord. ‘The full assurance of faith is 
the cross of the Lord, His death and burial. Hence He adds, 
And blessed is he who shall not be offended in me. For the 
cross may cause offence, even to the elect. But there is no 
greater testimony than this of a divine person. For there is 
nothing which seems to be more surpassing the nature of 
man than that one should offer Himself for the whole world. 
CyriL; Or else, He wished by this to shew that. whatever 
was passing in their hearts, could not be hid from His sight. 
For they were those who were offended at Him. AMBROSE; 


— VER, 24—-28. ST. LUKE. 245 


But we have before said, that mystically John was the type 

of the Law, which was the forerunner of Christ. John then 
sends his disciples to Christ, that they might obtain the filling 

up of their knowledge, for Christ is the fulfilling of the Law. 
And perhaps those disciples are the two nations, of whom the 
one of the Jews believed, the other of the Gentiles believed 
because they heard. They wished then to see, because blessed 
are the eyes that see. But when they shall have come to the 
Gospel, and found that the blind receive their sight, the 
Jame walk, then shall they say, “ We have seen with our 
eyes,” for we seem to ourselves to see Him whom we read of. 

Or perhaps through the instrumentality of a certain part of our opera- 
Body * we all seem to have traced out the course of our Lord’s = 
passion ; for faith comes through the few to the many. The Law 
then announces that Christ will come, the writings of the 
Gospel prove that He has come. 


24. And when the messengers of John were de- 
parted, he began to speak unto the people con- 
cerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness 
for to see? A reed shaken with the wind ? 

25. But what went ye out for to see? A man 
clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are 
gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings’ 
courts. 

26. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet ? 
Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet. 

27. This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I 
send my messenger before thy face, which shall pre- 
pare thy way before thee. 

28. For I say unto you, Among those that are 
born of women there is not a greater prophet than 
John the Baptist: but he that is least in the king- 
dom of God is greater than he. 


Cyrit; The Lord, knowing the secrets of men, foresaw Cyril. - 
that some would say, If until now John is ignorant of Jesus, @! suP- 
how did he shew [lim to us, saying, Behold the Lamb of 


4 St. Ambrose seems from the context by “ our Body” to signify the Church. 


246 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


God, which taketh away the sins of the world? To quench 
therefore this feeling which had taken possession of them, 
He prevented the injury which might arise from the offence, 
as it follows, And when the messengers of John were departed, 
he began to speak unto the people concerning John, what 
went ye out for to see? A reed shaken in the wind? Asif He 
said, Ye marvelled at John the Baptist, and oftentimes came 
to see him, passing over long journeys in the desert; surely 
in vain, if you think him so fickle as to be like a reed bending 
down whichever way the wind moves it. For such he appears 
to be, who lightly avows his ignorance of the things which he 
non occ. knows. Tit. Bost. But you went not out into the desert, (where 
there is no pleasantness,) leaving your cities, except as caring 
Simeon for this man. GREEK Ex. Now these things were spoken by 
our Lord after the departure of John’s disciples, for He would 
not utter the praises of the Baptist while they were present, 
lest His words should be counted as those of a flatterer. 
AMBROSE; Not unmeaningly then is the character of John 
praised there, who preferred the way of righteousness to the 
love of life, and swerved not through fear of death. For this 
world seems to be compared to a desert, into which, as yet 
barren and uncultivated, the Lord says we must not 50 
enter as to regard men puffed up with a fleshly mind, 
and devoid of inward virtue, and vaunting themselves in the 
heights of frail worldly glory, as a kind of example and model 
for our imitation. And such being exposed to the storms of 
this world, and tossed to and fro by a restless life, are rightly 
compared to a reed. 
ubi sup. ~GREEK Ex. We have also an infallible testimony to John’s 
way of life in his manner of clothing, and his imprisonment, 
into which he never would have been cast had he known how 
to court princes; as it follows, But what went ye out for (0 
see? A man clothed with soft raiment? Behold they who 
are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings’ 
houses. By being clothed with soft raiment, he signifies men 
ae who live luxuriously. Curys. But a soft garment relaxes 
29.in the austerity of the soul; and if worn by a hard and 
apes rigorous body, soon, by such effeminacy, makes it frail 
and delicate. But when the body becomes softer, the 
Cyril. Soul must also share the injury; for generally its workings 
ubi sup. correspond with the conditions of the body. CyriL; How 


VER. 24—28. ST. LUKE. 247 


then could a religious strictness, so great that it subdued to 
itself all fleshly lusts, sink down to such ignorance, except 
from a frivolity of mind, which is not fostered by austerities, 

but by worldly delights. If then ye imitate John, as one 
who cared not for pleasure, award him also the strength of 
mind, which befits his continence. But if strictness no 
more tends to this than a life of luxury, why do you, not 
respecting those who live delicately, admire the inhabitant of 

the desert, and his wretched garment of camel’s hair. CHrys. Chrys. 
By each of these sayings He shews John to be neither natu- $7. in 
rally nor easily shaken or diverted from any purpose. Am- Matt. 
BROSE; And although very many become effeminate by the 

use of softer garments, yet here other garments seem to be 
meant, namely, our mortal bodies, by which our souls are 
clothed. Again, luxurious acts and habits are soft garments, 

but those whose languid limbs are wasted away in luxuries 

are shut out of the kingdom of heaven, whom the rulers of 
this world and of darkness have taken captive. For these 

are the kings who exercise tyranny over those who are their 
fellows in their own works. 

CyRIL; But perhaps it does not concern us to excuse Cyril. 
John upon this ground, for you confess that he is worthy of"? 
imitation, hence He adds, But what went ye out for to sce ? 

A prophet? Verily I say unto you, more than a prophet. 

For the prophets foretold that Christ would come, but John 

not only foretold that He would come, but also declared 

Him to be present, saying, Behold the Lamb of God. Am- 
BROSE; Indced, greater than a prophet (or more than a 
prophet) was he in whom the prophets terminate; for 

many desired to see Him whom he saw, whom he baptized. 
CyriL; Having then described his character by the place Cyril. 
where he dwelt, by his clothing, and from the crowds who. ~?” 
went to see him, He introduces the testimony of the prophet, 
saying, This is he of whom it 1s written, Behold, I send my Mal. 3, 
angel. Titus Bost. He calls a man an angel, not because - 

he was by nature an angel, for he was by nature a man, but 
because he exercised the office of an angel, in heralding the 
advent of Christ. GREEK Ex. But by the words which: fol- ubi sup. 
low, Before thy face, he signifies nearness of time, for John 
appeared to men close to the coming of Christ. Wherefore 


248 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


must he indeed be considered more than a prophet, for those 
also who in battle fight close to the sides of kings, are their 
most distinguished and greatest friends. 

AMBROSE; But he prepared the way of the Lord not only in 
the order of birth according to the flesh, and as the messenger 
of faith, but also as the forerunner of His glorious passion. 
Hence it follows, Who shall prepare thy way before thee. 
AMBROSE; But if Christ also is a prophet, how is this man 
greater than all. But it is said, among those born of woman, 
not of a virgin. For He was greater than those, whose equal 
he might be in way of birth, as it follows, For I say unto you, 
of those that are born of woman, there is not a greater 

Chrys. prophet than John the Baptist. Curys. The voice of the 
ubi UP Tord is indeed sufficient to bear testimony to John’s pre- 
eminence among men. But any one will find the real 
facts of the case confirming the same, by considering his 
food, his manner of life, the loftiness of his mind. For 
he dwelt on earth as one who had come down from heaven, 
casting no care upon his body, his mind raised up to heaven, 
and united to God alone, taking no thought for worldly 
things; his conversation grave and gentle, for with the 
Jewish people he dealt honestly and zealously, with the 
king boldly, with his own disciples mildly. He did nothing 
nen lib. idle or trifling, but all things becomingly. Is1p. PELEus; Jahn 
NE P33: vas also greatest among those that are born of women, 
because he prophesied from the very womb of his mother, 
and though in darkness, was not ignorant of the light which 

had already come. 

AMBROSE; Lastly, so impossible is it that there should be 
any comparison between John and the Son of God, that he 
is counted even below the angels; as it follows, But he that 
is least in the kingdom of God, is greater than he. BEDE; 
These words may be understood in two ways. For either 
he called that the kingdom of God, which we have not yet 
received, (in which are the Angels,) and the very least among 
them is greater than any righteous man, who bears about a 
body, which weighs down the soul. Or if by the kingdom 

' of God be meant to be understood the Church of this time, 
the Lord referred to Himself, who in the time of His birth 
came after John, but was greater in divine authority, and the 


oa 


a 


VER. 29—35. ' -«§T. LUKE. 249 


power of the Lord. Moreover, according to the first explana- 
tion, the distinction is as follows, But he who is least in the 
kingdom of God, and then it is added, 7s greater than he. 
According to the latter, But he who is least, and then added, 
is greater in the kingdom of God than he. Curys. For He 
adds this, that the abundant praise of John might not give 
the Jews a pretext to prefer John to Christ. But do not 
suppose that he spoke comparatively of His being greater 
than John. AmBrRosE; For He is of another nature, which 
bears not comparison with human kind. For there can be 
no comparing of God with men. CyriL; But in a mystery, 
when shewing the superiority of John among those that are 
born of women, he places in opposition something greater, 
namely, Himself who was born by the holy Spirit the Son of 
God. For the kingdom of the Lord is the Spirit of God. 
Although then as respects works and holiness, we may be 
inferior to those who attained unto the mystery of the law, 
whom John represents, yet through Christ we have greater 
things, being made partakers of the Divine nature. 


29. And all the people that heard him, and the 
Publicans, justified God, being baptized with the 
baptism of John. 

30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the 
counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized 
of him. 

31. And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall 
I liken the men of this generation? and to what are 
they like? 

32. They are like unto children sitting in the 
marketplace, and calling one to another, and saying, 
We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced ; 
we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. 

33. For John the Baptist came neither eating 
bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a 
devil. 

34. The Son of man is come eating and drinking ; 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


250 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and a wine- 
bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners ! 
35. But wisdom is justified of all her children. 


Chrys. | Curys. Having declared the praises of John, he next 
37, in exposes the great fault of the Pharisees and lawyers, who 
Matt. would not after the publicans receive the baptism of John. 
Hence it is said, And all the people that heard him, and the 
Publicans, justified God. AMBROSE; God is justified by 
baptism, wherein men justify themselves confessing their 
sins. For he that sins and confesses his sin unto God, 
justifies God, submitting himself to Him who overcometh, 
and hoping for grace from Him; God therefore is justified 
by baptism, in which there is confession and pardon of sin. 
Evuses. Because also they believed, they justified God, for 
He appeared just to them in all that He did. But the 
disobedient conduct of the Pharisees in not receiving 
Pe.61, John, accorded not with the words of the prophet, That 
. thou mightest be justified when thou speakest. Hence it 
follows, But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel 
of God, §c. Brpe; These words were spoken either in 
the person of the Evangelist, or, as some think, of the 
Saviour; but when he says, against themselves, he means 
that he who rejects the grace of God, does it against himself. 
Or, they are blamed as foolish and ungrateful for being 
unwilling to receive the counsel of God, sent éo themselves. 
The counsel then is of God, because He ordained salvation 
by the passion and death of Christ, which the Pharisees and 
lawyers despised. AMBROSE; Let us not then despise (as 
the Pharisees did) the counsel of God, which is in the 
Is. 9, 6. baptism of John, that is, the counsel which the Angel of great 
LXX- counsel searches out. No one despises the counsel of man. 
Who then shall reject the counsel of God? 

CyriL; There was acertain play among the Jewish children 
of this kind. A company of boys were collected together, who, 
mocking the sudden changes in the affairs of this life, some of 
them sang, some mourned, but the mourners did not rejoice 
with those that rejoiced, nor did those who rejoiced fall in 
with those that wept. They then rebuked each other in turn 


VER. 29—35. ST. LUKE. 2351 


with the charge of want of sympathy. ‘That such were the 
feelings of the Jewish people and their rulers, Christ 
implied in the following words, spoken in the person of 
Christ; Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this 
generation, and to what are they like? They are lke to 
children sitting in the market-place. Brprt; The Jewish 
generation is compared to children, because formerly they 

had prophets for their teachers, of whom it is said, Out @ 

the mouths of babes and sucklings hast thou perfected praise. 
AMBROSE; But the prophets sung, repeating in spiritual 
strains their oracles of the common salvation; they wept, 
soothing with mournful dirges the hard hearts of the Jews. 

The songs were not sung in the market-place, nor in the 
streets, but in Jerusalem. For that is the Lord’s forum, in 
which the laws of His heavenly precepts are framed. GREG. Greg. 
Nyss. But singing and lamentation are nothing else but aes 
the breaking forth, the one indeed of joy, the other of sorrow. 

Now at the sound of a tune played upon a musical instru- 
ment, man by the concordant beating of his feet, and motion 

of his body, pourtrays his inward feelings. Hence he says, 

We have sung, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to 

you, and ye have not wept. Aue. Now these words have Aug. de 
reference to John and Christ. For when he says, We have aah nh 
mourned, and ye have not wept, it is in allusion to John, 4% !!: 
whose abstinence from meat and drink signified penitential 
sorrow; and hence he adds in explanation, For John came 
netther eating bread, nor drinking wine, and ye say he hatha 
devil. Cyrit; They take upon themselves to slander a man 
worthy of all admiration. They say that he who mortifies the 

law of sin which is in his members hath a devil. Aue. But ae 
his words, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced,» Be 
refer to the Lord Himself, who by using meats and drinks as 
others did, represented the joy of His kingdom. Hence it 
follows, The Son of man came eating and drinking, &c. 

Tit. Bost. For Christ would not abstain from this food, lest 

He should give a handle to heretics, who say that the creatures 

of God are bad, and blame flesh and wine. CyrtL; But 
where could they point out the Lord as gluttonous? For Christ 

is found every where repressing excess, and leading men to 
temperance. But He associated with publicans and sinners. 


252 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VII. 


Hence they said against Him, He ts a friend of Publicans 
and sinners, though He could in no wise fall into sin, 
but on the contrary was to them the cause of salvation. 
For the sun is not polluted though sending its rays over all 
the earth, and frequently falling upon unclean bodies. Neither 
will the Sun of righteousness be hurt by associating with the 
bad. Butlet no one attempt to place his own condition on a 
level with Christ’s greatness, but let each considering his 
own infirmity avoid having dealing with such men, for “ evil 
communications corrupt good manners.” It follows, And 
wisdom ts justified Of all her children. A™mBRosE; The Son 
of God is wisdom, by nature, not by growth, which is justified 
by baptism, when it is not rejected through obstinacy, but 
through righteousness is acknowledged the gift of God. 
Herein then is the justification of God, if he seems to 
transfer His gifts not to the unworthy and guilty, but to those 
Chrys. who are through baptism holy and just. Curys. But by 
o "10g, the children of wisdom, He means the wise. For Scripture 
is accustomed to indicate the bad rather by their sin than 
their name, but to call the good the children of the virtue 
which characterizes them. AMBROSE; He well says, of all, 
for justice is reserved for all, that the faithful may be taken 
Aug. up, the unbelievers cast out. Aue. Or, when he says, wisdom 
ubi SUP is sustified of all her children, he shews that the children 
of wisdom understand that righteousness consists neither in 
abstaining from nor eating food, but in patiently enduring 
want. For not the use of such things, but the coveting after 
them, must be blamed; only let a man adapt himself to the 
kind of food of those with whom he lives. 


36. And one of the Pharisees desired him that he 
would eat with him. And he went into the Pharisee’s 
house, and sat down to meat. 

37. And, behold, a woman in the city, which was 
a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in 
the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster box of 
ointment, 

38. And stood at his feet behind him weeping, 


VER. 36—50. ST. LUKE. 253 


and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe 
them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet 
and anointed them with the ointment. 

39. Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him 
saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if 
he were a prophet, would have known who and what 
manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she 
is a sinner. 

40. And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, 
I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, 
Master, say on. | 

41. There was a certain creditor which had two 
debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the 
other fifty. 

42. And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly 
forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them 
will love him most ? 

43. Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, 
to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him 
Thou hast rightly judged. 
- 44, And he turned to the woman, and said unto 
Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine 
house, thou gavest me no. water for my feet: but she 
hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with 
the hairs of her head. 

45. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman 
since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss 
my feet. 

46. My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but 
this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. 

47. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which 
are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to 
whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little. 

48. And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. 

49. And they that sat at meat with him began to 


Peccat. 


Greg. 
in Hom. 
33. in 
Ey. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


254 GOSPEL ACCORDING To CHAP. VII. 


say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth 
sins also? , 
50. And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath 


saved thee: go in peace. 


BEvE; Having said just before, And the people that heard 
him justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John, 
the same Evangelist builds up in deed what he had proposed 
in word, namely, wisdom justified by the righteous and the 
penitent, saying, And one of the Pharisees desired him, &c. 
Grec. Nyss. This account is full of precious instruction. 
For there are very many who justify themselves, being puffed 
up with the dreamings of an idle fancy, who before the time of 
judgment comes, separate themselves as lambs from the 
herds, not willing even to join in eating with the many, and | 
hardly with those who go not to extremes, but keep the middle 
path in life. St. Luke, the physician of souls rather than of 
bodies, represents therefore our Lord and Saviour most 
mercifully visiting others, as it follows, And he went into the 
Pharisees house, and sat down to meat. Not that He should 
share any of his faults, but might impart somewhat of His own 
righteousness. 

CyriL; A woman of corrupt life, but testifying her faithful 
affection, comes to Christ, as having power to release her from 
every fault, and to grant her pardon for the crimes she had 
committed. For it follows, And behold a woman in the city, 
which was a sinner, brought an alabaster box of ointment. 
BEDE; Alabaster is a kind of white marble tinged with 
various colours, which is generally used for vessels holding 
ointment, because it is said to be the best sort for preserving 
the ointment sweet. Geea. For this woman, beholding the 
spots of her shame, ran to wash them at the fountain of 
mercy, and blushed not at seeing the guests, for since she 
was courageously ashamed of herself within, she thought there 
was nothing which could shame her from without. Observe 
with what sorrow she is wrung who is not ashamed to weep 
even in the midst of a feast! Gree. Nyss. But to mark her 
own unworthiness, she stands behind with downcast eyes, 
and with her hair thrown about embraces His feet, and 


VER. 36—50. ST. LUKE. 255 


washing them with her tears, betokened a mind distressed at 

her state, andimploring pardon. For it follows, And standing 
behind, she began to wash his feet with her tears. GREG. Greg. 
For her eyes which once coveted after earthly things, she eee 
was now wearing out with penitential weeping. She once Evang. 
displayed her hair for the setting off of her face, she now 
wiped her tears with her hair. As it follows, And she wiped 
them with the hairs of her head. She once uttered proud 
things with her mouth, but kissing the feet of the Lord, she 
impressed her lips on the footsteps of her Redeemer. She 

once used ointment for the perfume of her body; what she 

had unworthily applied to herself, she now laudably offered 

to God. As it follows, And she anointed with ointment. 

As many enjoyments as she had in herself, so many offerings 

did she devise out of herself. She converts the number of her 
faults into the same number of virtues, that as much of her 
might wholly serve God in her penitence, as had despised 

God in her sin. Curys. Thus the harlot became then more Chrys. 
honourable than the virgins. For no sooner was she inflamed oes 
with penitence, than she burst forth in love for Christ. And | 
these things indeed which have been spoken of were done out- 
wardly, but those which her mind pondered within itself, were 
much more fervent. God alone beheld them. 

GreEG. But the Pharisee beholding these things despises Greg. 
them, and finds fault, not only with the woman who was uneane: 
a sinner, but with the Lord who received her, as it follows, 

Now when the Pharisee who had bidden him saw it, he snake 
within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, 
would have known who and what manner of woman this is 
which toucheth him. We see the Pharisee really proud 
in himself, and hypocritically righteous, blaming the sick 
woman for her sickness, the physician for his aid. The 
woman surely if she had come to the feet of the Pharisee 
would have departed with the heel lifted up against her. 
For he would have thought that he was polluted by another’s 
sin, not having sufficient of his own real righteousness 
to fill him. So also some gifted with the priests’ office, if 
perchance they have done any just thing outwardly or 
slightly, forthwith despise those who are put under them, 
and look with disdain on sinners who are of the people. 


256 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


But when we behold sinners, we must first bewail ourselvcs 
for their calamity, since we perhaps have had and are certainly 
liable to a similar fall. But it is necessary that we should 
carefully distinguish, for we are bound to make distinction 
in vices, but to have compassion on nature. For if we must 
punish the sinner, we must cherish a brother. But when by 
penance he has himself punished his own deed, our brother 
is no more a sinner, for he punished in himself what Divine 
justice condemned. The Physician was between two sick 
persons, but the one preserved her faculties in the fever, the 
other lost his mental perception. For she wept at what she 
had done; but the Pharisee, elated with a false sense of 
righteousness, overrated the vigour of his own health. 

Tir. Bost. But the Lord not hearing his words, but per- 
celving his thoughts, shewed Himself to be the Lord of 
Prophets, as it follows, And Jesus answering said unto him, 

Gloss. Szmon, I have something to say unto thee. Goss. And this 
v. Lyra indeed He spake in answer to his thoughts; and the Pharisee 
in loc. was made more attentive by these words of our Lord, as it is 
Greg- said, And he saith, Master, say on. GreEG. A parable 
ubi sup. ; : . 
concerning two debtors is opposed to him, of whom the one 
owed more, the other less; as it follows, There was a certain 
creditor which had two debtors, Gc. Tit. Bost. As if He said, 
Nor art thou without debts. What then! If thou art involved 
in fewer debts, boast not thyself, for thou art still in need of 
pardon. Then He goes on to speak of pardon, And when 
Gloss. they had nothing to pay, he freely forgave them both. GLoss. 
‘For no one can of himself escape the debt of sin, but only | 
bln by obtaining pardon through the grace of God. Gree. But 
‘both debtors being forgiven, the Pharisee is asked which 
most loved the forgiver of the debts. For it follows, Who 
then will love him most? To which he at once answers, I 
suppose, that he to whom he forgave most. And here we 
must remark, that while the Pharisee is convicted upon his own 
grounds, the madman carries the rope by which he will be 
bound; asit follows, But he said unto him, Thou hast rightly 
judged. 'The good deeds of the sinful woman are enumerated 
to him, and the evils of the pretended righteous; as it follows, 
And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest 
thou this woman? I entered into thy house, thou gavest me no 


VER. 36—50. ST. LUKE. 257 


water for my feet, but she hath washed my feet with her 
tears. Tir. Bost. As if He said, To provide water is easy, 
to pour forth tears is not easy. Thou hast not provided 
even what was at hand, she hath poured forth what was not 
at hand; for washing my feet with her tears, she washed 
away her own stains. She wiped them with her hair, that 
so she might draw to herself the sacred moisture, and by 
that by which she once enticed youth to sin, might now attract 
to herself holiness. 

Curys. But as after the breaking of a violent storm there Chrys. 
comes a calm, so when tears have burst forth, there is peace, one 
and gloomy thoughts vanish ; and as by water and the Spirit, 
so by tears and confession we are again made clean. Hence 
it follows, Wherefore I say unto you, Her sins which are 
many are forgiven, for she loveth much. For those who 
have violently plunged into evil, will in time also eagerly 
follow after good, being conscious to what debts they have 
made themselves responsible. Grrec. The more then the Greg. 
heart of the sinner is burnt up by the great fire of charity, so ue 
much the more is the rust of sin consumed. Tit. Bosr. But Evan. 
it more frequently happens that he who has sinned much is 
purified by confession, but he who has sinned little, refuses 
from pride to come to be healed thereby. Hence it follows, 

But io whom litile is forgiven, the same loveth little. CHRyYS. Chrys. 
We have need then ofa fervent spirit, for nothing hinders aon 
a man from becoming great. Let then no sinner despair, Matt. 
no virtuous man fall asleep; neither let the one be self-confi- 
dent, for often the harlot shall go before him, nor the other 
distrustful, for he may even surpass the foremost. Hence it is 

also here added, But he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven 

thee. 

GreG. Behold she who had come sick to the Physician Greg. 
was healed, but because of her safety others are still sick ; ¥>! s4p- 
for it follows, And they that sat at meat began to say within 
themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also. But the 
heavenly Physician regards not those sick, whom He sees to 
be made still worse by His remedy, but her whom He had 
healed He encourages by making mention of her own piety; as 
it follows, But he said unto the woman, Thy faith hath made 
thee whole; for in truth she doubted not that she would 


VOL. HI. S 


258 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


receive what she sought for. THEOPHYL. But after having 
forgiven her sins, He stops not at the forgiveness of sins, but 
adds good works, as it follows, Go in peace, i.e. in nigh- 
teousness, for righteousness is the reconciliation of man to 
God, as sin is the enmity between God and man; as if He 
said, Do all things which lead you to the peace of God. 
AmBROSE; Now in this place many seem to be perplexed 
with the question, whether the Evangelists do not appear to 

Severus have differed concerning the faith, GreeK Ex. For since 

ene the four Evangelists relate that Christ was anointed with 
ointment by a woman, I think that there were three 
women, differing according to the quality of each, their 
mode of action, and the difference of times. John, for ex- 
ample, relates that Mary, the sister of Lazarus, six days 
before the Passover, anointed the feet of Jesus in her own 
house; but Matthew, after that the Lord had said, You know 
that after two days will be the Passover, adds, that in Bethany, 
at the house of Simon the leper, a woman poured ointment 
upon the head of our Lord, but did not anoint His feet as 
Mary. Mark also says the same as Matthew; but Luke gives 
the account not near the time of the Passover, but in the 
middle of the Gospel. Chrysostom explains it that there 
were two different women, one indeed who is described in 
John, another who is mentioned by the three. 

AMBROSE; Matthew has introduced this woman as pour- 
ing ointment upon the head of Christ, and was therefore 
unwilling to call her a sinner, for the sinner, according 
to Luke, poured ointment upon the feet of Christ. She 
cannot then be the same, lest the Evangelists should seem to 
be at variance with one another. The difficulty may be also 
solved by the difference of merit and of time, so that the 
former woman may have been yet a sinner, the latter now more 

Aug. perfect. Aug. For I think we must understand that the same 
ae Mary did this twice, once indeed as Luke has related, when 
i.e. 79 at first coming with humility and weeping, she was thought 
worthy to receive forgiveness of sins. Hence John, when 

he began to speak of the resurrection of Lazarus, before he 

oe came to Bethany, says, But it was Mary who anointed our 
’ Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose 
brother Lazarus was sick. Mary therefore had already done 


VER. 36— 50. ST. LUKE. | 259 


this ; but what she again did in Bethany is another occurrence, 
which belongs not to the relation of Luke, but is equally told 
by the other three. 

GreEG. Now in a mystical sense the Pharisee, presuming Greg. 
upon his pretended righteousness, is the Jewish people pea 
the woman who was a sinner, but who came and wept at our Evang. 
Lord’s feet, represents the conversion of the Gentiles. 
AMBROSE; Or, the leper, is the prince of this world; 
the house of Simon the leper, is the earth. The Lord there- 
fore descended from the higher parts to this earth; for this 
woman could not have been healed, who bears the figure of a 
soul or the Church, had not Christ come upon earth. But 
rightly does she receive the figure of a sinner, for Christ also 
took the form of a sinner. If then thou makest thy soul 
approach in faith to God, it not with foul and shameful sins, 
but piously obeying the word of God, and in the confidence 
of unspotted purity, ascends to the very head of Christ. 

But the head of Christ is God. But let him who holds not! Cor. 
the head of Christ, hold the feet, the sinner at the feet, the just es 
at the head; nevertheless she also who sinned, has ointment. 
GREG. What else is expressed by the ointment, but the Greg. 
sweet savour of a good report? Ifthen we do good works ie 
by which we may sprinkle the Church with the sweet odour 

of a good report, what else do we but pour ointment upon 

the body of our Lord? But the woman stood by His feet, 

for we stood over against the feet of the Lord, when yet in 

our sins we resisted His ways. But if we are converted from 

our sins to true repentance, we now again stand by His feet, 

for we follow His footsteps whom we before opposed. Am- 
BROSE; Bring thou also repentance after sin. Wherever 
thou hearest the name of Christ, speed thither; into whatever 
house thou knowest that Jesus has entered, thither hasten ; 
when thou findest wisdom, when thou findest justice sit- 
ting in any inner chamber, run to its feet, that is, seek 
even the lowest part of wisdom; confess thy sins with tears. 
Perhaps Christ washed not His own feet, that we might wash 
them with our tears. Blessed tears, which can not only wash 
away our own sin, but also water the footsteps of the heavenly 
Word, that His goings may abound in us. Blessed tears, 

in which there is not only the redemption of sinners, but the 

$2 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


260 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VII. 


refreshing of the righteous. Gree. For we water the feet 
of our Lord with tears if we are moved with compassion to 
any even the lowest members of our Lord. We wipe our Lord’s 
feet with our hair, when we shew pity to His saints (with 
whom we suffer in love) by the sacrifice of those things with 
which we abound. AMBROSE; Throw about thy hair, scatter 
before Him all the graces of thy body. The hair is not to 
be despised which can wash the feet of Christ. Gree. The 
woman kisses the feet which she has wiped. This also we 
fully do when we ardently love those whom we maintain by 
our bounty. By the feet also may be understood the mystery 
itself of the Incarnation. We then kiss the feet of the Re- 
deemer when we love with our whole heart the mystery of the 
Incarnation. We anoint the feet with ointment, when we 
proclaim the power of His humanity with the good tidings 
of holy eloquence. But this also the Pharisee sees and 
grudges, for when the Jewish people perceives that the 
Gentiles preach God, it consumes away by its own malice. 
But the Pharisee is thus repulsed, that as it were through 
Him that false people might be made manifest, for in 
truth that unbelieving people never offered to the Lord 
even those things which were without them; but the Gentiles 
being converted, poured forth not only their substance but 
their blood. Hencé He says to the Pharisee, Thou gavest 
me no water for my feet, but she hath washed my feet with 
her tears; for water is without us, the moisture of tears 1s 
within us. That unfaithful people also gave no kiss to the 
Lord, for it was unwilling to embrace Him from love whom 
it obeyed from fear, (for the kiss is the sign of love,) but the 
Gentiles being called cease not to kiss the feet of their 
Redeemer, for they ever breathe in His love. AMBROSE; 
But she is of no slight merit of whom it is said, From the 
time that she entered has not ceased to kiss my feet, so that 
she knew not to speak aught but wisdom, to love aught but 
justice, to touch aught but chastity, to kiss aught but 
modesty. GREG. But it is said to the Pharisee, My head 
with oil thou didst not anoint, for the very power even of 
Divinity on which the Jewish people professed to believe, 
he neglects to celebrate with due praise. But she hath 
anvinted my fect with ointment. For while the Gentile 


VER. 36—50. ST. LUKE. 261 


people believed the mystery of His incarnation, it proclaimed 
also His lowest powers with the highest praise. 

AMBROSE; Blessed is he even who can anoint with oil the 
feet of Christ, but more blessed is he who anoints with oint- 
ment, for the essence of many flowers blended into one, 
scatters the sweets of various odours. And perhaps no other 
than the Church alone can bring that ointment which has 
innumerable flowers of different perfumes, and therefore 
no one can love so much as she who loves in many individuals. 
But in the Pharisee’s house, that is, in the house of the Law 
and the Prophets, not the Pharisee, but the Church is justi- 
fied. For the Pharisee believed not, the Church believed. The 
Law has no mystery by which secret faults are cleansed, and 
therefore that which is wanting in the Law is made up in the 
Gospel. But the two debtors are the two nations who are 
responsible for payment to the usurer of the heavenly trea- 
sury. But we do not owe to this usurer material money, but 
the balance of our good deeds, the coin of our virtues, the 
merits of which are estimated by the weight of sorrow, 
the stamp of righteousness, the sound of confession. But 
that denarius is of no slight value on which the image of the 
king is found. Woe to meif | shall not have what I received. 
Or because there is hardly any one who can pay the whole 
debt to the usurer, woe to me if I shall not seek the debt to 
be forgiven me. But what nation is it that owes most, 
if not we to whom most is lent? To them were en- 
trusted the oracles of God, to us is entrusted the Virgin’s 
offspring, Immanuel, i. e. God with us, the cross of our Lord, 
_- His death, His resurrection. It cannot then be doubted that 
he owes most who receives most. Among men he perhaps 
offends most who is most in debt. By the mercy of the Lord 
the case is reversed, so that he loves most who owes most, 
if so be that he obtains grace. And therefore since there 
is nothing which we can worthily return to the Lord, woe be 
to me also if I shall not have loved. Let us then offer our 
love for the debt, for he loves most to whom most is given. 


Isid. 
lib. iii. 
ep. 206. 


CHAP. VIII. 


1. And it came to pass afterward, that he went 
throughout every city and village, preaching and 
shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God: 
and the twelve were with him, 

2. And certain women, which had been healed of 
evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, 
out of whom went seven devils, 

3. And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod’s steward, 
and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto 
him of their substance. 


THropHyLt. He who descended from heaven, for our 
example and imitation, gives us a lesson not to be slothful in 
teaching. Hence it is said, And tt came to pass afterward 
that he went, Sc. Grea. Naz. For He passes from place to 
place, that He may not only gain many, but may consecrate 
many places. He sleeps and labours, that He may sanctify 
sleep and labour. He weeps, that He may give a value to 
tears. He preaches heavenly things, that He may exalt His 
hearers. Tit. Bost. For He who descends from heaven to 
earth, brings tidings to them that dwell on earth of a heavenly 
kingdom. But who ought to preach the kingdom of heaven ? 
Many prophets came, yet preached not the kingdom of 
heaven, for how could they pretend to speak of things which 
they perceived not? Isip. PELEus. Now this kingdom of 
God some think to be higher and better than the heavenly 
kingdom, but some think it to be one and the same in reality, 
but called by different names; at one time the kingdom of 
God from Him who reigneth, but at another the kingdom 
of heaven from the Angels and Saints, His subjects, who are 
said to be of heaven. 


VER: 1—3. ST. LUKE. 263 


BEDE; But like the eagle, enticing its young ones to fly, 
our Lord, step by step, raises up His disciples to heavenly 
things. He first of all teaches in the synagogues, and _per- 
forms miracles. He next chooses twelve whom He names 
Apostles; He afterwards takes them alone with Him, as He 
preached throughout the cities and villages, as it follows, 
And the twelve were with him. 'THEOPHYL. Not teaching or 
preaching, but to be instructed by Him. But lest it should 
seem that the women were hindered from following Christ, 
it is added, And certain women which had been healed of 
evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, out of 
whom went seven devils. BEDE; Mary Magdalene is the 
same of whose repentance, without mention of her name, we 
have just read. For the Evangelist, when he relates her going 
with our Lord, rightly distinguishes her by her known name, 
but when describing the sinner but penitent, He speaks of 
her generally as a woman; lest the mark of her former guilt 
should blacken a name of so great report. Out of whom seven 
devils are reported to have gone, that it might be shewn that 
she was full of all vices. GRec. For what is understood by Greg. 
the seven devils, but all vices? For since all time is compre- Houe 
hended by seven days, rightly by the number seven is univer- Ev- 
sality represented: Mary therefore had seven devils, for she was 
full of every kind of vice. It follows, And Joanna the wife 
of Chuza Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many others 
who ministered to him of their substance. JEROME; It was Hier. ia 
a Jewish custom, nor was it thought blameable, according to 7, BD. 
the ancient manners of that nation, that women should afford 
of their substance food and clothing to their teachers. This 
custom, as it might cause offence to the Gentiles, St. Paul 
relates he had cast off. But these ministered unto the Lord 1 Cor. 
of their substance, that He might reap their carnal things dai 
from whom they had reaped spiritual things. Not that the 
Lord needed the food of His creatures, but that He might 
set an example to masters, that they ought to be content with 
food and clothing from their disciples. BEDE; But Mary is 
by interpretation, “ bitter sea,” because of the loud wailing 
of her penitence ; Magdalene, “ a tower, or rather belonging 
to a tower,” from the tower of which it is said, Thou anee is 61, 
become my hope, my strong tower from the face of my enemy. ° 


264 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


Joanna is by interpretation “ the Lord her grace,” or “ the 
merciful Lord,” for from Him cometh every thing that we 
live upon. But if Mary, cleansed from the corruption of her 
sins, points to the Church of the Gentiles, why does not 
Joanna represent the same Church ce) subject to the 
worship of idols? 

For every evil spirit whilst he acts for the devil’s kingdom, 
is as it were Herod’s steward. Susanna is interpreted, “a 
lily,” or its grace, because of the fragrance and eaten 
of the heavenly life, and the golden heat of inward love. 


4. And when much people were gathered together, 
and were come to him out of every city, he spake by 
a parable: 

5. A sower went out to sow his seed: and as 
he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was 
trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it. 

6. And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it 
was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked 
moisture. 

7. And some fell among thorns; and the thorns 
sprang up with it, and choked it. 

8. And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, 
and bare fruit an hundredfold. And when he had 
said these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear, 
let him hear. 

9. And his disciples asked him, saying, What 
might this parable be ? 

10. And he said, Unto you itis given to know the 
mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to others in 
parables; that seeing they might not see, and hearing 
they might not understand. 

11. Now the parable is this: The seed is the word 
of God. 

12. Those by the way side are they that hear; 
then cometh the devil, and taketh away the word 


VER. 4—15. ST. LUKE. 265 


out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be 
saved. 

13. They on the rock are they, which, when they 
hear, receive the word with joy; and these have no 
root, which for a while believe, and in time of tempt- 
ation fall away. 

14. And that which fell among thorns are they, 
which, when they have heard, go forth, and are 
choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this 
life, and bring no fruit to perfection. 

15. But that on the good ground are they, which 
in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, 
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. 


Turopuy.. That which David had foretold in the person 
of Christ, I will open my mouth in parables, the Lord here Ps.78,2. 
fulfils; as it is said, And when much people were gathered 
together, and were come to him out of every city, he spake 
by a parable. But the Lord speaks by a parable, first indeed 
that He may make His hearers more attentive. For men 
were accustomed to exercise their minds on dark sayings, 
and to despise what was plain; and next, that the unworthy 
might not receive what was spoken mystically. 
OrIGEN; And therefore it is significantly said, When much 
people were gathered together, and were come to him out of 
every city. For not many but few there are who walk the 
strait road, and find the way which leadeth to life. Hence 
Matthew says, that He taught without the house by parables, Matt. 
but within the house explained the parable to His disciples. 1% ** 
Kvusesius ; Now Christ most fitly puts forth His first 
parable to the multitude not only of those who then stood 
by, but of those also who were to come after them, inducing 
them to listen to His words, saying, 4 sower went out to 
sow his seed. 
BEvE; The sower we can conceive to be none other but yonnig, 
the Son of God, Who going forth from His Father's bosom Cae, 


whither no creature had attained, came into the world that He Hom. 


might bear witness to the truth. Curys. Now His going, arts 


Heb. 1, 
14, 


John 7, 
15. 


266 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


Who is every where, was not local, but through the vail of 
the flesh He approached us. But Christ fitly denominates 
His advent, His going forth. For we were aliens from God, 
and cast out as criminals, and rebels to the king, but he who 
wishes to reconcile man, going out to them, speaks to them 
without, until having become meet for the royal presence, He 
brings them within; so also did Christ. THropuyL. But He 
went out now, not to destroy the husbandmen, or to burn up 
the earth, but He went out to sow. For oftimes the husband- 
man who sows, goes out for some other cause, not only to 
sow. Evusesius; Some went out from the heavenly country 
and descended among men, not however to sow, for they 
were not sowers, but ministering spirits sent forth to minister. 
Moses also and the prophets after him did not plant in men 
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but by keeping back 
the foolish from the error of iniquity, and the worship of 
idols, they tilled as it were the souls of men, and brought 
them into cultivation. But the only Sower of all, the Word 
of God, went out to sow the new seed of the Gospel, that is, 
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. THEOPHYL. But 
the Son of God never ceases to sow in our hearts, for not 
only when teaching, but creating, He sows good seed in our 
hearts. Tit. Bost. But He went out to sow His seed, He 
receives not the word as borrowed, for He is by nature the 
Word of the living God. The seed is not then of Paul, or 
of John, but they have it because they have received it. 
Christ has His own seed, drawing forth His teaching from 
His own nature. Hence also the Jews said, How knoweth 
this man letters, having never learned ? 

EvuseBius; He teaches therefore that there are two classes 
of those who received the seed; the first, of those who have 
been made worthy of the heavenly calling, but fall from 
grace through carelessness and sloth; but the second, of those 
who multiply the seed bearing good fruit. But according to 
Matthew he makes three divisions in each class. For those 
who corrupt the seed have not all the same manner of de- 
struction, and those who bear fruit from it do not receive 
an equal abundance. He wisely sets forth the cases of those 
who lose the seed. For some though they have not sinned, 
have lost the good sced implanted in their hearts, through its 


o™ 


VER. 4—15. ST. LUKE. 267 


having been withdrawn from their thoughts and memory by 

evil spirits, and devils who fly through the air; or deceitful 
and cunning men, whom He calls the birds of the air. Hence 

it follows, And as he sowed, some fell by the way side. 
THEOPHYL. He said not that the sower threw some on the 
way side, but that zt fell by the way side. For he who sows 
teaches the right word, but the word falls in different ways 
upon the hearers, so that some of them are called the way 
side: and it was trodden down, and the birds of the air 
devoured it. Cyriu; For every way side is in some measure 

dry and uncultivated, because it is trodden down by all 
men, and no seed gains moisture on it. So the divine 
warning reaches not the unteachable heart, that it should 
bring forth the praise of virtue. These then are the ways 
frequented by unclean spirits. There are again some who 
bear faith about them, as if it consisted in the nakedness 

of words; their faith is without root, of whom it is added, 
And some fell upon a rock, and as soon as it sprung up, 

it withered away, because it lacked moisture. BrpE; The 
rock, he says, is the hard and unsubdued heart. Now the 
moisture at the root of the seed is the same as what is called 

in another parable, the oil to trim the lamps of the virgins, Matt. 
that is, love and stedfastness in virtue. Evusresius; There” 
are also some who through covetousness, the desire of 
pleasure and worldly cares, which indeed Christ calls thorns, 
suffer the seed which has been sown in them to be choked. 
Curys. For as the thorns do not let the seed grow up, Chrys. 
but when it has been sown choke it by thickening round it, ree 
so the cares of this present life permit not the seed to bear Matt. 
fruit. But in things of sense the husbandman must be 
reproved who would sow amid thorns on a rock and the way 
side, for it is impossible that the rocks should become earth, 

the way not be a way, the thorns not be thorns. But in 
rational things it is otherwise. For it is possible that the 
rock should be converted into a fruitful soil, the way not 

be trodden down, the thorns dispersed. Cyrit; Now the 
rich and fruitful ground is the honest and good hearts which 
receive deeply the seeds of the word, and retain them and 
cherish them. And whatever is added to this, dAzd some 
Sell upon good ground, and springing up, brought forth 


" 268 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


Sruit an hundredfold. Yor when the divine word is poured 
into a soul free from all anxieties, then it strikes root deep, and 
sends forth as it were the ear, and in its due season comes to 
perfection. BrpE; For by fruit a hundredfold, he means 
perfect fruit. For the number ten is always taken to imply 
perfection, because in ten precepts is contained the keeping, 
or the observance of the law. But the number ten multiplied 
by itself amounts to a hundred; hence by a hundred very 
great perfection is signified. CyRIL; But what the meaning of 
the parable is, let us hear from him who made it, as it follows, 
And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath 


Basil. ears to hear, let him hear. Basi_; Hearing has reference to 
5°" the understanding. By this then our Lord stirs us up to 
Prov. 


listen attentively to the meaning of those things which are 
spoken. BEDE; For as often as the admonition occurs 
either in the Gospel or the Revelation of St. John, it signifies 
that there is a mystical meaning in what is said, and we 
must inquire more closely into it. Hence the disciples who 
were ignorant ask our Saviour, for it follows, And his dis- 
ciples asked him, §&c. But let no one suppose that as soon 
as the parable was finished His disciples asked Him, but 


— 4,as Mark says, When he was alone they asked him. ORiGEN; 


On gen, 


Now a parable is a narration of an action as done, yet not 


ay Prov. done according to the letter, though it might have been, 


Judges 
9, 8. 


Greg. 


ubi sup. 


representing certain things by means of others which are given 
in the parable. An enigma is a continued story of things 
which are spoken of as done, and yet have not been done, 
nor are possible to be done, but contains a concealed 
meaning, as that which is mentioned in the Book of Judges, 
that the trees went forth to anoint a king over them. But it 
was not literally a fact as is said, A sower went out to 
sow, like those facts related in history, yet it might have 
been so. 

EvusEsius; But our Lord told them the reason why He 
spake to the multitudes in parables, as follows, And he 
said, Unto you it is given lo know the mysteries of God. 
Grec. Naz. When you hear this you must not entertain 
the notion of different natures, as certain heretics do, who 
think that some men indeed are of a perishing nature, others 
of a saving nature, but that some are so constituted that their 


VER. 4—15. ST. LUKE. 269 | 


will leads them to better or worse. But add to the words, 
To you it ts given, if willing and truly worthy. THEOPHYL. 
_ But to those who are unworthy of such mysteries, they are 
obscurely spoken. Hence it follows, But to the rest in 
parables, that seeing they might not see, and hearing they 
might not understand. For they think they see, but see not, 
and hear indeed, but do not understand. For this reason 
Christ hides this from them, lest they should beget a greater 
prejudice against them, if after they had known the mysteries 
of Christ, they despised them. For he who understands and 
afterwards despises, shall be more severely punished. BEDE; 
Rightly then do they hear in parables, who having closed 
the senses of their heart, care not to know the truth, forgetful 
of what the Lord told them. He that hath ears to hear, let 
him hear. GrecG. But our Lord condescended to explain 
what He said, that we might know how to seek for explana- 
tion in those things which He is unwilling to explain through 
Himself. For it follows, Now the parable is this: The seed 
is the word of God. Evuses. Now He says, that there are 
three reasons why men destroy the seed implanted in their 
hearts. For some destroy the seed that is hid in them by 
lightly giving heed to those that wish to deceive, of whom 
He adds, Those by the way side are they that hear: then 
cometh the devil, and taketh away the word out of their 
hearts. Breve; Who in truth deign to receive the word 
which they hear with no faith, with no understanding, at least 
with no attempt to test the value of it. Huses. But 
some there are who having not received the word in any 
depth of heart, are soon overcome when adversity assails 
them, of whom it is added, They on the rock are they which 
when they hear, receive the word with joy; and these have 
no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation 
fall away. CyriL; For when they enter the Church they 
gladly wait on the divine mysteries, but with infirmity of 
purpose. But when they leave the Church they forget the 
sacred discipline, and as long as Christians are undisturbed, 
their faith is lasting; but when persecution harasses, their heart 
fails them, for their faith was without root. Gree. Many 
_ men propose to begin a good work, but as soon as they have 
become annoyed by adversity or temptation, they abandon 


Greg. 


in Hom. 


1§.inEv. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


270 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIIT. 


what they had begun. The rocky ground then had no moisture 
to carry on to constancy fruit which it had put forth. Evoses. 
But some choke the seed which has been deposited in them 
with riches and vain delights, as if with choking thorns, of 
whom it is added, And that which fell among thorns are 
they, which, when they have heard, go forth, and are choked 

Greg. with cares and riches Of this life, Fc. Gree. It is wonderful 

“h' *4P- that the Lord has represented riches as thorns, for these 
prick, while those delight, and yet they are thorns, for they 
lacerate the mind by the prickings of their thoughts, and 
whenever they entice to see they draw blood, as if inflicting 
a wound. But there are two things which He joins to riches, 
cares and pleasures, for they oppress the mind by anxiety 
and unnerve it by luxuries, but they choke the seed, for they 
strangle the throat of the heart with vexatious thoughts, and 
while they let not a good desire enter the heart, they close 
up as it were the passage of the vital breath. 

Evses. Now these things were foretold by our Saviour 
according to His foreknowledge, and that their case is so, 
experience testifies. For in no wise do men fall away from 
the truth of divine worship, but according to some of the 

Chrys. causes before mentioned by Him. Curys. And to sum up 

Hom. many things in afew words. Some indeed as careless hearers, 

Matt. some as weak, but others as the very slaves of pleasure and 
worldly things, hold aloof from what is good. The order of 
the way side, the rock, and the thorns is well, for we have 
first need of recollection and caution, next of fortitude, and 
then of contempt of things present. He therefore places the 
good ground in opposition to the way, the rock, and the thorns. 
But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest 
and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, §c. For 
they who are on the way side keep not the word, but the 
devil takes away their seed. But they who are on the rock 
sustain not patiently the assaults of temptation through weak- 
ness. But they who are among thorns bear no fruit, but are 

Greg. choked. GREG. The good ground then bears fruit through 

ubi sup. ° ‘ : ; 
patience, for nothing we do is good unless we endure patiently 
our closest evils. They therefore bear fruit through patience, 
who when they bear strifes humbly, are after the scourge 
received with joy to a heavenly rest. 


a 


VER. 16—18. ST. LUKE. 271 


16. No man, when he hath lighted a candle, 
covereth it with a vessel, or putteth it under a bed; 
but setteth it on a candlestick, that they which enter 
in may see the light. 

17. For nothing is secret, that shall not be made 
manifest; neither any thing hid, that shall not be 
known and come abroad. 

18. Take heed therefore how ye hear: for whoso- 
ever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath 
not, from him shall be taken even that which he 
seemeth to have. 


BEDE; Having before said to His Apostles, Unto you tt is 

given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to 
others in parables ; He now shews that by them at length 
must the same mystery be revealed also to others, saying, 
No man when he hath lighted a candle covereth it uith a 
vessel, or putteth it under a bed. Evuses. As if He said, As 
a lantern is lighted that it should give light, not that it should 
be covered under a bushel ora bed, so also the secrcts of 
the kingdom of heaven when uttered in parables, although 
hid from those who are strangers to the faith, will not however 
to all men appear obscure. Hence he adds, For nothing 1s 
secret that shall not be made manifest, neither any thing 
hid that shall not be known, and come abroad. As if He 
said, Though many things are spoken in parables, that secing 
they might not see, and hearing they might not understand, 
because of their unbelief, yet the whole matter shall be 
revealed. 

_ Aue. Or else in these words He typically sets forth the Aug. de 
boldness of preaching, that no one should, through fear of See 
fleshly ills, conceal the light of knowledge. For under the ii. q. 12. 
names of vessel and bed, he represents the flesh, but of that 
of lantern, the word, which whosoever keeps hid through 
fear of the troubles of the flesh, sets the flesh itself before the 
manifestation of the truth, and by it he as it were covers the 
word, who fears to preach it. But he places a candle upon 
a candlestick who so submits his body to the service of God, 


John 5, 
35. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
15. in 
Matt. 


Max. 
Quest. 
inScript. 
63. 


272 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


that the preaching of the truth stands highest in his esti- 
mation, the service of the body lowest. 

OrRIGEN ; But he who would adapt his lantern to the more 
perfect disciples of Christ, must persuade us by those things 
which were spoken of John, for he was a burning and a 
shining light. It becomes not him then who lights the light 
of reason in his soul to hide it under a bed where men sleep, 
nor under any vessel, for he who does this provides not for 
those who enter the house for whom the candle is prepared, 
but they must set it upon a candlestick, that is, the whole 
Church. 

Curys. By these words he leads them to diligence of life, 
teaching them to be strong as exposed to the view of all men, 
and fighting in the world as on a stage. As if he said, 
Think not that we dwell in a small part of the world, for 
ye will be known of all men, since it cannot be that so great 
virtue should lie hid. Maxim. Or perhaps the Lord calls 
Himself a light shining to all who inhabit the house, that is, 
the world, since He is by nature God, but by the dispensation 
made flesh. And so like the light of the lamp He abides in 
the vessel of the flesh by means of the soul as the light in the 
vessel of the lamp by means of the flame. But by the 
candlestick he describes the Church over which the divine 
word shines, illuminating the house as it were by the rays 
of truth. But under the similitude of a vessel or bed he 
referred to the observance of the law, under which the word 
will not be contained. BEDE; But the Lord ceases not to 
teach us to hearken to His word, that we may be able both to 
constantly meditate on it in our own minds, and to bring it 
forth for the instruction of others. Hence it follows, Take 
heed therefore how ye hear; for whosoever hath, to him shall 
be given. As if he says, Give heed with all your mind to the 
word which ye hear, for to him who has a love of the word, 
shall be given also the sense of understanding what he loves ; 
but whoso hath no love of hearing the word, though he deems 
himself skilful either from natural genius, or the exercise of 
learning, will have no delight in the sweetness of wisdom ; for 
oftentimes the slothful man is gifted with capacities, that if 
he neglect them he may be the more justly punished for his 
negligence, since that which he can obtain without labour 


VER. 19—21. ST. LUKE. 273 


he disdains to know, aud sometimes the studious man is 
oppressed with slowness of apprehension, in order that the 
more he labours in his inquiries, the greater may be the re- 
compense of his reward. 


19. Then came to him his mother and his brethren, 
and could not come at him for the press. 

20. And it was told him by certain which said, 
Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring 
to see thee. | 

21. And he answered and said unto them, My 
mother and my brethren are these which hear the 
word of God, and do it. 


Tit. Bost. Our Lord had left His kinsfolk according to 
the flesh, and was occupied in His Father’s teaching. But 
when they began to feel His absence, they came unto Him, 
as itis said, Then came unto him his mother and his brethren. 
When you hear of our Lord’s brethren you must include also 
the notions of piety and grace. For no one in regard of His 
divine nature is the brother of the Saviour, (for He is the 
Only-begotten,) but He has, by the grace of piety, made us 
partakers in His flesh and His blood, and He who is by 
nature God has become our brother. 

BEDE; But those who are said to be our Lord’s brethren 
according to the flesh, you must not imagine to be the chil- 
dren of the blessed Mary, the mother of God, as Helvidius 
thinks, nor the children of Joseph by another wife, as some 
say, but rather believe to be their kinsfolk. Tir. Bost. 
His brethren thought that when He heard of their presence 
He would send away the people, from respect to His mother’s 
name, and from His affection towards her, as it follows, 
And it was told him, Thy mother and thy brethren stand 
without. Currys. Think what it was, when the whole people Chrys. 
stood by, and were hanging upon His mouth, (for His teach- Fre 
ing had already begun,) to withdraw Him away from them. Matt. 
Our Lord accordingly answers as it were rebuking them, 
as it follows, And he answered and said unto them, My 

VOL. III. T 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
41. in 
Matt. 


274 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ‘CHAP. VIII. 


mother and my brethren are they which hear the word of 
God, and do it, &c. AMBROSE; The moral teacher who gives 
himself an example to others, when about to enjoin upon 
others, that he who has not left father and mother, is not 
worthy of the Son of God, first submits Himself to this pre- 
cept, not that He denies the claims of filial piety, (for it is 
His own sentence, He that knoweth not his father and mother 
shall die the death,) but because He knows that He 1s more 
bound to obey His Father’s mysteries than the feelings of 
His mother. Nor however are His parents harshly rejected, 
but the bonds of the mind are shewn to be more sacred than 
those of the body. Therefore in this place He does not 
disown His mother, (as some heretics say, eagerly catching 
at His speech,) since she is also acknowledged from the 
cross; but the law of heavenly ordinances is preferred to 
earthly affection. Brpr; They then who hear the word of 
God and do it, are called the mother of our Lord, because 
they daily in their actions or words bring Him forth as it 
were in their inmost hearts ; they also are His brethren where 
they do the will of His Father, Who is in heaven. 

Curys. Now He does not say this by way of reproof to 
His mother, but to greatly assist her, for if He was anxious 
for others to beget in them a just opinion of Himself, 
much more was He for His mother. And He had not 
raised her to such a height if she were always to expect 
to be honoured by Him as a son, and never to consider Him 
as her Lord. 'THEoPHYL. But some take this to mean that 
certain men, hating Christ’s teaching, and mocking at Him 
for His doctrine, said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand 
without wishing to see thee; as if thereby to shew His 
meanness of birth. And He therefore knowing their hearts 
gave them this answer, that meanness of birth harms not, but 
if a man, though of low birth, hear the word of God, He 
reckons him as His kinsman. Because however hearing 
only saves no one, but rather condemns, He adds, and doeth 
zt; for it becomes us both to hear and to do. But by the 
word of God He means His own teaching, for all the words 
which He Himself spake were from His Father. 

AMBROSE; In a mystical sense he ought not to stand with- 
out, who was seeking Christ. Hence also that saying, 


—~en, 


™ 


“ 


VER, 22—25. ST. LUKE. 975 


Come unto him, and be enlightened. For if they stand with- Ps. 34, 
out, not even parents themselves are acknowledged; and® "8: 
perhaps for our example they are not. How are we acknow- 
ledged by Him if we stand without? That meaning also is 

not unreasonable, because by the figure of parents He points 

to the Jews of whom Christ was born, and thought the Rom. 9, 
Church to be preferred to the synagogue. BeEpDE; For they ms 
cannot enter within when He is teaching whose words they 
refuse to understand spiritually. But the multitude went 
before and entered into the house, because when the Jews 
rejected Christ the Gentiles flocked to Him. But those who 

stand without, wishing to see Christ, are they, who not seeking 

a spiritual sense in the law, have placed themselves without 

to guard the letter of it, and as it were rather compel Christ 

to go out, to teach them earthly things, than consent to enter 

in themselves to learn spiritual things. 


22. Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he 
went into a ship with his disciples: and he said unto 
them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake. 
And they launched forth. 

23. But as they sailed he fell asleep: and there 
came down a storm of wind on the lake; and they 
were filled with water, and were in jeopardy. 

24. And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, 
Master, master, we perish. Then he arose, and 
rebuked the wind and the raging of the water: and 
they ceased, and there was a calm. 

25. And he said unto them, Where is your faith ? 
And they being afraid wondered, saying one to another, 
What manner of man is this! for he commandeth 
even the winds and water, and they obey him. 


Cyrit; When the disciples saw that all men received help 
from Christ, it seemed fitting that they themselves also should 
in turn rejoice in the benefits of Christ. For no one regards 
that which happens in the person of another equally with 
that to himself. The Lord therefore exposed the disciples 

T 2 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
27. in 
Matt. 


Cyril. 
ubi sup. 


Aug. 
de Cons. 
Ev. 1. 2. 
ec. 24. 


276 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


to the sea and the winds, as it follows, Now it came to 
pass on a certain day that he went into a ship with his 
disciples; and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the 
other side of the lake: and they launched forth. CuHRYS. 
Luke indeed avoids the question which might be put to him 
with regard to the order of time, saying, that He went into a 
ship on a certain day. Now if the storm had arisen when 
our Lord was awake, the disciples either had not feared, or 
not believed that He could do such a thing. For this cause 
He sleeps, giving them an occasion for fear; for it follows, 
But as they sailed he fell asleep; and there came down a 
slorm of wind on the lake. AMBROSE; We are told above, 
moreover, that He passed the night im prayer. How then 
does He here fall asleep in a storm? The security of power 
is expressed, that while all were afraid, He alone lay fearless ; 
but He lay asleep in the body, while in the mind he was in 
the mystery of divinity. For nothing happens without the 
Word. CyriL; But it seems to have been especially and 
wonderfully ordained that they should not seek His assistance 
when first the storm began to affect the boat, but after the 
danger had increased, in order that the power of the Divine 
Majesty might be made more manifest. Hence it is said, 
And they were filled with water, and were in jeopardy. 
This indeed our Lord allowed for the sake of trial, that having 
confessed their danger they should acknowledge the great- 
ness of the miracle. Hence when their great danger had 
driven them into intolerable fear, having no other hope of 
safety but the Lord of power Himself, they awoke Him. It 
follows, And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, 
Master, we perish. AuG. Matthew says, Master, save us, 
we perish. Mark, Master, carest thou not that we perish ? 
There is the same expression in all of men awakening 
our Lord, and anxious for their safety. Nor is it worth 
while to enquire which of these was most likely to have been 
said to Christ. For whether they said one of these three, 
or some other words which no Evangelist has mentioned, 
but of the same import, what matter is it? Though at the 
same time this may have been the case, that by the many 
who awoke Him, all these things were said, one by one, and 
another by another. 


VER. 22——25. ST. LUKE. O77 


Cyrit; But it could not be that they should perish while 

the Almighty was with them. Christ then arose, Who has 
power over all things, and immediately quells the storm and 
the violence of the wind, and the tempest ceased, and there 
wasacalm. Herein He shews Himself to be God, to Whom 
it is said, Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves Ps. 89, 
thereof arise, thou stillest them. So then as He sailed, our!” 
Lord manifested both natures in one and the same person, 
seeing that He who as man slept in the ship, as God by 
His word stilled the raging of the sea. Cyrit; But together 
with the raging of the waters, He quiets also the tumult 
of their souls, as it follows, And he said unto them, Where is 
your faith? By which word He shewed, that it is not so much 
the assault of temptation which causes fear, as faint-hearted- 
ness. For as gold is proved in the fire, so is faith in temptation. 
Aue. Now this is related by the other Evangelists in different Aug. 
words. For Matthew says, that Jesus said, Why are ye" 
fearful, O ye of little faith? but Mark as follows, Why are ats 
ye so fearful? How isit that ye huve no faith? i.e. that perfect Mark 4. 
faith like the grain of mustard seed. Mark then also says, 
O ye of little faith; but Luke, Where is your faith? And 
indeed all these may have been said, Why are ye fearful ? 
Where is your faith? O ye of little faith. Hence one 
Evangelist relates one, another another. 

CyriL; When the tempest was quelled at the command of 
Christ, the disciples in astonishment whispered one to the 
other, as it follows, And they being afraid wondered, &c. 
Now the disciples said not this as ignorant of Him, for they 
knew that He was God, and Jesus the Son of God. But 
they marvel at the exceeding vastness of His natural power, 
and the glory of His divinity, although He was like to us, 
and visible in the flesh. Hence they say, Who is this? 
that is, of what manner of man? how great, and with what 
great power and majesty? for it is a mighty work, a lordly 
command, no abject petition. Bebe; Or, it was not His 
disciples, but the sailors and others in the ship who 
wondered. 

But allegorically, the sea or lake is the dark and bitter tide 
of the world, the ship is the wood of the cross, by help of 
which the faithful, having passed the waves of this world, 


278 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


reach the shore of a heavenly country. AMBROSE; Our 
Lord therefore, who knew that He came upon earth for a 
divine mystery, having left His kinsfolk, went up into the 
ship. Bene; His disciples also, when summoned, enter 


ae 16,in with Him. Hence He says, Jf any one will come after 


Heb. 2, 
14, 


Mark 


me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow 
me. While His disciples are sailing, that is, the faithful 
passing through this world, and meditating in their minds 
the rest of the world to come, and by the breath of the Holy 
Spirit, or also their own exertions, eagerly leaving behind them 
the unbelieving pride of the world, suddenly our Lord fell 
asleep, that is, the time of our Lord’s passion was come, and 
the storm descended. For when our Lord entered the sleep 
of death upon the cross, the waves of persecution rose, stirred 
up by the breath of the devil, but while the patience of the 
Lord is not disturbed by the waves, the faint hearts of the 
disciples are shaken and tremble. They awoke our Lord 
lest they should perish while He slept, because having seen 
His death they wish for His resurrection, for if that were 
delayed they would perish for ever. He rises therefore and 
rebukes the wind, since by His sudden rising again He put 
down the pride of the devil who had the power of death. 
But He makes the tempest of nature to cease, since by His 
resurrection He baffled the rage of the Jews, who plotted His 
death. 

AMBROSE; You must remember that no one can pass from 
the course of this life without temptations, for temptation 
is the trial of faith. We are therefore subject to the storms 
of spiritual wickedness, but as watchful sailors we must awake 
the Pilot, who does not obey but commands the winds, who 
although He now no longer sleeps in the sleep of His own 
body, yet let us beware, lest through the sleep of our bodies 
He is to us asleep and at rest. But they are rightly reproved 
who feared, when Christ was present; since he surely who 
clings to Him can in no wise perish. 

BEDE; In like manner, when He appeared after His death 
to His disciples, He upbraided them with their unbelief, and 
thus having calmed the swelling waves, He made plain to 
all the power of His divinity. 


VER. 26—839. ST. LUKE. 279 


26. And they arrived at the country of the Gada- 
renes, which is over against Galilee. 

27. And when he went forth to land, there met 
him out of the city a certain man, which had devils 
long time, and ware no clothes, neither abode in any 
house, but in the tombs. 

28. When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell 
down before him, and with a loud voice said, 
What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of 
God most high? I beseech thee, torment me not. 

29. (For he had commanded the unclean spirit to 
come out of the man. For oftentimes it had caught 
him: and he was kept bound with chains and in 
fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of 
the devil into the wilderness.) 

30. And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy 
name? And he said, Legion: because many devils 
were entered into him. 

31. And they besought him that he would not 
command them to go out into the deep. 

32. And there was there an herd of many swine 
feeding on the mountain: and they besought him 
that he would suffer them to enter into them. And 
he suffered them. 

33. Then went the devils out of the man, and 
entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently 
down a steep place into the lake, and were choked. 

34. When they that fed them saw what was done, 
they fled, and went and told it in the city and in the 
country. 

35. Then they went out to see what was done; 
and came to Jesus, and found the man, out of whom 
the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, 
clothed, and in his right mind: and they were 
afraid. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
28. in 
Matt. 


280 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


36. They also which saw it told them by what 
means he that was possessed of the devils was healed. 

37. Then the whole multitude of the country of 
the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart 
from them; for they were taken with great fear: and 
he went up into the ship, and returned back again. 

38. Now the man out of whom the devils were 
departed besought him that he might be with him: 
but Jesus sent him away, saying, 

39. Return to thine own house, and shew how great 
things God hath done unto thee. And he went his 
way, and published throughout the whole city how 
great things Jesus had done unto him. 


CyriL; The Saviour, as He sailed with His disciples, 
came to a port, as it is said, And they arrived at the country 
of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee. Titus 
Bost. Many accurate copies have neither “‘ Gerazenes” nor 
“‘Gadarenes,” but ‘‘Gergezenes.” For Gadara is a city in 
Judza, but neither lake nor sea is found at it; and Geraza is 
a city of Arabia, having neither lake nor sea near. But 
Gergeza, from which the Gergezenes are called, is an ancient 
city near the lake of Tiberias, above which is a rock hanging 
over the lake, into which they say the swine were dashed down 
by the devils. But since Gadara and Geraza border upon the 
land of the Gergezenes, it is probable that the swine were 
led from thence to their parts. Bebe; For Geraza is a famous 
city of Arabia, on the other side of the Jordan, close to the 
mountain of Galaad, which was possessed by the tribe of 
Manasseh, and not far from the lake of Tiberias, into which 
the swine were cast headlong. 

CuRrys. But as soon as our Lord had departed from the sea, 
He meets with another more awful wonder. For the demoniac, 
like an evil slave, when he sees Him confirms his bondage, as it 
follows, And when he went forth to land, there met him out 


Aug. de of the cily a certain man, §&c. Auc. Whereas Matthew says, 


Cons. 
Ev. ut 
sup. 


that there were two possessed, but Mark and Luke mention only 
one; you must understand one of them to be amore distinguished 


VER. 26—39. ST. LUKE. 281 


and famous person, for whom that neighbourhood was chiefly 
distressed, and in whose restoration they were greatly inte- 
rested. Wishing to signify this, the two Evangelists thought 
right to mention him alone, concerning whom the report of 

this miracle had been most extensively noised abroad. 
Curys. Or, Luke selected from the two the one who was Chrys. 
most savage. Hence he gives the most melancholy account of Nar 
his calamity, adding, And he wore no clothes, neither abode Matt. 
in any house, but in the tombs. But the evil spirits visit the 
tombs of the dead, to instil into men that dangerous notion, 
that the souls of the dead become evil spirits. Cyrit; Now 

his going naked among the tombs of the dead was a mark 

of demoniacal wildness. But God permits some in His 
providence to become subject to evil spirits, that we may 
ascertain through them of what kind the evil spirits are 
towards us, in order that we may refuse to be made subject 
unto them, and so by the suffering of one many may be 
edified. 

Curys. But because the people acknowledged Him to be Chrys. 
man, the devils came publishing His divinity, which even “>! uP- 
the sea had proclaimed by its calmness. Hence it follows, 
When he saw Jesus he fell down before him, and with a 
loud voice said, §&c. Cyrit; Mark here the combination 
of fear with boldness and great desperation, for it is a sign of 
devilish despair to speak out boldly, What have I to do 
with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God most high? but of fear 
when they pray, I beseech thee not to cast me out. But 
if thou knowest Him to be the Son of God most high, thou 
confessest Him to be the God of heaven and earth, and of all 
things that are containedin them. How then dost thou make 
use not of thy own but His words, saying, What have I to 
do with thee? But what earthly prince will altogether en- 
dure to have his subjects tormented by barbarians? Hence 
it follows, For he had commanded the unclean spirit 
to come out of him. And He shews the necessity of the 
command, adding, For oftentimes it had caught him, &c. 
Curys. Therefore since no one could hold the possessed, Chrys. 
Christ goes to him and addresses him. It follows, And Jesus ™™! *P- 
asked him, saying, What is thyname? BEDE; He enquires 
not his name as ignorant of it, but that when the demoniac 


Greg. 
Hom. 
14. in 
Cantic. 
Tsaiah 
14, 13. 
Chrys. 
ubi gup. 


Max. 
Ep. ad 
Georgi- 


un). 


Auy. 

de Con. 
Ev. |. ii. 
24. 


Mark D, 
13, 


282 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


had confessed the plague which he endured, the power of 
the Healer might shine forth more welcome to him. But the 
priests also of our time, who through the grace of exorcism 
are able to cast out devils, are wont to say that the sufferers 
can no otherwise be cured than by openly telling in confes- 
sion every thing which either waking or sleeping they have 
endured from the unclean spirits, and above all when they 
imagine that the devils seek and obtain the possession of the 
human body. So also here the confession is added, And 
he said, Legion, because many devils were entered into 
him. 

GREG. Nyss. Certain evil spirits imitating the heavenly 
hosts and the legions of Angels say that they are legions. 
As also their prince says that he will exalt his throne above 
the stars that he may be like to the Most High. Curys. 
But when the Lord had overcome the evil spirits which dis- 
turbed His creatures, they thought that because of the 
enormity of those things which had been done, He would not 
wait the time of their punishment, and therefore since they could 
not deny their guilt, they entreat that they may not quickly un- 
dergo the penalty. As it follows, And they besought him that he 
would not command them to go out into the deep. THEOPHYL. 
Which indeed the devils demand, wishing yet longer to mix 
with mankind. CyriL; And hence it is plain that the rebel hosts 
against the Divine Majesty were thrust down to hell by the un- 
speakable power of the Saviour. Maxim. Now the Lord ordains 
for each class of sinners an appropriate punishment. The 
fire of Hell unquenchable for fleshly burnings, gnashing 
of teeth for wanton mirth, intolerable thirst for pleasure 
and revelry, the worm that dieth not for a crooked and 
malignant heart, everlasting darkness for ignorance and 
deceit, the bottomless pit for pride. Hence the deep is 
assigned to the devils as unto the proud, it follows, And there 
was there an herd of swine, §&c. Aue. The words of Mark, 
that there was a herd of swine nigh unto the mountains, and 
of Luke, on the mountains, do not differ from one another. 
For the herd of swine was so large, that they might be part 
on the mountain, part near it. For there were two thousand 
swine, as Mark has stated. AMBROSE; But the devils could 
not endure the clearness of the light of heaven, as those who 


VER. 26—39. ST. LUKE. 283 


have weak eyes can not bear the sun’s rays. CyriL; The 
multitude of unclean spirits seek therefore to be sent into 

the herd of unclean swine, like to themselves, for it follows, 

And they besought him that he would suffer them to enter inio 
them. ATHAN. But if they have no power over swine, the evil than. 
spirits have much less against men who are made after the image Anton. 
of God. We ought then to fear God alone, but despise them. 
Cyrit; But the Lord granted them permission, that this 
might be among other things to us an occasion of benefit, 

and the confidence of our safety. It follows, And he suffered 
them. We must therefore consider that the evil spirits are 
hostile to those which are subject to them, and this will be 
evident from their sending down the swine violently into the 
waters and choking them; as it follows, Then went the devils 

out of the man and entered into the swine, and the herd ran 
violently down a steep place into the lake, and were choked. 

And this Christ permitted to them which sought it, that it 
might appear from the event how cruel they are. It was also 
necessary to shew that the Son of God has no less power 

to foresee than the Father, that equal glory might be mani- 
fested in each. | 

Tit. Bost. But the shepherds take flight, lest they should Vide 

perish with the swine. Hence it follows, When they that peta 
fed them saw what was done they fled, and went and told Mark 5. 
it in the city and in the country, and excited the like 
alarm among the citizens. But the severity of their loss led 
them to the Saviour; for it follows, Then they went out to see 
what was done, and came to Jesus; and here remark, that 
while God punishes men in their substance, He confers a 
blessing upon their souls. But when they had set out, they 

see him in his right mind who had been long vexed. It 
follows, And they found the man out of whom the devils had 
departed sitting at the feet of Jesus clothed, (whereas before 

he was naked,) and in his right mind. For he departed not 

from those feet, where he obtained safety; and so acknow- 
ledging the miracle, they were astonished at the cure of the 
malady, and marvelled at the event; for it follows, And they 
were afraid. But this thing they discover partly by sight, 
partly hearing it in words. It follows, They also which saw 

it told them by what means he that was possessed of the 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


284 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIIT. 


devils was healed. But they ought to have besought the 
Lord not to depart from them, but to be the guardian of their 
country, that no evil spirits might come near them; but 
through fear they lost their own salvation, asking the Saviour 
to depart. It follows, Then the whole multitude of the 
country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart 
From them, for they were taken with great fear. THEOPHYL. 
They feared lest they should again suffer some loss, as they 
had suffered in the drowning of the swine. Curys. But 
observe the humility of Chnst; for when after conferring so 
great benefits upon them they sent Him away, He offers no 
obstacle, but departs, leaving thuse who had proclaimed 
themselves unworthy of His teaching. It follows, And he 
went up into the ship, and returned back again. Tit. Bost. 
But as He was departing, the man who had been afflicted will 
not part from his Saviour, for it follows, Nov the man out of 
achom the devils were departed besought him that he might 
be with him. THEOPHYL. For as one who had been tried by 
experience, he feared, lest perhaps when far from Jesus he 
should again become the prey of evil spirits. But the Lord 
shews him, that though He is not present with him, He can 
protect by His grace, for it follows, But Jesus sent him away, 
saying, Return to thine own house, and shew how great 
things God hath done for thee. But he said not, “ how great 
things I have done for thee,” giving us an example of humility, 


- that we should attribute all our righteousness to God. Tir. 


Chrys. 


ubi sup. 


Bost. He does not however turn aside from the law of truth, 
for whatever the Son doth the Father doth. But why does 
He, who every where charged those who were delivered to 
tell no one, say to this man who was delivered from the 
legion, Shew how great things God hath done for thee? 
Because in truth that whole country knew not God, and was 
in bondage to the worship of devils. Or more truly, now 
that He refers the miracle to His Father, He says, Shew how 
great, §c. but when He speaks of Himself He charges to 
tell no one. But he who was healed of the evil spirits knew 
Jesus to be God, and therefore published what great things 
God had done for him. For it follows, And he went through 
the whole city, Gc. Curys. And so abandoning those who 
had proclaimed themselves unworthy of His teaching, He 


VER. 26—39. 8ST. LUKE. 285 


appoints as their teacher the man who had been released 
from the evil spirits. 

BEDE; Now mystically; Gerasa signifies the Gentile 
nations, whom after His passion and resurrection Christ 
visited in His preachers. Hence Gerasa or Gergesa, as 
some say, is by interpretation “casting out an inhabitant,” 
that is, the devil by whom it was before possessed, or, “a 
stranger approaching,” who before was afar off. AMBROSE; 

Now although the number of those healed by Christ is 
different in Luke and Matthew, yet the mystery is one and 

the same. For as he who had a devil is the figure of the 
Gentile people, the two also in like manner take the figure 

of the Gentiles. For whereas Noah begat three sons, Shem, 

Ham, and Japhet; the family of Shem only was called to 

the possession of God, and from the other two the people 

of different nations were descended. He (as Luke says) 

had devils long time, inasmuch as the Gentile people was 
vexed from the deluge down to our Lord’s coming. But he 

was naked, because the Gentiles lost the garment of their 
nature and virtue. Auc. He abode in no house, that is, Aug. de 
he had no rest in his conscience; he dwelt among the tombs, ee 
because he delighted in dead works in his sins. AMBROSE; ii. q. 13. 
Or what are the bodies of the unbelieving but kinds of tombs 

in which the word of God abides not? 

Aue. Now that he was bound by brazen fetters and Aug. 
chains, signifies the harsh and severe laws of the Gentiles, ™™ ae 
by which also in their states offences are restrained. But, 
that having burst these chains he was driven by the evil 
spirit into the wilderness, means that having broken through 
these laws, he was also led by lust to those crimes which 
exceeded the ordinary life of men. By the expression that 
there was in him a legion of devils, the nations are signified 
who served many devils. But the fact that the devils were 
permitted to go into the swine, which fed on the mountains, 
signifies also the unclean and proud men over whom the 
evil spirits have dominion, because of their worship of idols. 

For the swine are they who, after the manner of unclean 
animals without speech and reason, have defiled the grace of 

their natural virtues by the filthy actions of their life. Aug. Aug. 
But by their being sent down violently into the lake, it is” *"? 


286 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


meant that the Church has been punfied, and now that the 
Gentiles are delivered from the dominion of evil spirits, those 
who refuse to believe in Christ, carry on their unholy rites in 
hidden places with dark and secret watchings. AMBROSE; ‘They 
are carried violently down, for they are reclaimed not by the 
contemplation of any good deed, but thrust as from a higher 
place to a lower, along the downward path of iniquity, they 
perish amidst the waves of this world, shut out from the 
approach of air. For they who are carried to and fro by the 
rapid tide of pleasure cannot receive the communication of 
the Spirit; we see then that man himself is the author of his 
own misery. For unless a man lived like the swine, the devil 
would never have received power over him, or received it, 
not to destroy but to prove him. And perhaps the devil, 
who after the coming of our Lord can no longer steal away 
the good, seeks not the destruction of all men, but only the 
wanton, as the robber lies in wait not for armed men, but 
the unarmed. When those who kept the herd saw this they 
fied. For neither the teachers of philosophy nor the chief 
of the synagogue can bring a cure to perishing mankind. 
It is Christ alone who takes away the sins of the people. 
PAN Ava. Or, by the herdsmen of the swine flying and telling 
Evan, }. these things, He represents certain rulers of the wicked, who 
ii.q-13.though they evade the law of Christianity, yet proclaim it 
among the nations by their astonishment and wonder. But 
by the Gerasenes, when they knew what was done, asking 
Jesus to depart from them, for they were struck with great 
fear, he represents the multitude delighting in their old 
pleasures, honouring indeed, but unwilling to endure the 
Christian law, saying that they cannot fulfil it, while they 
still marvel at the faithful released from their former abandoned 
mode of life. AMBROSE; Or there seems to have been a 
kind of synagogue in the city of the Gerasenes who besought 
our Lord to depart, because they were seized with great fear. 
For the weak mind receives not the word of God, nor can 
it endure the burden of wisdom. And therefore He no longer 
troubled them, but ascends from the lower parts to the higher, 
from the Synagogue to the Church, and returned across the 
lake. For no one passes from the Church to the Synagogue 
without endangering his salvation. But whoever desires to 


VER. 40—48. ST. LUKE. 287 


pass from the Synagogue to the Church, let him take up his 


cross, that he may avoid the danger. Aue. But that he, now Aug. 
bi 


that he is healed, desires to be with Christ, and it is said to 
him, Return to thy house, and tell what great things God has 
done for thee, implies that each should understand, that 
after the remission of his sins he should return to a good con- 
science as to his home, and obey the Gospel for the salvation 
of others, in order that there he may rest with Christ, lest 
by too early wishing to be with Christ he neglect the ministry 
of preaching necessary for this redemption of his brethren. 


40. And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was re- 
turned, the people gladly received him: for they were 
all waiting for him. 

41. And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, 
and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and he fell 
down at Jesus’ feet, and besought him that he would 
come into his house : 

42. For he had one only daughter, about twelve 
years of age, and she lay a dying. But as he went 
the people thronged him. 

43. And a woman having an issue of blood twelve 
years, which had spent all her living upon physicians, 
neither could be healed of any, 

44, Came behind him, and touched the border 
of his garment: and immediately her issue of blood 
stanched. 

45. And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all 
denied, Peter and they that were with him said, 
Master, the multitude throng thee and press thee, 
and sayest thou, Who touched me? 

46. And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me: 
for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me. 

47. And when the woman saw that she was not 
hid, she came trembling, and falling down before 
him, she declared unto him before all the people for 


sup. 


288 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


what cause she had touched him, and how she was 
healed immediately. 

48. And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good 
comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole: go in 
peace. 


Aug. de Ava. After relating the miracle of the Gadarenes, Luke 
ore goes on to relate that of the ruler of the synagogue’s daughter; 
28. saying, And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned, 
the people gladly received him: for they were all waiting 

Jor him. THEOPHYL. At once both because of His teach- 

Aug. ing, and His miracles. Avuc. But the event which He 
ubi sup. adds, And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, must 
not be supposed to have taken place immediately, but first 
mee that of the feast of the publicans which Matthew mentions, 
to which he so joins on this that it cannot consequently be un- 

Lt od : derstood to have happened otherwise. Tir. Bost. The name 
Ant. in 18 inserted for the sake of the Jews, who at that time well knew 
Mark 5.the event, that the name might be a demonstrative proof of 
the miracle. And there came not one of the lowest, but a 

ruler of the synagogue, that the mouths of the Jews might be 

the more closed. As it follows, And he was a ruler of the 
synagogue. Now he came to Christ because of his need; 

for grief sometimes urges us to do those things which are right, 

ae 32, according to the Psalm, Hold their mouths with bit and 
bridle, who come not nigh unto thee. TuroruyL. Through 
urgent need then he fell at His feet, as it follows, And he fell 

at Jesus’ feet; but it were right for him without a pressing 
necessity to fall at Christ’s feet and acknowledge Him to be God. 

cat hg Curys. But mark his dulness of heart, for it follows, and be- 
31.in sought him that he would come into his house; being ignorant 
Matt. in truth that He was able to heal when absent. For if he 
had known, he would have said as the centurion did, Speak the 

ae? word, and my daughter shall be healed. GReEEK Ex. But 
‘the cause of his coming is told by adding, For he had only 
one daughter, the prop of his house, the succession of his 

race, about twelve years old, in the very flower of her age; 

and she lay dying, about to be carried to the grave instead 


Chrys. of her nuptial bed. CuHrys. But the Lord had come not to 


ubi sup. 


VER. 40-—48. ST. LUKE. 289 


judge the world, but to save it. Whereupon He does not weigh 
the rank of the petitioner, but calmly undertakes the work, 
knowing that what was to happen would be greater than what 
was asked. For He was called to heal the sick, but He knew 
that He would raise up one that was by this time dead, and 
implant on the earth a firm hope of the resurrection. 
AMBROSE; But when about to raise the dead, in order to 
bring faith to the ruler of the synagogue, He first cured the 
issue of blood. So also a temporal resurrection is celebrated 
at the Passion of our Lord, that the other might be believed 
to be eternal. But as he went, the people thronged him. 
CyriL; This was the greatest sign that He had really put on = Chrys 
our flesh, and trampled under foot all pride. For they followed 5 toe 
Him not afar off, but thronged Him. 
GREEK Ex. Now acertain woman afflicted with a severe ubi sup. 
disease, whose infirmity had consumed her body, but physicians 
all her substance, finds her only hope in such great humbleness 
that she falls down before our Lord; of whom it follows, And 
a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, §c. Tir. non oce. 
Bost. Of how great praise then is this woman worthy, who 
with her bodily powers exhausted by the continual issue of 
blood, and with so great a crowd thronging around Him, in 
the strength of her affection and faith entered the crowd, and 
coming behind, secretly touched the hem of His garment. 
Cyrit; For it was not lawful for the unclean either to touch 
any of the holy saints, or come near a holy man. Curys. For Ch 
by the custom of the Law a malady of this kind was accounted aia 
a great uncleanness. Independently of this also, she had not Matt. 
yet aright estimation of Him, else she would not have thought to ae a 
remain concealed, but nevertheless she came trusting to be 
healed. THrorpHyL. But as when a man turns his eye to a 
shining hght, or puts fuel to the fire, immediately they have 
their effects; so indeed he who brings faith to Him who is 
able to cure, immediately obtains his cure; as it is said, and 
immediately her issue of blood stanched. Curys. But not 
the garments alone saved her, (for the soldiers also allotted 
them among themselves,) but the earnestness of her faith. 
THEOPHYL. For she believed, and was saved, and as was 
fitting first touched Christ with her mind, then with her body. 
GREEK Ex. But the Lord heard the woman’s silent thoughts, Asterius. 
VOL. IIT. U 


Victor. 
Ant. 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


290 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


and silently released her silent, permitting willingly the seizing 
of her cure. But afterwards He makes known the miracle, as 
it follows: And Jesus said, Who touched me? Cyrit; For 
the miracle which was performed escaped not the Lord, but 
He who knew all things asks as if He were ignorant. GREEK 
Ex. Now His disciples who knew not what was asked, but 
supposed He spoke merely of one touching Him, answer 
our Lord’s question, as follows, When all denied, Peter and 
they that were with him said, Master, the multitude press 
thee and throng thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me? 
Our Lord therefore distinguishes the touching by His answer, 
as it follows, And Jesus said, Somebody has touched me: 
as He said also, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear, 
although all had bodily hearing of this kind; but it is not 
truly hearing if a man hear carelessly, nor truly touching if 
he touch unfaithfully. He now therefore publishes what was 
done, as it is added, For I perceive that virtue is gone out of 
me. He answers rather materially, in consideration of the 
minds of His hearers. He is here, however, manifested to 
us to be the true God, both by His miraculous deed, 
and by His word. For it is beyond us, and perhaps 
beyond angels also, to be able to communicate virtue as from 
our own nature. This belongs to the Supreme Nature alone. 
For nothing created possesses the power of healing, or even 
of doing any other like miracles, except it be divinely given. 
But it was not from desire of glory that He suffered not to 
remain concealed the exhibition of His divine power, Who had 
so often charged silence about His miracles, but because He 
looked to their advantage who are called through faith to 
grace. Curys. For first He removes the woman’s fear, lest 
she should suffer the pangs of conscience, for as it were 
stealing the grace. Next He reproves her for thinking to 
lie concealed. Thirdly, He makes known her faults publicly 
for the sake of others, and betrays no less a miracle than 
the stanching of blood, by shewing that all things are open 
to His sight. Cyri~t; Moreover, He persuaded the ruler of 
the synagogue to believe undoubtingly that He would 
rescue his daughter from the hands of death. Curys. Now 
our Lord did not immediately discover her, for this reason, 
that by shewing that all things are known to Him, He might 


VER. 40—A48. ST. LUKE. 291 


make the woman publish what was done, that the miracle 
might be free from all suspicion. Hence it follows, And 
when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came 
trembling. ORIGEN; But the same cure which the woman 
obtained by touching Him, our Saviour confirmed by His 
word; as it follows, And he said unto her, Thy faith hath 
made thee whole; goin peace, that is, Be released from thy 
scourge. And indeed He first heals her soul by faith, then 
truly her body. Tir. Bost. He calls her daughter, as already non oce. 
healed because of her faith, TOF faith claims the grace of 
adoption. 

KusEs. Now they say that the woman set up in Paneas Euseb. 
(Cesarea Philippi, whence she came) a noble triumphal [57° 
monument of the mercy vouchsafed to her by the Saviour.|. vi. 
For there stood upon a lofty pedestal near the entrance to ~ 
her house a brasen statue of a woman on bended knees, 
and with her hands joined as if in prayer; opposite to which 
was erected another statue like to a man, made of the 
same material, clothed in a stole, and holding forth his dwracé. 
hand to the woman. At his feet upon the base itself a 
strange kind of plant was growing, which reaching to the 
hem of the brasen stole, was said to be the cure of all 
diseases. And they said that this statue represents Christ. 

It was destroyed by Maximinus. 

AMBROSE; Now mystically Christ had left the synagogue 
in Gerasa, and Him whom His own received not we strangers 
receive. BEDE; Or at the end of the world the Lord is 
about to return to the Jews, and to be gladly received by 
them through confession of the faith, AmBROSE; But whom 
do we suppose the chief of the synagogue to be, but the Law, 
from consideration of which our Lord had not entirely 
abandoned the synagogue. BEDE; Or, by the ruler of the 
synagogue is understood Moses. Hence he is rightly called 
Jairus, that is, “enlightening” or “ enlightened,” as he who 
receives the words of life to give to us, thereby both enlightens 
others, and is himself also enlightened by the Holy Spirit. But 
the ruler of the synagogue fell at the feet of Jesus, because 
the lawgiver with the whole race of the patriarchs knew that 


* YseAcis seems to mean here the eroah Priests, but especially the High Priest. 
dsgeerixh, used by the Jewish Kings and see J oseph. Orat. vi. 14. 


vu 2 


1 Cor. 
11, 3. 


292 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


Christ, appearing in the flesh, would be far preferred to them. 
For if the head of Christ is God, His feet must agreeably to this 
be taken for the Incarnation, by which He touched the earth 
of our mortality. The ruler asked Him to enter into his house, 
because he was desirous to behold His coming. His only 
daughter is the Synagogue, which alone was framed with a 
legal institution; which at twelve years of age, that is, when 
the time of puberty was approaching, lay dying; for having 
been brought up nobly by the prophets, as soon as it came 
to years of discretion, when it ought to bring forth spiritual 
fruits to God, being suddenly subdued through its weak- 
ness and error, it forgot to enter the way of spiritual life, 
and unless Christ had come to its help, would have fallen 
away into destruction. But the Lord going to heal the girl is 
thronged by the crowd, because giving wholesome warnings 
to the Jewish nation, He was borne down by the customs of 
a carnal people. AMBROSE; But while the Word of God 
hastens to this daughter of the ruler that He might save the 
children of Israel, the holy Church collected from among 
the Gentiles which was perishing by its falling away into 
gross crimes, seized first by faith the health prepared for others. 
BEDE; Now the issue of blood may be taken in two ways, 
that is, both for the prostitution of idolatry, and for those 
things which are done for the delights of the flesh and blood. 
AMBROSE; But what means it that this daughter of the ruler 
was dying at twelve years, and the woman was afflicted with 
the issue of blood for twelve years, but that it might be 
understood that as long as the Synagogue flourished the 
Church was weak. For almost in the same age of the world, 
the Synagogue began to grow up among the patriarchs, and 
idolatry to pollute the Gentile nation. 

AMBROSE; But as she had spent all her substance upon 
physicians, so the Gentile nations had lost all the gifis of 
nature. BEDE; Now by physicians understand either false 
doctors, or philosophers and teachers of secular laws, 
who disputing much concerning virtue and vice, promised 
that they would give to mortals useful instructions for life; 
or suppose that by the physicians are signified the unclean 
spirits themselves, who by giving as it were advice to men, 
procure themselves to be worshipped as God, on listening to 


VER. 40—48. ST. LUKE. 293 


whom the Gentiles the more they consumed the strength of 
their natural industry, so much the less were they able to be 
cured from the pollution of their iniquity. AmBRosE; Now 
hearing that the people of the Jews were sick, she begins to 
hope for the remedy of their salvation; she knew that the 
time was arrived when a Physician should come from heaven, 
she rose to meet Him, more ready from faith, more backward 
from modesty. For this is the part of modesty and faith to 
acknowledge weakness, not to despair of pardon. From 
modesty then she touched the hem of His garment; in faith 
she came, in piety believed, in wisdom knew herself to be 
healed; so the holy people of the Gentiles which bclieved 
God, blushed at its sins so as to desert them, offered its faith 

in believing, shewed its devotion in asking, put on wisdom in 
itself feeling its own cure, assumed boldness to confess that 

it had forestalled what was not its own. Now Christ is 
touched behind, as it is written, Thou shalt walk after the Deut. 
Lord thy God. Brpe; And He Himself says, If any man Fohai3, 
serve me, let him follow me. Or, because not seeing Christ 26- 
present in the flesh, now that the sacraments of the temporary 
dispensation were completed, the Church began to follow His 
footsteps through faith. 

GreG. But while the crowd thronged Him, one woman Greg. 
touched our Redeemer, because all carnal men in the Church ae 2 
oppress Him from whom they are afar off, and they alone Job 2. 
touch Him who are joined to Him in humility. The crowd 
therefore press Him and touch Him not, because it is both 
importunate in presence, and absent in life. BEDE; Or one 
believing woman touches the Lord, since Christ who is afflicted 
beyond measure by the diverse heresies multiplying around 
Hin, is faithfully sought by the heart alone of the Catholic 
Church. AMBROSE; For they believe not who throng Him; 
they believe whotouch. By faith Christ is touched, by faith He 
is seen. Lastly, to express the faith of her who touched Him, 

He says, [ know that virtue is gone out of me, which is a more 
palpable sign, that the Divine Nature is not confined within the 
possibility of man’s condition, and the compass of the human 
body, but eternal virtue overflows beyond the bounds of our 
mediocrity. For the Gentile people is not released by man’s 
aid, but the gathering of nations is the gift of God, which 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
31. in 
Matt. 


294 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. VIII. 


even by its little faith turns to itself the everlasting mercy. 
For if we think what our faith is, and understand how great 
the Son of God is, we see that in comparison of Him we 
touch only the hem, we cannot reach the upper parts of the 
garment. If then we also wish to be cured, let us touch by 
faith the hem of Christ. But he who has touched Him is 
not hidden. Happy the man who has touched the extreme 
part of the Word. For who can comprehend the whole ? 


49. While he yet spake, there cometh one from 
the ruler of the synagogue’s house, saying to him, 
Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Master. 

50. But when Jesus heard it, he answered him, 
saying, Fear not: believe only, and she shall be made 
whole. 

51. And when he came into the house, he suffered 
no man to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, 
and the father and the mother of the maiden. 

52. And all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, 
Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth. 

53. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that 
she was dead. 

54. And he put them all out, and took her by the 
hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise. 

55. And her spirit came again, and she arose 
straightway : and he commanded to give her meat. 

o6. And her parents were astonished: but he 


charged them that they should tell no man what was 
done. 


Currys. Our Lord conveniently waited until the death of 
the girl, that the miracle of her resurrection might be made 
public. For which reason also He goes slower, and speaks 
longer with the woman, that the daughter of the ruler of the 
synagogue may expire, and messengers come to tell Him. 
As it is said, While he yet spake, there cometh one from the 
ruler of the synayogue’s house, saying unto him, Thy 


VER, 49—56. ST. LUKE. 295 


daughter is dead. Avuc. But since Matthew states the ruler Aug. de 
of the synagogue to have told our Lord that his daughter ;27-Ey" 
was not on the point of death but quite dead, and Luke and 
Mark say, that she was not yet dead, nay, even go so far as to 

say that there came some afterwards, who told her death; 

we must examine, lest they should seem to be at variance. 

And we must understand that for the sake of brevity, Matthew 
chose rather to say, that our Lord was asked to do what it is 
obvious He did, naniely, to raise the dead. For our Lord 
needs not the words of the father concerning his daughter, 

but what is more important, his wishes. Certainly, if the 
other two or any one of them had mentioned that the father 

had said what those who came from the house said, that 
Jesus need not be troubled because the maid was dead, His 
words which Matthew has related would seem to be at 
variance with his thoughts. But now to those who brought 

that message, and said that the Master need not come, it is 

not said that the father assented. The Lord therefore did not 
blame him as distrustful, but the more strongly confirms his 
belief. As it follows, But when Jesus heard it, he answered 

the father of the girl, Believe only, $c. ATHAN. Our Lord Athan. 
requires faith from those who invoke Him, not because He iets re 
needs the assistance of others, (for He is both the Lord ne 
and Giver of faith,) but not to seem to bestow His gifts 
according to His acceptance of persons, He shews that He 
favours those who believe, lest they should receive benefits 
without faith, and lose them by unbelief. For when He 
bestows a favour, He wishes it to last, and when He heals, 

the cure to remain undisturbed. ‘THEOopHYL. When He 

was about to raise the dead He put all out, as teaching us 

to be free from vain-glory, and to do nothing for show, for 
when any one ought to perform miracles, he must not be in 

the midst of a great many, but alone and apart from the 
other. As it follows, And when he came into the house, he 
suffered no man to go in, suve Peter, and James, and John. 

Now these only He permitted to enter as the Heads of His 
disciples, and able to conceal the miracle. For He did not 

wish to be revealed to many before His time, perhaps on 
account of the envy of the Jews. So also when any one 
envies us, we ought not to make known to him our righte- 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


Johall, 


Severus, 


296 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP, VIII. 


ousness, lest we give him an occasion of greater envy. CHRYS. 
But He took not with Him His other disciples, so provoking 
them to a strange desire, because also they were not yet fully 
prepared, but He took Peter, and with him the sons of 
Zebedee, that the others also might imitate them. He 
took also the parents as witnesses, lest any should say the 
evidence of the resurrection was false. Luke adds to this 
also, that He shut out from the house those that were weep- 
ing, and shewed that they were unworthy of a sight of this 
kind. For it follows, And they all wept, and bewailed her. 
But if He then shut them out, much more now. For then it 
had not yet been revealed that death was turned into sleep. 
Let no one then hereafter despise himself, bringing an insult 
to the victory of Christ, whereby He has overcome death, and 
turned it into sleep. In proof of which it is added, But he 
said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth, &c. shewing 
that all things were at His command, and that He would 
bring her to life as if He were awakening her from sleep. 
They yet nevertheless laughed Him to scorn. For it follows, 
And they laughed him to scorn. He did not reprove them 
nor put an end to their laughter, that laughter also might be 
a sign of death. For since generally, after a miracle has 
been performed men continue unfaithful, He takes them by 
their own words. But that He might by sight dispose to 
the belief of the resurrection, He takes the hand of the maid. 
As it follows, But he took her by the hand, and called, say- 
ing, Maid, urise. And when He had taken her by the hand, 
He awoke her. As it follows, And her spirit returned, and 
she arose straightway. For He poured not into her another 
soul, but restored the same which she had breathed forth. 
Nor does he only awake the maid, but orders her to take 
food. For it follows, And he commanded to give her meat. 
That it might not seem like a vision what was done. Nor 
did He Himself give to her, but He commanded others to 
do it. As also He said in the case of Lazarus, Loose him. 
And afterwards He made him partake of meat with Him. 
GREEK Ex. He next charges the parents, astonished at the 
miracle, and almost crying out, not to publish abroad what 
was done. As it follows, And her parents were astonished ; 
but he charged them that they should tell no man what was 


VER. 49—3S6. ST. LUKE. 297 


done ; shewing that He is the Giver of good things, but not 
covetous of glory, and that He gives the whole, receiving nothing. 
But he who seeks after the glory of his works has indeed shewn 
forth something, but receives something. BEpE; But mys- 
tically, when the woman was cured of the issue of blood, word is 
brought that the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue is dead ; 
because while the Church was cleansed from the stain ofits sins, 
the Synagogue was forthwith destroyed by unbelief and envy ; 
by unbelief indeed, in that it refused to believe in Christ; by 
envy, im that it was grieved that the Church had believed. 
AMBROSE; But still also were the servants of the ruler incre- 
dulous with regard to the resurrection, which Jesus had fore- 
told in the Law, fulfilled in the Gospel; therefore say they, Do Ps. 16. 
not trouble him; as if it were impossible for Him to raise the 
dead. BEDE; Or this is even to this day said by those who see 
the state of the synagogue so destitute that they do not believe 
it can be restored, and therefore think nothing of praying for 
its resurrection. But those things which are impossible with 
men are possible with God. Therefore said the Lord to 
him, Fear not, only believe, and she shall be made whole. Lukels, 
The father of the girl is taken for the assembly of the ate 
doctors of the Law, which if it were willing to believe, 
the Synagogue also which is subject to it will be safe. 
AMBROSE; Therefore having entered into the house, He 
called a few to be judges of the coming resurrection: for the 
resurrection was not soon believed by the many. What then 
was the cause of this great difference? In a former case the 
widow’s son is raised up before all, here a few only are set 
apart to judge. But 1 think that herein the mercy of the 
Lord is shewn, since the widowed mother of an only son 
suffered no delay. There is also the token of wisdom, 
that in the widow’s son we should see the Church quick in 
believing; in the ruler of the synagogue’s daughter, the Jews 
about indeed to believe, but out of a great many only a few. 
Lastly, when our Lord says, She is not dead, but sleepeth, 
they laughed Him to scorn. For whoever believes not, laughs. 
Let them therefore mourn their dead who think they are 
dead. Where there is a belief of the resurrection, the notion is 
not of death but of rest. BEDE; The Synagogue also, because 
it has lost the joy of the Bridegroom, whereby alone it can live, 


298 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. CHAP, VIII. 


lying dead as it were among those that mourn, understands 
not even the reason why it weeps. 

AMBROSE; Now the Lord taking hold of the hand of the 
maid, cured her. Blessed is he whom wisdom takes by the 
hand, that she may bring him into her secret places, and 
command to be given him to eat. For the bread of heaven 
is the word of God. Hence comes also that wisdom which 
has filled its altars with the food of the body and blood of 

ia 9,God. Come, she says, eat my bread, and drink the wine 
which [ have mixed for you. BEDE; Now the maid arose 
straightway, because when Christ strengthens the hand, man 
revives from the death of the soul. For there are some, who 
only by the secret thought of sin are conscious of bringing 
death to themselves. The Lord signifying that such He 
brings to life again, raised the daughter of the ruler of the 
synagogue. But others, by committing the very evil in 
which they delight, carry their dead as it were without the 
gates, and to shew that He raises these, He raised the 
widow's son without the gates. But some also, by habits 
of sin, bury themselves, as it were, and become corrupt; and 
to raise these also the grace of the Saviour is not wanting; to 
intimate which He raised from the dead Lazarus, who had 
been four days in the grave. But the deeper the death of 
the soul, so much the more intense should be the fervour of 
penitence. Hence He raises with a gentle voice, the maid 
who lay dead in the room, the youth who was carried out He 
strengthens with many words, but to raise him who had been 
dead four days, He groaned in His spirit, He poured forth 
tears, and cried with a loud voice. But here also we must 
observe, that a public calamity needs a public remedy. Slight 
offences seek to be blotted out by secret penitence. The 
maid lying in the house rises again with few witnesses; the 
youth without the house is raised in the presence of a great 
crowd who accompanied him. Lazarus summoned from the 
tomb was known to many nations. 


CHAP. IX. 


1. Then he called his twelve disciples together, 
and gave them power and authority over all devils, 
and to cure diseases. 

2. And he sent them to preach the kingdom of 
God, and to heal the sick. 

3. And he said unto them, Take nothing for your 
journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, 
neither money; neither have two coats apiece. 

4. And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, 
and thence depart. 

5. And whosoever will not receive you, when ye 
go out of that city, shake off the very dust from your 
feet for a testimony against them. 

6. And they departed, and went through the 
towns, preaching the Gospel, and healing every 
where. 


CyriL; It was fitting that those who were appointed the 
ministers of holy teaching should be able to work miracles, 
and by these very acts themselves be believed to be the 
ministers of God. Hence it is said, Zhen called he his twelve 
disciples together, and gave them power and authority over 
all devils. Herein He brings down the haughty pride of the 
devil, who once said, There ts none who shall open his mouth test 10, 
against me. Evuses. And that through them the whole race rs X. 
of mankind may be sought out, He not only gives them power 
to drive away evil spirits, but to cure all kind of diseases at 


Cyril, 
in The- 
saur, |. 
12.¢.14. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
22. in 
Matt. 


Greg. 
Orat. ii. 
69. 


Chrys. 
ubi eup. 


300 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Ix. 


His command ; as it follows, And to cure diseases. CYRIL; 
Mark here the divine power of the Son, which belongs not to 
a fleshly nature. For it was in the power of the saints to 
perform miracles not by nature, but by participation of the 
Holy Spirit; but it was altogether out of their power 
to grant this authority to others. For how could created 
natures possess dominion over the gifts of the Spirit? 
But our Lord Jesus Christ, as by nature God, imparts graces 
of this kind to whomsoever He will, not invoking upon them 
a power which is not His own, but infusing it into them from 
Himself. Curys. But after that they had been sufficiently 
strengthened by His guidance, and had received competent 
proofs of His power, He sends them out, as it follows, And 
he sent them to preach the kingdom of God. And here we 
must remark, that they are not commissioned to speak of 
sensible things as Moses and the Prophets; for they promised 
a land and earthly goods, but these a kingdom, and whatso- 
ever is contained in it. GrRec. Naz. Now in sending His 
disciples to preach, our Lord enjoined many things on them, 
the chief of which are, that they should ke so virtuous, so 
constant, so temperate, and, to speak briefly, so heavenly, that 
no less through their manner of living than their words, the 
teaching of the Gospel might be spread abroad. And there- 
fore were they sent with lack of money, and staves, and a 
single garment; He accordingly adds, And he said to them, 
Take nothing in the way, neither staves. CuRys. Many 
things indeed He ordained hereby ; first indeed it rendered 
the disciples unsuspected ; secondly, it held them aloof from 
all care, so that they might give their whole study to the 
word ; thirdly, it taught them their own proper virtue. But 
perhaps some one will say that the other things indeed are 
reasonable, but for what reason did He command them to 
have no scrip on their way, nor two coats, nor staff? In 
truth, because He wished to rouse them to all diligence, 
taking them away from all the cares of this life, that they 
might be occupied by the one single care of teaching. 
EvusEB. Wishing then that they should be free from the 
desire of wealth and the anxieties of life, He gave this 
injunction. He took it as a proof of their faith and courage, 
that when it was commanded them to lead a life of extreme 


VER. 1—6. ST. LUKE. 301 


poverty, they would not escape from what was ordered. For it 

was fitting that they should make a kind of bargain, receiving 
these saving virtues to recompense them for obedience to 
commands, And when He was making them soldiers of 
God, He girds them for battle against their enemies, by telling 

them to embrace poverty. For no soldier of God entangles 
himself in the affairs of a secular life. AMBROSE; Of what kind 2 Tim. 
then he ought to be who preaches the Gospel of the kingdom” * 
of God is marked out by these Gospel precepts ; that is, he 
must not require the supports of secular aid; and clinging 
wholly to faith, he must believe that the less he requires those 
things, the more they will be supplied to him. ‘THEOPHYL. 

For He sends them out as very beggars, so that He would 
have them neither carry bread, nor any thing else of which 

men are generally in want. Ava. Or, the Lord did not Aug. de 
wish the disciples to possess and carry with them these things, (°!: 
not that they were not necessary to the support of this life, 

but because He sent them thus to shew that these things were 

due to them from those believers to whom they announced the 
Gospel, that so they might neither possess security, nor carry 
about with them the necessaries of this life, either great or 
little. He has therefore, according to Mark, excluded all 
except a staff, shewing that the faithful owe every thing to 
their ministers who require no superfluities. But this per- 
mission of the staff He has mentioned by name, when He 
says, They should take nothing in the way, but a staff only. 
AMBROSE; To those also who wish it, this place admits of 
being explained, so as to seem only to represent a spiritual 
temper of mind, which appears to have cast off asit were a certain 
covering of the body; not only rejecting power and despising 
wealth, but renouncing also the delights of the flesh itself. 
THEOPHYL. Some also understand by the Apostles not carry- 

ing scrip, nor staff, nor two coats, that they must not lay up 
treasures, (which a scrip implies, collecting many things,) 

nor be angry and of a quarrelsome spirit, (which the staff 
signifies,) nor be false and of a double heart, (which is meant 

by the two coats.) CyRIL; But it may be said, How then shall cyril. 
necessary things be prepared forthem. He therefore adds, And ™ ™P- 
into whatsoever house ye enter, there abide, and thence depart. 

As if He said, Let the food of disciples suffice you, who 


Cyril. 
ubi sup. 


302 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


receiving from you spiritual things, will minister unto you tempo- 
ral. But He ordered them to abide in one house, so as neither 
to incommode the host, (that is, so as to send him away,) nor 
themselves to incur the suspicion of gluttony and wantonness. 
AMBROSE ; He pronounces it to be foreign to the character 
of a preacher of the heavenly kingdom to run from house to 
house and change the nghts of inviolable hospitality; but 
as the grace of hospitality is supposed to be offered, so also 
if they are not received the dust must be shaken off, and they 
are commanded to depart from the city; as it follows, And 
whosoever will not receive you when ye go out of that city, 
shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony, &c. 
BEDE; The dust is shaken off from the Apostles’ feet as a 
testimony of their labours, that they entered into a city, and 
the apostolical preaching had reached to the inhabitants 
thereof. Or the dust is shaken off when they receive nothing 
(not even of the necessaries of life) from those who despised the 
Gospel. CyriL; For it is very improbable that those who de- 
spise the saving Word, and the Master of the household,will shew 
themselves kind to His servants, and seek further blessings. 
AMBROSE ; Or it is a great return of hospitality which is here 
taught, 1. e. that we should not only wish peace to our hosts, 
but also if any faults of earthly infirmity obscure them, they 
should be removed by receiving the footsteps of apostolical 
preaching. BeEpe; But if any by treacherous negligence, 
or even from zeal, despise the word of God, their communion 
must be shunned, the dust of the feet must be shaken off, 
lest by their vain deeds which are to be compared to the 
dust, the footstep of a chaste mind be defiled. Evsrs. But 
when the Lord had girded His disciples as soldiers of God 
with divine virtue and wise admonitions, sending them to the 
Jews as teachers and physicians, they afterwards went forth, 
as it follows, And they departed, and went through the towns 
preaching the gospel, and healing every where. 


7. Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was 
done by him: and he was perplexed, because that 
it was said of some, that John was risen from the dead ; 

8. And of some, that Elias had appeared; and of 
others, that one of the old prophets was risen again. 


VER. 7—9. ST. LUKE. 303 


9. And Herod said, John have I beheaded: but 
who is this, of whom I hear such things? And he 
desired to see him. 


Curys. It was not till a long time had passed that Herod Chrys. 
took notice of the things that were done by Jesus, (to shew nd 
you the pride of a tyrant,) for he did not acknowledge them 
at first, as it is said, Now Herod heard, §&c. THEOPHYL. 
Herod was the son of Herod the Great who slew the children, 
who was king, but this Herod was tetrarch. He inquired 
about Christ, who He was. Hence it follows, And he was 
perplexed. Curys. For sinners fear both when they know, 
and when they are ignorant; they are afraid of shadows, 
are suspicious about every thing, and are alarmed at the 
slightest noise. Such in truth is sin; when no one blames or 
finds fault, it betrays a man, when no one accuses it con- 
demns, and makes the offender timid and backward. Butthe 
cause of fear is stated afterwards, in the words, Because that 
at was said of some. THYorHyYL. For the Jews expected a 
resurrection of the dead to a fleshly life, eating and drinking, 
but those that rise again will not be concerned with the 
deeds of the flesh. CHrys. When Herod then heard of the Chrys. 
miracles which Jesus was performing, he says, John have I’ 
beheaded, which was not an expression of boasting, but by 
way of allaying his fears, and bringing his distracted soul 
to recollect that he had killed. And because he had be- 
headed John, he adds, but who is this. THreopny.. If 
John is alive and has risen from the dead, I shall know him 
when I see him; as it follows, And he sought to see him. 

Auc. Now Luke, though he keeps the same order in his narra- Aug. de 
tive with Mark, does not oblige us to believe that the course , soar 
of events was the same. In these words too, Mark testifies 

only to the fact that others (not Herod) said that John had 

risen from the dead, but since Luke has mentioned Herod’s 
perplexity, we must suppose either that after that perplexity, 

he confirmed in his own mind what was said by others, since 

he says to his servants, (as Matthew relates,) This is John the 
Baptist, he is risen from the dead, or these words of Matthew 

must have been altered so as to signify that he was still 
doubting. 


Aug. de 
Con. Ev. 
1.2. ¢.45. 


304 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


10. And the apostles, when they were returned, 
told him all that they had done. And he took them, 
and went aside privately into a desert place belong- 
ing to the city called Bethsaida. 

11. And the people, when they knew it, followed 
him: and he received them, and spake unto them 
of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had 
need of healing. 

12. And when the day began to wear away, then 
came the twelve, and said unto him, Send the 
multitude away, that they may go into the towns 
and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals: 
for we are here in a desert place. 

13. But he said unto them, Give ye them to 
eat. And they said, We have no more but five 
loaves and two fishes; except we should go and buy 
meat for all this people. 

14. For they were about five thousand men. And 
he said to his disciples, Make them sit down by fifties 
in a company. 

15. And they did so, and made them all sit 
down. 

16. Then he took the five loaves and the two 
fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, 
aud brake, and gave to the disciples to set before the 
multitude. 

17. And they did eat, and were all filled: and 
there was taken up of fragments that remained to 
them twelve baskets. 


Ava. Matthew and Mark, taking occasion from what had 
occurred above, relate here how John was slain by Herod. 
But Luke, who had long before given an account of John’s 
sufferings, after mentioning that perplexity of Herod’s, as to 
who our Lord was, immediately adds, And the apostles when 
they were returned told him all that they had done. BeEvE; 


VER. JO—17. ST. LUKE. $05 


But they not only tell Him what they had done and tanght, 

but also, as Matthew implies, the things which John suffered Matt. 
while they were occupied in teaching, are now repeated to Him !* }2. 
either by His own, or, according to Matthew, by John’s 
disciples. 

IstpoRE; Our Lord because He hates the men of blood, Jeid.Pe- 
and those that dwell with them, as long as they depart not from an oes 
their crimes, after the murder of the Baptist left the mur- 
derers and departed; asit follows, And he took them, and went 
aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city called 
Bethsaida. BrEpe; Now Bethsaida is in Galilee, the city of 
the Apostles Andrew, Peter, and Philip, near the lake of 
Gennesaret. Our Lord did not this from fear of death, (as 
some think,) but to spare His enemies, lest they should commit 
two murders, waiting also for the proper time for His © 
own sufferings. Currys. Now He did not depart before, oe 
but after it was told Him what had happened, manifesting 49. in 
in each particular the reality of His incarnation. Tue- Matt 
OPHYL. But our Lord went into a desert place because He 
was about to perform the miracle of the loaves of bread, that 
no one should say that the bread was brought from the 
neighbouring cities. CHRys. Or He went into a desert place Chrys. 
that no one might follow Him. But the people did not retire, ®! §P- 
but accompanied Him, as it follows, And the people when 
they knew it, followed him. Cyrit; Some indeed asking to 
be delivered from evil spirits, but others desiring of Him the 
removal of their diseases; those also who were delighted with 
His teaching attended Him diligently. 

BEDE; But He as the powerful and merciful Saviour by 
receiving the weary, by teaching the ignorant, curing the sick, 
filling the hungry, implies how He was pleased with their devo- 
tion ; as it follows, And he reeeived them, and spake unto them 
of the kingdom of God, &c. 'THEOPHYL. That you may learn 
that the wisdom which is in us is distributed into word and 
work, and that it becomes us to speak of what has been done, 
and to do what we speak of. But when the day was wearing 
away, the disciples now beginning to have a care of others 
take compassion on the multitude. CyriL; For, as has been 
said, they sought to be healed of different diseases, and because 
the disciples saw that what they sought might be accomplished 

VOL. Ill. x 


306 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX 


by His simple assent, they say, Send them away, that they be 
no more distressed. But mark the overflowing kindness of 
Him who is asked. He not only grants those things which 
the disciples seek, but to those who follow Him, He supplies 
the bounty of a munificent hand, commanding food to be 
set before them; as it follows, But he said unto them, Give ye 
them to eat. THEOPHYL. Now He said not this as ignorant 
of their answer, but wishing to induce them to tell Him how 
much bread they had, that so a great miracle might be mani- 
fested through their confession, when the quantity of bread 
was made known. 

CyriL; But this was a command which the disciples were 
unable to comply with, since they had with them but five 
loaves and two fishes. As it follows, And they said, We have 
no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we go and 


Aug. de buy meat for all this people. AuG. In these words indeed 


Con.Ev. 


1. ii. e. 


Luke has strung together in one sentence the answer of 
Philip, saying, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not 
sufficient for them, but that every one may have a litle, 


;, and the answer of Andrew, There is a lad here who has five 


loaves and two small fishes, as John relates. For when Luke 
says, We have no more but five loaves and two fishes, he 
refers to the answer of Andrew. But that which he added, Ez- 
cept we go and buy food for all the people, seems to belong to 
Philip’s answer, save that he is silent about the two hundred 
pennyworth, although this may be implied also in the 
expression of Andrew himself. For when he had said, There 
is a lad here who has five loaves and two fishes, he added, 
But what are these among so many? that is to say, unless 
we go and buy meat for all this people. From which diversity 
of words, but harmony of things and opinions, it is sufficiently 
evident that we have this wholesome lesson given us, that 
we must seek for nothing in words but the meaning of the 
speaker; and to explain this clearly, ought to be the care of 
all truthtelling authors whenever they relate any thing con- 
cerning man, or angel, or God. Cyrit; But that the 
difficulty of the miracle may be still more enhanced, the 
number of men is stated to have been by no means small. 


Mat.14, As it follows, And there were about five thousand men, besides 


women and children, as another Evangelist relates. 


VER. 10—17. ST. LUKE. 307 


THEOPHYL. Our Lord teaches us, that when we entertain any 
one, we ought to make him sit down at meat, and partake of 
every comfort. Hence it follows, And he said to his disciples, 
§c. AvuaG. That Luke says here, that the men were ordered to as 
sit down by fifties, but Mark, by fifties and hundreds, does” 
not matter, seeing that one spoke of a part, the other of the 
whole. But if one had mentioned only the fifties, and the 
other only the hundreds, they would seem to be greatly 
opposed to one another; nor would it be sufficiently distinct 
which of the two was said. But who will not admit, that one 
was mentioned by one Evangelist, the other by another, and 
that if more attentively considered it must be found so. 
But I have said thus much, because often certain things 
of this kind exist, which to those who take little heed and 
judge hastily appear contrary to one another, and yet are not 
so. Curys. And to make men believe that He came from Chrys. 
the Father, Christ when He was about to work the miracle oun 
looked up to heaven. As it follows, Then he took the Matt. 
Jive loaves, &c. CyRriL; This also He did purposely for our 
sakes, that we may learn that at the commencement of a 
feast when we are going to break bread, we ought to offer 
thanks for it to God, and to draw forth the heavenly blessing 
upon it. As it follows, dnd he blessed, and brake. CHRYS. Chrys. 
He distributes to them by the hands of His disciples, go UPI SUP: 
honouring them that they might not forget it when the miracle 
was past. Now He did not create food for the multitude 
out of what did not exist, that He might stop the mouth of the 
Manichezans, who say that the creatures are independent of #«r¢- 
Him; shewing that He Himself is both the Giver of food, and iat 
the same who said, Let the earth bring forth, &c. He makes 
also the fishes to increase, to signify that He has dominion 
over the seas, as well as the dry land. But well did He per- 
form a special miracle for the weak, at the same time that 
He gives also a general blessing in feeding all the strong as 
well as the weak. And they did all eat, and were filled. 
Grec. Nyss. For whom neither the heaven rained manna, nor Greg. 
the earth brought forth corn according to its nature, but from eae 
the unspeakable garner of divine power the blessing was acd C. 
poured forth. The bread is supplied in the hands of those w ho” 
serve, it is even increased through the fulness of those who 

X 2 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


308 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


eat. The sea supplied not their wants with the food of 
fishes, but He who placed in the sea the race of fishes. AM- 
BROSE ; Itis clear that the multitude were filled not by a scanty 
meal, but by a constant and increasing supply of food. You 
might see in an incomprehensible manner amid the hands of 
those who distributed, the particles multiplying which they 
broke not; the fragments too, untouched by the fingers of the 
breakers, spontaneously mounting up. CyriL; Nor was this 
all that the miracle came to; but it follows, And there was 
taken up of the fragments that remained, twelve baskets, that 
this might be a manifest proof that a work of love to our neigh- 
bour will claim a rich reward from God. THropHyi. And 
that we might learn the value of hospitality, and how much 
our own store is imcreased when we help those that need. 
Curys. But He caused not loaves to remain over, but frag- 
ments, that He might shew them to be the remnants of the 
loaves, and these were made to be of that number, that there 
might be as many baskets as disciples. 

AmBROSE; After that she who received the type of the 
Church was cured of the issue of blood, and that the Apostles 
were appointed to preach the Gospel of the kingdom of God, 
the nourishment of heavenly grace is imparted. But mark 
to whom it is imparted. Not to the indolent, not to those 
in a city, of rank in the synagogue, or in high secular 
office, but to those who seek Christ in the desert. BEDE; 
Who Himself having left Juda, which by unbelief had 
bereft herself of the source of prophecy, in the desert of the 
Church which had no husband, dispenses the food of the word. 
But many companies of the faithful leaving the city of their 
former manner of life, and their various opinions, follow Christ 
into the deserts of the Gentiles. AMBRosE; But they who are 
not proud are themselves received by Christ, and the Word 
of God speaks with them, not about worldly things, but of 
the kingdom of God. And if any have ulcers of bodily 
passions, to these He willingly affords His cure. But every 
where the order of the mystery is preserved, that first through 
the remission of sins the wounds should be healed, but after- 
wards the nourishment of the heavenly table should plen- 
tifully abound. BrpE; Now when the day was going down, 
he refreshes the multitudes, that is, as the end of the 


VER. 10—17. ST. LUKE. 309 


world approaches, or when the Sun of righteousness sets for 
us. AMBROSE; Although the multitude is not as yet fed 
with stronger food. For first, as milk, there are five loaves; 
secondly, seven ; thirdly, the Body of Christ is the stronger 
food. But if any one fears to seek food, let him leave every 
thing that belongs to him, and listen to the word of God. 
But whoever begins to hear the word of God begins to eat, 
the Apostles begin to see him eating. And if they who eat, 
as yet know not what they eat, Christ knows; He knows 
that they eat not this world’s food, but the food of Christ. 
For they did not as yet know that the food of a believing 
people was not to be bought and sold. Christ knew that we 
are rather to be bought with a ransom, but His banquet to 
be without price. BEDE; The Apostles had only got but 
the five loaves of the Mosaic law, and the two fishes of each 
covenant, which were covered in the secret place of obscure 
mysteries, as in the waters of the deep. But because men 
have five external senses, the five thousand men who followed 
the Lord signifv those who still live in worldly ways, knowing 
well how to use the external things they possess. For they 
who entirely renounce the world are raised aloft in the 
enjoyment of His Gospel feast. But the different divisions | 
of the guests, indicate the different congregations of Churches 
throughout the world, which together compose the one 
Catholic. AMBROSE; But here the bread which Jesus brake 
is mystically indeed the word of God, and discourse con- 
cerning Christ, which when it is divided is increased. For 
from these few words, He ministered abundant nourishment 
to the people. He gave us words like loaves, which while 
they are tasted by our mouth are doubled. BeEpgE; Now our 
Saviour does not create new food for the hungry multitudes, 
but He took those things which the disciples had and blessed 
them, since coming in the flesh He preaches nothing else 
than what had been foretold, but demonstrates the words of 
prophecy to be pregnant with the mysteries of grace; He looks 
towards heaven, that thither He may teach us to direct the 
eye of the mind, there to seek the light of knowledge; He 
breaks and distributes to the disciples to be placed before the 
multitude, because He revealed to them the Sacraments of 
the Law and the Prophets that they might preach them to the 
world. : 


Ps.81,6. 


310 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


. AMRROSE; Not without meaning are the fragments which 

remained over and above what the multitudes had eaten, 
collected by the disciples, since those things which are 
divine you may more easily find among the elect than 
among the people. Blessed is he who can collect those 
which remain over and above even to the learned. But for what 
reason did Christ fill twelve baskets, except that He might 
solve that word concerning the Jewish people, His hands 
served in the basket? thatis, the people who before collected 
mud for the pots, now through the cross of Chnist gather 
up the nourishment of the heavenly life. Nor is this 
the office of few, but all. For by the twelve baskets, as 
if of each of the tribes, the foundation of the faith is 
spread abroad. BeEpE; Or by the twelve baskets the twelve 
Apostles are figured, and all succeeding teachers, despised 
indeed by men without, but within loaded with the frag- 
ments of saving food. 


18. And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, 
his disciples were with him: and he asked them, 
saying, Whom say the people that I am ? 

19. They answering said, John the Baptist; but 
some say, Elias; and others say, that one of the old 
prophets is risen again. 

20. He said unto them, But whom say ye that I 
am? Peter answering said, The Christ of God. 

21. And he straitly charged them, and commanded 
them to tell no man that thing ; 

22. Saying, The Son of man must suffer many 
things, and be rejected of the elders and Chief Priests 
and Scribes, and be slain, and be raised the third 
day. 


Cyrit; Our Lord having retired from the multitude, and 
being in a place apart, was engaged in prayer. As it is said, 
And it came to pass, as he was alone praying. For He 
ordained Himself as an example of this, instructing His 
disciples by an easy method of teaching. For I suppose the 
rulers of the people ought té be superior also in good deeds, 


VER. 18—-22. ST. LUKE. . 311 


to those that are under them, ever holding converse with 
them in all necessary things, and treating of those things in 
which God delights. BEDE; Now the disciples were with 
the Lord, but He alone prayed to the Father, since the saints 
may be joined to the Lord in the bond of faith and love, but 
the Son alone is able to penetrate the incomprehensible 
secrets of the Father’s will. Every where then He prays alone, 
for human wishes comprehend not the counsel of God, nor 
can any one be a partaker with Christ of the deep things of 
God. Cyrit; Now His engaging in prayer might perplex 
His disciples. For they saw Him praying like a man, Whom 
before they had seen performing miracles with divine power. 
In order then to banish all perplexity of this kind, He asks 
them this question, not because He did not know the reports 
which they had gathered from without, but that He might 
rid them of the opinion of the many, and insti] into them the 
true faith. Hence it follows, And he asked them, saying, 
Whom say the people that Tam? Berne; Rightly does our 
Lord, when about to enquire into the faith of the disciples, 
first inquire into the opinion of the multitudes, lest their con- 
fession should appear not to be determined by their knowledge, 
but to be formed by the opinion of the generality, and they 
should be considered not to believe from experience, but 
like Herod to be perplexed by different reports which they 
heard. Avec. Now it may raise a question, that Luke says Aug. de 
that our Lord asked His disciples, Whom do men say that Iy¢"-E%: 
am, at the same time that He was alone praying, and they 
also were with Him; whereas Mark says, that they were 
asked this question by our Lord on the way; but this is 
difficult only to him who never prayed on the way. 
AMBROSE; But it is no trifling opinion of the multitude 
which the disciples mention, when it is added, But they 
answering said, John the Baptist, (whom they knew to be 
beheaded;) but some say, Elias, (whom they thought 
would come,) but others say that one of the old Prophets 1s 
risen again. But to make this enquiry belongs to a different 
kind of wisdom from ours, for if it were enough for the Apostle 
Paul to know nothing but Christ Jesus, and Him crucified, 1 Cor. 2, 
what more can I desire to know than Christ? Cyrit; But mark” 
the subtle skill of the question. For he directs them first 


summa 
virtu- 
tum. 


312 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


to the praises of strangers, that having overthrown these, 
He might beget in them the right opinion. So when the 
disciples had given the opinion of the people, He asks 
them their own opinion; as it is added, And He said unto 
them, Whom say ye that Iam? How marked is ye! He ex- 
cludes them from the other, that they may avoid their opinions; 
as if He said, Ye who by my decree are called to the Apo- 
stleship, the witnesses of my miracles, whom do ye say that I 
am? But Peter anticipated the rest, and becomes the mouth- 
piece of the whole company, and launching forth into the 
eloquence of divine love, utters the confession of faith, 
as it is added, Peter answering said, The Christ of God. He 
says nol merely that He was Christ of God, but now He uses 
the article. Hence it is in the Greek, r3y Xpiotév. For many 
divinely accounted persons are in diverse ways called Christs, 
for some were anointed kings, some prophets. But we 
through Christ have been anointed by the holy Spirit, have 
obtained the name of Christ. But there is only one who 1s 
the Christ of God and the Father, He alone as it were having 
His own Father who is in heaven. And so Luke agrees in- 
deed in the same opinion as Matthew, who relates Peter to have 
said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God, but speak- 
ing briefly Luke says that Peter answered, the Christ of God. 
AMBROSE; In this one name there is the expression both of 
His divinity and incarnation, and the belief of His passion. 
He has therefore comprehended every thing, having ex- 
pressed both the nature and the name wherein is all virtue. 

CyriL; But we must observe, that Peter most wisely con- 
fessed Christ to be one, against those who presumed to 
divide Immanuel into two Christs. For Christ did not enquire 
of them, saying, Whom do men say the divine Word is? but the 
Son of man, whom Peter confessed to be the Son of God. 
Herein then is Peter to be admired, and thought worthy of 
such chief honour, seeing that Him whom he marvelled at in 
our form, he believed to be the Christ of the Father, that is 
to say, that the Word which proceeded of the Father’s Sub- 
stance was become man. 

AMBROSE; But our Lord Jesus Christ was at first unwilling 
to be preached, lest an uproar should arise; as it follows, And 
he straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell no 


VER. 23— 27, ST. LUKE. 313 


man any thing. For many reasons He commands His dis- 
ciples to be silent; to deceive the prince of this world, to re- 
ject boasting, to teach humility. Christ then would not boast, 

and dost thou boast who art of ignoble birth? Likewise He 

did it to prevent rude and as yet imperfect disciples from being 
oppressed with the wonder of this awful announcement. They 

are then forbid to preach Him as the Son of God, that they 
might afterwards preach Him crucified. Carys. Timely Chrys. 
also was our Lord’s command that no one should tell that He ye 
was Christ, in order that when offences should be taken away Matt. 
and the sufferings of the cross completed, a proper opinion of 
Him might be firmly rooted in the minds of the hearers. For 

that which has once taken root and afterwards been torn up, 
when fresh planted will scarcely ever be preserved. But that 
which when once planted continues undisturbed, grows up 
securely. For if Peter was offended merely by what he heard, 
what would be the feelings of those many who, after they had 
heard that He was the Son of God, saw Him crucified, and 

spit upon? CyriL; It was the duty then of the disciples to 
preach Him throughout the world. For this was the work 

of those who were chosen by Him to the office of the Apostle- 
ship. But as holy Scripture bears witness, There is a time Eccles. 
Jor every thing. For it was fitting that the cross and resurrec- “ior 
tion should be accomplished, and then should follow the preach- 

ing of the Apostles; as it is spoken, saying, The Son of man 
must needs suffer many things. AMBROSE; Perhaps because 

the Lord knew that the disciples would believe even the 
difficult mystery of the Passion and Resurrection, He wished 

to be Himself the proclaimer of His own Passion and Resur- 


rection. 


23. And he said to them all, If any man will come 
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross 
daily, and follow me. 

24. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; 
but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same 
shall save it. 

25. For what is a man advantaged, if he gain 
the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast away? 


Cyril. 
non oce. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
55. in 
Matt. 


Basil. 
in Cons. 
Mon.. 
cap. 4. 


Basil. 
in reg. 
fus. Int. 


Orig. 
in Matt. 
tom. 12. 


314 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of 
my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, 
when he shall come in his own glory, and in his 
Father’s, and of the holy angels. 

27. But I tell you of a truth, there be some stand- 


ing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see 
the kingdom of God. 


CyriL; Great and noble leaders provoke the mighty in 
arms to deeds of valour, not only by promising them the 
honours of victory, but by declaring that suffering is in itself 
glorious. Such we see is the teaching of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. For He had foretold to His disciples, that He must 
needs suffer the accusations of the Jews, be slain, and rise 
again on the third day. Lest then they should think that 
Christ indeed was to suffer persecution for the life of the 
world, but that they night lead a soft life, He shews them 
that they must needs pass through similar struggles, if they 
desired to obtain His glory. Hence it is said, And he said 
unto all. BErpbrE; He rightly addressed Himself to all, since 
He treats of the higher things (which relate to the belief in 
His birth and passion) apart with His disciples. Curys. Now 
the Saviour of His great mercy and lovingkindness will have 
no one serve Him unwillingly and from constraint, but those 
only who come of their own accord, and are grateful for being 
allowed to serve Him. And so not by compelling men and 
putting a yoke upon them, but by persuasion and kindness, 
He draws unto Him every where those who are willing, saying, 
If any man will, §c. 

Basit; But He has left His own life for an example of 
blameless conversation to those who are willing to obey Him; 
as He says, Come after me, meaning thereby nota following of 
His body, for that would be impossible to all, since our Lord 
is in heaven, but a due imitation of His life according to their 
capacities. BEDE; Now unless a man renounces himself, he 
comes not near to Him, who is above him; it is said there- 
fore, Let him deny himself. Bastt; A denial of one’s self is 
indeed a total forgetfulness of things past, and a forsaking of 
his own will and affection. ORIGEN; A man also denies 


VER. 23—27. ST. LUKE. 315 


himself when by a sufficient alteration of manners or a good 
conversation he changes a life of habitual wickedness. He who 
has long lived in lasciviousness, abandons his lustful self 
when he becomes chaste, and in like manner a forsaking of 
any crimes is a denial of one’s self. 

BastL; Now a desire of suffering death for Christ and a Basil. 
mortification of one’s members which are upon the earth, and” ™- 
a manful resolution to undergo any danger for Christ, and 
an indifference towards the present life, this it is to take up 
one’s cross. Hence it is added, And let him take up his cross 
daily. THEOPHYL. By the cross, He speaks of an ignomi- 
nious death, meaning, that if any one will follow Christ, he 
must not for his own sake flee from even an ignominious 
death. GREG. In two ways also is the cross taken up, either euce: 
when the body is afflicted through abstinence, or the mind 39. AEN: 
touched by sympathy. GREEK Ex. He rightly joins these two, ean, 
Let him deny himself, and let him take up his cross, for as 
he who is prepared to ascend the cross conceives in his 
mind the intention of death, and so goes on thinking to have 
no more part in this life, so he who is willing to follow our 
Lord, ought first to deny himself, and so take up his cross, 
that his will may be ready to endure ey Ga calamity. 

BasiL; Herein then stands a man’s perfection, that he Basil. 
should have his affections hardened, even towards life itself, tee ae 
and have ever about him the answer of death*, that he should by? 2 Cor. 1, 
no means trust in himself. But perfection ilies its beginning «: daoxel- 
from the relinquishment of things foreign to it; suppose these “*: 
to be possessions or vain-glory, or affection for things that 
profit not. 

BepvE; We are bid then to take up the cross of which we 
have above spoken, and having taken it, to follow our Lord 
who bore His own cross. Hence it follows, And let him follow 
me. ORIGEN; He assigns the cause of this when He adds, For Origen. 
whosoever will save his life shall lose it; that is, whosoever will“ °P- 
according to the present life keep his own soul fixed on 
things of sense, the same shal] lose it, never reaching to the 
bounds of happiness. But on the other hand He adds, but 
whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, shall save it. That 


@ Responsum mortis Vulg. S. Thomas in 2 Cor. 1.’ Lect. iii. explains it by 
.certitudinem mortis. 


316 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Ix. 


is, whosoever forsakes the things of sense looking upon 
truth, and exposes himself to death, as it were losing his 
life for Christ, shall the rather save it. If then it is a blessed 
thing to save our life, (with regard to that safety which is in 
God,) there must be also a certain good surrender of life 
which is made by looking upon Christ. It seems also to me 
from resemblance to that denying of one’s self which has been 
before spoken of, that it becomes us to lose a certain sinful 

life of ours, to take up that which is saved by virtue. 
Cyril. CyriL; But that incomparable exercise of the passion of 
non e+ Christ, which surpasses the delights and precious things of 
the world, is alluded to when he adds, What ts a man advan- 
taged, tf he gain the whole world and lose himself, or be a cast 
away? Asif he says, When a man, through his looking after 
the present delights, gains pleasure, and refuses indeed to 
suffer, but chooses to live splendidly in his riches, what ad- 
vantage will he get then, when he has lost his soul? For the 
1 Cor.7, fashion of this world passeth away, and pleasant things depart 
Sap. 5, as a shadow. For the treasures of ungodliness shall not 
9. profit, but righteousness snatches a man from death. GREc. 
i 9. Sincethen the holy Church has one time of persecution, another 
coreg: time of peace, our Lord has noticed both times in His com- 
39.in mand to us. For at the time of persecution we must lay 
down our soul, that is our life, which He signified, saying, 
Whosoever shall lose his life. But in time of peace, those 
things which have the greatest power to subdue us, our 
earthly desires, must be vanquished; which Hesignified, saying, 
What does it profit a man, &c. Now we commonly despise 
all fleeting things, but still we are so checked by that feeling 
of shame so common to man, that we are yet unable to ex- 
press in words the uprightness which we preserve in our 
hearts. But to this wound the Lord indeed subjoins a suit- 
able application, saying, For whoever shall be ashamed of 
me and my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed. 
THEOPHYL. He is ashamed of Christ who says, Am I to 
believe on Him that is crucified? He also is ashamed of 
His words who despises the simplicity of the Gospel. But 
of him shall the Lord be ashamed in His kingdom, in the 
same manner as if a master of a househol : should have a bad 
servant, and be ashamed to have him. Cyrit; Now he strikes 


VER. 23—27. ST. LUKE. 317 


fear into their hearts, when He says that He will descend from 
heaven, not in His former humility and condition proportioned 
to our capacities for receiving Him, but in the glory of the 
Father, with the Angels ministering unto Him. For it follows, 
When he shall come in his own glory, and his Father's, and 
of the holy angels. Awful then and fatal will it be, to be 
branded as an enemy, and slothful in business, when so great 
a Judge shall descend with the armies of Angels standing 
round Him. But from this you may perceive, that though 
He has taken to Himself our flesh and blood, the Son is no 
less God, seeing that He promises to come in the glory 
of God the Father, and that Angels shall minister to Him 
as the Judge of all, Who was made man like unto us. 
AMBROSE; Now our Lord while He ever raises us to look 
to the future reward of virtue, and teaches us how good it 
is to despise worldly things, so also He supports the weak- 
ness of the human mind by a present recompense. For it is 
a hard thing to take up the cross, and expose your life to 
danger and your body to death; to give up what you are, 
when you wish to be what you are not; and even the loftiest 
virtue seldom exchanges things present for future. The good 
Master then, lest any man should be broken down by despair 
or weariness, straightway promises that He will be seen by 
the faithful, in these words, But I say unto you, There are 
some standing here who shall not taste of death till they see 
the kingdom of God. 'THEOPHYL. That is, the glory in which 
the righteous shall be. Now He said this of His transfi- 
guration, which was the type of the glory to come; as if He 
said, There are some standing here, Peter, James, and John, 
who shall not reach death before they have seen at the time 
of My transfiguration what will be the glory of those who con- 
fess Me. GreEc. Or, by the kingdom of God in this place, is Greg. 
meant the present Church; and some of His disciples were ata 
to live in the body up to that time, when they should behold Ev. 
the Church of God built and raised up against the glory of 
the world. AmBroseE; If then we also wish not to fear death, 
let us stand where Christ is. For they only cannot taste 
death who are able to stand with Christ, wherein we may 
consider -from the nature of the very word, that they will 
not experience even the slightest perception of death, who 


318 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


are thought worthy to obtain union with Christ. At least 
let us suppose that the death of the body is tasted by touch, 
the life of the soul preserved by possession; for here not the 
death of the body, but of the soul, is denied. 


28. And it came to pass about an eight days after 
these sayings, he took Peter and John and James, 
and went up into a mountain to pray. 

29. And as he prayed, the fashion of his counte- 
nance was altered, and his raiment was white and 
glistering. 

30. And, behold, there talked with him two men, 
which were Moses and Elias: 

31. Who appeared in glory, and spake of his de- 
cease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. 


Evusesius; Our Lord, when He made known to His 
disciples the great mystery of His second coming, that it 
might not seem that they were to believe in His words only, 
proceeds to works, manifesting to them, through the eyes of 
their faith, the image of His kingdom; as it follows, And 
it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he 
took Peter and John and James, and went up into a moun- 

rele tain to pray. DAMASCENE; Matthew and Mark indeed say 
Trans- that the transfiguration took place on the sixth day after the 
fig-§-8- promise made to the disciples, but Luke on the eighth. 
But there is no disagreement in these testimonies, but they 
who make the number six, taking off a day at each end, that 
is, the first and the last, the day on which He makes the 
promise, and that on which He fulfilled it, have reckoned 
only the intervening ones, but He who makes the number 
eight, has counted in each of the two days above mentioned. 
But why were not all called, but only some, to behold the 
sight? There was only one indeed who was unworthy to see 
the divinity, namely Judas, according to the word of Isaiah, 
Isai. 26, Let the wicked be taken away, that he should not behold the 
Lxx. glory of God. If then he alone had been sent away, he 
might have, as it were from envy, been provoked to greater 


VER. 28—31. ST. LUKE. 319 


wickedness. Henceforward He takes away from the traitor 
every pretext for his treachery, seeing that He left below the 

rest of the company of the Apostles. But He took with 

Him three, that in the mouths of two or three witnesses every 

word should be established. He took Peter, indeed, because 

He wished to shew him that the witness he had borne to Him 

was confirmed by the witness of the Father, and that he 

was as it were to preside over the whole Church. He took 

with Him James, who was to be the first of all the disciples 

to die for Christ; but He took John as the clearest singer 

of the sacred doctrine, that having seen the glory of the 

Son, which submits not to time, he might sound forth, 

In the beginning was the Word. AMBROSE; Or, Peter went John 1, 
up, who received the keys of the kingdom of heaven; John, - 

to whom was committed our Lord’s mother; James, who Acts12, 
first suffered martyrdom. THaEopuyL. Or, He takes these* 
with Him as men who were able to conceal this thing, and 
reveal it to no one else. But going up into a mountain to 
pray, He teaches us to pray solitary, and going up, into 
stooping to earthly things. 

DaMASCENE ; Servants however pray in one way}; Our Damas. 
Lord prayed in another. For the prayer of the servant is} °°? 
offered up by the lifting up of the mind to God, but the 
holy mind of Christ, (who was hypostatically united to God,) iwiera- 
prayed, that He might lead us by the hand to the ascent,“ 
whereby we mount up in prayer to God, and teach us that Heis 
not opposed to God, but reverences the Father as His begin- ,, 2,.5, 
ning; nay, even tempting the tyrant, who sought from Him ‘re 
whether He were God, (which the power of His miracles 
declared,) He concealed as it were under the bait ahook; that 
he who had deceived man with the hope of divinity might fitly 
himself be caught with the clothing of humanity. Prayer is 
the revelation of Divine glory; as it follows, And as he prayed, 
the fashion of his countenance was altered. CyriL; Not 
as though His body changed its human form, but a certain 
glistening glory overspread it. DamascENE; Now the devil, Damas. 
seeing His face shining in prayer, recollected Moses, whose“ sup. 
face was glorified. But Moses indeed was arrayed with Boe 
a glory, which came from without; our Lord, with that which 34, 29. 
proceeded from the inherent brightness of Divine glory. For 


320 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


since in the hypostatical union there is one and the same 
glory of the Word and the flesh, He is transfigured not as 
receiving what He was not, but manifesting to His disciples 


Mat.17, what He was. Hence, according to Matthew, it is said, that 


He was transfigured before them, and that His face shone 
as the sun; for what the sun is in things of sense, God 
is in spiritual things. And as the sun, which is the fountain 
of light, cannot be easily seen, but its light is perceived from 
that which reaches the earth; so the countenance of Christ 
shines more intensely, like the sun, but His raiment is 
white as snow; as it follows, And his raiment was white and 
glistering; that is, lighted up by its participation of the divine 
light. Anda little afterwards, But while these things were so, 
that it might be shewn there was but one Lord of the new and 
old covenant, and the mouths of heretics might be shut, and men 
might believe on the resurrection, and He also, who was trans- 
figured, be believed to be the Lord of the living and the dead, 
Moses and Elias, as servants, stand by their Lord in His glory ; 
hence it follows, And behold there talked with him two men, 
For it became men, seeing the glory and confidence of their 
fellow servants, to admire indeed the merciful condescension 
of the Lord, but to emulate those who had laboured before 
them, and looking to the pleasantness of future blessings, 
to be the more strengthened for conflicts. For he who has 
known the reward of his labours, will the more easily endure 


Chrys. them. Curys. Or else this took place because the multitude 


Hom. 
56. in 
Matt. 


said He was Elias or Jeremias, to shew the distinction 
between our Lord and His servants. And to make it plain 
that He was not an enemy of God, and transgressor of the 
law, He shewed these two standing by Him; (for else, 
Moses the lawgiver, and Elias who was zealous for the glory 
of God, had not stood by Him,) but also to give testimony to 
the virtues of the men., For each had ofttimes exposed Him- 
self to death in keeping the divine commands. He wishes 
also His disciples to imitate them in the government of the 
people, that they might be indeed meek like Moses, and 
zealous like Elias. He introduces them also to set forth the 
glory of His cross, to console Peter and the others who feared 
His Passion. Hence it follows, And spake of his decease, 
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. Cyrit; The 


VER. 28—$]. ST. LUKE. 321 


mystery, namely, of His Incarnation, also the life-giving 
Passion accomplished on the sacred cross. AMBROSE; Now 
in a mystical manner, after the words above said, is ex- 
hibited the transfiguration of Christ, since he who hears 
the words of Christ, and believes, shall see the glory of His 
resurrection. For, on the eighth day the resurrection took 
place. Hence also several Psalms are written, ‘ for the eighth,’ peaiees 
or perhaps it was that He might make manifest what He had 
said, that he who for the word of God shall lose his own life, 
shall save it, seeing that He will make good His promises at 
the resurrection. rpg; For.as He rose from the dead after 
the seventh day of the Sabbath, during which He lay in the 
tomb, we also after the six ages of this world, and the seventh 
of the rest of souls, which meanwhile is passed in another 
life, shall rise again as it were in the eighth age. AMBROSE; 
But Matthew and Mark have related that He took them with 
Him after six days, of which we may say after 6000 years, 
(for a thousand years in the Lord’s sight are as one day ;) but 
more than 6000 years are reckoned. We had rather then 
take the six days symbolically, that in six days the works 
of the world were completed, that by the time we may under- 
stand the works, by the works the world. And so the times 
of the world being finished, the resurrection to come is de- 
clared; or because, He who has ascended above the world, and 
has passed beyond the moments of this life, is waiting, seated 
as it were on a high place, for the everlasting fruit of the re- 
surrection. BEDE; Hence He ascends the mountain to pray and 
be transfigured, to shew that those who expect the fruit of the 
resurrection, and desire to see the King in His glory, ought to 
have the dwelling place of their hearts on high, and be ever 
on their knees in prayer. AMBROSE; I should think that in the 
three who are taken up into the mountain, was contained ina 
mystery the human race, because from the three sons of Noah 
sprung the whole race of man; I did not perceive that they 
were chosen out. Three then are chosen to ascend the moun- 
tain, because none can see the glory of the resurrection, 
but they who have preserved the mystery of the Trinity with 
inviolable purity of faith. 

BEDE; Now the transfigured Saviour shews the glory of 
His own coming, or our resurrection; who as He then ap- 

VOL. ILI. Y 


322 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX, 


peared to His Apostles shall in like manner appear to all 
the elect. But the raiment of the Lord is taken for the 
band of His Saints, which in truth when our Lord was 
upon earth seemed to be despised, but when He sought the 
1Johas, mount, shines with a new whiteness; for now are we the sons 
of God; and it does not yet appear what we shall be. But 
we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him. 
AMBROSE; Or else, according to your capacity is the word 
either lessened or increased to you, and unless you ascend the 
summit of a higher wisdom, you behold not what glory there 
is in the word of God. Now the garments of the Word, are 
the discourses of the Scriptures, and certain clothings of the 
Divine mind; and as His raiment shone white, so in the eyes 
of your understanding, the sense of the divine words becomes 
clear. Hence after Moses, Elias; that is, the Law and the 
Prophets in the Word. For neither can the Law exist without 
the Word, nor the Prophet, unless he prophesied of the Son 
of God. 


32. But Peter and they that were with him were 
heavy with sleep: and when they were awake, they 
saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him. 

33. And it came to pass, as they departed from 
him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us 
to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one 
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not 
knowing what he said. 

34. While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and 
overshadowed them: and they feared as they entered 
into the cloud. 

35. And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, 
This is my beloved Son: hear him. 

36. And when the voice was past, Jesus was 
found alone. And they kept it close, and told no 
man in those days any of those things which they had 
seen. 


THEopHYL. While Christ is engaged in prayer, Peter is 
heavy with sleep, for he was weak, and did what was natural 


VER. 32—36. ST. LUKE. 323 


to man; as it is.said, But Peter and they that were with him 
were heavy with sleep. But when they awake, they behold 
His glory, and the two men with Him; as it follows, And 
when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men 
that stood with him. Curys. Or, by the word sleep, he Chrys. 
means that strange maze that fell upon them by reason nae 
of the vision. For it was not night time, but the exceeding Matt. 
brightness of the light weighed down their weak eyes. 
AMBROSE; For the incomprehensible brightness of the 
Divine nature oppresses our bodily senses. For if the 
sight of the body is unable to contain the sun’s ray when 
opposite to the eyes which behold it, how can the corrup- 
tion of our fleshly members endure the glory of God? And 
perhaps they were oppressed with sleep, that after their 
rest they might behold the sight of the resurrection. There- 
fore when they were awake they saw His glory. For no one, 
except he is watching, sees the glory of Christ. Peter was 
delighted, and as the allurements of this world enticed him 
not, was carried away by the glory of the resurrection. Hence 
it follows, And it came to pass as they departed, &c. CYRIL; 
For perhaps holy Peter imagined that the kingdom of heaven © 
was at hand, and therefore it seemed good to him to abide on 
the mount. Damas. It were not good for thee, Peter, that Damas. 
Christ should abide there, for if He had remained, the pro- oe 
mise made to thee would never receive its accomplishment. fig. 
For neither wouldest thou have obtained the keys of the 
kingdom, nor the tyranny of death been abolished. Seek 
not bliss before its time, as Adam did to be made a God. 
The time shall come when thou shalt enjoy the sight without 
ceasing, and dwell together with Him who is light and life. 

AMBROSE; But Peter distinguished not only by earnest 
feeling, but also by devout deeds, wishing like a zealous work- 
man to build three tabernacles, offers the service of their united 
labour; for it follows, Let us make three tabernacles, one for 
thee, &c. Damas. But the Lord ordained thee not the builder Damas. 
of tabernacles, but of the universal Church. Thy words have °”! SuP- 
been brought to pass by thy disciples, by thy sheep, in build+ 
ing a tabernacle, not only for Christ, but also for His ser- 
vants. But Peter said not this deliberately, but through 
the inspiration of the Spirit revealing things to come, as it 

¥ 2 


324 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


follows, not _ knowing what he said. Cyrit; He knew not 
what he said, for neither was the time come for the end of 
the world, or for the Saints’ enjoyment of their promised hope. 
And when the dispensation was now commencing, how was 
it fitting that Christ should abandon His love of the world, 
Damas. Who was willing to suffer for it? Damas. It behoved Him 
ub *4P- a1so not to confine the fruit of His incamation to the service 
of those only who were on the mount, but to extend it to all 
believers, which was to be accomplished by His cross and 
non oce. passion. Tit. Bosr. Peter also was ignorant what he said, 
seeing that it was not proper to make three tabernacles for 
the three. For the servants are not received with their 
Lord, the creature 1s not placed beside the Creator. AMBROSE; 
Nor does the condition of man in this corruptible body allow 
of making a tabernacle to God, whether in the soul or in the 
body, or in any other place; and although he knew not what 
he said, yet a service was offered which not by any deliberate 
forwardness, but its premature devotion, receives in abundance 
the fruits of piety. For his ignorance was part of his condi- 
Chrys. tion, his offer of devotion. Curys. Or else Peter heard that 
ubi sup- it wasnecessary Christ must die, and on the third day rise again, 
but he saw around him a very remote and solitary place; he 
supposed therefore that the place had some great protection. 
Exod. For this reason he said, /¢ ts good for us to be here. Moses 
9 Kinge too was present, who entered into the cloud. Elias, who on 
1,12. the mount brought down fire from heaven. The Evangelist 
then, to indicate the confusion of mind in which he utters 
Aug. de this, added, Not knowing what he said. Auc. Now in what 
iieg6, Luke here says of Moses and Elias, And it came to pass as they 
departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, tt is good 
for us to be here, he must not be thought contrary to Matthew 
and Mark, who have soconnected Peter’s suggestion of this, as if 
Moses and Elias were still speaking with our Lord. For 
they did not expressly state that Peter said it then, but rather 
were silent about what Luke added, that as they departed, 
Peter suggested this to our Lord, 

THEOPHYL. But while Peter spake, our Lord builds a 
tabernacle not made with hands, and enters into it with the 
Prophets. Hence itis added, While he thus spake there came 
a cloud and overshadowed them, to shew that He was not 


VER. 82—836. ST. LUKE. 325 


inferior to the Father. For as in the Old Testament it was 
said, the Lord dwelt in the cloud, so now also a cloud re- 
ceived our Lord, not a dark cloud, but bright and shining. 

Basi; For the obscurity of the Law had passed away; Basil. 
for as smoke is caused by the fire, so the cloud by light;,. . ie 
but because a cloud is the sign of calmness, the rest of the 
future state is signified by the covering of acloud. AMBROsE; 

For it is the overshadowing of the divine Spirit which does 

not darken, but reveals secret things to the hearts of men. 
OrIGEN ; Now His disciples being unable to bear this, fell Orig. in 
down, humbled under the mighty hand of God, greatly ee 
afraid since they knew what was said to Moses, No man shalt 

see my face, and live. Hence it follows, And they feared as 
they entered into the cloud. AMBROSE; Now observe, that 

the cloud was not black from the darkness of condensed air, 

and such as to overcast the sky with a horrible gloom, but 

a shining cloud, from which we were not moistened with 
rain, but as the voice of Almighty God came forth the dew of 
faith was shed upon the hearts of men. For it follows, 
And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my 
beloved Son: hear ye him. Elias was not His Son. Moses 

was not. But this is the Son whom you see alone. CyRIL; Cyril. 
How then should men suppose Him who is really the Son ae 
to be made or created, when God the Father thundered c. 14. 
from above, This is my beloved Son! as if He said, Not one 

of My sons, but He who is truly and by nature My Son, 
according to whose example the others are adopted. He 
ordered them then to obey Him, when He added, Hear ye 
him. And to obey Him more than Moses and Elias, for Christ 

is the end of the Law and the Prophets. Hence the Evangelist | 
adds significantly, And when the voice was past, Jesus was 
Jound alone. 'THEOPHYL. Lest in truth any one should suppose 

that these words, This is my beloved Son, were uttered about 
Moses or Elias. AmBrosE; They then departed, when our 
Lord’s manifestation had begun. There are three seen at 

the beginning, one at the end; for faith being made perfect, 
they are one. Therefore are they also received into the body 

of Christ, because we also shall be one in Christ Jesus; or 
perhaps, because the Law and the Prophets came out from the 
Word. THrEopHYL. Now those things which began from the 


Orig. 
ubi sup. 


Damas. 
ubi sup. 


326 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Ix. 


Word, end in the Word. For by this he implies that up to 
a certain time the Law and the Prophets appear, as here 
Moses and Elias; but afterwards, at their departure, Jesus 
is alone. For now abideth the Gospel, legal things having 
passed away. Brepe; And mark, that as when our Lord 
was baptized in Jordan, so also when He was glorified on 
the Mount, the mystery of the whole Trinity is declared; for 
His glory which we confess at baptism, we shall see at the 
resurrection. Nor in vain does the Holy Spirit appear here 
in the cloud, there in the form of a dove, seeing that he who 
now preserves with a simple heart the faith which he receives, 
shall then in the light of open vision look upon those things 
which he believed. 

OriGcEN ; Now Jesus wishes not those things which relate 
to His glory to be spoken of before His passion. Hence 
it follows, And they kept it close. For men would have 
been offended, especially the multitude, if they saw Him 
crucified Who had been so glorified. Damas. This also our 
Lord commands, since He knew His disciples to be imper- 
fect, seeing that they had not yet received the full measure 
of the Spirit, lest the hearts of others who had not seen 
should be prostrated by sorrow, and lest the traitor should be 
stirred up to a frantic hatred. 


37. And it came to pass, that on the next day, when 
they were come down from the hill, much people met 
him. 

+ 38. And, behold, a man of the company cried out, 
saying, Master, I beseech thee, look upon my son: 
for he is mine only child. 

39. And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly 
crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth 
again, and bruising him hardly departeth from him. 

40. And I besought thy disciples to cast him out; 
and they could not. 

41. And Jesus answering said, O faithless and 
perverse generation, how long shall I be with you, 
and suffer you? Bring thy son hither. 


VER. 37—43. ST. LUKE. 327 


42. And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw 
him down, and tare him. And Jesus rebuked the 
unclean spirit, and healed the child, and delivered 
him again to his father. 


43. And they were all amazed at the mighty power 
of God. 


BrEbDE; Certain places accord with certain events. On 
the Mount our Lord prays, is transfigured, reveals the secrets 
of His glory to His disciples ; as He descends to the lower 
parts, He is received by a large concourse. As it is said, 
And it came to pass, that on the next day, when he was 
come down from the hill, much people met him. Above He 
makes known the voice of the-Father, below He expels the 
evil spirits. Hence it follows, And, behold, a man of the 
company cried.out, saying, Master, I beseech thee look upon 
my son. Tit. Bost. It seems indeed to me that this was a 200 occ. 
wise man. For he said not to the Saviour, “ Do this or 
that,” but, Zook on my son, for this suffices for His salvation ; 
as the prophet said, Look on me, and have mercy on me; 
and he says, on my son, to shew that his was a reasonable 
forwardness in crying out aloud among the multitude. He 
adds, for he is mine only child. As if to say, There is none 
other I can expect to be the consolation of my old age. He 
next enters into the sufferings, that he may move his Hearer 
to compassion, saying, And, lo, the spirit taketh him. He 
then seems to accuse the disciples, but his answer is rather 
a justification of his casting aside his fear, saying, And I 
besought thy disciples to cast him out: and they could not. 
As if he said, Think not that I have come lightly unto Thee. 
Marvellous is Thy greatness! I did not intrude upon Thy 
presence at once, but went first to Thy disciples. Because 
they failed to work the cure, I am now compelled to ap- 
proach Thee. Our Lord therefore does not blame him, but 
the faithless generation ; for it follows, And Jesus answering 
said, O faithless and perverse generation. a 
: . . rys. 
Currys. But that this man was much weakened in faith, Hom. 
the writings of the Gospel shew us in several places. In $7. in 
that place where he says, Help thou my unbelief; and, If thou Mare 
, 23. 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
57. in 
Matt. 


Chrys. 
ubi sup. 


328 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


canst. And in that where Christ said, All things are possible 
to him that believeth, §c. CHRys. Hence it seems to me 
more correct to account the father of the demoniac unbe- 
lieving, because he also casts reproach upon the holy Apostles, 
saying that they could not subdue the evil spirits. But it were 
better to have sought favour from God by honouring Him, for 
He has respect to them that fear Him. But he who says that 
those are weak with respect to their power over evil spirits, who 
have obtained that power from Christ, calumniates rather the 
grace than those who are adorned with that grace in whom 
Christ works. Christ is therefore offended with the accusa- 
tion of the saints, to whom was entrusted the word of holy 
preaching. Wherefore the Lord rebukes him and those like- 
minded with him, saying, O faithless and perverse generation. 
As if He said, Because of your unbelief the grace has not 
received its accomplishment. 

Curys. Now He does not direct His words to him alone, 
but to all the Jews, lest He should cause him to doubt. For 
it must have been that many were offended. THEOPHYL. 
By the word perverse, He shews that this wickedness in 
them was not originally or by nature, for by nature indeed 
they were upright, being the seed of Abraham, but became 
perverted through malice. Cyrit; As if not knowing how 
to continue in the right beginnings. Now Christ disdains 
to dwell with those who are thus disposed. Hence He says, 
How long shall I be with you, and suffer you? Feeling 
troubled with their company, because of their evil deeds. 
Currs. Hereby also He shews that His departure was 
desired by Him, not because the suffering of the cross was 
grievous, but rather their conversation. BEDE; Not that 
weariness has overcome His patience, but after the manner of 
a physician, when he sees a sick man acting contrary to his 
commands, he says, ‘ How long shall I come to thy house, 
when I order one thing, you do another. But to prove that 
He was not angry with the man, but with the sin, He imme- 
diately added, Bring thy son hither. 

Tit. Bost. He might indeed have healed him by His 
simple command, but He makes his sufferings public, bring- 
ing the weak im faith to the sight of things present. Then 
the devil, when he perceived our Lord, rends and dashes the 


VER. 37—48. ST. LUKE. 329 


child down; as it follows, And as he was yet a coming, the 
devil threw him down, and tare him; that so first the 
sufferings should be made manifest, then the remedy be 


applied. Curys. The Lord however does this not for display, mite 


but for the father’s sake, that upon seeing the devil dis- 
turbed at the mere summons, he might thus at least be led 
to the belief of the future miracles ; of which it follows, And 
Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and 
delivered him again unto his father. Cyrit; Now before 
not his father but the devil possessed him, but now the 
Evangelist adds that the people were astonished at the great- 
ness of God, saying, And all were amazed at the mighty 
power of God, which he says, because of the gift of Christ, 
who conferred on the holy Apostles also the power of work- 
ing divine miracles,-and having the mastery over evil spirits. 

BEDE; Now in a mystical manner in proportion to their 
deserts does our Lord daily ascend to some men, seeing that 
the perfect and those whose conversation is in heaven, He 
glorifies by exalting higher, instructing them in things eternal, 


and teaching them things which can not be heard by the’ 


multitude, but to others he descends, in that He strengthens 
the earthly and foolish men, teaching and chastening them. 


ubi sip. 


Now this demoniac Matthew calls a lunatic; Mark, deaf Matt. 


anddumb. Matthew signifies those who change as the moon, oe 


15. 


increasing and decreasing through different vices, Mark those 9, 25- 


who are dumb in not confessing the faith, deaf in not hear- 
ing the very word of faith. While the boy is coming to our 
Lord, he is dashed to the ground; because men when turned 
to the Lord are often grievously afflicted by the devil, that 
he may instil a hatred of virtue, or revenge the injury of his 
expulsion. As in the beginning of the Church he waged 
as many fierce conflicts as he had to bewail losses suddenly 
brought upon His kingdom. But our Lord rebukes not the 
boy who suffered violence, but the evil spirit who inflicted 
it; for he who desires to correct the sinner, ought by reproof 
and abhorrence to drive away the vice, but to revive the man 
by gentleness, until he'can restore him to the spiritual father 
of the Church. 


Cyril. 


non occ. 


Ps.21,5. 


330 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


43. But while they wondered every one at all 
things which Jesus did, he said unto his disciples, 

44. Let these sayings sink down into your ears: 
for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands 
of men. 

45. But they understood not this saying, and it 
was hid from them, that they perceived it not: and 
they feared to ask him of that saying. 


CyriL; Every thing that Jesus did claimed admiration from 
all men for a peculiar and divine light reflected upon each 
of His works, according to the Psalms, honour and majesty 
wilt thou lay upon him. Although all indeed marvelled at 
those things which He did, He however addresses what 
follows, not to all, but to His disciples; as it is said, But 
while they wondered every one, §&c. He had shewn His 
glory on the mount to His disciples, and after this delivered 
aman from an evil spirit, but it was necessary for Him to 


* undergo His passion for our salvation. Now His disciples 


Origen. 
in Matt. 
tom. 13. 


Se 8, 


might have been perplexed, saying, “ Have we then been 
deceived in that we thought him to be God?” That they 
might know then what was to happen to Him, He bids them 
lay up in their minds as a certain deposit the mystery of His 
passion, saying, Let these sayings sink down in your hearts. 
By the word your, He distinguishes them from others. For 
the multitude were not to know that He was about to suffer, 
but were rather to be assured that the dead would rise again, 
destroying death, lest they should be offended. Tit. Bost. 
While all thus were wondering at the miracles, He foretels 
His passion. For miracles do not save, but the cross con- 
veys the benefit. Hence he adds, For the Son of man shall 
be delivered into the hands of men. ORIGEN; But it is not 
clearly expressed by whom He is to be delivered, for one 
says, that He is to be delivered up by Judas, another by the 
devil; but Paul says, that God the Father delivered Him up 
for us all; but Judas, as he delivered Him up for money, did 
it traitorously, the Father for His mercies’ sake. THEOPHYL. 
Now our Lord in condescension to their infirmities and 
governing them with a kind of economy, did not permit 


VER. 46—850. ST. LUKE. 331 


them to understand what was said of the cross; as it follows, 

But they understood not. BEvDE; This ignorance of the 
disciples proceeds not so much from slowness of understanding 

as from affection, for since they were yet carnal and ignorant of 

the mystery of the cross, they could not believe that He whom 

they thought to be really God would suffer death. And 
because’ they were often accustomed to hear Him speak by 
figure, they thought that He meant figuratively something 
else, by what He said of His betrayal. Cyrit; Now some one 
perhaps will say, How were the disciples ignorant of the 
mystery of the cross, seeing that it was touched upon in 
several places by the shadows of the Law? But as Paul relates, 
Even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon2 Cor. 
their hearts. It becomes then those who approach Christ, * 1° 
to say, Open thou my eyes, that I may behold the wonderful Ps. 119, 
things out of thy law. THEoPHyL. Mark also the reverence *™ _ 
of the disciples in what follows, And they feared to ask him 

of that saying. For fear is the first step to reverence. 


46. Then there arose a reasoning among them, 
which of them should be greatest. 

47. And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their 
heart, took a child, and set him by him, 

48. And said unto them, Whosoever shall receive 
this child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever 
shall receive me receiveth him that sent me: for he 
that is least among you all, the same shall be great. 

49. And John answered and said, Master, we saw 
one casting out devils in thy name; and we forbad 
him, because he followeth not with us. 

50. And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not: for 
he that is not against us is for us. 


CyriL; The devil lays plots of various kinds for them that Cyril. 
love the best way of life. And if indeed by carnal allure-"°" °° 
ments he can gain possession of a man’s heart, He sharpens 
his love of pleasure; but if a man has escaped these snares, 
he excites in him a desire of glory, and this passion for vain- 


332 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO _ CHAP. IX. 


glory had seized some one of His apostles. Hence it is said, 
Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them 
should be the greatest. For to have such thoughts, belongs 
to him who desires to be superior to the rest; but I think 
it improbable that all the disciples gave way to this weakness ; 
and therefore suppose that the Evangelist, not to seem to lay 
the charge to any individual, expresses himself indefinitely, 
saying, that there arose a reasoning among them. 'THEOPHYL. 
Now it seems that this feeling was excited by the circumstance 
of their not being able to cure the demoniac. And while 
they were disputing thereupon, one said, It was not owing 
to my weakness, but another’s, that he could not be cured ; 
and so thereby was kindled a strife among them, which was the 
greatest. BEpE; Or, because they saw Peter, James, and John, 
taken apart to the mount, and the keys of the kingdom of heaven 
promised to Peter, they were angry that these three, or 
Peter, should have precedence over all; or because in the 
payment of the tribute they saw Peter made equal to the 
Lord, they supposed he was to be placed before the rest. 
But the attentive reader will find that the question was raised 
among them before the payment of the penny. For in truth 
Mat.18, Matthew relates that this took place at Capernaum; but 
Sano Mark says, And he came to Capernaum, and being in the 
house, he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among 
yourselves in the way? But they held their peace; for by the 
way they had disputed among themselves who should be the 
greatest. CyriIL; But our Lord, Who knew how to save, 
seeing in the hearts of the disciples the thought that had 
risen up thereupon as it were a certain root of bitterness, plucks 
it up by the roots before it received growth. For when 
passions first begin in us, they are easily subdued ; but having 
gained strength, they are with difficulty eradicated. Hence 
it follows, And Jesus perceiving the thought of their heart, 
&c. Let him who thinks Jesus to be mere man, know that 
he has erred; for the Word, although made flesh, remained 
God. For it is God alone Who is able to search into the 
heart and reins. But in taking a child, and placing it beside 
Him, He did it for the Apostles’ sake and ours. For 
the disease of vain-glory feeds generally on those who 
have the preeminence among other men. But a child 


VER. 46—50. ST. LUKE. 333 


has a pure mind and unspotted heart, and abides in simplicity 
of thought; he courts not honours, nor knows the limits of 
each one’s power, nor shuns seeming to be inferior to others, 
bearing no moroseness in his mind or heart. Such the Lord 
embraces and loves, and thinks them worthy to be near 
Him, as those who had chosen to taste of the things which 
are His; for He says, Learn of me, for Iam meek and lowly 
of heart. Hence it follows, And he says unto them, Who- 
soever shall receive a child in my name, receiveth me. As 
if He were to say, Seeing that there is one and the same 
reward to those that honour the saints, whether perchance such 
an one be the least, or one distinguished for honours and 
glory, for in him is Christ received, how vain is it to seek 
to have the preeminence? BrprE; Now herein He either 
teaches, that the poor of Christ are to be received by those 
who wish to be greater simply for His honour, or He persuades 
men that they are children in malice. Hence when He said, 
Whoever shall receive that child, he adds, in my name; 
that in truth they may pursue with diligence and reason for 
Christ’s name that form of virtue which the child observes, 
with only nature for its guide. But because He also teaches 
that He is received in the child, and He Himself was born 
unto us a child; lest it should be thought that this was all 
which was seen, He subjoined, And whoever shall receive 
me, receiveth him that sent me ; wishing verily to be believed, 
that as was the Father, such and so great was He. AMBROSE ; 
For he who receives the followers of Christ, receives Christ ; 
and he who receives the image of God, receives God; but 
because we cannot see the image of God, it has been made 
present to us by the incarnation of the Word, that the divine 
nature which is above us, may be reconciled to us. 

CyrriL; Now He still more plainly conveys the meaning of the 
preceding words, saying, For he that ts least among you all, the 
same shall be great ; in which He speaks of the modest man 
who from honesty thinks nothing high of himself. ‘THEOPaYL. 
Because then our Lord had said, He who is least among you 
all, the same shall be great, John feared, lest perhaps they 
had done wrong in hindering a certain man by their own 
power. For a prohibition does not shew the probitor to be 
inferior, but to be one who thinks himself somewhat superior. 


3384 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


Hence it is added, And John answered and said, Master, 
we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and we forbad 
him. Not indeed from envy, but to distinguish the working 
of miracles, for he had not received the power of working 
miracles with them, nor had the Lord sent him as He did 
them; nor did he follow Jesus in all things. Hence he adds, 
because he followeth not with us. 

AMBROSE; For John loving much, and therefore much be- 
loved, thinks that they should be excluded from the privilege 
who did not practise obedience. CyRIL; But we ought to 
consider not so much the worker of the miracles, as the grace 
which was in him, who, by the power of Christ, performed 
miracles. But whatif there should be both those which be num- 
bered together with the Apostles, and those who are crowned 
with the grace of Christ; there are many diversities in Christ’s 

Matt. gifts. But because the Saviour had given the Apostles:power 

1) 8- to cast out evil spirits, they thought no one else but 
themselves alone was permitted to have this privilege granted 
to him, and therefore they come to enquire if it were lawful 
for others also to do this. 

AMBROSE; Now John is not blamed, because he did this 
from love, but he is taught to know the difference between 
the strong and the weak. And therefore our Lord though 
He rewards the stronger, yet does not exclude the weak; as 

‘it follows, And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not, for 
he that is not against you 1s for you. True, O Lord. For 
both Joseph and Nicodemus, through fear Thy secret disci- 
ples, when the time came, did not refuse their offices. 
Lukell, But still since Thou saidst elsewhere, He that is not with me 
as against me, and he that gathereth not with me scattereth, 
explain unto us lest the two seem contrary to one another. 
And it seems to me, if any one considers the Searcher of — 
hearts, he cannot doubt that every man’s action is distinguished 
Chrys. by the motive of his heart. Curys. For in the other 
41. in Place when He said, He that is not with me is against me, 
Matt. He shews the Devil and the Jews to be opposed to Him; 
but here He shews that he who in Christ’s name cast 
out devils, is partly on their side. Cyrit; As if He said, On 
the side of you who love Christ, are all they who wish to 
follow those things which conduce to His glory, being crowned 

with His grace. 


VER. 51—56. ST. LUKE. 335 


THEOPHYL. Marvel then at the power of Christ, how His 
grace works by means of the unworthy and those who are 
not His disciples: as also men are sanctified through the 
priests, although the priests be not holy. AmBRosE; Now 
why does He in this place say that they are not to be hindered, 
who by the imposition of hands can subdue the unclean 
spirits, when according to Matthew, He says to these, J Matt. 7, 
never knew you? But we ought to perceive that there is no?*" 
difference of opinion, but that the decision is this, that not 
only the official works but works of virtue are required in a 
priest, and that the name of Christ is so great, that even to 
the unholy it serves to give defence, but not grace. Let 
no one then claim to himself the grace of cleansing a man, 
because in him the power of the eternal Name has worked. 
For not by thy merits, but by his own hatred, the devil is 
conquered. BeEpDE; Therefore in heretics and false catholics, 
it becomes us to abhor, and forbid not the common sacraments 
in which they are with us, and not against us, but the divisions 
contrary to peace and truth, wherein they are against us as 
‘following not the Lord. 


51. And it came to pass, when the time was come 
that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his 
face to go to Jerusalem, 

52. And sent messengers before his face: and they 
went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to 
make ready for him. 

53. And they did not receive him, because his face 
was as though he would go to Jerusalem. 

54, And when his disciples James and John saw 
this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we command fire 
to come down from heaven, and consume them, even 
as Elias did? 

55. But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, 
Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. 

56. For the Son of man is not come to destroy 
men’s lives, but to save them. And they went to 
another village. 


836 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


Cyri_; When the time was near at hand in which it behoved 
our Lord to accomplish His life-giving Passion, and ascend 
up to heaven, He determines to go up to Jerusalem, as it is 
said, And it came to pass, &c. Tit. Bost. Because it was 
necessary that the true Lamb should there be offered, where 
the typical lamb was sacrificed; but it is said, he stedfastly 
set his face, that is, He went not here and there traversing 
the villages and towns, but kept on His way straight towards 
Jerusalem. BEDE; Let then the Heathen cease to mock the 
Crucified, as if He were a man, who it is plain, as God, both 
foresaw the time of His crucifixion, and going voluntarily to 
be crucified, sought with stedfast face, that is, with resolute 
and undaunted mind, tbe spot where He was to be crucified. 
CyriL; And He sends messengers to make a place for Him 
and His companions, who when they came to the country of 
the Samaritans were not admitted, as it follows, And sent 
messengers before his face: and they went, and cntered into 
a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. And 
they did not receive him. AMBROSE; Mark that He was un- 
willing to be received by those who He knew had not 
turned to Him with a simple heart. For if He had wished, 
He might have made them devout, who were undevout. But 
God calls those whom He thinks worthy, and whom He wills 
He makes religious. But why they did not receive Him the 
Evangelist mentions, saying, Because his face was as if he 
would go to Jerusalem. THEopPHYL. But if one understands 
that they did not receive Him for this reason, because He 
had determined to go to Jerusalem, an excuse is found for 
them, who did not receive Him. But we must say, that in 
the words of the Evangelist, And they did not receive him, is 
implied that He did not go into Samaria, but afterwards as if 
some one had asked Him, He explained in these words, why 
they did not receive Him. And He went not to them, i.e. not 
that He was unable, but that He did not wish to go there, 
but rather to Jerusalem. BEDE; Or the Samaritans see that 
our Lord is going to Jerusalem, and do not receive Him. 


John 4, Lor the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans, as John 


9. 


shews. 
CyRIL; But our Lord, Who knewall things before they came 
to pass, knowing that His messengers would not be received by 


VER. 51—56. ST. LUKE. 337 


the Samaritans, nevertheless commanded them to go before 
Him, because it was His practice to make all things conduce 
to the good of His disciples. Now He went up to Jerusalem 
as the time of His suffering drew near. In order then that they 
might not be offended, when they saw Him suffer, bearing 
in mind that they must also endure patiently when men per- 
secute them, He ordained beforehand as a kind of prelude 
this refusal of the Samaritans. It was good for them also in 
another way. For they were to be the teachers of the world, 
going through towns and villages, to preach the doctrine 
of the Gospel, meeting sometimes with men who would not 
receive the sacred doctrine, allowing not that Jesus sojourned 
on earth with them. He therefore taught them, that in an- 
nouncing the divine doctrine, they ought to be filled with 
patience and meekness, without bitterness, and wrath, and 
fierce enmity against those who had done any wrong to them. 
But as yet they were not so, nay, being stirred up with fervid 
zeal, they wished to bring down fire from heaven upon them. 
It follows, And when his disciples James and John saw this, 
they said, Lord, wilt thou that we.command fire to come down 
Jrom heaven, &c. AMBROSE; For they knew both that when 
Phineas had slain the idolaters it was counted to him for 
righteousness; and that at the prayer of Elijah fire came down 
from heaven, that the injuries of the prophet might be avenged. 
BevE; For holy men who well knew that that death which 
detaches the soul from the body was not to be feared, still 
because of their feelings who feared it, punished some sins 
with death, that both the living might be struck with a whole- 
some dread, and those who were punished with death might 
receive harm not from death itself but from sin, which would 
be increased were they to live. 

AMBROSE; But let him be avenged who fears. He who 
fears not, seeks not vengeance. At the same time the merits 
of the Prophets are likewise shewn to have been in the 


Apostles, seeing that they claim to themselves the right of 


obtaining the same power of which the Prophet was thought 
worthy ; and fitly do they claim that at their command fire 


should come down from heaven, for they were the sons of 


thunder. 


Numb. 


25, 8. 
Ps. 107, 
31. 


2 Kings 
1,10.12. 


v. Theo- 


Trt. Bost. They thought it much juster that the Samari- phyl. in 


VOL. ITI. Z 


338 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. IX. 


tans should perish for not admitting our Lord, than the 
fifty soldiers who tried to thrust down Elijah. AMBROSE; 
But the Lord is not moved against them, that He might shew 
that perfect virtue has no feeling of revenge, nor is there any 
anger where there is fulness of love. For weakness must not 
be thrust out, but assisted. Let indignation be far from the 
religious, let the high-souled have no desire of vengeance. 
Hence it follows, But he turned and rebuked them, and 
said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. BEDE; 
The Lord blames them, not for following the example of the 
holy Prophet, but for their ignorance in taking vengeance 
while they were yet inexperienced, perceiving that they did 
not desire correction from love, but vengeance from hatred. 
After that He had taught them what it was to love their 
neighbour as themselves, and the Holy Ghostalso had been 
infused into them, there were not lacking these punishments, 
though far less frequent than in the Old Testament, because 
the Son ef man came not to destroy men’s lives, but to 
save them. As if He said, And do you therefore who are 
sealed with His Spirit, imitate also His actions, now deter- 
mining charitably, hereafter judging justly. AMBROSE; 
For we must not always punish the offender, since mercy 
sometimes does more good, leading thee to patience, the sinner 
to repentance. Lastly, those Samaritans believed the sooner, 
who were in this place saved from fire. 


57. And it came to pass, that, as they went in the 
way, a certain man said unto him, Lord, I will 
follow thee whithersoever thou goest. 

58. And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, 
and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man 
hath not where to lay his head. 

59. And he said unto another, Follow me. But 
he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my 
father. 

60. Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their 
dead ; but go thou and preach the kingdom of God. 

61. And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; 


VER. 57—62. ST. LUKE. 339 


but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at 
home at my house. 

62. And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put 
his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for 
the kingdom of God. 


CyriL; Although the Almighty Lord is bountiful, He does cyri1, 
not grant to every one absolutely and indiscriminately 2 °e- 
heavenly and divine gifts, but to those only who are 
worthy to receive them, who free themselves and _ their 
souls from the stains of wickedness. And this we are taught 
by the force of the angelic words, And tt came to pass, 
that, as they went in the way, a certain man said unto him, 
Lord, I will follow thee. First indeed there is much tardi- 
ness implied in the manner of his coming. Itis next shewn 
that he is filled with too great presumption. For he sought 
not to follow Christ simply as several others of the people, 
but rather caught at the honour of the Apostleship. Whereas 
Paul says, No one taketh the honour to himself but he that Heb. 5, 
7s called of God. AtTHan. He dared also to match himself ie. 
with the incomprehensible power of the Saviour, saying, non occ. 
I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest; for to follow the 
Saviour simply to hear His teaching is possible to human 
nature, as it directs itself towards men, but it is not 
possible to go with Him wherever He is; for He is incompre- 
hensible, and is not confined by place. Cyrit; In another 
respect also our Lord deservedly gives him a refusal, for He 
taught that to follow the Lord, a man must take up his cross, 
and renounce the affection of this present life. And our Lord 
finding this lacking in him does not blame him, but corrects 
him. 

It follows, And Jesus says to him, The foxes have holes, §c. 
TueopHyL. For having seen our Lord drawing much people 
to Him, he thought that he received reward from them, and 
that if he followed our Lord, he might obtain money. BEDE; 
Therefore it is said to him, Why do you seek to follow Me 
for the riches and gain of this world, when so great is My 
poverty that I have not even a place of rest, and take shelter 
under another man’s roof. CuHrys. See how our Lord sets 

Zz 2 


2 Cor. 


Ti 
10 


14. 


t. 3, 


340 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Ix. 


forth by his works the poverty which he taught. For him 
was no table spread, no lights, no house, nor any such 
thing. 

Cyri_; Now under a mystical signification He applies the 
name of foxes and birds of the air to the wicked and crafty 
powers of evil spirits. As if He said, Since foxes and birds 
of the air have their abode in thee, how shall Christ rest in 
thee? What fellowship has light with darkness? ATHAN. 
Or herein our Lord teaches the greatness of His gift, as if He 
said, All created things may be confined by place, but the 
Word of God has incomprehensible power. Say not then, 
I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. But if thou 


. wouldest be a disciple, cast off’ foolish things, for it is 


impossible for him who remains in foolishness to become a 
disciple of the Word. AmBROsE; Or, He compares foxes 
to heretics, because they are indeed a wily animal, and, ever 
intent upon fraud, commit their robberies by stealth. They 
let nothing be safe, nothing be at rest, nothing secure, for 
they hunt their prey into the very abodes of men. The 
fox again, an animal full of craft, makes no hole for itself, 
yet likes to lie always concealed in a hole. So the heretics, 
who know not how to construct a house for themselves, 
circumscribe and deceive others. ‘This animal is never 
tamed, nor is it of use to man. Hence the Apostle, A heretic 
after the first and second admonition reject. But the birds 
of the air, which are frequently brought in to represent 
spiritua] wickedness, build as it were their nests in the 
breasts of the wicked, and as long as deceit reigns over 
the affections, the divine principle has no opportunity to 
take possession. But when a man has proved his heart to 
be innocent, upon him Christ leans in some measure the weight 
of His greatness, for by a more abundant shedding of grace 
He is planted in the breasts of good men. So then it does 
not seem reasonable that we should think him faithful 
and simple, who is rejected by the judgment of the Lord, 
notwithstanding that he promised the service of unwearied 
attendance; but our Lord cares not for this kind of service, 
but only purity of affection, nor is his attendance accepted 
whose sense of duty is not proved. For the hospitality of 
faith should be given with circumspection, lest while 


VER. 57—62. ST. LUKE. 341 


opening the interior of our house to the unbelieving, through 

our imprudent credulity we fall asnare to the treachery of others. 
Therefore that you may be aware that God despises not 
attendance upon him but deceit, He who rejected the deceit- 

ful man chose the innocent. For it follows, And he said unto 
another, Follow me. But He says this to him, whose father 

He knew to be dead. Hence it follows, But he said, Lord, 
suffer me first to go and bury my father. BEDE; He did 

not refuse the discipleship, but his wish was, having fulfilled 

the filial duty of burying his father, to follow Christ more 
freely. 

- AMBROSE; But the Lord calls those upon whom He has 
compassion. Hence it follows, And Jesus said, Let the 
dead bury their dead. Since we have received as a religious 
duty the burial of the human body, how is it thus that the 
burial even of a father’s dead body is forbidden, unless you are 

to understand that human things are to be postponed to 
divine? It is a good employment, but the hindrance is 
greater, for he who divides his pursuits, draws down his 
affections; he who divides his care, delays his advances. 
We must first set about the things which are most important. 

For the Apostles also, that they might not be occupied in the 
office of distributing alms, ordained ministers for the poor. 
Curys. But what more necessary than the bunial of his ltl 
father, what more easy, seeing that there would not be much 9”. in 
time given to it? We are then hereby taught that it becomes Matt. 
us not to spend even the slightest portion of our time in vain, 
although we have a thousand things to compel us, nay 

to prefer spiritual things to even our greatest necessities. 
For the devil watchfully presses close upon us, wishing to 
find any opening, and if he causes a slight negligence, he 
ends in producing a great weakness. AMBROSE; The per- 
formance of a father’s burial is not then prohibited, but 

the observance of religious duty is preferred to the ties 

of relationship. The one is left to those in like condition, 

the other is commanded to those who are left. But how can 

the dead bury the dead? unless you here understand a two- 

fold death, one a natural death, the other the death of sin. Rom. 9, 
There is also a third death, by which we die unto sin, live | 
unto God. 


Chrys. 


342 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Ix. 


Curys. By thus saying, their dead, he shews that this 


ubi sup- nan’s father was not his dead, for I suppose that the 


Exod. 


20, 12. 


deceased was of the number of the unbelieving. AMBROSE; 
Or because the throat of the ungodly is an open sepulchre, 
their memory is ordered to be forgotten whose services die 
together with their bodies. Nor is the son recalled from his 
duty to his father, but the faithful is separated from the 
communion of the unbelieving; there is no prohibition of 
duty, but a mystery of religion, that is, that we should have 
no fellowship with the dead Gentiles. CyriL; Or else, his 
father was borne down with years, and he thought he was 
doing an honourable act in proposing to pay the kind offices 
which were due to him, according to Exodus, Honour thy 
father and thy mother. Wence when calling him to the ministry 
of the Gospel, our Lord said, Follow me, he sought for a time ~ 
of respite, which should suffice for the support of his decrepit 
father, saying, Permit me first to go and bury my father, 
not that he asked to bury his deceased father, for Christ 
would not have hindered the wish to do this, but he said, 
Bury, that is, support in old age even till death. But the 
Lord said to him, Let the dead bury their dead. For there 
were Other attendants also bound by the same tie of relation- 
ship, but as I consider dead, because they had not yet 
believed Christ. Learn from this, that our duty to God is to 
be preferred to our love for our parents, to whom we shew 
reverence, because through them have we been born. But the 
God of all, when as yet we were not, brought us into being, 
our parents were made the ministers of our introduction. 


Aug.de Aug. Our Lord spoke this to the man to whom He had said, 


Con.E 
L.ii.c.2 


3 Follow me. But another disciple put himself forward, to 


whom no one had spoken any thing, saying, I will follow 
thee, O Lord; but let me first go and bid them farewell who 
are at home, lest perchance they look for me as they are wont. 
CyRrIL; Now this promise is worthy of our admiration and 
full of all praise, but to bid farewell to those who are at 
home, to get leave from them, shews that he was still some- 
how divided from the Lord, in that he had not yet resolved 
to make this venture with his whole heart. For to wish to 
consult relations who would not agree to his proposal be- 
tokens one somewhat wavering. Wherefore our Lord con- 


VER. 57—62. ST. LUKE. 343 


demns this, saying, No man, having put his hand to the 
plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom Qf God. 
He puts his hand to the plough who is ambitious to follow, 
yet looks back again who seeks an excuse for delay in 
returning home, and consulting with his friends. Auc. As if Aug. 
he said to him, The East calls thee, and thou tumest to the a 
West. BEDE: To put one’s hand to the plough, is also, (as 
it were by a certain sharp instrument,) by the wood and iron 
of our Lord’s passion, to wear away the hardness of our 
heart, and to open it to bring forth the fruits of good works. 
But if any one, having begun to exercise this, delights to look 
back with Lot’s wife to the things which he had left, he is 
deprived of the gift of the kingdom to come. GREEK EX. Nilus 
For the frequent looking upon the things which we have “o* 
forsaken, through the force of habit draws us back to our 
past way of life. For practice has great power to retain to 
itself. Is not habit generated of use, and nature of habit? 
But to get rid of or change nature is difficult; for although 
when compelled it for a while turns aside, it very rapidly 
returns to itself. 

BepE; But if the disciple about to follow our Lord is 
reproved for wishing even to bid farewell at home, what will 
be done to such as for no advantage-sake frequently visit the 
houses of those whom they have left in the world? 


Vulg. 
septua- 
ginta 
duos. 


CHAP. X. 


1. After these things the Lord appointed other 
seventy also, and sent them two and two before his 
face into every city and place, whither he himself 
would come. 

2. Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly 
is great, but the labourers are few: pray ye therefore 
the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth 
labourers into his harvest. 


CyriL; God had made known by the Prophets that the 
preaching of the Gospel of salvation was to embrace not only 
Israel, but also the Gentile nations; and therefore after the 
twelve Apostles, there were other seventy-two also appointed 
by Christ, as it is said, After these things the Lord ap- 
pointed other seventy-two also. BEDE; Rightly are seventy- 
two sent, for to so many nations of the world was the Gospel 
to be preached, that as at first twelve were appointed because 
of the twelve tribes of Israel, so, these also were ordained 
as teachers for the instruction of the foreign nations. 


Aug. de Aug. As also in twenty-four hours the whole world moves 
est. . e . ° 
Ev. 1. ii, round and receives light, so the mystery of enlightening the 


q: 14. 


world by the Gospel of the Trinity, is hinted at in the seventy- 
two disciples. For three times twenty-four makes seventy- 
two. Now as no one doubts that the twelve Apostles fore- 
shadowed the order of Bishops, so also we must know that 
these seventy-two represented the presbytery, (that is, the 
second order of priests.) Nevertheless, in the earliest times 
of the Church, as the Apostolical writings bear witness, both 
were called presbyters, both also called bishops, the former 


VER. 1, 2. GOSPEL ACCORDING TO 8T. LUKE. 345 


of these signifying “ ripeness of wisdom,” the latter, “ dili- 
gence in the pastoral care.” Cyrit; An outline of this ordi- 
nance also was set forth in the words of Moses, who at the 
command of God chose out seventy, upon whom God poured 

out His Spirit. In the book of Numbers also it was written Numb. 
of the children of Israel, that they came to Elim, which is*” ” 
by interpretation “ ascent,” and there were there twelve 
fountains of water, and seventy palm trees. For when we 

fly to spiritual refreshment, we shall find twelve fountains, 
namely, the holy Apostles, from whom we imbibe the know- 
ledge of salvation as from the well-springs of the Saviour; and 
seventy palms, that is, those who were now appointed by; Isai. 12, 
Christ. For the palm is a tree of sound core, striking deep 

root and fruitful, always growing by the water side, yet at the 
same time putting forth its leaves upwards. | 

It follows, And he sent them two and two. Grec. He eG 
sends the disciples to preach two and two, because there are >in 
two commands of charity, the love of God, and love of our =™ 
neighbour ; (and charity cannot exist without at least two 5) 
thereby silently suggesting to us, that he who has not love to 
another, ought not to undertake the office of preaching. 
OriGEN ; Likewise also the twelve were reckoned by two and 
two, as Matthew shews in his enumeration of them. For that Matt. 
two should be joined in service, seems from the word of God to eee 
be an ancient custom. For God led Israel out of Egypt by 13, Vy 
the hands of Moses and Aaron. Joshua and Caleb also, united Prov. 18, 
together, appeased the people who had been provoked by the '” 
twelve spies. Hence it is said, A brother assisted oy a 
brother is as a fortified city. 

BasiL; At the same time it is implied by this, that if any 
are equal in spiritual gifts, they should not suffer a fondness 
for their own opinion to get the better of them. GRrkEc. It is Greg. 
rightly added, before his face into every city and place, ee 
whither he himself would come. For the Lord follows His 
preachere, since the preaching comes first, and then the 
Lord enters into the tabernacle of our heart; seeing that 
through the words of exhortation going before, truth is re- 
ceived into the mind. Hence Esaias says to. the preachers, 
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight a highway for Isa. 40, 
our God. Tueoruyt. The Lord had appointed the disciples * 


Vulg: 


346 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


for the sake of the multitude, who were in want of teachers. 
For as our corn fields require many reapers, so the innume- 
rable company of those who are to believe need many teachers, 
as it follows, The harvest truly is great. Curys. But how 
does He give the name of harvest to a work only just now at 
its beginning? the plough not yet put down, nor the furrows 
turned, He yet speaks of harvests, for His disciples might waver 
and say, How can we sosmall a number convert the whole world, 
how can foolish men reform the wise, naked men those that are 
armed, subjects their rulers? Lest they should be disturbed 
then by such thoughts, He calls the Gospel a harvest; as if He 
says, All things are ready, I send you to a gathering Of fruits 
already prepared. Ye can sow and reap the same day. 
As then the husbandman goes out to harvest rejoicing, much 
more also and with greater cheerfulness must you go out 
into the world. For this is the true harvest, which 
tack shews the fields all prepared for you. GreG. But not 
P without deep sorrow can we add, but the labourers are 
few. For although there are who would hear good things, 
they are wanting who should spread them. Behold the 
world is full of priests, but seldom is there found a labourer 
in God’s harvest, because we undertake indeed the priestly 
office, but we perform not its works. BEDE; Now as the 
great harvest is this whole multitude of believers, so the few 
labourers are the Apostles, and their followers who are sent 

to this harvest. 
Cyril. CyriL; As the large fields require many reapers, so also 
Tit, do the multitude of believers in Christ. Hence He adds, 
Bost. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would 
send forth labourers into his harvest. Now mark that when 
He said, Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that 
he would send forth labourers into the harvest, He after- 
wards Himself performed it. He then is the Lord of the 
harvest, and by Him, and together with Him, God the Father 
Chrys. rules over all. CHrys. But he afterwards increased them 
$9. in greatly, not by adding to their number, but awarding to them 
Matt. power. He implies that it is a great gift to send la- 
bourers into the divine harvest, by His saying that the Lord of 
Greg. the harvest must be prayed to upon this account. GRrxG. 
ubi sup. Hereby also the people must be induced to pray for 


VER. 3, 4. ST. LUKE. 347 


their pastors, that they may be able to work what is good for 
them, and that their tongue grow not lifeless in exhortation. 
For often for their own wickedness their tongue is tied. But 
often for the fault of the people it comes to pass that the 
word of preaching is withdrawn from their rulers. 


3. Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as 
Jambs among wolves. 

4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and 
salute no man by the way. 


Cyrrit; Luke next relates, that the seventy disciples ob- 
tained for themselves from Christ apostolical learning, lowli- 
ness, innocency, justice, and to prefer no worldly things to 
holy preachings, but to aspire to such fortitude of mind as to 
be afraid of no terrors, not even death itself. He adds 
therefore, Go. Curys. For their comfort amid every dan- Chrys. 
ger was the power of Him who sent them. And therefore a 
saith He, Behold, I send you; as if he said, This will Matt. 
suffice for your consolation, this will be enough to make you 
hope, instead of fearing the coming evils which He signifies, 
adding, as lambs among wolves. 

IstpoRE; Denoting the simplicity and innocence in His tee 
disciples. For those who were riotous, and by their enor-}, ;. ep. 
mities did despite to their nature, He calls not lambs, but *°°- 
goats. 

AMBROSE; Now these animals are at variance among them- 
selves, so thatthe oneis devoured by the other, the lambs 
by the wolves; but the good Shepherd has no fear of wolves 
for His flock. And therefore the disciples are appointed not 
to make prey, but to impart grace. For the watchfulness 
of the good Shepherd causes the wolves to attempt nothing 
against the lambs; He sends them as lambs amid wolves 
that that prophecy might be fulfilled, The wolf and the are. 
lamb shall feed together. Curys. For this was a clear Chrys. 
announcement of glorious triumph, that the disciples of ug 
Christ, when surrounded by their enemies as lambs among Mate. 
wolves, should still convert them. BEDE; Or He especially 
gives the name of wolves to the Scribes and Pharisees, who 


Greg. 
Hom. 
17.inEv. 


348 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. x. 


are the Jewish clergy. AMBROSE; Or the heretics are com- 
pared to wolves. For wolves are beasts who lay in wait near 
the sheep folds, and prow] about the shepherds’ cottages. 
They dare not enter the abodes of men, they pry out sleeping 
dogs, absent or slothful shepherds; they seize the sheep by 
the throat, that they may quickly strangle them; ravenous 
beasts, with bodies so stiff that they cannot easily turn themselves, 
but are carried along by their own impetus, and so are often 
deceived. If they are the first to see a man, it is said, they by 
a certain natural impulse, tear out his voice; but if a man first 
sees them, they quake with fear. In like manner the heretics 
lurk about Christ’s sheep folds, how] near the cottages at night 
time. For night is the time for the treacherous who obscure 
the light of Christ with the mists of false interpretation. 
The inns of Christ, however, they dare not enter, and therefore 
are not healed, as he was in an inn who fell among thieves. 
They look out for the shepherds’ absence, for they can 
not attack the sheep when the shepherds are by. Owing also 
to the inflexibility of a hard and obstinate mind, they seldom 
if ever turn from their error, while Christ the true interpreter 
of Scripture mocks them, so that they vent forth their violence 
in vain, and are not able to hurt ; and if they overtake any one 
by the subtle trickery oftheir disputations, they make him dumb. 
For he is dumb who confesses not the word of God with the glory 
which belongs to it. Beware then lest the heretic deprive you 
of your voice, and lest you detect him not first. For he is creep- 
ing on while his treachery is disguised. But if you have 
discovered his unholy desires, you can not fear the loss of 
a holy voice. ‘They attack the throat, they wound the vitals 
while they seek the soul. If also you hear any one called a 
priest, and you know his robberies, outwardly he is a 
sheep, inwardly a wolf, who is longing to gratify his rage with 
the insatiable cruelty of human murder. 

GreEG. For many when they receive the right of rule, are 
vehement in persecuting their subjects, and manifesting the 
terrors of their power. And since they have no bowels of 
mercy, their desire is to seem to be masters, forgetting alto- 
gether that they are fathers, changing an occasion for humi- 
lity, into an exaltation of power. We must on the other hand 
consider, that as lambs are sent among wolves because they 


VER. 8, 4. ST. LUKE. 349 


preserve the feeling of innocence, so we should make no malici- 
ous attacks. For he who undertakes the office of preacher 
ought not to bring evils upon others, but to endure them; 
who although at times an upright zeal demands that he 
should deal harshly with his subjects, should still inwardly in 
his heart love with a fatherly feeling those whom outwardly 
he visits with censure. And that ruler gives a good example 
of this, who never submits the neck of his soul to the yoke 
of earthly desire. Hence it is added, Carry neither purse nor 
scrip. GREG. Naz. The sum of which is, that men ought to Gree. 
be so virtuous that the Gospel should make no less progress 
through their way of life than their preaching. Grea. For the ha 
preacher (of the Gospel) ought to have such trust in God, \7.inEv. 
that although he has provided not for the expenses of this pre- 
sent life, he should still be most certainly convinced that these 
will not fail him; lest while his mind is engaged in His tem- 
poral things, he should be less careful for the spiritual things 
of others. 

Cyrit; Thus He had already commanded them to have 
no care for these persons, when He said, J send you as lambs 
among wolves. And He also forbade all care about what is 
external to the body, by saying, Take neither purse nor scrip. 
Nor did He allow men to take with them any of those things 
which were not attached to the body. Hence He adds, Nor 
shoes. He not only forbade them to take purse and scrip, 
but He did not allow them to receive any distraction in their 
work, such as interruption by greetings on their way. Hence 
He adds, Sulute no one by the way. Which had long ago 
been said by Elisha. As if He said, Proceed straight on to2 Kings 
your work without exchanging blessings with others. For ’ a 
it is a loss to waste the time which 1s fitter for preaching, in 
unnecessary things. AMBROSE; Our Lord did not then forbid 
these things because the exercise of benevolence was dis- 
pleasing to Him, but because the motive of following after 
devotedness was more pleasing. GreEc. Naz. The Lord Greg. 
gave them these commands also for the glory of the word," 
lest it should seem that enticements could more prevail over 
them. He wished them also not to be anxious to speak 
others. 


Gree. If any one would have these words taken also Gre 
i sup. 


350 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. x. 


allegorically, the money shut up in a purse is the hidden 
wisdom. He then who has the word of wisdom, and neglects 
to employ it for his neighbour, is like one who keeps his 
money tied up in his purse. But by the scrip is meant the 
troubles of the world, by the shoes (made of the skins of 
dead animals) are signified the examples of dead works. 
He then who undertakes the office of preacher ought not to 
bear the burden of business, lest while this presses down 
his neck he should not rise to the preaching of heavenly things; 
nor ought he to behold the example of foolish works, lest he 
think to shield his own works as by dead skins, that is, lest 
because he observes that others have done these things, he 
imagine that he also is at liberty to do the same. AMBROSE; 
Our Lord also would have nothing human in us. For Moses 
is bid to loose off the human and earthly shoe when he was 


Exod.3, Sent to deliver the people. But if any one is perplexed 


5. 
Exod. 


12, 11. 


Greg. 


why in Egypt we are ordered to eat the lamb with shoes 
on, but the Apostles are appointed to preach the Gospel 
without shoes: he must consider, that one in Egypt ought 
still to beware of the serpent’s bite, for there were many 
poisonous creatures in Egypt. And he who celebrates the 
Passover in figure may be exposed to the wound, but the 
minister of truth fears no poison. 

Grec. Now every one who salutes on the way does so 


ubi “UP from the accident of the journey, not for the sake of wishing 


health. He then who not from love of a heavenly country, 
but from seeking reward, preaches salvation to his hearers, 
does as it were salute on the journey, since accidentally, 
not from any fixed intention, he desires the salvation of his 
hearers. 


5. And into whatever house ye enter, first say, 
Peace be to this house. 

6. And if the son of peace be there, your peace 
shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again. 

7. And in the same house remain, eating and 


‘drinking such things as they give; for the labourer 


is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. 


VER. 5—12. ST. LUKE. 351 


8. And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they 
receive you, eat such things as are set before you: 

9. And heal the sick that are therein, and say 
unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto 
you. 

10. But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they 
receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of 
the same, and say, 

11. Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth 
on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding 
be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come 
nigh unto you. 

12. But I say unto you, that it shall be more 
tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city. 


Curys. Peace is the mother of all good things, without it Chrys. 
all other things are vain. Our Lord therefore commanded His eee 
disciples on entering a house first to pronounce peace as a Matt. 
sign of good things, saying, Into whatever house ye enter, 
Jirst say, Peace be to this house. AmBRosE; That in truth 
we should convey the message of peace, and that our very 
first entrance be attended with the blessing of peace. CHrys, Chrys. 
And hence he who presides in the Church gives it, saying, eae 
Peace unto all. Now holy men ask for peace, not only that i 
which dwells among men in mutual intercourse, but that which cont. 
belongs to ourselves. For oftentimes we wage war in our?" 
hearts, and are disturbed even when no one troubles us; bad 
desires also frequently rise up against us. Tit. Bos. But it is 
said, Peace he to this house, that is, to them that dwell in the 
house. As if he says, I speak unto all, both the greater and 
the less, yet should not your salutation be addressed to them 
that are unworthy of it. Hence it is added, And if the son 
of peace be there, your peace shall rest uponit. As if he 
says, You indeed shall utter the word, but the blessing of 
peace shall be applied wherever I shall deem men worthy of it. 
But if any one is not worthy, ye are not mocked, the grace 


3. 


Greg. 
hhow. 
17, in 
Ev. 


Chre- e 
ubi sup. 


Greg. 
ubi sup. 


$52 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


of your word has not perished, but is returned unto you. 
And this is what is added, But tf not, it shall return unto 
you again. Grea. For the peace which is offered by the 
mouth of the preacher shall either rest on the house, if there 
be any one in it predestined to life, who follows the 
heavenly word which he hears; or if no one be willing 
indeed to hear, the preacher himself shall not be without 
fruit, for the peace returns to him, while the Lord gives him 
the recompense of reward for the labour of his work. But if 
our peace is received, it is meet that we should obtain earthly 
supplies from those to whom we offer the rewards of a 
heavenly country. Hence it follows: And in the same house 
remain, eating and drinking such things as they give. 
Mark, that He who forbade them to carry purse and scrip, 
allows them to be an expense to others, and to receive suste- 
nance from preaching. CuHrys. But lest any one should say, 
I am spending my own property im preparing a table for 
strangers, He first makes them offer the gift of peace, to which 
nothing is equal, that you may know that you receive greater 
things than you give. Tit. Bost. Or else; Since you are 
not appointed judges as to who are worthy and who are 
unworthy, eat and drink what things they offer to you. 
But leave to me the trial of those who receive you, unless 
you happen also to know that the son of peace is not there, 
for perhaps in that case you ought to depart. 

THEOPHYL. See then how He taught His disciples to beg, 
and wished them to receive their nourishment as a reward. 
For it is added, For the labourer is worthy of his hire. 
GREG. For now the very food which supports him is part of 
the wages of the labourer, as in this life the hire commences 
with the labour of preaching, which in the next is com- 
pleted with the sight of truth. And here we must con- 
sider that two rewards are due to one work of ours, one on the 
journey, which supports us in labour, the other in our country, 
which recompenses us at the resurrection. Therefore the 
reward which we receive now ought so to work in us, that we 
the more vigorously strive to gain the succeeding reward. 
Every true preacher then ought not so to preach, that he may 
receive a reward at the present time, but so to receive a reward 


VER. 5—12. ST. LUKE. 353 


that he may have strength to preach. For whoever so 
preaches that here he may receive the reward of praise, or 
riches, deprives himself of an eternal reward. 

AMBROSE; Another virtue is added, that we should not go 
about easily, changing from house to house. For it follows, 

Go not from house to house; that is, that we should pre- 
serve a consistency in our love towards our hosts, nor lightly 
loose any bond of friendship. 

BEbDE; Now having described the reception from different 
houses, he teaches them what they ought to do in the cities ; 
namely, to have intercourse with the good in all, but to keep 
from the society of the wicked in every thing; as it follows, 
But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat 
such things as are set before you. THrornHyL. Although 
they be few and poor, ask for nothing more; He also tells 
them to work miracles, and their word shall draw men to their 
preaching. Hence he adds, And heal the sick that are 
therein, and say to them, The kingdom of God is come nigh 
unto you. For if you first heal and then teach, the word 
will prosper, and men believe that the kingdom of God 
is come nigh. For they would not be cured unless by 
the working of some divine power. But also when they 
are healed in their soul, the kingdom of God comes nigh 
unto them, for itis far off from him over whom sin has the 
dominion. Cxrys. Now mark the excellence of the Apostles. Chrys, 
They are bid to utter nothing relating to sensible things, such aa 
as Moses and the Prophets spoke of, namely, earthly goods, Matt. 
but certain new and marvellous things, namely, the kingdom 
of God. Max. Which itis said ts come nigh, not to shew the Max. 
shortness of time, for the kingdom of God cometh not with Te 
observation, but to mark the disposition of men towards the !9- 
kingdom of God, which is indeed potentially in all believers, 
but actually in those who reject the life of the body, and 
choose only the spiritual life ; who are able to say, Now I live, Gal 2, 
yet not I, but Christ liveth tn me. 

AMBROSE; He next teaches them to shake off the dust 
from their feet when the men of a city have refused to en- 
tertain them, saying, Into whatsoever city ye enter, and 
they receive you not, shake off the dust. Brpr; Either as a 
testimony to the earthly toil which they had in vain under- 

VOL. III. 2A 


354 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X 


gone for them, or to shew that so far from seeking any thing 
earthly from them, they suffer not even the dust from their 
land to cleave to them. Or by the feet is meant the very 
labour and walking to and fro of preaching; but the dust with 
which they are sprinkled is the lightness of worldly thoughts, 
from which even the greatest teachers cannot be free. ‘Those 
then who have despised the teaching, turn the labours and 
dangers of the teachers into a testimony of their condemn- 
ation. ORIGEN; By wiping off the dust of their feet against 
them, they in some sort say, The dust of your sins shall de- 
servedly come upon you. And mark that the cities which 
receive not the Apostles and sound doctrine have streets, 


Matt 7,according to Matthew, Broad is the way which leadeth 


Gen. 19. 


to destruction. 'THrEopayt. And as they who receive the 
Apostles are said to have the kingdom of God come nigh unto 
them as a blessing, so those who do not receive them are 
said to have it nigh unto them as a curse. Hence He adds, 
Notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God 
is come nigh unto you, as the coming of a king is to some for 
punishment, but to some for honour. Hence it is added re- 
specting their punishment, But I say unto you, It shall be 
more tolerable for Sodom, &c. Evses. For in the city of 
Sodom Angels were not without entertainment, but Lot was 
found worthy to receive them into his house. If then at the 
coming of the disciples into a city there shall not be found 
one to receive them, will not that city be worse than Sodom? 
These words persuaded them to attempt boldly the rule 
of poverty. For there could not be a city or village without 
some inhabitants acceptable to God. For Sodom could not 
exist without a Lot found in it, at whose departure the whole 
was suddenly destroyed. BrpE; The men of Sodom, 
although they were hospitable in the midst of all their wicked- 
ness of soul and body, yet were there no such guests found 
among them as the Apostles. Lot indeed was righteous 
both in seeing and hearing, yet he is not said to have taught 
or worked miracles. 


13. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, 
Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done 
in ‘Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, 


VER. 13— 16. ST. LUKE. 355d 


they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sack- 
cloth and ashes. 

14. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and 
Sidon at the judgment, than for you. 

15. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to 
heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell. 

16. He that heareth you heareth me; and he that 
despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth 
me despiseth him that sent me. 


AMBROSE; Our Lord warns us that they will meet with a 
heavier punishment who have refused to follow the Gospel 
than those who have chosen to break the law; saying, Woe 
unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! BrepE; Chora- 
zin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, Tiberias also which John 
mentions, are cities of Galilee situated on the shore of the 
lake of Gennesaret, which is called by the Evangelists the sea 
of Galilee or Tiberias. Our Lord thus mourns over these 
cities which after such great miracles and wonders repented 
not, and are worse than the Gentiles who break through the 
law of nature only, seeing that after despising the written 
law, they feared not to despise also the Son of God and His 
glory. Hence it follows, For if the mighty works had been 
done in Tyre and Sidon which have been done in you, they 
had a great while ago repented sitting in sackcloth and ashes, 

§c. By sackcloth, which is woven together from the hairs of 
goats, he signifies a sharp remembrance of previous sin. But 

by ashes, he hints at the consideration of death, by which we 

are reduced to dust. Again, by the sedéi2g down, he implies 

the lowliness of our conscience. Now we have seen in this 

day the word of the Saviour fulfilled, since Chorazin and 
Bethsaida, though our Lord was present among them, believed 

not, and Tyre and Sidon were friendly both to David and 1Kings 
Solomon, and afterwards believed in the disciples of Christ who” 
preached the Gospel there. 

Curys. Our Lord mourns over these cities for our example, Chrys. 
because shedding tears and bitter lamentations over those ae 
who are insensible to grief, is no slight antidote, tending Matt. 

2A2 


Aug. 
Serm. 
102. 


356 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. Xx. 


both to the correction of the insensible, and to the remedy 
and consolation of those who mourn over them. Again, He 
draws them over to what is good, not only by lament- 
ing over them, but also by alarming them. Hence it follows, 
But tt shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon, &c. This 
we ought also to listen to. For not upon them alone, but 
upon us also, He hath passed sentence, if we receive not the 
guests who come to us, since He commanded them to shake 
off the very dust from their feet. And in another place: Now 
when our Lord had done many mighty works in Capernaum, 
and had Himself dwelt there, it seemed to be exalted above 
the other cities, but through unbelief fell to destruction. 
Hence it follows, And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to 
heaven, shall be thrust down to hell; that, in fact, the 
judgment might be in proportion to the honour. BEDE; 
This sentence admits of two meanings: Either for this reason 
shalt thou be thrust down into hell, because thou proudly 
resisted My preaching; that in truth she might be un- 
derstood to have raised herself up to heaven by her pride. Or, 
because thou art exalted to heaven by My dwelling in thee, 
and by My miracles, shalt thou be beaten with more stripes, 
since even these thou refusedst to believe. And that no one 
should suppose that this interpretation applied only either to 
the cities or the persons who, seeing our Lord in the flesh 
despised Him, and not to all also who now despise the words 
of the Gospel, He proceeds to add these words, He that 
heareth you, heareth me. Cyrit; Whereby He teaches, | 
that whatever is said by the holy Apostles must be received, 
since he who heareth them heareth Christ, and an inevitable 
punishment therefore hangs over heretics who neglect the 
words of the Apostles; for it follows, and he who de- 
spises you despises me. BrEpDE; That is, that every one in- 
deed on hearing or despising the preaching of the Gospel 
might learn that he is not despising or hearing the mere 
individual preacher, but our Lord and Saviour, nay the 
Father Himself; for it follows, And he that despiseth me, 
despiseth him that sent me. For the Master is heard in His 
disciple, the Father honoured in His Son. Ave. But if the 
word of God reaches to us also, and appoints us in the 
Apostles place, beware of despising us, lest that reach unto 


VER. 17—20. ST. LUKE. $57 


Him which you have done unto us. BEbE; It may also be 
understood as follows, He who despiseth you, despiseth me, 

that is, he who shews not mercy to one of the least of My 
brethren, neither shews it to Me. But he who despiseth me, Matt. 
(refusing to believe on the Son of God,) despiseth him that aE ave 
sent me. For I and my Father are one. Tir. Bost. But Johnl0, 
at the same time He herein consoles His disciples, as if?” 
He said, Say not why are we about to suffer reproach. Let 

your speech be with moderation. I give you grace, upon Me 

your reproaches fall. 


17. And the seventy returned again with joy, say- 
ing, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through 
thy name. 

18. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as 
lightning fall from heaven. 

19. Behold, I give unto you power to tread on ser- 
pents and scorpions, and over all the power of the 
enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you. 

20. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the 
spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, 
because your naimes are written in heaven. 


CyRIL; It was said above that our Lord sent forth His dis- 
ciples sealed with the grace of the Holy Spirit, and that being 
made ministers of preaching, they received power over the 
unclean spirits. But now when they returned, they confess 
the power of Him who honoured them, as it is said, And the 
seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils 
are subject unto us, &c. They seemed indeed to rejoice rather 
that they were made workers of miracles, than that they had 
become ministers of preaching. But they had better have 
rejoiced in those whom they had taken, as St. Paul says to 
them that were called by him, My joy and my crown. Phil. 4, 

Grec. Now our Lord, in a remarkable manner, in order to ice 
put down high thoughts in the hearts of His disciples, 28.1 Mor. 
Himself related the account of the fall which the teacher of“ * 
pride suffered; that they might learn by the example of the 


358 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


author of pride, what they would have to dread from the sin 
of pride. Hence it follows, I beheld Satan as lightning 


Basil. fall from heaven. Basit; He is called Satan, because he is an 


Hom. 
Quod 
Deus 
non est 
auctor 
mali. 


2 Cor. 
11, 14. 


Basil. 
adv. 
Eunom. 
1. 3. 


Numb. 
21, 8. 


enemy to God, (for this the Hebrew word signifies,) but he 
is called the Devil, because he assists us in doing evil, and 1s 
an accuser. His nature is incorporeal, his abode in the air. 

BEDE; He says not, ‘I see now,’ but referring to past time, 
I saw, when he fell. But by the words as lightning, He 
signifies either a fall headlong from the high places to the 
lowest, or that now cast down, he transforms himself into an 
angel of light. Tit. Bost. Now He says that He saw it, as 
being Judge, for He knew the sufferings of the spirits. 
Or He says, as lightning, because by nature Satan shone as 
lightning, but became darkness through his affections, since 
what God made good he changed in himself to evil. Basti; 
For the heavenly Powers are not naturally holy, but accord- 
ing to the analogy of divine love they receive their measure 
of sanctification. And as iron placed in the fire does not 
cease to be iron, though by the violent application of the flame, 
both in effect and appearance, it passes into fire ; so also the 
Powers on high, from their participation in that which is natu- 
rally holy, have a holiness implanted in them. For Satan had 
not fallen, if by nature he had been unsusceptible of evil. 

CyriL; Orelse, I saw Satan as lightning fall from heaven, 
that is, from the highest power to the lowest impotence. 
For before the coming of our Saviour, he had subdued the 
world to him, and was worshipped by all men. But when 
the only-begotten Word of God came down from heaven, he 
fell as lightning, seeing that he is trodden under foot by those 
who worship Christ. As it follows, And, behold, I give unto 
you power to tread upon serpents, §c. 

Tit. Bost. Serpents indeed at one time under a figure 
were made to bite the Jews, and kill them because of 
their unbelief. But there came One who should destroy those 
serpents; even the Brazen Serpent, the Crucified, so that if 
any one should look on Him believing, he might be healed from 
his wounds and saved. CuHrys. Then lest we should suppose 
this was spoken of beasts, He added, And over all the power of 
the enemy. BEDE; Thatis, I give you the power of casting out 
every kind of unclean spirit, from the bodies possessed. And as 


VER. 17—20. ST. LUKE. 359 


faras regards themselves, He adds, And nothing shall hurt you. 
Although it might also be taken literally. For Paul when a 28, 
attacked by a viper suffered no injury. John having drunk © 
poison is not harmed by it*. But I think there is this 
difference between serpents who bite with the teeth, and 
scorpions who sting with the tail, that the serpents signify men 
ar spirits raging openly, scorpions signify them plotting in 
secret. Or serpents are those which cast the poison of evil 
persuasion upan virtues just beginning, scorpions which go 
about to corrupt at last virtues which have been brought 
to perfection. THEOPHYL. Or serpents are those which 
visibly hurt, as the evil spirit of adultery and murder. But 
those are called scorpions which invisibly injure, as in the 
sins of the spirit. Gree. Nyss. For pleasure is called in Greg. 
Scripture a serpent, which by nature is such that if its head rer 
has reached a wall so as to press upon it, it drags its whole 
body after it. So nature has given man the habitation which was 
necessary for him. But by means of this necessity, pleasure as- 
saults the heart, and perverts it to the indulgence of immoderate 
ornament; in addition to this it brings in its train covetousness, 
which is followed by lust, that is, the last member or 
tail of the beast. But as itis not possible to draw back the 
serpent by its tail, so to remove pleasure we must not begin 
with the last, unless one has closed the first entrance to evil. 
ATHAN. But now through the power of Christ boys Athan. 
; Orat. in © 
make a mock at pleasure, which formerly led away the aged, Pass. et 
and virgins stedfastly trample upon the desires of serpentine 5°°¢ . 
‘ omni. 
pleasure. Some also tread upon the very sting of the scor- 
pion, that is, of the devil, namely death, and fearing not de- 
struction, become witnesses of the word. But many giving up 
earthly things walk with a free step in heaven, dreading not 
the prince of the air. 
Tir. Bost. But because the Joy with which He saw 
them rejoice savoured of vain-glory, for they rejoiced that 
they were as it were exalted, and were a terror to men 
and evil spirits, our Lord therefore adds, Notwithstanding 
in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you, &c. 
BEDE; They are forbidden to rejoice in the subjection of 
the spirits to God, since they were flesh; for to cast 


* See Isidore de Vit. et Morte Sanct. §, 73. 


Ps. 89, 
16. 


360 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. xX. 


out spirits and to exercise other powers is sometimes 
not on account of his merit who works, but is wrought through 
the invocation of Chnist’s name to the condemnation of those 
who mock it, or to the advantage of those who see and hear. 
CyriL; Why, O Lord, dost not Thou permit men to rejoice in 
the honours which are conferred by Thee, since itis written, In 
thy name shall they rejoice all the day? But the Lord raises 
them up by greater joys. Hence He adds, But rejoice that 
your names are written in heaven. BEnvE; As if he said, It 
becomes you to rejoice not in the putting down of the evil 
spirits, but in your own exaltation. But it would be well for 
us to understand, that whether a man has done heavenly or 
earthly works, he is thereby, as if marked down by letter, for 
ever fixed inthe memory of God. THEOPHYL. For the names 
of the saints are written in the book of life not in ink, but in 
the memory and grace of God. And the devil indeed fell from 
above; but men being below have their names inscribed 


Basil. inabove in heaven. Basi; There are some who are written 


Esai. 4 


Jer. rit ’ indeed not in life, but according to Jeremiah in the earth, that 


Ps. 69, 
28. 


in this way there might be a kind of double enrolment, of 
the one indeed to life, but of the other to destruction. 

But since it is said, Let them be blotted out of the book of 
the living, thisis spoken of those who were thought worthy to 
be written in the book of God. And in this way a name is 
said to be put down in writing or blotted out, when we turn 
aside from virtue to sin, or the contrary. 


21. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, 
I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, 
that thou hast hid these things from the wise and 
prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even 
so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight. 

22. All things are delivered to me of my Father: 
and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father ; 
and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom 
the Son will reveal him. 


THEOoPAYL. As a loving father rejoices to see his sons do 
right, so Christ also rejvices that His Apostles were made 


VER. 21, 22. ST. LUKE. 361 


worthy of such good things. Hence it follows, Jn that 

hour, Sc. Cyrit; He saw in truth that through the 

operation of the Holy Spirit, which He gave to the holy 

Apostles, the acquisition of many would be made, (or that 

many would be brought to the faith.) He is said therefore to 

have rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, that is, in the results which 

came forth through the Holy Spirit. For as one who loved 

mankind He considered the conversion of sinners to be a 

subject for rejoicing, for which He gives thanks. As it 

follows, I give thanks unto thee, O Father. BEDE; Con-confteor 

fessing does not always signify penitence, but also thanks- |, 18, 

giving, as is frequently found in the Psalms. 49; 30, 
Cyrit; Now here, say they whose hearts are perverted, } 12; 62, 

the Son gives thanks to the Father as being inferior. But 

what should prevent the Son of the same substance with the 

Father from praising His own Father, who saves the world 

by Him? But if you think that because of His giving thanks 

He shews Himself to be inferior, observe, that He calls Him 

His Father, and the Lord of heaven and earth. Tir. Bost. non oce. 

For all other things have been produced by Christ from 

nothing, but He alone was incomprehensibly begotten of 

His Father; Who therefore of the Only-begotten alone, as a 

true Son, is by nature the Father. Hence He alone says to His 

Father, I give thanks to thee, O Father, Lord, &c. that is, I 

glorify thee. Marvel not that the Son glorifies the Father. 

For the whole substance of the Only-begotten is the glory 

of the Father. For both those things which were created, 

and the Angels, are the glory of the Creator. But since these 

are placed too low in respect of His dignity, the Son alone, 

since He is perfect God like His Father, perfectly glorifies 

His Father. AtHaN. We know also that the Saviour often ,... 

speaks as man. For His divine nature has human nature ae 

joined to it, yet you would not, because of His clothing Himself ¢ Sabul. 

with a body, be ignorant that He was God. But what do they 3. con. 

answer to this, who wish to make out a substance of evil, oe 

but form to themselves another God, other than the true 

Father of Christ? And they say that he is unbegotten, the 

creator of evil and prince of iniquity, as well as the maker of Gen. 

the world’s fabric. Now our Lord, affirming the word of}- 

Moses, says, I give thanks unto thee, Father, Lord of heaven 


’ 


Epiph. 
adv. 
Her.42. 


Chrys. 
Hom. 
38. in 
Matt. 


362 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. x. 


and earth. Erie. But a Gospel composed by Marcion 
has, “I give thanks to Thee, O Lord,” being silent as to the 
words of heaven and earth, and the word Father, lest it 
should be supposed that He calls the Father the Creator of 
the heaven and the earth. 

AMBROSE; Lastly, he unveils the heavenly mystery by 
which it pleased God to reveal His grace, rather to the little 
ones than the wise of the world. Hence it follows, That 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent. 
THEOPHYL. The distinction may be, that it is said, the wise, 
meaning, the Pharisees and Scribes who interpret the law, 
and the prudent, meaning those who were taught by the 
Scribes, for the wise man is he who teaches, but the prudent 
man he who is taught; but the Lord calls His disciples 
babes, whom He chose not from the teachers of the law, but 
out of the multitude, and by calling, fishermen; babes, that 
is, as devoid of malice. AMBROSE; Or by a babe we should 
here understand one who knew nothing of exalting himself, 
and of boasting in proud words of the excellence of his 
wisdom, as the Pharisees often do. BEDE; He therefore gives 
thanks that He had revealed to the Apostles as unto babes 
the sacraments of His coming, of which the Scribes and 
Pharisees were ignorant, who think themselves wise, and are 
prudent in their own sight. THropuy.t. ‘The mysteries then 
were hid from those who think themselves wise, and are not; 
for if they had been, these would have been revealed to them. 
Breve; To the wise and prudent then He opposed not the 
dull and foolish, but babes; that is, the humble, to shew that 
He condemned pride, not quickness of mind. ORIGEN; For 
a feeling of deficiency is the preparation for coming perfec- 
tion. For whoever by the presence of the apparent good 
perceives not that he is destitute of the true good, is deprived 
of the true good. 

Curys. Now He does not rejoice and give thanks because 
the mysteries of God were hid from the Scribes and Pharisees, 
(for this were not a subject of rejoicing, but of lament,) but 
for this cause gives He thanks, that what the wise knew not, 
babes knew. But moreover He gives thanks to the Father, 
together with whom He Himself does this, to shew the great 
love wherewith He loves us. He explains in the next place, 


VER. 21, 22. ST. LUKE. 3638 


that the cause of this thing was first His 6wn will and the 
Father’s, who of His own will did this. As it follows, Even 

so, Father; for so tt seemed good in thy sight. GREG. We Greg. 
receive these words as an example of humility, that we ea. 
should not rashly presume to scan the heavenly counsel, ¢- 14. 
concerning the calling of some, and the rejection of others; 

for that cannot be unjust which seemed good to the Just One. 

In all things therefore, externally disposed, the cause of the 
visible system is the justice of the hidden will. . 

Curys. But after He had said, J thank thee that thou hast chrys. 
revealed them to babes, lest you should suppose that Christ ae 
was destitute of the power to do this, He adds, All things are Matt. 
delivered to me of my Father. ATHAN. The followers of a¢han. 
Arius, not rightly understanding this, rave against our Lord, Ft. 

: é : ° ° . . in Matt. 
saying, [fall things were given to him, that is, the dominion 11, 22. 
of the creatures, there was a time when He had them not, and 
so was not of the substance of the Father. For if He had 
been, there would be no need for Him to receive. But hereby 
is their madness the rather detected. For if before He had 
received them, the creature was independent of the Word, 
how will that verse stand, Jn him all things consist ? But ifCol. 4, 
as soon as the creatures were made, they were all given to Him, 
where was the need to give, for by him were all things made ? John13. 
The dominion of the creation is not then, as they think, 
here meant, but the words signify the dispensation made in 
the flesh. For after that man sinned, all things were con- 
founded; the Word then was made flesh, that He might re- 
store all things. All things therefore were given Him, not: 
because He was wanting in power, but that as Saviour He 
should repair all things; that as by the Word all things at the 
beginning were brought into being, so when the Word was 
made flesh, He should restore all things in Himself. BepE; Or 
by the words, All things are delivered to me, He means not the 
elements of the world, but those babes to whom by the Spi- 
rit the Father made known the Sacraments of His Son; and 
in whose salvation when He here spoke He was rejoicing. 
AMBROSE; Or, when you read all things, you acknowledge the 
Almighty, not the Son lower than the Father; when you read 
delivered, you confess the Son, to whom by the nature of one 
substance all things rightly belong, not conferred as a gift by | 


Athan. 
Orat. 1. 
cont. 
Arian. 


Orig. 


364 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


grace. Cyri_; Now having said that all things were given 
Him by His Father, He rises to His own glory and excellence, 
shewing that in nothing He is surpassed by His Father. 
Hence He adds, And no one knoweth who the Son is but the 
Father, $c. For the mind of the creatures is not able to com- 
prehend the manner of the Divine substance, which passes 
all understanding, and His glory transcends our highest con- 
templations. By Itself only is known what the Divine nature is. 
Therefore the Father, by that which He is, knoweth the Son; 
the Son, by that which He is, knoweth the Father, no differ- 
ence intervening as regards the Divine nature. And in an- 
other place. For that God is, we believe, but what He is by 
nature, is incomprehensible. Butif the Son was created, how 
could He alone know the Father, or how could He be known 
only by the Father. For to know the Divine nature is 
impossible to any creature, but to know each created thing 
what it is, does not surpass every understanding, though 
it is far beyond our senses. ATHAN. But though our 
Lord says this, itis plain that the Arians object to Him, saying, 
that the Father is not seen by the Son. But their folly is 
manifest, as if the Word did not know Itself which reveals to 
all men the knowledge of the Father and Itself; for it follows, 
And to whomsoever the Son will revealhim. Tir. Bost. Now 
a revelation is the communication of knowledge in proportion 
to each man’s nature and capacity; and when indeed the nature 
is congenial, there is knowledge without teaching; but here 
the instruction is by revelation. OrIGEN; He wishes to 


& 
non 0CC. reveal as the Word, not without the exercise of reason; and as 


1 Cor. 
12, 8. 9 


Justice, who knoweth rightly both the times for revealing, 
and the measures of revelation; but He reveals by removing 


* the opposing veil from the heart, and the darkness which He 


has made His secret place. But since upon this men who 
are of another opinion think to build up their impious doc- 
trine, that in truth the Father of Jesus was sent down to the 
ancient saints, we must tell them that the words, To whom- 
soever the Son will reveal him, not only refer to the future 
time, after our Saviour uttered this, but also to the past time. 
But if they will not take this word reveal for what is past, they 
must be told, that it is not the same thing to know and 
to believe. To one is given by the Spirit the word of know- 


VER, 28, 24. | . $T. LUKE 365 


ledge; to another faith by the same Spirit. There were 
then those who believed, but did not know. AMBROSE; 
But that you may know that as the Son revealed the Father 
to whom He will, the Father also reveals the Son to whom He 
will, hear our Lord’s words, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, 
for flesh and blood have not revealed it to thee, but my 
Father which is in heaven. 


23. And he turned him unto his disciples, and 
said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see the 
things that ye see: | 

24. For I tell you, that many prophets and kings 
have desired to see those things which ye see, and 
have not seen them; and to hear those things which 
ye hear, and have not heard them. 


THEOPHYL. Having said above, No one knoweth who the 
Father is but the Son, and to whomsoever the Son will reveal 
him; He pronounces a blessing upon His disciples,to whom 
the Father was revealed through Him. Hence it is said, And 
he turned him unto his disciples,and said, Blessed are the eyes, 
&c. Cyrit; He turns to them indeed, since He rejected the 
Jews, who were deaf, with their understandings blinded, and 
not wishing to see, and gives Himself wholly to those who 
love Him; and He pronounces those eyes blessed which see 
the things no others had seen before. We must however 
know this, that seeing does not signify the action of the eyes, 
but the pleasure which the mind receives from benefits con- 
ferred. For instance, if any one should say, He hath seen 
good times, that is, he has rejoiced in good times, accord- 
ing to the Psalm, Thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem. For pa, 198, 
many Jews have seen Christ performing divine works, that is > 
to say, with their bodily sight, yet all were not fitted to re- 
ceive the blessing, for they believed not; but these saw not 
His glory with their mental sight. Blessed then are our eyes, 
since we see by faith the Word who 1s made man for us, shed- 
ding upon us the glory of His Godhead, that He may make us 
like unto Him by sanctification and righteousness. THEOPHYL. 


Matt. 
13, 17. 


Chrys. 


in Joan. 
Hom. 8. 


Origen. 
in Cant 


1. 2. 
one 


866 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


Now He blesses them, and all truly who look with faith, be- 
cause the ancient prophets and kings desired to see and hear 
God in the flesh, as it follows; For I say unto you, that 
many prophets and kings have desired, §&c. BEDE; Matthew 
more clearly calls them prophets, and righteous men. For 
those are great kings, who have known how, not by yielding 
to escape from the assaults of temptations, but by mas- 
tering to gain the rule over them. Curys. Now from this 
saying many imagine that the prophets were without the 
knowledge of Christ. But if they desired to see what the 
Apostles saw, they knew that He would come to men, and 
dispense those things which He did. For no one desires 
what he has no conception of; they therefore knew the Son 
of God. Hence He does not merely say, They desired to 
see me, but those things which ye see, nor to hear me, but 
those things which ye hear. For they saw Him, but not yet 
Incarnate, nor thus conversing with men, nor speaking with 
such authority to them. BrEpDE; For those looking afar off 
saw Him in a glass and darkly, but the Apostles having our 
Lord present with them, whatever things they wished to 
learn had no need to be taught by angels or any other 
kind of vision. ORIGEN; But why does he say that many 


‘prophets desired, and not all? Because it is said of Abra- 


ham, That he saw the day of Christ and was glad, which 
sight not many, but few attained to; but there were other 
prophets and just men not so great as to reach to Abra- 
ham’s vision, and the experience of the Apostles, who, He 
says, saw not, but desired to see. 


25. And, behold, a certain Lawyer stood up, and’ 
tempted him, saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit 
eternal life? 

26. He said unto him, What is written in the law? 
how readest thou? 

27. And he answering said, Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and 
thy neighbour as thyself. - | 


VER. 25—2Q8. ST. LUKE. 367 


28. And he said unto him, Thou hast answered 
right: this do, and thou shalt live. 


BEDE; Our Lord had told His disciples above that their 
names were written in Heaven; from this it seems to me the 
lawyer took occasion of tempting our Lord, as it is said, 
And, behold, a certuin lawyer stood up, and tempted him. 
CyrixL; For there were in fact certain men who then went 
about the whole country of the Jews bringing charges against 
Christ, and saying that He spoke of the commands of Moses 
as useless, and Himself introduced certain strange doctrines. 

A lawyer then, wishing to entrap Christ into saying some- 
thing against Moses, comes and tempts Him, calling Him 
Master, though not bearing to be His disciple. And because 
our Lord was wont to speak to those who came to Him concern- 
ing eternal life, the lawyer adopts this kind of language. And 
since he tempted Him subtly, he receives no other answer than 
the command given by Moses; for it follows, He said unto him, 
What is written in the law? how readest thou? AMBROSE; 
For he was one of those who think themselves skilled in the law, 
and who keep the letter of the law, while they know nothing 
of its spirit. From a part of the law itself our Lord proves 
them to be ignorant of the law, shewing that at the very first 
the law preached the Father and the Son, and announced the 
sacraments of the Lord’s Incarnation; for it follows, And he 
answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, and utith all thy soul, and with all thy strength, 
and with all thy mind. BasiL; By saying, with all thy Basil. in 
mind, he does not admit of any division of love to other things, F* 4* 
for whatever love you cast on lower things necessarily 
takes away from the whole. For as a vessel full of liquid, 
whatever flows therefrom must so much diminish its fulness ; 
so also the soul, whatever love it has wasted upon things un- 
lawful, has so much lessened its love to God. 

GREG. Nyss. Now the soul is divided into three faculties; Greg.de 
one merely of growth and vegetation, such as is found in Opife.8. 
plants; another which relates to the senses, which is pre- 
served in the nature of irrational animals; but the perfect 
faculty of the soul is that of reason, which is seen in human 


Basil. 
Reg.fus. 
adint .2. 


adint.3. 


Chrys. 


368 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. x. 


nature. By saying then the heart, He signified the bodily 
substance, that is, the vegetative; by the soul the middle, or 
the sensitive; but by saying the mind, the higher nature, that 
is, the intellectual or reflective faculty. THEOPHYL. We must 
hereby understand that it becomes us to submit every power 
of the soul to the divine love, and that resolutely, not slackly. 
Hence it is added, And with all thy strength. Maxim. To 
this end then the law commanded a threefold love to God, that 
it might pluck us away from the threefold fashion of the 
world, as touching possessions, glory, and pleasure, wherein 
also Christ was tempted. 

BasiL; But if any one ask how the love of God is to be 
obtained, we are sure that the love of God cannot be taught. 
For neither did we learn to rejoice in the presence of light, 
or to embrace life, or to love our parents and children; 
much less were we taught the love of God, but a certain 
seminal principle was implanted in us, which has within it- 
self the cause, that man clings to God; which principle the 
teaching of the divine commands is wont to cultivate 
diligently, to foster watchfully, and to carry on to the perfec- 
tion of divine grace. For naturally we love good; we love 
also what is our own, and akin to us; we likewise of our own 
accord pour forth all our affections on our benefactors. If then 
God is good, but all things desire that good, which is wrought 
voluntarily, He is by nature inherent in us, and although from 
His goodness we are far from knowing Him, yet from the very 
fact that we proceeded forth from Him, we are bound to 
love Him with exceeding love, as in truth akin to us; He is 
likewise also a greater benefactor than all whom by nature we 
love here. And again. The love of God then is the first 
and chief command, but the second, as filling up the first 
and filled up by it, bids us to love our neighbour. Hence 
it follows, And thy neighbour as thyself. But we have an 
instinct given us by God to perform this command, as who 
does not know that man is a kind and social animal? For 
nothing belongs so much to our nature as to communicate 
with one another, and mutually to need and love our re- 
lations. Of those things then of which in the first place He 
gave us the seed, He afterwards requires the fruits. 

Curys. Yet observe how, almost to the same extent of 


VER. 29—37. ST. LUKE. 369 


obedience he requires the performance of each command. 
For of God he says, with all thy heart. Of our neighbour, 
as thyself. Which if it were diligently kept, there would be 
neither slave nor free man, neither conqueror nor conquered, 
(or rather, neither prince nor subject,) rich nor poor, nor 
would the devil be even known, for the chaff would rather 
stand the touch of fire than the devil the fervour of love; so 


surpassing all things is the constancy of love. GREG. But Greg. 
since it is said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, EE 
how is he merciful in taking compassion upon another, whoc. 14. 


still, by unrighteous living, is unmerciful to himself? 

Cyrit; When the lawyer had answered the things con- 
tained in the law, Christ, to whom all things were known, 
cuts to pieces his crafty nets. For it follows, And he said to 
him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt 
live. ORIGEN; From these words it is undoubtingly gathered, 
that the life which is preached according to God the Creator 
of the world, and the Scriptures given by Him, is life ever- 
lasting. For the Lord Himself bears testimony to the 


passage from Deuteronomy, Thou shalt love the Lord thy peut, 6, 


God; and from Leviticus, Thou shalt love thy neighbour * ‘ 
vel ) 


as thyself. But these things were spoken against the fol-); 


lowers of Valentinus, Basil, and Marcion. For what else 
did he wish us to do in seeking eternal life, but what is con- 
tained in the Law and the Prophets ? 


29. But he, willing to justify himself, said unto 
Jesus, And who is my neighbour ? 

30. And Jesus answering said, A certain man went 
down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among 
thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and 
wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. 

31. And by chance there came down a certain 
Priest that way : and when he saw him, he passed by 
on the other side. 

32. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the 
place, came and looked on him, and passed by on 
the other side. 

VOL, Ll. 28 


e 


1 John 
4, 20. 


870 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


33. Buta certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came 
where he was; and when he saw him, he had con- 
passion on him, 

34. And went to him, and bound up his wounds, 
pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, 
and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. 

35. And on the morrow when he departed, he 
took out two pencé, and gave them to the host, and 
said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever 
thou spendest more, when J come again, I will repay 
thee. 


36. Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was 
neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves ? 

37. Aud he said, He that shewed mercy on him. 
Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise. 


CyriL; The lawyer, when praised by our Saviour for having 
answered right, breaks forth into pride, thinking that he had 
no neighbour, as though there was no one to be compared to 
him in righteousness. Hence it is said, But he willing to 
justify himself said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour ? 
For somehow first one sin and then another takes him 
captive. From the cunning with which he sought to tempt 
Christ, he falls into pride. But here when asking, who zs my 
neighbour, he proves himself to be devoid of love for his 
neighbour, since he did not consider any one to be his 
neighbour, and consequently of the love of God; for he 
who loves not his brother whom he sees, cannot love God 
whom he does not see. AMBROSE; He answered that he 
knew not his neighbour, because he believed not on Christ, 
and he who knows not Christ knows not the law, for being 
ignorant of the truth, how can he know the law which makes 
known the truth? 

THEOPHYL. Now our Saviour defines a neighbour not in 
respect of actions or honour, but of nature; as if He says, 
Think not that because thou art righteous thou hast no 
neighbour, for all who partake of the same nature are thy 


VER, 29—37. ST. LUKE. | 371 


neighbours. Be thou also their neighbour, not in place, but 
in affection and solicitude for them. And in addition to this, 
he brings forward the Samaritan as an example. As it 
follows, And Jesus answering him said, A certain man 
went down, §c. GREEK Ex. He has well used the general Severus. 
term. For He says not, “ a certain one went down,” but, a 
certain man, for his discourse was of the whole human race. 
Ava. For that man is taken for Adam himself, representing Aug. de 
the race of man; Jerusalem, the city of peace, that heavenly ; ae 
country, from the bliss of which he fell. Jericho is inter- 
preted to be the moon, and signifies our mortality, because 
it rises, increases, wanes, and sets. 

Psgupo-AuG. Or Jerusalem, which is by interpretation Hypog- 
“ the sight of peace,” we mean Paradise, for before man simed3. 
he was in sight of peace, that is, in paradise ; whatever he saw 
was peace, and going thence he descended (as if brought 
low and made wretched by sin) into Jericho, that is, the 
world, in which all things that are born die as the moon. 
THEOPHYL. Now he says not “ descended,” but “ was 
descending.” For human nature was ever tending down- 
wards, and not for a time only, but throughout busied about 
a life liable to suffering. Basit; This interpretation corre- 
sponds tothe places, if any one willexamine them. For Jericho 
lies in the low parts of Palestine, Jerusalem is seated on an 
eminence, occupying the crest of a mountain. The man 
then came from the high parts to the low, to fall into the 
hands of the robbers who infested the desert. As it follows, 
And he fell among thieves. : 

Curys. First, we must needs pity the ill fortune of the Chrys. 

Hom. in 
man who fell nnarmed and helpless among robbers, and who joc, Fa. 
was so rash and unwise as to choose the road in which he !*t- 
could not escape the attack of robbers. For the unarmed 
can never escape the armed, the heedless the villain, the 
unwary the malicious. Since malice is ever armed with 
guile, fenced round with cruelty, fortified with deceit, and 
ready for fierce attack. AMBROSE; But who are those 
robbers but the Angels of night and darkness, among whom 
he had not fallen, unless by deviating from the divine com- 
mand he had placed himself in their way. Curys. At the Chrys, 
beginning of the world then the devil accomplished his"! sp- 
2B2 


Aug. 


ubi sup. 


372 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. x, 


treacherous attack upon man, against whom he practised the 
poison of deceit, and directed all the deadliness of his malice. 

AuG. He fell then among robbers, that is, the devil and his 
angels, who through the disobedience of the first man, stripped 
the race of mankind of the ornaments of virtue, and wounded 
him, that is, by ruining the gift of the power of free will. Hence 
it follows, eho stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, 
and departed, for to that man sinning he gave a wound, but 
to us many wounds, since to one sin which we contract we 


Aug. - add many. <Avuc. Or they stripped man of his immor- 


q. Ev. 
Ait 


ubi sup. 


Rom. 5, 


12. 


Chrys. 


ubi sup. 


‘tality, and wounding him (by persuading to sin) left him 
half dead; for wherein he is able to understand and know 
God, man is alive, but wherein he is corrupted and pressed 
down bysins, he is dead. And this is what is added, leaving him 
halfdead. Psrvpo-Auc. For the half dead has his vital func- 
tion (that is, free will) wounded, in that he is not able to return 
to the eternal life which he has lost. And therefore he lay, 
because he had not strength of his own sufficient to rise and 
seek a physician, that is, God, to heal him. ‘THEOPHYL. Or 
man after sin is said to be half dead, because his soul is im- 
mortal, but his body mortal, so that the half of man is under 
death. Or, because his human nature hoped to obtain sal- 
vation in Christ, so as not altogether to lie under death. But 
in that Adam had sinned death entered in the world, in 
the righteousness of Christ death was to be destroyed. 
AMBROSE ; Or they stripped us of the garments which we have 
received of spiritual grace, and so are wont to inflict wounds. 
For if we keep the unspotted garments we have put on, we 
can not feel the wounds of robbers. BasiL; Or it may be 
understood that they stripped us after first inflicting wounds; 
or wounds precede nakedness, as sin precedes the absence of 
grace. Brpe; But sins are called wounds, because the per- 
fectness of human nature is violated by them. And they 
departed, not by ceasing to lie in wait, but by hiding the 
craft of their devices. 

Curys. Here then was man (that is, Adam) lying destitute 
of the aid of salvation, pierced with the wounds of his sins, 
whom neither Aaron the high priest passing by could ad- 
vantage by his sacrifice; for it follows, And by chance there 
came down a certain priest that way, and when he saw him, 


VER. 29—87. ST. LUKE. $73 


he passed by on the other side. Nor again coutd his brother 
Moses the Levite assist him by the Law, as it follows, And 
likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked 

on him, and passed by on the other side. Auc. Or by the Priest ave: 
and the Levite, two times are represented, namely, of the Law ”” "? 
and the Prophets. By the Priest the Law is signified, by 
which the priesthood and sacrifices were appointed; by the 
Levites the prophecies of the Prophets, in whose times the 

law of mankind could not heal, because by the Law came 

the knowledge not the doing away of sin. THEOPHYL. But 

He says, passed by, because the Law came and stood till Rom. 3, 
its time foreordained, then, not being able to cure, departed. ees 
Mark also that the Law was not given with this previous inten- 

tion that it should cure man, for man could not from the 
beginning receive the mystery of Christ. And therefore it is 

said, And by chance there came a certain priest, which ex- 
pression we use with respect to those things which happen 
without forethought. Aug. Or it is said, passed by, because Aug. 
the man who came down from Jerusalem to Jericho is be-471._ 
lieved to have been an Israelite, and the priest who came down, 
certainly his neighbour by birth, passed him by lying 
on the ground. And a Levite also came by, likewise his 
neighbour by birth; and he also despised him as he lay. 
Tueroray.. They pitied him, I say, when they thought about 
him, but afterwards, overcome by selfishness, they went away 
again. For this is signified by the word, passed him by. 
Ava. A Samaritan coming by, far removed by birth, very Aug. 
near in compassion, acted as follows, But a certain Samari- *' *9P- 
tun as he journeyed came where he was, §c. In whom our 

Lord Jesus Christ would have Himself typified. For Sama- 

ritan is interpreted to be keeper, and it is said of him, He Pe. 128, 
shall not slumber nor sleep who keeps Israel; since being *: Rom. 6, 
raised from the dead he dieth no more. Lastly, when it was? 
said to him, Thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil, He said 4, sone 
He had not a devil, for He knew Himself to be the caster out of 
devils, He did not deny that He was the keeper of the weak. 
GREEK Ex. Now Christ here fully calls Himself a Samaritan. Severus. 
For in addressing the lawyer who was glorying in the Law, He 
wished to express that neither Priest nor Levite, nor all they 

who were conversant with the Law, fulfilled the requirements 


374 GOSPEL ACCORDING TU CHAP. xX. 


of the Law, but He came to accomplish the ordinances of the 
Law. AMBROSE; Now this Samaritan was also coming down. 
ie 3) For who is he that ascended upon into heaven, but he who 
came down from heaven, even the Son of Man who is in heaven. 
Turornys, But He says, journeying, as though He purposely 
determined this in order to cure us. Auc. He came in the 
I'secus likeness of sinful flesh, therefore ‘near to him, as it were, in 


ree . likeness. 

aa 
3. Greek Ex. Or He came by the way. For He was a true 
 S"P* traveller, not a wanderer; and came down to the earth for 


our sakes. AMBROSE; Now when He came He was made 
very near to us by His taking upon Himself our infirmities, 
He became a neighbour by bestowing compassion. Hence it 
follows, And wehen he saw him he was moved with compassion. 
ubi sup. PseUDO-AuG. Seeing him lying down weak and motionless. And 
therefore was He moved with compassion, because He saw in 
Rom. 8, him nothing to merit a cure, but He Himself for sin condemned 
sin in the flesh. Hence it follows, And went to him, and 
eure bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine. Ave. For 
171, What so distant, what so far removed, as God from man, the 
immortal from the mortal, the just from sinners, not in dis- 
tance of place, but of likeness. Since then He had in Him 
two good things, righteousness and immortality, and we two 
evils, that is unrighteousness, and mortality, if He had taken 
upon Him both our evils He would have been our equal, and 
with us have had need of adeliverer. That He might be then 
not what we are, but near us, He was made nota sinner, as 
thou art, but mortal like unto thee. By taking upon Him- 
self punishment, not taking upon Himself guilt, He destroyed 
Aug. de both the punishment and the guilt. Ate. The binding up 
Sea of wounds is the checking of sins; oil is the consolation of 
19. a good hope, by the pardon given for the reconciliation 
of man; wine is the incitement to work fervently in spint. 
AmBRrosE; Or, He binds up our wounds by a stricter com- 
mandment, as by oil he soothes by the remission of sin, as by 
wine he pricks to the heart by the denunciation of judgment. 
Greg. GreG. Or in the wine he applies the sharpness of constraint, 
‘Moral, in the oil the softness of mercy. By wine let the corrupt 
c.8. parts be washed, by oil let the healing parts be assuaged; we 
must then mix gentleuess with severity, and we must so com- 


VER. 29—$37. ST. LUKE. 375 


bine the two, that those who are put under us be neither ex- 
asperated by our excessive harshness, nor be relaxed by too 
much kindness. THEOPHYL. Or else, intercourse with man 

is the oil, and intercourse with God is the wine which signi- 

fies divinity, which no one can endure unmixed unless oil be 
added, that is, human intercourse. Hence he worked some 
things humanly, some divinely. He poured then in oil and 
wine, as having saved us both by His human and His divine 
nature. Curys. Or, he poured in wine, that is, the blood of Chrys. 
His passion, and oil, that is, the agointing of the chrism, Hom. 
that pardon might be granted by His blood, sanctification be ial 
conferred by the chrism. The wounded parts are bound up *® 
by the heavenly Physician, and containing a salve within 
themselves, are by the working of the remedy restored to their 
former soundness. Having poured in wine and oil, he placed 
him upon His beast, as it follows, and placing him upon his 
beast, &c. 

Ava. His beast is our flesh, in which He has condescended Aug. de 
to come to us. To be placed on the beast is to believe in 2°" 
the incarnation of Christ. AmBRosE; Or, He places us on 4. 19. 
His beast in that He bears our sins, aid is afflicted for us, Tsai. 53, 
for man hath been made like to the beasts, therefore He 4: LXX. 
placed us on His beast, that we might not be as horse and 2. 
mule, in order that by taking upon Him our body, He might F8-32,9- 
abolish the weakness of our flesh. THtopoyL. Or He placed 
us on His beast, that is, on His body. For He hath made us 
His members, and partakers of His body. The Law indeed 
did not take in all the Moabites, and the Ammonites shall pou. 
not enter into the Church of God; but now in every 33. 
nation he that feareth the Lord is accepted by Him, who is 
willing to believe and to become part of the Church. Where- 
fore He says, that he brought him to an inn. Cunrys. For chrys, 
the Inn, is the Church, which receives travellers, who are tired ¥t 8uP- 
with their journey through the world, and oppressed with the 
load of their sins; where the wearied traveller casting down 
the burden of his sins is relieved, and after being refreshed is 
restored with wholesome food. And this is what is here said, 
and took care of him. For without is every thing that is con- 
flicting, hurtful and evil, while within the Inn iscontained all rest 
and health. BEDE; And rightly He brought him placed on His 


376 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. xX. 


beast, since no one, except he be united to Christ’s body by 
Baptism, shall enter the Church. 

AMBROSE; But as the Samaritan had not time to stay 
longer on the earth, he must needs return to the place whence 
he descended, as it follows, And on the morrow he took out 
two pence, §c. What is that morrow, but perchance the day 

Ps.118,of our Lord’s resurrection? of which it was said, This is 
the day the Lord hath made. But the two pence are the 
two covenants, which bear stamped on them the image of the 
eternal King, by the pce of which our wounds are healed. 

Aug. Ava. Or the two pence are the two commandments of love, 

ubi stp. which the Apostles received from the Holy Spirit to preach 
to others; or the promise of the present life, and that which is 
to come. ORIGEN; Or the two pence seem to me to be the 
knowledge of the sacrament, in what manner the Father is in 
the Son, and the Son in the Father, which is given as a 
reward by the Angel to the Church that she may take more 
diligent care of the man entrusted to her whom in the short- 
ness of the time He Himself had also cured. And it is 
ptomised that whatever she should spend on the cure of the 
half dead man, should be restored to her again, And what- 
soever thou spendest more, when F come again I will 
repay thee. 


ee AvuG. The inn-keeper was the Apostle, who spent more 
1 Cor? 7, either in giving counsel, as he says, Now concerning virgins, 
15. Ihave no commandment of the Lord, yet I give my judgment ; 


or, in working even with his own hands, that he might not 
2 Thess. trouble any of the weak in the newness of the Gospel, though 
Co. 9, it was lawful for him to be fed from the Gospel. Much more 
"also did the Apostles spend, but those teachers also in their 
time have spent more who have interpreted both the Old and 
New Testament, for which they shall receive their reward. 
AMBROSE; Blessed then is that inn-keeper who is able.to cure 
the wounds of another; blessed is he to whom Jesus says, 
Whatsoever thou hast spent more, when I come again I will 
repay thee. But when wilt thou return, O Lord, save on the 
Judgment day? For though Thou art ever every where, and 
though standing in the midst of us, art not perceived by us, 
yet the time will be in which all flesh shall behold Thee 
coming again. Thou wilt then restore what Thou owest 


VER. 38—42. ST. LUKE. 377 


to the blessed, whose debtor Thou art. Would that we were 

confident debtors, that we could pay what we had received! 
CyriL_; After what has gone before, our Lord fitly ques- 

tions the lawyer; Which of these three thinkest thou 

was neighbour to him who fell among thieves? But he 

said, He that shewed mercy on him. For neither Priest 

nor Levite became neighbour to the sufferer, but he only 

who had compassion on him. For vain is the dignity of 

the Priesthood, and the knowledge of the Law, unless they 

are confirmed by good works. Hence it follows, And Jesus 

satth unto him, Go and do thou likewise. Curys. As if He Chrys, 

said, If thou seest any one oppressed, say not, Surely he isin Heb. 

wicked; but be he Gentile or Jew and need help, dispute io 

not, he has a claim to thy assistance, into whatever evil he has 

fallen. AuG. Hereby we understand that he is our neigh- Aseras 

bour, to whomsoever we must shew the duty of compassion, Doc. 

if he need it, or would have shewn if he had needed it. From}. ;" 

which it follows, that even he who must in his turn shew us ©: 22. 

this duty, is our neighbour. For the name of neighbour has 

relation to something else, nor can any one be a neighbour, 

save to a neighbour; but that no one is excluded to whom 

the office of mercy is to be denied, is plain to all; as our Lord 

says, Do good to them that hate you. Hence it is clear, that yy... 

in this command by which we are bid to love our neighbour, 5, 44. 

the holy angels are included, by whom such great offices of 

mercy are bestowed upon us. Therefore our Lord Himself 

wished also to be called our neighbour, representing Himself 

to have assisted the half dead man who lay in the way. Am- 

BROSE; For relationship does not make a neighbour, but 

compassion, for compassion is according to nature. For 

nothing is so natural as to assist one who shares our 


nature. 


38. Now it came to pass, as they went, that he 
entered into a certain village: and a certain woman 
named Martha received him into her house. 

39. And she had a sister called Mary, which also 
sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word. 


Jobn ll. 


Aug. 


Ser. 103. 


John 1, 
12. 


Matt. 
25, 40. 


ae 4, 


378 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. X. 


40. But Martha was cumbered about much serv- 
ing, and came to him, and ‘said, Lord, dost thou not 
care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid 
her therefore that she help me. 

41. And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, 
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many 
things: 

42. But one thing is needful: and Mary hath 
chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away 
from her. 


BEDE; The love of God and our neighbour, which was 
contained above in words and parables, is here set forth in 
very deed and reality; for it is said, Now tt came to pass, as 
they went, that he entered into a certain village. ORIGEN; 
The name of which village Luke indeed here omits, but John 
mentions, calling it Bethany. Avc. But the Lord, who came 
to his own, and his own received him not, was received as a 
guest, for it follows, And a cerlain woman named Martha 
received him into her house, &c. as strangers are accustomed 
to be received. But still a servant received her Lord, the 
sick her Saviour, the creature her Creator. Butif any should 
say, “‘ O blessed are they who have been thought worthy to 
receive Christ into their houses,” grieve not thou, for He 
says, For inasmuch as ye have done it to the least of my 
brethren, ye have done it unto me. But taking the form of a 
servant, He wished therein to be fed by servants, by reason of 
His condescension, not His condition. He hada body in which 
He was hungry and thirsty, but when He was hungry in the 
desert, Angels ministered to Him. In wishing therefore to be 
fed, He came Himself to the feeder. Martha then, setting 
about and preparing to feed our Lord, was occupied in serv- 
ing; but Mary her sister chose rather to be fed by the Lord, 
for it follows, And she had a sister called Mary, which also 
sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word. 

Curys. It is not said of Mary simply that she sat near 
Jesus, but at His feet, to shew her diligence, stedfastness, 
and zeal, in hearing, and the great reverence which she 


VER. 38—42. ST. LUKE. 379 


had for our Lord. Avuc. Now as was her humility in sitting 
at His feet,so much the more did she receive from Him. 
For the waters pour down to the lowest part of the valley, 
but flow away from the rising of the hill. 

BastL; Now every work and word of our Saviour is a rule 
of piety and virtue. Forto this end did He put on our body, 
that as much as we can we might imitate His conversation. 
CyriL; By His own example then He teaches His disciples 
how they ought to behave in the houses of those who receive 
them, namely, when they come to a house, they should not 
remain idle, but rather fill the minds of those who receive 
them with sacred and divine teaching. But let those who 
make ready the house, go to meet their guests gladly and 
earnestly, for two reasons. First, indeed, they will be edified 
by the teaching of those whom they receive; next also they 
will receive the reward of charity. And hence it follows here, 
But Martha was cumbered about much serving, §c. AvG. 
Martha was well engaged in ministering to the bodily wants 
or wishes of our Lord, as of one who was mortal, but He who 
was clothed in mortal flesh, in the beginning was the Word. 
Behold then what Mary heard, The Word was made flesh. 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Basil. 
Const. 
Mon. ec. 
le 


Aug. 
ubi sup. 


Behold then Him to whom Martha ministered. The one was: 


labouring, the other at rest. But yet Martha, when much 
troubled in her occupation and business of serving, inter- 
rupted our Lord, and complained of her sister. For it follows, 
And said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left 
me to serve alone? For Mary was absorbed in the sweetness 
of our Lord’s words; Martha was preparing a feast for our 
Lord, in whose feast Mary was now rejoicing. While then 
she was listening with delight to those sweet words, and was 
feeding on them with the deepest affection, our Lord was 
interrupted by her sister. What must we suppose was her 
alarm, lest the Lord should say to her, “ Rise, and help thy 
sister?” Our Lord therefore, who was not at a loss, for He 
had shewn He was the Lord, answered as follows, And 
Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha. The 
repetition of the name is a mark of love, or perhaps of 
drawing the attention, that she should listen more earnestly. 
When twice called, she hears, Thou art troubled about many 
things, that is, thou art busied about many things. For man 


Ps. 73, 
28. 


Acta 4, 
32. 


Aug. 
Serm. 
108. 


380 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO CHAP. 3 


wishes to meet with something when he is serving, and ca 
not; and thus between seeking what is wanting and preparin 
what is at hand, the mind is distracted. For if Martha ha. 
been sufficient of herself, she would not have required th. 
aid of her sister. ‘There are many, there are diverse thing: 
which are carnal, temporal, but one is preferred 1. 
many. For one is not from many, but many from on 
Hence it follows, But one thing ts needful. Mary wishe . 
to be occupied about one, according to that, It 1s good fc: 
me to cling close unto the Lord. The Father, the Son, th. 
Holy Spirit, are one. To this one he does not bring u- 
unless we being many. have one heart. Cyrit; Or els 
when certain brethren have received God, they will not b 
anxious about much service, nor ask for those things whic 
are not in their hands, and are beyond their needs. For ever, 
where and in every thing that which is superfluous is burder 
some. For it begets weariness in those who are wishing t : 
bestow it, while the guests feel that they are the cause ¢: 
trouble. Basti; It is foolish also to take food for th- 


- support of the body, and thereby in return to hurt the body. 
. and to hinder it in the performance of the divine commanc 


If then a poor man come, let him receive a model an: 
example of moderation in food, and let us not prepare ou 

own tables for their sakes, who wish to live luxuriously. Fe: 
the life of the Christian is uniform, ever tending to on: 
object, namely, the glory of God. But the life of those wh : 
are without is manifold and vacillating, changed about a: 
will. And how in truth canst thou, when thou settest th: 

table before thy brother with profusion of meats, and for th. 
pleasure of feasting sake, accuse him of luxury, and revil 
him asa glutton, censuring his indulgence in that which thor 
thyself affordest him? Our Lord did not commend Marth: 
when busied about much serving. 

Ava. What then? Must we think that blame was cas: 
upon the service of Martha, who was engaged in the cares o. 
hospitality, and rejoiced in having so great a guest? If this be 
true, let men give up ministering to the needy; in a word, le 
them be at leisure, intent only upon getting wholesome know- 
ledge, taking no care what stranger is in the village in wan! 
of bread; let works of mercy be unheeded, knowledge only 


VER. $8—42. ST. LUKE. 381 


be cultivated. THEopHyL. Our Lord does not then forbid 
hospitality, but the troubling about many things, that is to 
say, hurry and anxiety. And mark the wisdom of our Lord, 
in that at first He said nothing to Martha, but when she 
sought to tear away her sister from hearing, then the Lord 
took occasion to reprove her. For hospitality is ever 
honoured as long as it keeps us to necessary things. But 
when it begins to hinder us from attending to what is of 
more importance, then it is plain that the hearing of the 
divine word is the more honourable. 

Auc. Our Lord then does not blame the actions, but dis- Aug. 
tinguishes between the duties. For it follows, Mary hath Bi Seren. 
chosen that good part, &c. Not thine a bad one, but hers a 194. 
better. Why a better? bécause it shall not be taken away from 
her. From thee the necessary burden of business shall one 
time be taken away. For when thou comest into that country, 
thou wilt find no stranger to receive with hospitality. But 
for thy good it shall be taken away, that what is better may 
be given thee. Trouble shall be taken away, that rest may 

‘be given. Thou art yet at sea; she is in port. For the 
sweetness of truth is eternal, yet in this life it is increased, 

and in the next it will be made perfect, never to be taken 
away. AMBROSE; May you then like Mary be influenced 

by the desire of wisdom. For this is the greater, this the 
more perfect work. Nor let the care of ministering to 
others turn thy mind from the knowledge of the heavenly 
word, nor reprove or think indolent those whom thou seest 
seeking after wisdom. Auc. Now mystically, by Martha’s Aug. 
receiving our Lord into her house is represented the Church de Gus 
which now receives the Lord into her heart. Mary her!.ii.g.30. 
sister, who sat at Jesus’ feet and heard His word, signifies the 

same Church, but in a future life, where ceasing from labour, 

and the ministering to her wants, she shall delight in Wisdom 
alone. But by her complaining that her sister did not help 

her, occasion is given for that sentence of our Lord, in which 

he shews that Church to be anxious and troubled about 
much service, when there is but one thing needful, which is 

yet attained through the merits of her service; but He says 

that Mary hath chosen the good part, for through the one the Greg. 
other is reached, which shall not be taken away. Greg. S 1 


382 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. CHAP. } 


Or by Mary who sat and heard our Lord’s words, is signifie : 
the contemplative life; by Martha engaged in more outwar: 
services, the active life. Now Martha’s care is not blamec. 
but Mary is praised, for great are the rewards of an activ 

life, but those of a contemplative are far better. Henc. 
Mary’s part it is said will never be taken away from her, fc 

the works of an active life pass away with the body, but th. 
joys of the contemplative life the rather begin to increas. 


from the end. 